
GERHARD HERZBERG
An Illustrious Life in Science


GERHARD HERZBERG
An Illustrious Life in Science
Boris Stoicheff
NRC Press
Ottawa
McGill–Queen’s University Press
Montreal & Kingston London Ithaca

© 2002 National Research Council of Canada
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in a retrieval system, or
transmitted by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of the National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa,
Ontario K1A 0R6, Canada. 
Printed in Canada on acid-free paper.
ISSN 1701-1833
ISBN 0-660-18757-4     Electronic ISBN 0-660-19258-6
NRC No. 44462 
National Library of Canada cataloguing in publication data
Stoicheff, B. (Boris), 1924–
Gerhard Herzberg: an illustrious life in science
(NRC Press biography series, No. 1, ISSN 1701-1833)
Co-published by McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Includes bibliographical references.
Issued by the National Research Council of Canada.
ISBN-0-660-18757-4
1.
Herzberg, Gerhard, 1904–1999.    2.  Spectrum analysis — History.
3.
Molecular spectroscopy — History.    4.  Physicists — Canada — Biography.
5.
Scientists — Canada — Biography.
I.
National Research Council Canada.       II.  Title       III.  Series.
QC16.H47S86 2002     530´.092     C2002-980029-3
NRC Monograph Publishing Program
Editor: P.B. Cavers (University of Western Ontario)
Editorial Board: H. Alper, OC, FRSC (University of Ottawa); G.L. Baskerville, FRSC
(University of British Columbia); W.G.E. Caldwell, OC, FRSC (University of Western
Ontario); C.A. Campbell, CM, SOM (Eastern Cereal and Oilseed Research Centre); S. Gubins
(Annual Reviews); B. Ladanyi, FRSC (École Polytechnique de Montréal); W.H. Lewis
(Washington University); A.W. May, OC (Memorial University of Newfoundland);
G.G.E. Scudder, OC, FRSC (University of British Columbia); B.P. Dancik, Editor-in-Chief,
NRC Press (University of Alberta)
Inquiries: Monograph Publishing Program, NRC Press, National Research Council of
Canada, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0R6, Canada.
Web site: www.monographs.nrc.ca
Correct citation for this publication: Stoicheff, B. 2002. Gerhard Herzberg: An Illustrious
Life in Science. NRC Press, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 468 pp.

Dedicated to my wife Joan


vii
CONTENTS
FOREWORD by Takeshi Oka. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
PROLOGUE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1. Family and Early Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2. University Years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3. A Year in Göttingen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4. A Year in Bristol. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5. Privatdozent in Darmstadt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
6. Searching the World for an Academic Position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
7. Guest Professorship at the University of Saskatchewan . . . . . . . 101
8. Beginnings in Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
9. The War Years in Canada. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
10. Interlude at the Yerkes Observatory, The University of Chicago. . 157
11. News of Family and Friends in War-Torn Europe. . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
12. Return to Canada. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
13. The National Research Council: The Temple of Science . . . . . . . 209
14. The Spectroscopy Laboratory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222
15. Inspiring the Growth of Basic Research. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 246
16. Research and Worldwide Acclaim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
17. Ambassador of Canadian Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 274
18. The Classic Volumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 290
19. Challenging the New Politics of Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306
20. Nobel Laureate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 320
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
21. Weathering the Aftermath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343
22. The Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 358
23. Continuing Activities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 368
EPILOGUE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 389
CHRONOLOGY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 395
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 398
NOTES AND REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 400
APPENDICES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426
BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 431
HONOURS AND AWARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 446
NAME INDEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 449
SUBJECT INDEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 456
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 463


FOREWORD
Gerhard Herzberg was a great scientist whose eventful life spanned most of
the twentieth century. He began his research in Germany at a time when the
new quantum mechanics was just beginning to unravel the mysteries of the
microscopic world. He became one of the founders of modern spec-
troscopy, the study of spectra, the most accurate and intricate fingerprints
of atoms and molecules. Spectroscopy played a central role in the devel-
opment of modern science, and Herzberg dedicated his life to its develop-
ment. He made many experimental and theoretical discoveries and was
responsible for systematizing the field. His textbook Atomic Spectra and
Atomic Structure and the three-volume monograph Molecular Spectra and
Molecular Structure became the “bible” for spectroscopically oriented physi-
cists, chemists, and astronomers. His laboratory in Ottawa, Canada, became
the scientific mecca for a generation of spectroscopists, and he is aptly
called the founding father of molecular spectroscopy. We benefited not only
from Herzberg’s dedication to science, but also from his commitment to
humanity; his enthusiasm and sincerity inspired those of us who were lucky
enough to be associated with him. I am thrilled that this biography will inform
a wider audience about this great man, his work, and his humanity.
Boris Stoicheff, the author of this biography, belonged to Herzberg’s
research group at the National Research Council (NRC) in Ottawa from
1951 to 1964, first as a postdoctoral fellow and then as a staff member. He
is 20 years younger than Herzberg and is famous in the field for his pio-
neering contributions to Raman spectroscopy and later to non-linear optics.
He  knew Herzberg closely in his early years, but he also worked with other
great scientists, and this gives him both great insight and perspective. In
fact, more than 30 years ago, the ever-prescient Herzberg himself “appoint-
ed” Stoicheff as his biographer. He knew of Stoicheff’s love of reading
biographies and histories of science, as well as his excellence as a writer
and his scholarly accuracy to details. Herzberg must also have sensed Stoi-
cheff’s genuine admiration for him as a scientist and a person. Stoicheff’s
love and respect for Herzberg, his expertise in science, and his knowledge
of people in the field, as well as his insights into Canadian science policy,
make him Herzberg’s ideal biographer. The knowledge of and love and
respect for our predecessors is a pillar of our civilization, and this book is
a great contribution to both science and humanity.
Professor T. Oka
The Enrico Fermi Institute
The University of Chicago
ix


PROLOGUE
It was the afternoon of November 2nd, 1971, and Gerhard Herzberg, sitting
on the Moscow Express, wondered about the delay in leaving the Lenin-
grad Station. He had been brought to the train on this cold and damp day
with much fanfare by scientific colleagues of Leningrad University. They
carried his bags, saw him settled comfortably at a reserved window seat,
and waved cheerfully as the “All Aboard” sounded. But the train remained
motionless, as restless passengers continually checked their watches. Soon
he became aware of some commotion on the platform as a burly figure was
hurriedly guided by a conductor, gesturing to Herzberg’s car and cabin. The
next moment, Herzberg was being addressed by a breathless man who
removed his fur hat and stood at attention. “Professor Herzberg, I am the
Secretary of the Soviet Academy of Science, and I have the honour to
report that you have been awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics.” With these
words, the Secretary shook hands with Herzberg and quickly stepped off
the train as it began moving.
So it was that Gerhard Herzberg of the National Research Council of
Canada first learned of the supreme scientific accolade, while far away
from home and alone. He was on a train to Moscow, left with his own
thoughts for six hours among strangers who knew little if any English, and
he no Russian. They obviously did not understand the hurried message, and
he could not share his pleasure, somewhat tinged with bewilderment, that
the award, if true, was in physics. Of course, he was a physicist, yet one
with many interests in chemical and astrophysical problems. All of his
studies and university degrees were in physics. He had spent ten years at
the Physics Institute of the Technische Hochschule in Darmstadt and anoth-
er ten as a faculty member of the Physics Department at the University of
Saskatchewan. He had been at the National Research Council (NRC) in
Ottawa since 1948, where he served as Director of the Pure Physics
Division for two decades. Yet he knew that his books on atomic and molec-
ular spectra and structures, and his latest discoveries in free radicals, were
of more immediate interest to chemists and to chemistry. So why, if true,
the Prize in Physics?
Normally, while travelling by plane or train, with time on his hands,
Herzberg would review his upcoming visit, recall the scientists he was
most likely to meet, and then try to catch up on reading recent publications
in his many areas of scientific interest. But none of this was possible at this
xi

xii
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
moment, nor could he rest. Today’s news upset his usual sense of discipline
and overwhelmed his very being. Past events flooded his mind.
The untimely death of his wife Luise, barely six months before, was
foremost in his thoughts, along with her support for almost forty-two years
and especially her courage on their leaving Germany during the dark days
of the Nazi regime. Over the years, they had collaborated in research and
co-authored many papers on molecular spectra. From their earliest time
together, with his concentration on science, Luise was his window to the
world. But no more. Since her death he was isolated from the day’s hap-
penings and was as lonely as he now felt in this train compartment with
strangers. As night quickly fell, the enveloping darkness added to this
cheerless atmosphere and kindled his memories of family hardships during
the tumultuous years of his youth.
Only as the train sped through the brightly lit city of Novgorod did this
emptiness leave him to be replaced by more genial thoughts. He recalled
that it was his good fortune to start scientific work just as the new quantum
theory was developing, with rapid applications to atomic and molecular
problems. He had matured as a scientist in the right place at the right time,
namely in Germany in the 1920s, and he cherished the memory of his out-
standing mentors. A year in Göttingen, the world centre of mathematics and
physics, gave him the opportunity to meet and work with some of the great-
est scientific minds of that era. Best of all, he met Luise there. He also
enjoyed his year in Bristol, where he met many of the English physicists
and chemists. Then came an exciting five-year period during which he
developed his own research laboratory in Darmstadt with eager students
and visitors from abroad. But conditions in Germany deteriorated rapidly
with the Nazis in power, and in 1935 he finally found a safe haven in
Saskatoon on the Canadian prairies, where he and Luise were warmly wel-
comed. They quickly fell in love with Canada and, having decided that
Canada was to be their home, raised a son and daughter. He remembered
that at the University of Saskatchewan, everything possible was done to
enable him to pursue his beloved spectroscopy and to write two volumes of
his trilogy Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure. After ten happy
years there, he had the good fortune to fulfill a boyhood dream of being an
astronomer. He felt that his three years at Yerkes Observatory of The
University of Chicago, working among the world’s top astrophysicists,
were most productive.

Then he was given the extraordinary opportunity to establish a major
spectroscopy laboratory at the NRC in Ottawa with unstinting encourage-
ment by two of its Presidents, C. Jack Mackenzie and E.W.R. (Ned)
Steacie. He made the most of it. His laboratory became the “Mecca” for
molecular studies and attracted aspiring young scientists from around the
world as well as visits from the major players in the field. A succession of
important results followed, and he felt that the pinnacle of his own research
had been reached with the pioneering work on free radicals. But lately, with
continual reviews by government committees and drastically reduced
budgets for research, the atmosphere at the NRC was changing. He won-
dered what would be the final outcome of the new Senate Committee hear-
ings on Science Policy. So far this committee had severely and unfairly
criticized the operation of the NRC, whereas the NRC was acclaimed
throughout the world as one of the major institutes of fundamental and
applied science and engineering. He recalled a brief meeting a few months
earlier, when Bill Schneider, President of the NRC, told him that the future
for basic research in the laboratories looked bleak, but that an award of a
Nobel Prize might save the NRC.
Herzberg’s mood of foreboding immediately changed as the long
expanse of bright lights signalled his arrival in Moscow. He was delighted
to be greeted at the station by his friends S.L. Mandelstam and I.I. Sobel’-
man, who congratulated him on being awarded the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry. The news that it was the prize in chemistry was confirmed by
laudatory telegrams from NRC President Schneider and from the Nobel
Foundation and by the bustling members of the U.S.S.R. radio and TV
media. Now Herzberg could believe that the Nobel Prize was indeed his; it
set his mind at rest as he was whisked to Mandelstam’s apartment for a
quiet celebratory evening.
PROLOGUE      xiii


PART ONE
THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)


1. FAMILY AND EARLY EDUCATION
Family and Childhood1
In later years, when Gerhard Herzberg was reminded that he shared a very
famous birthday, he replied with his hearty laugh, “Yes, with Sir Isaac
Newton.” Gerhard was born on 25 December 1904 in Osdorf, Pinneberg, a
northwestern suburb of the “Free City” of Hamburg, Germany. He was the
younger son of Albin and Ella Herzberg, his brother Walter having been
born in January of the same year. This was a middle-class family, with
Albin Herzberg working as the assistant manager of a small manufacturing
and exporting company in Hamburg. Nominally of Evangelist Lutheran
denomination, Gerhard’s parents rarely attended church and attached no
special significance to the day of his birth. As a child, Gerhard quickly real-
ized that being born on Christmas Day meant missing out on birthday par-
ties and extra gifts.
Gerhard later learned from a cousin that the Herzberg genealogy could
be traced back eleven generations to 1573 through the records of two Luth-
eran churches in the town of Langensalza where the Herzberg families had
lived for almost four hundred years. Joachim Hertzbergk (eventually
Herzberg) was first on the list. He had apparently changed his name from
Hans Quatmer,2 and although this change suggested a connection with the
nearby city of Herzberg, according to the city archivist, none has been
found. All of the Herzbergs had been born in Langensalza and lived there
until Albin’s move to Hamburg. Albin was born on 12 April 1872, the sixth
child in a family of five sisters and two brothers. His father, Franz Otto
Herzberg, and mother, Anna Sophia Christina Kürsten, were both born in
Langensalza, where Franz Otto spent his life as a merchant. Albin was not
a healthy youth, and friends convinced him to become a vegetarian for the
good of his health. As luck would have it, he met Ella Biber at a social gath-
ering of vegetarians in Hamburg and they soon married.
Ella was seventeen when she married Albin, thirteen years her senior,
in Hamburg in November of 1902, and so she came into new family
responsibilities at a young age. Ella was born in Hamburg on 7 July 1885
The most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious.
It is the source of all true art and science.
Albert Einstein

4
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
and became accustomed to heavy responsibilities with the death of her
mother when she was only seven years old. Henrietta Maria died at the age
of thirty-five, leaving Ella and her sisters Marie, Henny, and Anni in the
care of their father, Rudolf Alber Biber. Biber, a master glazier in Hamburg,
was overtly religious and raised the girls as vegetarians. Soon after Ella’s
marriage, Biber emigrated to Canada and, after spending a few years in
Vancouver, settled in Seattle, Washington. 
At the turn of the century, Langensalza was a town of about 12,500
inhabitants, mainly Protestants. It was built along the Salza River near its
juncture with the Unstrut River, in the plains of Thuringia, just east of a
heavily forested region and south of the Hartz Mountains, near the larger
cities of Eisenach, Erfurt, and Weimar. Langensalza was situated along
north–south and east–west trade routes and prospered with the mining of
travertine, weaving and cloth making, and the cultivation of woad, a plant
from which blue pigment was extracted. 
Young Gerhard spent several summers in Langensalza where he stayed
with his aunts, the widow Ida and spinster Anna Marie (called Mimi by
Gerhard), who lived in an apartment above his favourite bakery at 7 Korn-
markt Strasse. His grandparents, Franz Otto and Anna Sophia, lived near-
Gerhard and Walter, 1906                      The Herzberg Family, 1910

by at 16 Marktkirche beside St. Bonifacii Church, but he didn’t come to
know them well as they had died by the time he was five. Gerhard explored
the town’s extensive medieval walls and watch towers and old Dryburg
Castle, the home of Hermann von Salza, who was the grand master of the
Teutonic Order in the early thirteenth century and under whom the order
rose to prominence. Gerhard spent a summer accompanying Herr Griem,
an artisan friend of his aunts, on long walks to several townships as he plied
his trade and took orders for goods to be delivered on future trips. Among
the nearby towns they visited was Eisenach, twenty-eight kilometres away,
the birthplace of Johann Sebastian Bach in 1685 and the site of Wartburg
Castle, where Martin Luther sought safety in 1521 and translated the New
Testament into German. The castle was also noted for its Sängerkrieg, the
contests of knights, poets, and singers of courtly love, later used by Richard
Wagner in the opera Tannhäuser. Langensalza’s medieval atmosphere
attracted the romantic poets Klopstock, Novalis, and Brentano in the late
eighteenth century, who together with Goethe and Schiller in nearby
Weimar were the acknowledged cultural inspiration for Germany at that
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      5
“Even a Nobel Prize winner once wore a sailor’s suit
and played [cowboys and] Indians”, according to Walter Herzberg.

6
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
time. It was also Langensalza’s historic fate to be the location of a major
battle of the Austro-Prussian Wars in 1866, where King George V of Han-
nover lost his kingdom to Otto von Bismarck of Prussia, who then united
Germany in 1871.
Gerhard was the sole Herzberg to be given that Christian name over the
four centuries of the Herzberg family, with most having the name Heinrich,
Friedrich, or Otto. Not surprisingly, he was christened Gerhard Heinrich
Friedrich Otto Julius on 9 July 1905, with all four godfathers, who were
friends and relatives, present at the ceremony. In view of his own failing
health following heart problems, Albin chose this many godfathers for both
of his sons to ensure that they would be looked after. The christening took
place in St. Gertrudkirche along the Eilbekkanal where Gerhard was con-
firmed fifteen years later. Albin Herzberg was anxious that his two sons
have the best education possible. Because they lived in the bustling city of
Hamburg, Albin recognized the need for a much better education than he
had or than was the custom of the Herzbergs living in Langensalza. In fact,
there was no indication whatsoever of past academic pursuits or any uni-
versity connections in the family. Gerhard’s great-grandfather, Friedrich
Wilhelm, was a wound-dresser, and Uncle Karl apprenticed in chemistry
and became the resident chemist of a sugar factory in Austria. There
seemed to be even less educational tradition in Ella Biber’s family.
In his late teens, Albin left Langensalza to seek employment in Ham-
burg and remained there for the rest of his short life. In time, he earned a
reasonable income, paid taxes, and owned real estate and was entitled as a
Brger to vote for members of the Hamburg Parliament. The Free and
Hanseatic City of Hamburg, situated on the Elbe and Alster rivers about
one hundred kilometres from the North Sea, was Germany’s largest city
and Europe’s busiest port. It developed into a city of canals, with twin lakes
at its centre, the Binnenalster (Inner Alster) and the Aussenalster (Outer
Alster), ringed by parks and many old churches. Hamburg originated in the
ninth century and became a member of the Hanseatic League of medieval
German towns that together provided security for merchant trading with
foreign lands at a time when Germany lacked a strong national govern-
ment. The city grew rapidly to become an industrial and shipping centre of
great wealth and remains so today. With its many shipping and import and
export offices, Hamburg seemed to be an ideal location to find employment
for anyone unsuited to heavy labour, as was Albin’s lot. He was successful
in finding a job in the central offices of Fred C. Jenkins, Hamburg, a fabri-

cator and distributor of specialty electrical products, and was quickly pro-
moted to become its assistant manager at the age of twenty-two.
Since the Herzbergs were reasonably well-off, the family moved to an
apartment on the elegant Isestrasse so that the boys could attend the high-
ly recommended Vorschule (part of the Oberrealschule of Eppendorf) on
Hegestrasse, just two blocks away from their apartment. The Vorschule of
that period was equivalent to our elementary school, the difference being
that the school year began in April and the program lasted four years.
Children started school at age six, but a case of measles delayed the entry
of Gerhard for a year, and he finally started school in 1911. Two years later,
the family moved to a house in Langenhorn at the north end of the city, and
the boys went to school on the new metro line, which had a station stop
near their school. Because Ella was musically inclined, a piano was pur-
chased, much to the enjoyment of Walter, who began serious study of the
piano in what was to become his profession. Gerhard took up the violin.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      7
Downtown Hamburg, with the Inner and Outer Alster Lakes.

8
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Gerhard often visited his father at work downtown, on Lilienstrasse
near the central railway station. His main interest was in the library on the
corner, which was dedicated to Bürgemeister Mönckeburg (1839–1908).
This was the library where he first borrowed books on astronomy. At that
time, he could see the stars at night as he walked the streets of Hamburg
and wondered “what does it all mean”, kindling an interest which contin-
ued throughout his life. Gerhard also took a liking to the nearby statue of
the poet Heinrich Heine, father of the song “Die Lorelei”, depicting the
seated poet reading a scroll, “What does the lonely tear want—it only
spoils my view.”3 A special treat for the family on some Sundays was a boat
cruise through the twin lakes and canals, ending with dinner at the Vege-
tarische Gaststätte above the Alster Arcade, a vegetarian restaurant owned
and operated for many years by Herr Schubarth, a friend of Albin’s. The
family spent the summers at their cottage in Duvenstedt, near a forest and
game preserve north of Hamburg.
Gerhard was an excellent student throughout his four years at the Vor-
schule, and on completing the program in 1915, he was awarded his first
prize, a book on the Great Fire of 1842, which destroyed a quarter of the
inner city of Hamburg leaving over twenty thousand people homeless. A
century later, fire rained from the skies during the Second World War,
destroying half the city and killing almost fifty-five thousand of its inhab-
itants.
Just before Gerhard’s graduation, his father died. Albin was a small
man, a hunchback, who was persistently ill. He suffered from “Wasser
sucht”, or dropsy, with the accumulation of water and swelling of the body,
a problem originating from an earlier heart condition. He tried many reme-
dies and, in the summer of 1914, even went south to Italy to recuperate, but
this was not of much help. The Great War started later that year, but Albin
was not called for military service. He died at home on 21 February 1915
at forty-three years of age, leaving a young widow and the boys aged ten
and eleven. At Albin’s funeral, his eldest sister Emma Eichelmann and her
husband persuaded Ella to let Gerhard live with them in Frankfurt and
attend secondary school there. Thus, on completion of the school year,
Gerhard moved to Frankfurt and in April began attending the Liebig-
Oberrealschule, a high school for training as a teacher. The ten year old
youngster soon became homesick. He found his uncle, who tried to change
his vegetarian ways, to be rather stern and Gerhard talked of returning
home. After six unhappy months, he was sent home to his mother. In the

meantime Ella Herzberg had given up her home, and to make ends meet,
she and Frau Kind, a friend, opened a small confectionery store on Mühl-
endammstrasse. Ella and her sons lived in a few rooms behind the store. As
the war continued and sugar became scarce, the two women changed the
candy store into a sewing shop.
The Realgymnasium of the Johanneum
On the advice of his teachers from the Vorschule, Gerhard was persuaded
to attend a Gymnasium, a school in preparation for entry into university.
Originally, the Gymnasium in Germany existed for the study of the great
German poets and thinkers, as well as the classics of antiquity in Latin and
Greek. Only a small fraction of the youth attended such schools, mainly the
well-to-do and upper middle class. As science and technology became
important in the culture and economic well-being of the nation, the Gym-
nasium came to consist of two parts: the Humanistische Gymnasium with
emphasis on the classics and languages and the Realgymnasium with sci-
ence and mathematics being three-quarters of the curriculum. Gerhard
enrolled in the Realgymnasium of the Johanneum in the fall semester. The
Johanneum was one of the oldest secondary schools in Hamburg, dating
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      9
The Realgymnasium of the Johanneum in Hamburg.

10
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
back to 1550. It was a famous boys’ school and “The School” in Hamburg.
The Johanneum was a fee-school, but thanks to his excellent Vorschule
record, Gerhard won a scholarship for his nine years at the Johanneum,
beginning with the sexta in 1915 through to the ober prima in 1924.
Student enrollment was six hundred at the time, with the majority com-
pleting programs in six years for the professions or mercantile trades. Only
about ten students each year completed the Abitur or school-leaving cer-
tificate, the necessary qualification for university entrance. The school was
situated on Armgartstrasse at the Eilbekkanal just across the street from
St. Gertrudkirche, within walking distance from home. Another of Ham-
burg’s famous schools was the Heinrich Hertz Gymnasium, named in
honour of the scientist who first generated and detected electromagnetic
waves, a field of research related to Gerhard’s later studies.
During these early years, Gerhard immersed himself in his science
studies and developed a particular love for astronomy. This led to the build-
ing of a small telescope with his friend Hans-Werner Döring and to his last-
ing fascination with the heavens. Along with his favourite subjects of math-
ematics, physics, and chemistry, the curriculum included Latin, French,
Spanish, and English. He soon added the works of Goethe, Schiller,
Klopstock, Kant, and others to his studies and developed a proficiency in
shorthand, which helped him throughout his schooling. He and Hans-
Werner formed a close friendship with Alfred Schulz, a classmate who
joined the Johanneum somewhat later when the Schulz family moved from
the Rhineland to Hamburg. These three were inseparable during the gym-
nasium years, completely imbued with German culture and constantly dis-
cussing science and philosophy and the present political scene. They main-
tained their close relationship up to the early 1930s by correspondence and
brief visits, while continuing their studies and professions and living in dif-
ferent cities.
The Johanneum was close to the Aussenalster, the favourite swimming
area for Gerhard and his friends. One day, after his swim, he saw someone
doing exercises on the bank and engaged him in conversation on the value
of exercising, what was a good technique, and how regularly it should be
done. He learned that the method used by this man was based on the book
Mein System by J.P. Müller, which promoted good health through fifteen
minutes of exercising each day.4 Gerhard was so enthused by this demon-
stration that he purchased the book and followed its illustrated routine
faithfully until he reached the age of eighty-five. Swimming and this daily

exercise activity helped to make up for his reluctance to participate in team
sports or to join the new German pathfinder clubs (or boy scouts) that were
springing up all over the country. Herzberg also became interested in the
optimism of autosuggestion by the French psychotherapist Emil Coué. In
vogue in the 1920s was the saying “Day by day, in every way, I am getting
better and better”, which Herzberg took up in a determined way.
In the early 1900s, less than 10 percent of all German students were
studying science of any kind, a fact that was borne out by the small class
in the Realgymnasium.5 Nevertheless, the Johanneum had teachers of the
highest calibre, one of which was Professor Wilhelm Hillers, a science
teacher, and it was Gerhard’s good fortune to study under him. Hillers had
revised one of the best physics texts of that time and had edited a Teacher’s
Journal of Physics (the German equivalent of today’s American Journal of
Physics).6 The text of two large volumes, Lehrbuch der Physik, was writ-
ten by E. Grimsehl, a former teacher at the Johanneum who died in the
Great War. These volumes were kept up-to-date by Hillers and H. Starke, a
professor of the Technische Hochschule in Aachen, and the revised texts
were in use by German universities until recent times. It was Hillers who
first aroused Gerhard’s interest in atomic physics and spectra of atoms.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      11
Gerhard and Walter with their mother, 1918.

12
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
At that time a major upheaval of classical physics was taking place
with Albert Einstein’s new ideas of relativity and Max Planck’s quantum
principle. Hillers gave a stimulating course in modern physics during spe-
cial classes held from seven o’clock each morning until the regular school
opening at eight o’clock. Along with his lectures, Hillers would carry out
spectacular demonstrations for the class. What especially caught Gerhard’s
attention was the model of an atom, the emission of light, and the spectra
of gases. When Hillers passed the light from an electric lamp through a
glass prism, a vivid rainbow of colors was produced on a screen. This was
what Isaac Newton had seen about 250 years before when he shone sun-
light coming through a slit in a window shutter into a prism and then onto
a wall. He called the spread of colour a spectrum. In the early 1800s,
Joseph Fraunhofer of Munich examined the spectrum of sunlight in more
detail by placing a telescope after the prism instead of a screen. He
observed a greater spread of the spectrum of colours and noted that it was
crossed with a large number of dark lines. He measured the positions of
about seven hundred of them, which are now called the Fraunhofer spec-
trum. At that time it was not known what these spectral lines meant, but
later they were found to be due to absorption of sunlight by the cooler gases
in the sun’s atmosphere. Fraunhofer also observed the spectra of stars and
planets and came to be regarded as the father of the science of spectroscopy
and astrophysics. Somewhat later, G.R. Kirchhoff and R. Bunsen at the
University of Heidelberg studied the spectra of various salts in flames and
discovered the principle of spectrum analysis—that emission and absorp-
tion spectra are characteristic of the atoms and molecules that produce
them.
There followed an enormous number of studies of flame, arc and spark
spectra, and solar and stellar spectra, and the spectra of distinctive wave-
lengths, which are unique for each element, became known. No satisfacto-
ry explanations were forthcoming for the production of spectra until 1913
when Niels Bohr, a young Danish physicist working in the Manchester lab-
oratory of Ernest Rutherford, presented his epoch-making theory.7 Bohr
dealt with hydrogen, the simplest atom and element. He accepted Ruther-
ford’s planetary atomic model that hydrogen consisted of a positively
charged, heavy nucleus at the centre and one negatively charged electron
orbiting around it. Bohr then assumed that the electron could only occupy
specific stable orbits, each of different energy, and that the electron did not
lose energy while whirling around in any of these orbits. However, when

the electron jumped from a higher more energetic orbit to a lower orbit of
less energy, light would be emitted. Conversely, light was absorbed when
the electron was raised from a lower to a higher orbit. The light energy
emitted or absorbed was a quantum of energy, namely the difference in
energy of the two orbits, given by E = hν, where according to Max Planck,
h is a constant (now named after Planck) and ν is the frequency of the radi-
ation. Bohr’s theory was successful in accounting for the observed spectra
of hydrogen and ionized helium (that is, helium possessing only a single
electron after removal of the second electron) and, with further elaboration,
predicted and explained many other features of atomic spectra.
The demonstrations of the spectra of different gases entranced the
young Gerhard, and he was intrigued that light was produced by electrons
in atoms jumping from higher orbits to lower ones. Moreover, the spectrum
of each of the known elements was strikingly different and could be used
to identify the gas producing it, whether observing light from the stars,
planets, or laboratory sources. These results remained imbedded in his
mind. Within a few years, Gerhard was to produce one of the finest and
most complete spectra of atomic hydrogen in the visible region as his first
independent piece of research.8
As the tide of the Great War turned against Germany, the economic sit-
uation worsened, with a shortage of food and only a few vegetables avail-
able. This culminated in the “turnip winter” of 1916–1917 when all soups,
meals, jams, and desserts were limited to turnips.9 The Herzberg fortunes,
along with those of most Germans, reached a critical stage by the war’s end
in November 1918. Moreover, Ella fell prey to swindlers and sold the fam-
ily cottage and a piece of land for a pittance. Inflation raised living costs to
inconceivable levels: a litre of milk, which was 1.5 Marks (M) in June of
1920, jumped to 10 in June of 1922, to 1,000 in May of 1923, to 2 million
in August, to 5 trillion the following month, and to 400 trillion in Novem-
ber. On 15 November 1923, the new Rentenmark (RM), equal to a trillion
old Marks, was introduced, and some economic stability was achieved.
Under these severe postwar economic conditions, the sewing shop had
very little work to do. Finally, in late 1922, as the devastating inflation con-
tinued to grow, Ella’s partner, Frau Kind, convinced Ella to emigrate to
America to marry her widowed son in Wyoming and to leave Gerhard and
Walter, aged seventeen and eighteen, in her care. The boys were severely
disappointed at this latest turn of events, realizing this would end any
semblance of a family life, and they wondered when they would see their
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      13

14
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
mother again. The family’s financial situation was desperate and this
seemed to be a reasonable solution. In Wyoming, Ella first worked as a
housekeeper for the widower, and then finding she could not manage his
five unruly children, she hastily moved to Seattle, Washington, where her
father and a sister lived. Ella’s monthly letters from America brought a few
dollars to help with expenses and a little pocket money for Walter and
Gerhard. To make ends meet, Gerhard began tutoring in mathematics and
science. Walter completed the six year diploma program at the Johanneum
and became an apprentice in a business firm. He played the piano in local
restaurants in the evenings and gave lessons to children on weekends, while
seriously practicing for the concert stage at every opportunity.
Thoughts of University
As the final school year came to a close and his friends began making plans
to attend university, Gerhard wondered what lay in store for him. At Easter
of 1924, Gerhard was one of nine students to obtain the “Abitur”. Of
course, he too wanted to go to university and was determined to do so.
Moreover, being one of the top students in his graduating class, Gerhard
was constantly encouraged by his teachers to continue his education. But
how could he afford it? His family had no funds of any kind. And where
should he go? Astronomy was at the top of his list. He sought the advice of
a vocational guidance bureau (Berufsberatungsstelle) that existed at that
time in Hamburg. The counsellor took Gerhard’s interest in astronomy seri-
ously and wrote on his behalf to Dr. Schorr, the Director of the Hamburg
Observatory. The response was most discouraging: “There is no point in
thinking of a career in astronomy unless one has private means of support.”
Obviously, astronomy was out of the question. Gerhard then turned his
attention to mathematics and physics. On the advice of his counsellor, he
considered another, more practical possibility such as enrolling in a new
program of technische physik, or engineering physics, recently introduced
in several universities, the closest being the Technische Hochschule in
Darmstadt. Surprisingly, the University of Hamburg, in Germany’s second
most populated city, had only been incorporated in 1919 and was not yet
strong in science or engineering. Gerhard sent away to several universities
for information about their programs and applied to the technical schools
in Munich, Danzig, Dresden, and Darmstadt. 

The remaining and major problem, however, was financial. Gerhard
had managed so far on the few dollars received from his mother and his
earnings from tutoring. Where would he find the funds to register at a uni-
versity, pay tuition fees, and live in another city? At best, it would mean
finding a supplementary job, with only about half of his time devoted to
school and studies. The financial problem was a constant concern. Matters
were quickly coming to a head, since the university terms began in late
April and it was already mid-March.
One day, at the home of his friend Alfred Schulz, Gerhard was dis-
cussing this worrisome problem with the family. Alfred’s father was the
Hamburg representative of the Aachen cloth firm “Tuchfabrik van Gülpen”
and, as a merchant and trader in fine cloths, had become acquainted with
the established families and businessmen of Hamburg. Herr Schulz sug-
gested that Gerhard write to the wealthy industrialist Hugo Stinnes. Stinnes
had started a shipping company in 1892 and developed it into a huge cor-
poration and trust, controlling mines, shipbuilding and shipping, paper
mills, and foundries, with vast holdings reaching as far as South America.
He was also one of the founders of the conservative German People’s Party
and an elected member of the Reichstag since 1920.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      15
Graduating class of 1924.
Top row: Alfred Schulz, – , – , Gerhard, Hans-Werner Dring.

16
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
At first the thought of asking for financial assistance from someone he
didn’t know seemed to be a brazen idea to the young Gerhard, but in des-
peration he finally wrote to Herr Stinnes on 22 March 1924, enquiring
about the possibility of a loan:
Dear Herr Stinnes,
Please excuse me for writing to you today out of necessity in a per-
sonal matter. I am nineteen years old and my father who was an assistant
manager with a local company died nine years ago. My mother emigrat-
ed to Seattle in America a year and a half ago so as to make a livelihood
possible for me and my brother, and she lives there herself in very mod-
est circumstances.
I have attended the Realgymnasium of the Johanneum on Armgart-
strasse and recently graduated with the Abitur according to the enclosed
copy of my graduating certificate. I would now like to take up the study
of engineering physics in Munich. According to information from the
Technische Hochschule in Munich, I will need a minimum monthly
amount of about 90 to 120 RM. Until recently my mother has been able
to support my quite modest livelihood, and I have helped with some tutor-
ing which I am doing at present. My most recent attempt to obtain sup-
port for my studies from an uncle has floundered since he does not have
the means.
I now take the liberty, dear Herr Stinnes, of enquiring of you whether
you would possibly help me with a loan. The professors and teachers
mentioned in the copy of my certificate would in every way oblige you
with information about me.
I look forward to your most kind answer, and sign
With all respect, quite humbly,10
Gerhard Herzberg.
He wrote a similar letter to the banker Max Warburg, who replied instant-
ly that “in view of the difficult economic situation, only in the most serious
emergencies can we consider helping”.11
While visiting his aunts in Langensalza two weeks later, Gerhard was
astounded to receive an acknowledgement from the Stinnes Company
dated 8 April, requesting that he present himself to Herr Heinersdorff at the
offices of the company on any afternoon, preferably between four and six
o’clock, for further discussion on this matter.12 Because the trip to Ham-
burg was beyond his means, Gerhard replied sending a photograph of

himself and asking whether his friend Alfred Schulz could come in his
place to provide more information on his future plans.13 On second
thought, however, and helped by a payment from his relative Otto Herz-
berg, who owned a dry-goods store in Langensalza, Gerhard appeared in
person at the Stinnes Company on the elegant boulevard Jungfernstieg on
17 April, not knowing that Hugo Stinnes had died on 10 April. The inter-
view with Herr Heinersdorff, now representing Hugo Stinnes, Jr., was brief
and friendly but ended without any verbal commitment. In the meantime,
Gerhard was still undecided as to whether to go to Munich or Darmstadt.
Although the Technische Hochschule in Munich was considered to be the
top school, Gerhard was frightened by what he had read of the political sit-
uation in Munich and of the “Beer Hall Putsch” the past November, with
Adolf Hitler’s attempt to overthrow the Weimar Republic.14 Living costs
were higher than in Darmstadt, and moreover, as late as 23 April, he still
had not received a notice of acceptance. Understandably, his preference
was for Darmstadt.
A few days after the Heinersdorff interview, he was pleasantly sur-
prised to receive word (dated the same day as his visit) that he had been
awarded a scholarship “for the next while” at 90 RM per month.15 There
were no conditions attached to the scholarship, such as having to repay it
as in a loan, nor was it clear to Gerhard whether he was obliged to report
about his studies and progress, or how often. With the major financial prob-
lem resolved in this beneficent way, Gerhard hurriedly prepared to move to
Darmstadt and to enroll in the Technische Hochschule in time for lectures
beginning in a few day’s time on 29 April. There was little to pack and take
with him, only a few clothes, his beloved Grimsehl texts, his violin, a type-
writer, and bicycle. On the way to Darmstadt, he stopped in Frankfurt to
spend a day with his cousins and aunt and uncle, the Eichelmanns.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      17

18
2. UNIVERSITY YEARS
Darmstadt 
Darmstadt, the capital of the Grand Duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt for cen-
turies, was a city of the arts and learning and a treasure of the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries, the greatest age of German culture and architec-
ture.1 It was a prosperous provincial town, primarily a residential and
small-business centre of approximately ninety thousand inhabitants.
Situated twenty-five kilometres south of Frankfurt, it was nestled in rolling
farmland, surrounded by forests, and in the neighbourhood of the larger
cities of Mannheim, Mainz, and Wiesbaden. The inner core of Darmstadt
was the old town, with quaint half-timbered houses in a maze of narrow
cobbled streets radiating outwards from the seventeenth century Landgraf’s
Castle, the residence of the Grand Duke Ernst Ludwig. Its tall bell tower
overlooked the Marktplatz, a central market square, itself a remnant of the
early fourteenth century. Scattered among the gabled wooden houses stood
lesser palaces and great houses that had been built in the days when Hesse
was among the most notable independent German principalities. To the
north of the Castle stood the Landestheater, an outstanding work of archi-
tecture that was completed in the early nineteenth century and was one of
the largest theatres in its time. Beside it was the Landesmuseum, built
almost a century later, that contained collections tracing the history of the
ruling families of Hesse and of the art and culture of the region.
At the very centre of Darmstadt was the Luisenplatz with its landmark
statue of the Grand Duke Ludwig I, which sat on a thirty-nine metre high
column and was affectionately called langer Ludwig (long Louis) by the
locals. A few hundred metres to the east of the Castle rose the Mathil-
denhöhe, a small hill with the five-fingered Hochzeitstrum (Wedding
Tower) atop. This was the crowning piece of the celebrated Künstler-
kolonie (artists colony), which established the Jugendstil or Art Nouveau
movement at the turn of the century, leading to Darmstadt’s reputation as a
prominent centre of art. Several churches and two synagogues graced the
city. The oldest church, dating from 1330, was the City Church, the burial
place of the House of George I. Overlooking the Luisenplatz was the
Church of St. Ludwigs (1827), a replica of the Pantheon in Rome built to
To add spice to my life, I would wish for no other society
than the one which Darmstadt has to offer.
18th Century French Traveller

one-fifth scale. A small, exquisite Russian Chapel on Mathildenhöhe was
commissioned by Nikolas II, the last Romanov Czar, who married Princess
Alixandra of Darmstadt and needed an Orthodox church for worship when
visiting his wife’s family.
Darmstadt’s largest industry was chemical, with almost half of the
workforce employed in the large factories of E. Merck and Rohm & Haas,
located north of the railway station. About 10 percent of the workers were
employed by the government. Others worked in printing houses and small
factories making photographic paper, leather goods, and wood products,
and shopkeepers and craftsmen plied their trades from stores and work-
shops beside their homes. Until the Great War, Darmstadt had been the gar-
rison town of Hesse, but by 1920 the military units had disappeared and the
barracks were converted into much-needed living quarters, schools, and
offices. This loss of the military led to economic hardships and damage to
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      19
Darmstadt with Landgraf’s Castle in centre, Landesmuseum
and Landestheater on left, and Herrngarten Park with the
Technische Hochschule in background.

20
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
the prestige of the city, resulting in questioning whether Darmstadt should
remain as the capital of Hesse, a decision postponed for the time being.
The close of 1923, a year of crisis for Germany, marked the end of wild
inflation, the threat of Bavarian separatism, and fighting against French
occupation of the Ruhr. Along with the overthrow of the Hitler Putsch in
Munich in November, some semblance of economic stability was finally
achieved. In Darmstadt, a housing program was started, industrial build-
ings and sports and recreational facilities were being built, and a streetcar
system was being developed. Moreover, the intellectual and cultural life in
Darmstadt was improving, as efforts were made to lead the city back to
being the cultural capital of Hesse once again.
The Technische Hochschule Darmstadt (THD)
The pride of Darmstadt was its Technische Hochschule, the only technical
university among the five universities of the State of Hesse.2 It had lowly
beginnings in 1826 as the “Secondary and Technical School”, a school for
the training of tradesmen and craftsmen. Ten years later the technical part
became the “Higher Trade School” and erected its own building bordering
the old town. Over the years, as Germany became an industrial country, the
trade school developed into the “Polytechnic School”. Following the
Franco-Prussian War and the union of the German states in 1871 to form
the Second Reich, the school received its charter to become the Technische
Typical Darmstadt houses in the old town near the THD.

Hochschule zu Darmstadt in 1877, with a commitment to teaching and
research and with the Abiturum being the prerequisite for admission.3 At
that time, the enrollment was only about two hundred full- and part-time
students in all five Departments (Schools of Construction, General Engin-
eering, Mechanical Engineering, Mathematics and Natural Sciences, and
the Chemical–Technical School) and dropped rapidly to a total of only
ninety-eight students a few years later as a result of the economic crisis of
the 1870s.
Enrollment at the THD recovered in 1882 with the creation by Erasmus
Kittler of the first School of Electrical Engineering in a German technische
hochschule. Kittler had joined the THD that year and became known as one
of the fathers of electrical engineering in Germany. This program proved to
be very popular and student numbers increased rapidly, with many students
attracted from eastern Europe. Approval was given for a new building for
the THD on land of Herrngarten Park donated by the Grand Duke Ernst
Ludwig. By the time of the inauguration in 1895, the building was already
too small for the increased enrollment, and further extensions including a
large auditorium were approved. In the meantime, the THD was accorded
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      21
Mathildenhöhe with the Wedding Tower and Russian Chapel, Darmstadt.

22
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
the right to grant doctorate degrees. By the turn of the century, over 2,000
students were registered in its engineering departments, and in 1909–1910,
four women were admitted for the first time, following the trend of the
major universities in Germany. During the Great War, enrollment dropped
drastically but increased rapidly at war’s end from 1,180 in the winter of
1918–1919 to 2,131 a year later and to 3,011 in 1922–1923.4 This increase
added to the already serious housing shortage. In 1924 the General Faculty,
which combined all non-technical subjects, was split into the Department
of Cultural and Political Science and the Department of Mathematics and
Natural Science. Two degree programs were developed in physics. One
was based on the existing theory-oriented course with qualification in
physics, introducing the students to research. The other was a practice-
oriented course with qualification in engineering—the Technical Physics
program. The latter was a major step in extending the curriculum beyond
the purely technical and in preparing engineers, through liberal arts cours-
es, for their leading role in society. At that time, total enrollment at the THD
was 2,346, of which 69 were in the new Department of Mathematics and
Natural Science.
Technische Hochschule Darmstadt, 1924.

The study of physics had been promoted as early as 1869 at the Poly-
technic School with the establishment of the Institute of Physics. Dr.
Friedrich Kohlrausch was a professor there from 1871 to 1875, carrying on
research in electrolytes. Practical Physics, his textbook on the techniques
of measurement, became an indispensable guide for generations of physi-
cists. Dr. Paul Schering arrived at the THD in 1888 as Professor of Physics
and served as Dean of the Institute of Physics at the time of the opening of
the new building in 1905. The main research instruments were a synchro-
nized clock and seismograph with a pendulum extending through four sto-
ries from the roof to the basement. After Professor Schering reached
Emeritus status, Professor Hans Rau took over as Director of the Institute.
Konrad Zeissig was an Assistant in 1893 and, on receiving his Doctorate in
Göttingen in 1897, became a Professor of Physics at the THD. His survey
of magnetic fields in Hesse served as a model for future surveys. When
approval was granted for establishing an Institute for Technical Physics, he
taught the physics course until his retirement in 1934.
Herzberg Enrolls in the THD
Herzberg arrived in Darmstadt on 26 April 1924 to register in the Technical
Physics program of the Technische Hochschule. Darmstadt was to be his
home until 1935, except for a two year interval spent as a postdoctoral fel-
low in Göttingen and Bristol. With only a few Rentenmarks in his pocket,
savings from tutoring and his mother’s allowance, and the promise of 90
RM per month from the Stinnes Company, he set out to find suitable quar-
ters near the university. Housing was scarce, as most of the students had
already arrived and registered, but after a day’s search, he managed to find
a simple attic room on Hobrechtstrasse in a nice residential district near the
Odenwald. It was a large, airy room but had no gas or electric light or sim-
ilar comforts, and so the rent was relatively cheap, 18 RM per month, and
well within his limited budget. The THD was within walking distance
through the interesting downtown region of the Marktplatz, Rathaus, and
Castle. Herzberg was impressed with the huge campus of the THD and its
extensive buildings, with the Institutes of Physics and Chemistry in sepa-
rate buildings. He registered on 28 April for the summer semester from
Easter to early August and was relieved to learn that he could pay the first
year’s fees of 157 RM in two instalments.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      23

24
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
On that same day, he was pleasantly surprised to receive his first pay-
ment of 90 RM from the Stinnes Company and wrote a long letter to Alfred
Schulz about his impressions and experiences in Darmstadt.5 Herzberg
attended the opening ceremonies presided by “His Magnificence”, the
Rector of the THD, and was informed of the heavy course load of at least
forty hours per week, almost double the hours at a normal university.6 His
courses included mathematics, physics, chemistry, mechanics, engineering
drawing, and philosophy. He also enrolled in a physics laboratory for an
extra fee. All in all, Herzberg’s schedule was close to fifty hours per week,
Monday through Saturday. This was such a heavy load that he gave up fur-
ther practice of the violin. He planned to keep Sundays free for exploring
Darmstadt and for hiking in the surrounding forests. At home each night,
he reviewed his lectures with the help of his shorthand notes and worked
through the physics lecture material in his Grimsehl texts, leaving little
time for other activities. Nevertheless, he was in constant touch with Walter
and his friends Alfred and Hans-Werner by letter, a habit he developed
early and continued throughout his university years. Moreover, since these
letters were Gerhard’s only connection with his roots and early life, he
began to save those he received as well copies of his own.
Fraternity life on campus was in full bloom, a large number of the stu-
dents belonged to these Korps societies. Many members were “colour-
wearing”, that is, often dressed in colourful uniforms, and participated in
fencing classes. As Gerhard wrote to Alfred: “Of course, if I find a frater-
nity or an association which suits me very much, I shall join; but my con-
ditions are rather difficult to meet.” He obviously was not well informed
about fraternities. In any case, he would not have fitted into their way of
life very easily, since he was a vegetarian and teetotaller, while fraternity
members seemed duty-bound to participate in rituals of beer drinking.
Besides, he would not have been able to afford the obligatory costs of being
a member. Nevertheless, he was hurt to learn that most of the newcomers
were besieged with invitations to become members, but not a single frater-
nity approached him. Eventually he found out that Jews were not admitted
to fraternities, and he surmised that the reason for this personal slight was
his Jewish-sounding name.7 Students did not understand that although
Hertzberg was indeed a Jewish name, Herzberg (without the “t”) was an
Aryan name. 
This was his first realization of the anti-Semitic atmosphere at the
THD, a situation endemic in German universities at that time and one that

was to grow much worse and change his life irrevocably ten years later.
This first experience hurt deeply, as revealed by his noting many instances
of misbehaviour of fraternity members in his letters to Alfred. During the
first semester, he found that many fraternity members were not serious stu-
dents and did not attend lectures or problems classes regularly. Moreover,
in the physics laboratory where students worked in groups of four because
of overcrowding, some in his group took little interest in the experiments
or in the accuracy of their measurements. The students wanted to finish as
quickly as possible and so copied from previous reports as well as from
notes and exercises of their fraternity members. Only the exceptionally
good philosophy course given by Professor Julius Goldstein seemed to
attract the students’ concentration. Professor Goldstein was such an
extremely fine lecturer that even though he was Jewish, the Korps students
attended his classes and paid attention. What particularly disturbed Gerhard
was learning that for the past two years these students did not carry out the
solstice celebrations on the usual date of 21 or 22 June but on the 24th, the
day the Foreign Minister Walter Rathenau (1867–1922), a Jew, was assas-
sinated by nationalists who opposed his attempts to fulfill the Versailles
Treaty obligations.8
Money was also a constant worry, and Gerhard was in a terrible predic-
ament during May and early June, waiting day in and day out for receipt of
his next 90 RM from Stinnes, until it arrived in mid-June.9 He had paid
only half of the tuition fees (90 RM) and needed at least 45 RM (1.5 RM
per day) for food, and his rent was 18 RM. His last 25 RM was spent on
the necessary drawing instruments, leaving him no money to buy books.
Moreover, he somehow had to put aside at least 30 RM per month to pay
the tuition fees for the next semester. After only a month at the THD, he
began to plan on how to spend August and September, the months between
summer and winter semesters, most profitably. University students in
Germany at that time used to move about, spending the summers in a small
university town in order to enjoy nature and sport; Herzberg, however,
could only think of the expenses of the next semester and how he might
meet them. He applied to several industries for employment. He hoped to
work in Stuttgart, where he had been invited to live with an uncle free of
charge, and so could save money for his schooling. But the factories to
which he applied answered in the negative.
Near the end of the first semester, Herzberg was offered a job in the
instrument shop of the THD. This turned out to be a blessing, not only for
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      25

26
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
the remuneration, but also because he was befriended by Heinrich Peters, a
graduate student in physics, from whom he learned much about the Insti-
tute of Physics, its faculty, and what professor to study under and work for.
Peters was working for his Diplom Ingenieur, the Engineering Diploma,
under Professor Hans Rau, the Director of the Institute of Physics, and he
encouraged Herzberg to enroll in Rau’s physics course. That summer, Her-
zberg also set his sights on an academic career, as he wrote to Alfred:
At the shop I also learned that an academic profession is not so expensive
or hopeless. When one finishes the exams, one accepts an assistant posi-
tion with a starting salary of 250 RM, then one can Habilitate as a
Privatdozent and remain as an assistant with salary. One has most of all
to strive to publish a lot of papers in order to become “known”, thus hav-
ing a good chance to “get a call”. It is certain that I shall follow this path,
if I can only find the necessary abilities in me.10
At that time, it was normal for a graduate in physics to be employed in
industry or as a gymnasium teacher, with only the rare, brilliant, and usu-
ally affluent graduate able to continue studies to the Doctorate degree and
proceed to an academic career. At this very early stage, in his first year of
university, Herzberg had decided on his future path and he never lost sight
of this ambitious goal.
Cultural activities were plentiful during the summer of 1924; there
were performances of plays by Ernst Barlach and Henrik Ibsen and con-
troversial works by Igor Stravinsky and George Bernard Shaw. With few
resources at his disposal, Herzberg limited his attendance to the musical
events celebrating the sixtieth anniversary of Richard Strauss and the one
hundredth of Anton Bruckner. A different exciting event for Darmstadters
was the flight over the city of Zeppelin LZ 126 in September to open an
air show, a precursor to the building of an airport as a joint project of the
THD, industry, the state, and the city.
A Lonely First Semester
The prevalent, lackadaisical, fraternity atmosphere resulted in a very lone-
ly first semester for Herzberg, who did not develop any new close friend-
ships and rarely participated in social activities. As for female companion-
ship, this too seemed rare, because of his meagre means and his serious
study habits. In fact he found sparse representation of women on campus,
on average about 1 percent, with attendance mainly in chemistry classes

and general lectures, and almost none in the technical courses. The few
women in his classes were not given any special consideration, and most
professors began their lectures with the words “Gentlemen …”. As he
wrote to Alfred “There is no ground here for your suspicion of my spend-
ing time with women.”11
This was a difficult period for Gerhard, not only was he living by him-
self in a vastly different setting and constantly concerned about making
ends meet, but above all, he missed his brother and friends Alfred and
Hans-Werner. Even the regular writing and receipt of letters hardly made
up for the lack of their daily companionship. While his news to Walter and
Hans-Werner dealt mainly with his studies and Sunday hikes in the Oden-
wald and Neckar Valley, he carried on extensive and heated arguments on
philosophy and politics with Alfred, who was immersed in his studies of
history. Meanwhile, the four of them were making plans for a two week
cycling trip in the Black Forest near Lake Constance at the end of Sep-
tember.
An argument that Gerhard and Alfred carried on for months by lengthy
letters concerned Alfred’s leaning towards nationalism and Gerhard’s ten-
dancy towards socialism and pacifism. It seemed that Alfred had earlier
approved of the Hitler Putsch but suddenly had changed his mind, to Ger-
hard’s relief. The Nazis fancied themselves to be nationalists, whereas Ger-
hard thought that a national person would want the best for his people and
would call every war, even a victorious one, a national misfortune because
all cultural and economic valuables are destroyed by war. As he wrote to
Alfred:
Having a pacifist and socialist Ramsay MacDonald as leader in Great
Britain and an Édouard Herriot in France might have some influence in
Germany.… Furthermore, to claim that a real culture is only possible with
a strong feeling of national identity is disproved by the fact that Schiller,
Goethe, Lessing, Herder, Kant, [and others of the Sturm und Drang
Movement] thought much more cosmopolitan than national. Lessing
wrote: “Patriotism, a heroic weakness.” Goethe once said to Eckermann
something like: “Nationalism is strongest at the lowest level of culture.
The higher a culture stands, the more patriotism loses its meaning.” …
And quoting Schopenhauer: “Every poor soul who has nothing in the
world to be proud of seizes as a last resort on being proud of the nation to
which he belongs. In doing so he recovers and is now gratefully ready to
defend all the shortcomings and blunders that are hers.”12
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      27

28
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Such correspondence continued back and forth, and heated discussions
were then carried on during their vacation in the Black Forest. In the end,
Gerhard and Alfred could not agree on any important points in politics and
world view and, because of their longer hours of course work in the fol-
lowing semester, decided not to carry on such lengthy arguments by week-
ly letters. However, this did not stop them from keeping each other
informed about their studies and well-being in the short term. Yet they
could not resist their habitual discussions of politics and philosophy, and
within a year, they resumed bimonthly correspondence on topics of the
day.
Professor Dr. Hans Rau
The winter semester of October to February 1924–1925 provided Herzberg
with the stimulus to decide on a career in basic physics rather than in engi-
neering physics. This came about while attending the physics classes of
Dr. Rau, who gave extraordinarily good lectures that were illustrated with
clever demonstrations.13 The lectures were in a very large hall with about
five hundred students in attendance. But Rau could be heard, and he was
exciting. His lectures were modelled after those of Professor Zenneck of
the Technische Hochschule Braunschweig who was renowned in Germany
for his outstanding lecturing style, as was Professor Pohl of the University
of Göttingen. 
Rau had studied mathematics and physics at the Universities of Munich
and Würzburg. After his Doctorate in 1906, he was an assistant to Professor
Zenneck, a specialist in wireless telegraphy, and so became familiar with
his lecturing methods. Rau obtained the Habilitation at the TH Braun-
schweig in 1909, and in 1911, he returned to Würzburg as Privatdozent and
assistant to Professor Wilhelm Wien, who was awarded the Nobel Prize
that year for his discoveries regarding the laws governing the radiation of
heat. In 1920, Dr. Rau became Assistant Professor in Munich and made a
reputation for his research on positive or canal rays. When he joined the
THD in 1922, he accepted so many university duties, first as Director of the
Institute of Physics, then as Dean of Mathematics and the Natural Sciences
from 1925 to 1927, and Rector in 1928, that he had no time for research
and hardly published any more. In spite of his many responsibilities, Rau
found time to supervise the research of several students, and Herzberg
considered himself very lucky to be one of these. Thus began a lifelong

association with Rau, his scientist father, who meant so much to Herzberg
and whom he considered to be one of the finest people of his acquaintance.
During the tenure of the Stinnes award, Herzberg sent letters to Herr
Heinersdorff every six months regarding his progress and plans for future
studies. In the first semester, he was counselled that he was taking too
many courses and that it would be better to take fewer and have the chance
to study them better.14 In June 1925, he was congratulated on his achieve-
ments in the first year and advised to take a one or two week vacation and
come back refreshed for the next semester.15 Only a month later Herzberg
was shocked to learn that the scholarship would end.16 Because of the sud-
den downturn in the economy at the time, and barely a year after the death
of Hugo Stinnes, the Stinnes Corporation in Hamburg was bankrupt. Herz-
berg immediately wrote back about his difficulties with the sudden termi-
nation of this scholarship, and on 5 August, he received an additional, and
final, two month payment to tide him over.17,18 He immediately gave up his
Sunday walks in the nearby forests and began tutoring in mathematics and
physics, and he remained in Darmstadt during holidays in an effort to
reduce expenses.
Darmstadt also experienced a serious economic setback as many com-
panies closed, including G. Erhardt & Sons, which produced Art Nouveau
(Jugendstil) furniture. Strikes at the chemical plants of Merck and Rohm &
Haas were damaging, and unemployment in Darmstadt increased from 340
in July 1925 to 1,625 in the next six months and to 3,200 in the winter of
1926–1927, with about 18,000 inhabitants receiving benefits from the gov-
ernment.
With Herzberg’s excellent record, the THD waived his tuition fee, and
just at that time, the German government established a new bursary pro-
gram, the Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes, for the best students in the
country. A very strong recommendation from Dr. Rau resulted in Herzberg
being awarded one of the first bursaries, with payments continuing through
to completion of his diploma and Doctorate degrees and including a post-
doctorate year (1929) in Göttingen. When Herzberg learned that Alfred’s
family was suddenly in dire straits, he strongly recommended that Alfred
apply for a bursary with strong support from his professors.
In spite of the growing economic uncertainties, Darmstadt continued
its focus on musical and cultural events. During the summer of 1925, there
were performances by the State Opera Orchestras of Dresden and of Berlin
and by the Vienna Philharmonic Symphony directed by Bruno Walter.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      29

30
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Herzberg found the time and carefully saved, even skimping on meals and
the purchase of books, in order to attend some of these special concerts.
The Engineering Diploma Program
Along with his full-time technical curriculum, Herzberg managed to par-
ticipate in English classes and developed a fairly good facility with written
and oral English. This capability was important for his future research since
about half of the technical journals were published in English. He also
began to attend the weekly colloquia in his second year at the THD in order
to get acquainted with the visiting research scientists and engineers of
Germany and their work. He found it exciting to be in the presence of such
eminent visitors, even though much of the discussion was well beyond his
comprehension. In 1925, he attended an International Conference on
Physical Chemistry held in Darmstadt and was inspired by talks given by
Svante Arrhenius, one of the earliest Nobel Prize winners in chemistry, and
by Friedrich Paneth, one of the first to produce the methyl free radical
(CH3), whose spectrum and structure was to become Herzberg’s legacy to
chemistry four decades later.
With his switch to pure physics, Herzberg kept up with current research
by reading the technical journals Annalen der Physik and Zeitschrift für
Physik in the small library of the THD. In his third year (1926), he saw in
a current issue of Annalen der Physik the first article in the series of four
by Erwin Schrödinger titled “Quantization as an Eigenvalue Problem” and
was intrigued.19 He had just taken classes in partial differential equations
from the mathematician Professor Jakob Horn and so was familiar with the
term “eigenvalue”. This, together with his knowledge of the Bohr theory of
the atom and its concept of quantization, caused him to study the paper
until he understood it. He became so engrossed in the subject that he report-
ed on the Schrödinger paper at the weekly Physics Colloquium, his first
presentation to a scientific audience of his peers and professors. He was
then persuaded by William Prager, a young Privatdozent in mechanical
engineering, to give this colloquium to the engineers. Subsequently, Rau
learned that Schrödinger was to give a lecture in Freiburg and sent Herz-
berg to hear him along with a letter of introduction. There, he heard a fine
lecture in a charming Viennese accent and had the opportunity to meet the
creator of the new “Wave Mechanics”, a heady experience for a young man
just learning about atomic physics and quantum theory.

For the research requirement for the Engineering Diploma, Herzberg
joined the small group of students working under the supervision of Rau.
He found Kurt Lion to be a friendly and skilled experimenter from whom
he learned much. Lion and Hermann Rodenstock, a member of the family
that owned the Rodenstock optical firm in Munich, were carrying out
experiments on canal rays. Heinrich Peters, whom he had met in the work-
shop, and Margarethe Blumenthal, related to the founders of Blumenthal &
Co. in Darmstadt, were working on the spectra of hydrogen. Peters had
joined the THD in 1921, and the others came in 1923, a year earlier than
Herzberg. Rau had given Peters the difficult assignment of trying to find
the spectrum of H3. At that time, the existence of the hydrogen ions H+, H2
+,
and H3
+ in an electrical discharge was known from the mass spectrometer
studies of J.J. Thomson (the English scientist who had discovered the elec-
tron).20 Rau had asked Peters to excite hydrogen by canal rays, then to sep-
arate the H3
+ by electric and magnetic fields, and to look for the spectrum
of H3 in emission. This turned out to be an exceedingly perplexing problem
which Peters did not complete.21 Herzberg would discover the spectrum of
H3 serendipitously about fifty years later using a different source.22 For
Herzberg’s diploma research, Rau suggested that he work with Margarethe
Blumenthal, who was experiencing experimental difficulties. The research
problem was to excite the emission spectrum of hydrogen. So began
Herzberg’s work on hydrogen, leading to a lifetime of interest in atomic
and molecular hydrogen.
For this research, Herzberg became adept at glassblowing and made a
glass discharge tube that had the possibility of permitting hydrogen gas to
flow through it at a controlled rate. He found, as others had observed before
him, that in the visible region, the emission spectrum of the reddish-blue
electrical discharge consisted of a few atomic lines superimposed on the
many-line spectrum of molecular hydrogen. As he increased the voltage of
the discharge, the atomic lines increased in intensity, and he noted that the
molecular lines persisted at the walls of the tube, suggesting that hydrogen
atoms combined more readily to form molecular hydrogen at the walls.
When he cooled the walls of the tube with ice, the colour of the discharge
changed to purple, and the spectrum consisted mainly of a progression of
atomic lines with smaller and smaller spacing, ending in a series limit, the
so-called ionization limit. This extended the known spectrum of atomic
hydrogen in the visible region to about twenty lines of the Balmer series.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      31

32
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Wavelengths for this series of lines are represented by the simple formula
first given by J.J. Balmer in 1885 and derived by Niels Bohr in 1913:
1/ = RH(1/22 – 1/n2)
where  is the wavelength, RH is a constant now known as the Rydberg
constant, and n is an integer greater than 2. It is not surprising that this sim-
ple line spectrum of hydrogen by Herzberg in 1927 is reproduced in hun-
dreds of texts today as the prime example of our understanding of atomic
spectroscopy.
By Easter of 1927, Herzberg had completed the course and research
requirements for the Diplom Ingenieur, having received the highest possi-
ble ranking of sehr gut in all of his courses, except for a 2 in machine draw-
ing.23 He was awarded the Mueller–Alewyn–Plakette Medal as the out-
standing THD graduand for this degree. On receiving the award, Herzberg
made a point of thanking all of his professors in an acknowledgement
included in his diploma dissertation.
Herzberg’s brief experimental research project on the emission spec-
trum of atomic hydrogen resulted in his first three scientific papers and
launched him on a distinguished career in spectroscopy.24 His third paper,
titled “On the Continuous Spectrum of Hydrogen”, was the publication of
his first oral presentation at a Physical Society Meeting.25 This was held in
Kissingen, near Würzburg, with Professor Wilhelm Wien as chairman of
the session. The discussion that followed Herzberg’s presentation, with
questions from W. Wien and the spectroscopists W. Grotrian and L.S. Orn-
stein, was also included in the published proceedings. 
Herzberg was the sole author of all three papers, with due acknowl-
edgment that the work was based in part on joint experiments with M. Blu-
Herzberg’s spectrum of the hydrogen atom, the Balmer series.

menthal. He also heartily thanked Rau, his highly respected teacher, for his
constant stimulation and interest and for his generosity in making available
the means to carry out this research. That Rau, his supervisor or Doktor-
Vater, would not insist on his own name appearing on these papers was a
rare practice in research institutes in Germany and elsewhere and remains
so today. In this regard, Rau was a highly unusual mentor. At that time in
Germany, the scientific society was stratified, with the professor having
tremendous power: he determined everything, and it was very difficult for
a young experimentalist, especially a student, who depended on the use of
instruments provided by the professor, to work on his own or on his own
ideas.26 Rau, however, encouraged independent research and a high stan-
dard of thoroughness and accuracy. While he was a very busy teacher and
administrator, he was always interested in the work of his students and had
good suggestions to help overcome any difficulties in research. Student
projects were never considered as joint work with this supervisor, and Rau
did not add his name to their published papers. In fact, Herzberg was the
sole author for his next nine publications, which formed the basis of his
thesis for the “Doctor of Engineering” degree. This experience impressed
Herzberg immensely, and he put it to good use during his later career as
supervisor and director of research.
The Doctor of Engineering Degree
When Herzberg informed Professor Rau that he wanted to continue his
studies with him in spectroscopy for the Doctorate degree, Rau consented
immediately. At that time there were no qualifying examinations for the
Doctorate in physics, and acceptance of a research student was entirely up
to the Professor. For this research, Rau suggested that Herzberg read
Arnold Sommerfeld’s famous book Atomic Structure and Spectral Lines
published in 1919, which contained all of the knowledge in the field at that
time, and see whether he could come up with a good idea.27 Herzberg’s first
idea seemed an obvious one, an extension of the work of Bohr on the spec-
trum of atomic hydrogen, namely an atomic system with a single electron
orbiting a nucleus. Sommerfeld had already applied the theory to the spec-
trum of He+, the helium ion. Helium, with a nucleus of charge two and two
electrons, is next to hydrogen in the periodic table. When one electron is
removed, forming He+, its spectrum is similar to that of hydrogen except
that the energy levels are increased by a factor of four (the square of the
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      33

34
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
nuclear charge) and the wavelengths of the principal series of lines are
reduced by the same factor. The next element is lithium with a nuclear
charge of three and three orbiting electrons. When two electrons are
removed, leaving Li++, a system with one electron orbiting a nucleus, its
spectrum would be expected to be similar to that of hydrogen but with
wavelengths reduced by a factor of nine. Rau agreed that this would be a
worthy problem.
In preparation for the spectroscopy of Li++, Herzberg designed a dis-
charge cell, and a glass shop near the THD made it for him. Having set up
A hard-working researcher at the THD.

the apparatus, he began working with electrical discharges and soon was
sidetracked onto a completely different investigation. As he recalled, he did
not get a really good start on the Li problem, nor did he ever return to it.
The fortuitous observation that caught Herzberg’s attention during
these discharge experiments was the persistence of a brilliant yellow–
golden glow many seconds after the electrical discharge was switched off.
This was such a striking phenomenon that it aroused his curiosity about its
source. He decided to study the spectrum of this afterglow, and it became
the subject of his thesis for the Doctorate degree. Because vacuum pumps
in those early days were inefficient, it was difficult to remove all traces of
air in the cell, and he found the presence of nitrogen to be the explanation
of the beautiful yellow afterglow. Thus, instead of working with an atomic
spectrum, Herzberg realized he was now dealing with a more complex
molecular spectrum, that of the nitrogen molecule N2 and possibly its ion
N2
+ . The analysis of such a spectrum would require the study of molecular
spectroscopy of diatomic molecules.
He found that in general, the spectra of molecules show characteristics
akin to the spectra of atoms. As in atoms, there are a number of electronic
states as a result of different energies of electrons binding the atoms to form
a molecule. The atoms in a molecule can vibrate against each other, and the
structure as a whole can rotate, and these motions obey quantum rules.
Thus, for each electronic state, there is a series of almost equally spaced
vibrational levels having discrete energies of Ev = hosc(v + 1/2). Here h is
Planck’s constant, osc is the vibrational frequency of the molecule, and the
vibrational quantum number v can take the values 0, 1, 2, 3, etc. In turn,
each vibrational level consists of rotational levels with energies given by
Er = BJ(J + 1), where B is known as the rotational constant and is related
to the moment of inertia of the molecule and J is the rotational quantum
number having values 0, 1, 2, 3, etc.28
Transitions take place between the various energy levels according to
known selection rules, giving rise to three types of spectra. Rotation spec-
tra occur by transitions from one rotational level to another in the same
vibrational level and same electronic state and appear as nearly equidistant
lines in the far infrared and microwave regions of the spectrum.
Rotation–vibration spectra arise from transitions from rotational levels in
one vibrational level to rotational levels of another vibrational level in the
same electronic state, producing what are called “bands” in the infrared
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      35

36
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
region. Electronic spectra are due to transitions from rotational levels of
various vibrational levels of one electronic state to the rotational and vibra-
tional levels of another electronic state, yielding a series of bands with rota-
tional structure, which can be seen at high resolution. Such spectra occur in
the visible and ultraviolet regions of the spectrum. These three types of
spectra require vastly different experimental techniques for observation,
Vibrational and rotational levels of two electronic states A and B
of a diatomic molecule, with transitions shown by the vertical arrows.

including light sources and methods of excitation, spectrometers, and
methods of detection. 
Herzberg’s investigation of the afterglow yielded electronic spectra of
N2 and of the ion N2
+, with much vibrational and rotational structure. He
observed the so-called “tail bands” of N2
+ for the first time and recognized
that the positions of a series of band heads can have a parabolic dependence
as a function of vibrational quantum number and can show convergences
within a series.29 Similar results were reported simultaneously for the iso-
electronic molecule CN by Francis A. Jenkins of New York University.
Herzberg also found in the spectra of the afterglow that only certain rota-
tional levels occurred in N2, a result explained later as arising from pertur-
bations in these levels.
All of the spectra in these studies were photographed with glass and
quartz prism instruments built at the THD under the guidance of Herr Sting,
a superb machinist. Rau had a close connection with the C.A. Steinheil–
Söhne Company of Munich, makers of prism spectrographs, and was able
to obtain blueprints for a three-prism spectrograph. Several of these instru-
ments were built at the THD with long and short focal lengths and were
used by Herzberg in this early work. Grating instruments with their higher
resolution were few in Germany, and no source for gratings existed in
Europe at that time.30 Such spectrographs were only available at the THD
after Herzberg’s postdoctoral years in Göttingen and Bristol, when they
were designed by him and built by Herr Sting at the THD with gratings
from England and the United States of America.
In his paper on the afterglow in nitrogen, Herzberg disagreed with an
explanation suggested in an earlier study.31 Soon after, at a meeting in
Göttingen, Herzberg met one of the authors, Karl-Friedrich Bonhoeffer, the
eldest son of the large, distinguished Bonhoeffer family. He was consider-
ably older than Herzberg, and at that time, Bonhoeffer was a section head
at the Kaiser–Wilhelm Institute in Berlin-Dahlem. A few years later he
became Professor of Chemistry and established the Institute of Physical
Chemistry at the University of Frankfurt. Herzberg was enchanted by Bon-
hoeffer’s personality and how he took this criticism from a young man.
They quickly became close friends. Herzberg came to value this relation-
ship throughout his life as Bonhoeffer was not only a first-rate scientist,
who had helped separate ortho- and para-hydrogen, but also a very warm
person and a most courageous one, as later events were to prove.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      37

38
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
The spectroscopic studies of the nitrogen afterglow were completed in
a year of concentrated research, written up, and published. These early
results, all obtained with a simple discharge tube with air and nitrogen,
were small yet important contributions to this developing field and
launched Herzberg on his life’s work in molecular spectroscopy. This
research was accepted for his Doctorate thesis, “On the Afterglow of
Nitrogen and Oxygen and on the Structure of the Negative Bands of
Nitrogen”, which he submitted on 8 May 1928.32 The readers of this brief
dissertation, which consisted mainly of published papers, were the Rector
Hans Rau and Hans Baerwald, a professor of theoretical physics. Herzberg
passed his oral examination with a sehr gut on 26 May and was awarded
the Doctor of Engineering degree.
After the Doctorate Degree
Having obtained his Doctorate degree, Herzberg took a week off to relax
from this arduous year.33 He accepted Rau’s invitation to stay at his chalet
in the picturesque Bavarian town of Garmisch-Partenkirchen and spent the
week by himself, hiking in the Alps and mainly thinking about his future.
Doktor Ingenieur Herzberg, 1928.

He was anxious to continue his studies at another institute, and luckily the
Studienstiftung would continue for this additional year. Even before com-
pleting his Doctorate, Herzberg was invited to be an assistant by Professor
Rudolf Ladenburg at the Kaiser-Wilhelm Institute in Berlin-Dahlem, on the
recommendation of K.-F. Bonhoeffer. He was invited to carry out investi-
gations of anomalous dispersion, with complete freedom to dwell on any
theme in this field.34 This would be an enviable opportunity to join the
prestigious Berlin school with the giants of physics, Einstein, Planck, von
Laue, and Schrödinger, and the extraordinary group of younger scientists,
including Walther Nernst, Lise Meitner, Rudolf Ladenburg, and Friedrich
Paschen. However, Herzberg was intent on improving his theoretical
understanding of molecular physics, and what better place than the
University of Göttingen, the birthplace of quantum mechanics in 1925 and
the recognized centre of atomic and molecular physics. He had been invit-
ed to give a colloquium there in the summer of 1928 and was most
impressed with the scientific atmosphere, the well-equipped laboratories,
and particularly Professors James Franck and Max Born.35 The lecture
Herzberg gave, essentially a progress report on his thesis work, was in fact
an informal test for his admission as a postdoctoral fellow, and he was
accepted to join this famous centre for the year 1929. He hoped to learn
much from the outstanding people there and from the many leading scien-
tists who visited in a constant stream from the continent, Great Britain, and
North America. He would not be disappointed. But first he had research to
complete, papers to write, and much reading to do in order to catch up on
the theoretical advances in molecular spectroscopy being reported from
around the world.
The years 1926–1928 are remembered as vintage years for the devel-
opment of many of the basic ideas of molecular spectroscopy and molecu-
lar structure, and Herzberg was immersed in this new field of science
almost from its beginning. By this time the new theory of quantum
mechanics had been used to obtain a full understanding of the electronic
structure of atoms, and now it was being extended to the problems of
molecular structure. In turn, the spectra of atoms and molecules proved to
be a natural testing ground for the theory of quantum mechanics.
Rules for determining the types and number of electronic states for
diatomic molecules that result from states of the separated atoms were
developed in 1927 by E. Wigner and E.E. Witmer in Göttingen.36 A major
step that simplified the application of quantum theory for the analysis of
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      39

40
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
molecular spectra was the recognition that because of the large difference
in masses of nuclei and electrons (a factor of about two thousand), the
lighter electrons move very much faster than the vibrating or rotating
nuclei. One of the first applications of this idea was in 1925 by James
Franck, who proposed that an electron jumps to a higher or lower energy
level in a molecule so rapidly in comparison to the vibrational motion of
the nuclei that immediately afterwards the nuclei still have essentially the
same relative position and velocity as before the jump.37 A year later, while
in Göttingen, Edward U. Condon derived this idea quantum mechanically
and it became known as the Franck–Condon Principle.38 Another important
result was derived by J. Robert Oppenheimer and Max Born in 1927, the
Born–Oppenheimer Approximation.39 They proposed that electrons com-
plete many cycles of their motion, whereas the nuclei barely move, and that
interactions between electrons and nuclei could be ignored. Thus the
motions of electrons and nuclei are treated separately, and the total energy
of a molecule is written as a sum of the electronic, vibrational, and rota-
tional energies, namely E = Ee + Ev + Er. 
The first quantum mechanical calculation of molecule formation was
developed in Zurich in 1927 by Walter Heitler and Fritz London for hydro-
gen (H2).40 Their treatment, which led to the valence theory for chemical
bonds, assumed that a molecule is composed of atoms bound together by
electrons of the separated atoms. This method was subsequently extended
and modified by John C. Slater and Linus Pauling. An alternative treat-
ment, known as the molecular orbital theory, began from the premise that
a molecule is a unit, with the outer electrons belonging to the molecule as
a whole. Fundamental papers on the latter were published in 1926–1927 by
Friedrich Hund and by Robert S. Mulliken a year later.41,42 Herzberg stud-
ied these many basic contributions thoroughly in preparation for his year in
Göttingen.
Added to these theoretical developments was the experimental discov-
ery of the Raman effect in 1928 by C.V. Raman and R.S. Krishnan in India
and, independently a few weeks later, by G. Landsberg and L. Mandelstam
of the Soviet Union.43,44 It was found that when monochromatic light trav-
erses a transparent medium, the spectrum of scattered light consists of new
weak radiation of shifted frequency, in addition to the strong unshifted
“Rayleigh” line. The new lines in the spectrum, known as “Raman” lines,
are characteristic of the medium and correspond to transitions between rota-
tional and vibrational levels in the molecular medium. Raman spectra com-

plement infrared spectra and provide valuable information on molecular
symmetry, vibrational frequencies, rotational constants, and molecular
structure.
Along with his concentrated studies of these various new theoretical
and experimental developments, Herzberg managed to complete experi-
ments on a new band system in carbon monoxide, CO, and to report his
findings in two papers. He also completed papers on the dissociation ener-
gy of nitrogen, N2, and on intensity distributions in band spectra. With
twelve published papers to his credit, another accepted for publication, and
his head full of the exciting new advances in molecular spectroscopy, Herz-
berg now felt that he was ready for the challenges he would face in Göt-
tingen.
During these summer months, he had been so immersed in his research
that he was completely oblivious to the changing political atmosphere on
campus, which had become exceedingly National Socialist. Although the
Rector did not permit political party groups to elect members to the Student
Body at the THD, the National Socialist German Student Union agitated
strongly for change. When renamed the “Peoples Students”, this group
managed to elect three student representatives in 1928. At the summer
solstice celebrations of that year, the uniformed Nazi militia, the brown-
shirted storm troopers or SA (Sturmabteilung), appeared for the first time
in Darmstadt.45
Just before moving on to Göttingen, Herzberg participated in one of the
large Conferences of German Scientists and Physicians, held in Hamburg
in September of 1928, and had the opportunity to meet many physicists and
chemists. As is customary at such popular general conferences, he found
these personal meetings and discussions to be far more important than lis-
tening to the many short and detailed technical presentations. He chose this
occasion to spend an extra few days in his hometown visiting Walter and
friends Alfred and Hans-Werner, catching up on their news and activities.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      41

42
3. A YEAR IN GÖTTINGEN
The city of Göttingen was famous for its university, the George August
University of Göttingen, founded in the 1730s by the Elector of Hannover,
who was King George II of England.1 In the 1920s the University of
Göttingen was the acknowledged world centre of atomic physics and math-
ematics and was famous for the development of the new quantum theory.
It had an enrollment of about thirty-five hundred students with almost a
third taking mathematics and physics. Its international prestige was first
established in mathematics by the famous mathematician, physicist, and
astronomer Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) and enhanced in the 1900s
by Felix Klein, David Hilbert, Hermann Minkowski, Richard Courant, Carl
Runge, and Hermann Weyl, all of whom were also very much interested in
physics. To this group of mathematicians were added the outstanding
physicists Max Born, Robert Pohl, and James Franck. They directed the
Institute of Theoretical Physics and the First and Second Institutes of Phys-
ics, respectively, with all three Institutes housed in the same building, along
with the Institute of Mathematics under the direction of Richard Courant.
It is not knowledge, but the act of learning, not possession but
the act of getting there, which grants the greatest enjoyment.
Carl Friedrich Gauss
The Institute of Physics, University of Göttingen.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 42

The strength of this formidable research centre lay in the interaction of
mathematicians, theorists, and experimentalists with joint colloquia and the
free movement of students and visitors among the Institutes. Thus,
Göttingen attracted many famous visitors as well as some of the most bril-
liant students from all over the world.
Max Born and James Franck
Herzberg had chosen to spend the first half of his stay in the Institute of
Theoretical Physics directed by Max Born, whose group had created quan-
tum mechanics, and the other half with the Nobel Laureate James Franck
at the Second Institute of Physics.2 Born and Franck formed a powerful
team, and joined by the mathematics faculty, they played an outstanding
role in atomic and molecular physics in the twelve years of their tenure in
Göttingen.3,4 They first met as young students at the University of Heidel-
berg in 1901 and became lifelong friends. Both were born to well-estab-
lished German Jewish families, Born’s father having a Chair at the
University of Breslau, and Franck’s father being a banker in Hamburg.
Although the early studies of Born and Franck were in humanistic gymna-
siums with emphasis in the classics, each clearly had decided on a career
in physics. Born continued his studies at the University of Göttingen,
received his Doctorate in 1907, and stayed on as Privatdozent until 1914,
when he was offered a Chair at the University of Berlin. Physically unfit
for the army in World War I because of asthma, he first worked on a farm
and then helped to improve communications systems and tested inventions
for the artillery. In 1919, he accepted Max von Laue’s proposal to exchange
chairs and moved to the University of Frankfurt. Two years later, Born was
offered the prestigious post of Professor and Director of one of the two
Institutes of Physics in Göttingen, the other being under Professor Robert
Pohl whose main interest was solid state physics. Born foresaw the need
and opportunity to establish a centre for atomic physics in Göttingen and
accepted the appointment on the condition that he serve as Director of a
new Institute of Theoretical Physics and that his friend James Franck be
appointed a Professor and Director of the Second Institute of Physics in
order to supervise experimental research in atomic physics.5 At that time in
German universities, it was customary for each physics professor to have
his own institute with a faculty, docents, assistants, and students, and this
is what Born proposed. He knew that Franck and Pohl had been at the same
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      43
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 43

44
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
school in Hamburg and were great friends, so there would be good relations
between the two experimental institutes. This plan was accepted, leading to
the University of Göttingen becoming a third strong centre for physics, in
addition to Munich and Berlin.
James Franck had studied at the Wilhelm Gymnasium in Hamburg and,
after a semester in Heidelberg, he enrolled in the University of Berlin,
which was the centre of physics at that time, with the distinguished profes-
sors Max Planck and, later, Albert Einstein. The Physics Department was
noted for its regular Wednesday Colloquia, which Franck considered to be
the most important happening in his education, as some of the greatest
minds in physics discussed the problems presented by the discoveries in
atomic physics and Planck’s quantum hypothesis. Franck obtained his
Doctorate in 1906 for research in collisions of electrons and ions. In Berlin,
he continued with studies of collisions of electrons and gaseous atoms, and
in 1914 while experimenting with mercury, he and his younger colleague
Gustav Hertz showed that energy was transferred from an energetic
electron to an atom only in discrete quanta.6 This result was correctly
Professors Max Born, James Franck, and
Robert Pohl of the University of Göttingen.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 44

interpreted by them to mean that quantization applies to all atomic process-
es, not just to absorption and emission of radiation, and to all atomic sys-
tems, not only to hydrogen. The Great War interrupted this research. Both
were called up and immediately left the university, eventually joining
Pioneer Regiment No. 36, a special unit for chemical warfare organized by
Fritz Haber, the Director of the Kaiser-Wilhelm Instituts für Physikalische
Chemie. While on the Russian front in 1916, Franck contracted severe
polyneuritis which affected his legs and was sent home to recuperate. He
was awarded the Iron Cross first and second class and the Hanseatic Cross
of Hamburg for bravery.7 From 1917 to 1921 he served as a Section Head
in Haber’s Institute in Berlin-Dahlem.
James Franck agreed to join Max Born in Göttingen. At the same time,
Richard Courant was appointed to the Institute of Mathematics. The addi-
tion of these three to the Science Faculty in 1921 led to mockery of “the
Jewish University” by Göttingen students but did not dissuade them from
enrolling in the courses of these distinguished professors.8 Born’s insis-
tence that Franck be appointed in Göttingen was amply justified when
Franck and Hertz were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1925 for
their discovery of the laws governing the impact of an electron upon an
atom. Franck’s interest in collisions of electrons with atoms expanded to
include collisions between atoms, the formation and dissociation of mole-
cules, fluorescence emission, and chemical processes. His laboratory soon
became recognized as the leading centre for molecular spectroscopy, and
he was quickly surrounded by talented research students from the world
over. There was great informality in the laboratory, and Professor and assis-
tants would bicycle together at lunchtime for a swim and snack at the
swimming pool by the Leine River. Franck was revered by all who knew
him for his open friendliness and general approach to science and everyday
life. One young scientist said of him, “His character was written on his
face. The affection he inspired can be ascribed to two features which stood
out in his character: his absolute, natural honesty, and his profound human
warmth.”4 Another added, “He was the most immediately lovable man I
have ever met.”9 Herzberg was also to come under his spell.
Herzberg arrived in Göttingen on 2 November 1928 and spent two days
in search of an affordable room.10 In the process he became familiar with
this walled city and its narrow alleys with half-timbered houses, reminis-
cent of Darmstadt’s old town. Many of the houses were student taverns,
and others were small shops to serve the various needs of the university
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      45
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 45

46
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
community. It was a city of 42,500 inhabitants, and its centre was teeming
with students circling the legendary “Goose Girl” statue and fountain
behind the thirteenth century Rathaus on whose wall he noted the Latin
motto Extra Göttingen non est vita—Away from Göttingen there is no life.
Beyond the old walls were a series of scientific industries and laboratories,
a forerunner of today’s research parks. To his surprise, Herzberg found that
one of the main roads in Göttingen, named Herzberger Landstrasse, led to
the small city of Herzberg about fifty kilometres to the northeast, which he
later visited. He wondered whether there was any connection to his name,
since Langensalza, the Herzberg family home for four centuries, was only
about one hundred and fifty kilometres southeast of this city, but archival stud-
ies suggest that there is no relationship in the names of town and family.
Herzberg’s search for lodgings revealed that rooms in Göttingen were
not scarce, but many in the vicinity of the university were in poor condi-
tion and others were very costly. At the suggestion of James Franck he
found a suitable and reasonably priced room (at 40 RM per month with
breakfast and maid service) in the home of George Schlüter, a former
mayor of Göttingen, at 5 Merkelstrasse, in the outskirts of the city.10 Other
residents included a professor, a dentist, and a widow. As Herzberg soon
learned, the mathematician Hermann Weyl lived next door at No. 3, and
James Franck lived just across the street at No. 4, a palatial home with a
high tower overlooking the city. This region was adjacent to a park and
extensive forest but a considerable distance east of the town centre and the
main university buildings. The Institutes of Physics were housed in a large
brick building at the southern end of town about a ten minute walk from the
centre. Herzberg could obviously make use of a bicycle and would have to
save for this added expense or borrow from his friends back home.
Member of the Institute of Theoretical Physics
Although Herzberg had no intention of becoming a theorist, he hoped to
develop a deeper understanding of the new quantum theory and apply it to
the analysis of molecular spectra. Quantum mechanics had been formulat-
ed by Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, and Pascual Jordan in Göttingen in
1925. Wave mechanics was introduced a year later by Erwin Schrödinger
in Zurich, and a more general form of quantum mechanics was introduced
by Paul Dirac in Cambridge. These new theories were quickly applied to
the clarification of atomic spectra, and excitement ran high that quantum
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 46

theory would be equally useful in the understanding of molecular spectra.
Herzberg particularly wanted to study the wave mechanical treatment of
the valency forces in molecular hydrogen recently presented by Walter
Heitler and Fritz London. He was also intrigued by the molecular orbital
theory being developed by Erich Hückel and Friedrich Hund in Germany,
John E. Lennard-Jones in England, and Robert S. Mulliken in the United
States.
At the University, Herzberg learned that Professor Born had suffered a
nervous breakdown from the long hours and months of strenuous effort in
supervising and keeping up with his group of brilliant young theorists.
Among his group were Wolfgang Pauli, Werner Heisenberg, Friedrich
Hund, Pascual Jordan, Walter Heitler, Lothar Nordheim, Eugene Wigner,
J. Robert Oppenheimer, and E.U. Condon.11 A tiring trip to Russia in 1928
as well as worries over the deteriorating political situation in Germany did
not help matters, and Born was forced to interrupt teaching and research
and relax for much of the year that Herzberg spent in Göttingen.12
Although Born’s frequent absences were a disappointment to Herzberg,
Born was able to lecture from time to time and Herzberg made certain to
attend these sessions.
Almost the first person he met on arrival at the Institute was Walter
Heitler, already famous for his paper on valence theory, also twenty-four
years old, and now assistant to Born. They immediately recognized their
mutual interests in molecular problems and enjoyed discussions while
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      47
Walter Heitler.
Friedrich Hund.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 47

48
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
walking in the nearby forests and hiking in the Alps. Thus began a lifetime
friendship and scientific collaboration resulting in the publication of two
papers while they were in Göttingen. Others in the theoretical group at that
time were assistants Wigner and Hund, young students Maria Goeppert,
Max Delbrück, and Victor F. Weisskopf from Vienna, and Professor John
E. Lennard-Jones, a visitor from the University of Bristol.
As a matter of course, all members of the Institutes of Physics attend-
ed the famous weekly Physics Colloquia held jointly by the three Pro-
fessors.13 These were at a very high level and often given by visitors and
foreign guests. At this time when theoretical physicists were inclined to be
somewhat abstract and mathematical in their presentations, using the new
tools of matrix, operator, and eigenvalue methods not yet generally famil-
iar to physicists, Franck would intervene to ask the theorists to bring out
the physics of their topics. His presence was a benefit to all, especially to
the younger experimentalists and students.9 At an early stage, Herzberg
was asked to give a colloquium on his most recent work on a new band sys-
tem in carbon monoxide, CO, and felt that the ensuing discussion came off
well. With his continuing interest in astronomy, he attended the Astronomy
Colloquia, as well as the more informal joint seminars on theoretical and
experimental physics. Also much time was spent in study and discussion
with the theorists. All in all, this was a most stimulating year and reward-
ing experience, although it took many long hours of constant work to try to
keep up with the many new ideas and rapid developments in all of these
fields. Herzberg also kept up with the current scientific literature and devel-
oped a system of index cards noting references and brief abstracts of the
papers that interested him. This collection of references proved to be indis-
pensable to his later writings. He was completely absorbed in his work,
with little time for other activities, except for writing letters to his friends
in Darmstadt and Hamburg and to the ever-widening circle of molecular
spectroscopists around the world. He developed the habit of typing a num-
ber of letters each evening and kept copies, which he filed meticulously
along with the letters he received.
Herzberg also had the opportunity to participate in several conferences.
In December of 1928, he presented a paper on his work with Heitler titled
“New theoretical and experimental results on homopolar binding” at a
regional conference of Hessian physicists in Frankfurt. At this conference,
he heard an introductory lecture by Schrödinger on the theoretical percep-
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 48

tion of the value of physical models which was particularly illuminating
and clear. He then spent several days in Darmstadt, staying with his col-
league Kurt Lion, and gave a colloquium at the THD on “Quantum theory
and chemistry”. In February, a Conference of the German Physical Society
was held in Göttingen with a large attendance. Here, among other spectro-
scopists, he met his friend Karl-Friedrich Bonhoeffer, the physical chemist,
and while discussing recent research, Herzberg learned that the Delbrück
and Bonhoeffer families had been neighbours in the wealthy Grunewald
suburb of Berlin and that Karl-Friedrich’s brother Klaus had married Max
Delbrück’s sister Emmie.14 Towards the end of June 1929, Herzberg pre-
sented his work on the dissociation energy of oxygen at a conference in
Bad Nauheim near Frankfurt. Again, he took the opportunity to spend a few
days at the THD for talks with Rau and colleagues and to give two colloquia,
one on electron spin and the second on ortho- and para-hydrogen.
During the first part of his stay in Göttingen, Herzberg concentrated his
attention on the electronic structure of molecules, and using the Wigner–-
Witmer rules, he was able to show from a theoretical argument that the
accepted value for the dissociation energy of oxygen was not correct. He
was also able to establish an upper limit for the dissociation energy of nitro-
gen. As he wrote to his friend Hans-Werner, he was especially pleased that
he had priority in determining this new value, confirmed three months later
by R.T. Birge and R.S. Mulliken, two American leaders in spectroscopy.15
Although these contributions were not of major significance, they were
important steps in the development of molecular science and introduced
Herzberg’s name to the international community. The “build-up principles”
of diatomic molecules occupied most of his time, and he applied the molec-
ular orbital theory of Hund and Mulliken with modifications to distinguish
between bonding and anti-bonding electrons in molecules. He wrote a long
and detailed paper on this topic and presented his work in the Physics Col-
loquium. Because he could not assume that the audience was familiar with
this new theory, he expanded his presentation with an introductory tutorial
and gave two colloquia on the subject for a total time of three hours. There
was much discussion and helpful comment, which caused him to make
extensive changes to his manuscript before submission to Zeitschrift für
Physik.16 He also submitted a paper on this topic to the 1929 Conference of
the German Physical Society, held in Prague in mid-September. This new
work was deemed to be of such importance by many in the community that
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      49
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 49

50
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Herzberg’s name became linked with those of Hund and Mulliken in the
early development of molecular orbital theory.
One of Herzberg’s most important contributions in Göttingen was
based on the observed rotational Raman spectrum of nitrogen (N2) obtained
by Franco Rasetti at that time.17 On seeing the published spectrum, Herz-
berg immediately recognized the difference in intensity alternation of rota-
tional lines in N2 from that in H2. He thought it significant that the even-
numbered lines were stronger than the odd-numbered lines in N2, while the
reverse was true for H2. He contacted Heitler, who also sensed its impor-
tance, and in a short time they analyzed the problem and submitted a brief
paper to Die Naturwissenschaften with their explanation.18 Intensity alter-
nation of rotational lines in a molecular spectrum, that is, whether the even-
or odd-numbered lines are stronger, is based on whether an atomic nucle-
us contains an even or odd number of particles (leading to the so-called
Bose or Fermi statistics, respectively). At that time (1929), only two ele-
mentary particles were known, protons and electrons, both of which obey
Fermi statistics, and the premise was made that protons and electrons were
constituents of nuclei. Hydrogen nuclei have a mass of one atomic unit and
a positive charge of one unit and consist of a single proton, that is, an odd
number of particles, and therefore obey Fermi statistics. This is in keeping
with the observation that the odd-numbered rotational lines in the spectra
of H2 are more intense than even-numbered lines. Nitrogen nuclei (mass of
fourteen atomic units and a positive charge of seven units) were assumed
to have fourteen protons and seven electrons, that is, an odd number of
Fermi particles, and therefore the spectra of N2 should exhibit odd-
numbered lines that are more intense, just as in H2. However, this was con-
trary to the spectrum observed by Rasetti, which showed that N nuclei do
not obey Fermi statistics but rather Bose statistics. Heitler and Herzberg
were the first to point out this remarkable result for N nuclei and its dis-
crepancy with the then current theory. Although this result was the first
indication that electrons are not present in nuclei, Heitler and Herzberg did
not go that far in explaining the discrepancy: they suggested that electrons
in the nucleus lose their spin and thus their influence on the statistics of the
nucleus. Only after the discovery of the neutron (mass of one atomic unit
and no charge), by James Chadwick in Cambridge three years later (1932),
was it proposed by Heisenberg that nuclei consist of protons and neutrons,
but not electrons. Thus nitrogen nuclei consist of seven protons and seven
neutrons, an even number of particles in total, and so obey Bose statistics,
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 50

as first demonstrated by molecular spectroscopy.19 Although the paper by
Heitler and Herzberg was essential to this result and to Heisenberg’s
assumption that neutrons are fermions, he made no mention of their work
in his paper.
Member of the Second Institute of Physics
During the last half of his ten month stay in Göttingen, Herzberg carried
out experimental research at the Second Institute of Physics directed by
James Franck and also continued his close contact with the theorists. Two
of Franck’s assistants were Hertha Sponer and Heinrich G. Kuhn, both
accomplished experimental scientists, completely immersed in investiga-
tions of electronic spectra of diatomic molecules, studies which were of
great interest to Herzberg. At that time, few women were attending univer-
sities and only rarely were they employed as assistants or staff members.
Sponer and the mathematician Emmy Noether were the only women facul-
ty members at the University of Göttingen. Both were unpaid, unbeamter
ausserordentlicher professors (unofficial extraordinary professors) among
235 male faculty members. In time, both were recognized as eminent con-
tributors to their specialized fields of study. Sponer was known among the
spectroscopy group as a methodical worker and a stickler for details, yet
Herzberg found he could profitably work with her because of their interests
in similar molecular problems. Later he was to collaborate with Sponer on
a joint paper and to help her in providing data and checking tables of data
for her book Molecular Spectra and Applications in Chemical Problems.
Each morning, Franck with his assistants and senior guests (the
Rundgang) visited the graduate students to discuss progress and problems.
In this way, Herzberg became familiar with the overall research program of
the Institute. Herzberg collaborated in experimental research with Pro-
fessor Günter Scheibe, a visitor from the University of Erlangen in Bavaria.
He and Scheibe took up a suggestion by Franck and looked at the electronic
spectra of the methyl halides, but all they found with eight different methyl
compounds were continuous spectra in the wavelength region 2000–8000
angstroms (Å). These, of course, were not as interesting as discrete spectra
and  were difficult to understand. Herzberg and Scheibe expected to find
vibrational structure at shorter wavelengths, and later, when a fluoride-
prism, vacuum spectrograph was at their disposal, they observed a discrete
spectrum of methyl iodide (CH3I). Theirs was the first study of methyl
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      51
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 51

52
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
halide spectra occurring in the vacuum ultraviolet region, and the results
were submitted for presentation at the Discussions of the Faraday Society
to be held in late September in Bristol and for publication.20,21 This was
Herzberg’s first work on polyatomic spectra.
Herzberg also met with the group enrolled in the First Physical Institute
directed by Robert Pohl, although their research on crystals, crystal spec-
tra, and solid state problems was far removed from his own interests in
atoms and molecules in the gas phase. To his surprise, he was asked by the
younger students in the First Institute of Physics to give an overview of
recent developments in gaseous spectroscopy, because they had difficulty
following the talks on atomic and molecular physics in the Colloquia.
While others in Göttingen with more experience could have given these
lectures, Herzberg agreed and presented a series of informal lectures as an
introduction to atomic and molecular spectroscopy. These were also attend-
ed by graduate students and researchers from the other Institutes, including
some from Born’s theoretical group. One of these was the recently arrived
Victor Weisskopf, who recalled that at that time students had two choices
of outstanding schools in atomic physics in Germany: they could go either
to Göttingen or to Munich, where there was Arnold Sommerfeld and his
great school:
I went to Göttingen and there I met the great physicists who were the cre-
ators of quantum mechanics. The important thing, however, was not to
meet the great ones, but the many young people who were on my level,
or a little more advanced, all eager to learn, to discuss and to argue.
There were young instructors like Heitler, Herzberg, Nordheim, and
Wigner, and graduate students, people of my age or a little older, such as
Delbrück and Teller and Maria Goeppert. We learned quantum mechan-
ics together. It was a great experience and sensation. I will never forget
G. Herzberg—he also remains in my memory as one of the outstanding
teachers—he at that time taught for the first time the course “Intro-
duction to Atomic Physics” which is now immortalized in his book
which you all know, Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure. It was an out-
standing course at that time and still is, a fantastic achievement after
forty years! Atomic quantum mechanics, the consequences of symmetry,
the term spectra, the systematics of spectroscopy, the transition proba-
bilities, all this was exciting because it was so beautiful, and only a few
years old.22
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 52

Even at this early stage in his career Herzberg was demonstrating his
abilities as a superb teacher, with the clear exposition and excitement of
research that have characterized his lectures ever since. Another who
attended these lectures was his colleague Scheibe, who immediately sug-
gested that Herzberg should publish this work as a book. He offered to con-
tact Theodor Steinkopff, a publisher in Dresden whom he knew very well,
and to introduce Herzberg and the idea of the book to him. This he did, and
before long, Herzberg was negotiating a book on atomic and molecular
spectroscopy with the publisher. Thus began the writing of the series of
books that became classics in physics and chemistry.
While Herzberg spent most of his time in the laboratory of Franck’s
Institute and in studying, writing, and in discussions with the groups and
visitors, he wanted to sit in on one or two of Franck’s courses. However, as
he soon learned, Franck was not interested in giving the typical lecture
course and had come to an agreement with Pohl, who consented to give the
main lectures in physics, for which he became renowned throughout Ger-
many. Franck much preferred to hold sessions of small informal seminars
given by his students, visitors, and himself. In one of these seminars, Herz-
berg heard an account of recent spectroscopic research by Luise Hedwig
Oettinger, one of Franck’s students, and engaged her in discussions of the
work. By chance, she lived only a block away from Herzberg, at 19 Dahl-
mannstrasse, and they often met on the way to or from the University. He
enjoyed these encounters, and before long found they had similar views of
their future careers and common intellectual interests. She was as deter-
mined as he to become a research scientist and to focus on molecular sci-
ence. They became close friends, and together they attended Göttingen’s
cultural and musical events, as well as social activities in professors’homes,
and hiked on Sundays in the nearby forests. They would marry by year-end.
While Göttingen was undoubtedly one of the main European centres of
learning, Herzberg was disappointed with the quantity and quality of music
and theatre, which could not compare with what he had enjoyed in Darm-
stadt. In Göttingen, too, the Korps societies seemed to play a dominant role
in campus life, but of course, he took no interest in their activities. To make
up for the lack of cultural occasions, professors and their wives regularly
entertained friends and students in their homes. Many faculty members
were talented musicians, and their favourite relaxation was the informal
playing of the works of the German and Austrian composers. For the
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      53
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 53

54
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
younger set, there were parties and dances at professors’ homes. One of the
most memorable locations was the huge entrance hall of the home of
Professor and Mrs. Franck, where their two daughters hosted assistants,
visitors, and students. A special treat was the view of Göttingen at night
from the high tower of the Franck home.23 During a Christmas party at the
Institute of Physics, humorous stories were told, one being about an
Egyptian king’s daughter, whose face the storyteller thought looked very
much like that of Luise, and from that time on, Luise was known as the
Egyptian princess, much to the amusement of her friends.
Among the many visitors in Göttingen whom Herzberg met were
J.G. Winans, a National Research Fellow at Princeton University, and
E.C.G. Stueckelberg, a Swiss theorist, who had jointly written a paper titled
“The origin of the continuous spectrum of the hydrogen molecule”.24 This
topic had been the subject of Herzberg’s first presentation at a Physical
Society Meeting and his third paper, which he realized had given a far-out
suggestion for the origin of this spectrum. He immediately understood that
this latest work, based on quantum theory, gave the correct explanation for
the spectrum as arising from transitions from a bound to an unbound or
repulsive state. Another visitor was the Dutch physicist M.J. Druyvesteyn,
who described a spectrum in a mixture of helium and neon but could not
explain its origin.25 Although Herzberg was not particularly interested in
this work at the time, he made a note of it. To his surprise, about fifty years
later while working on spectra of the noble gases, he obtained the same
spectrum at much higher resolution and solved the riddle: the spectrum was
due to the ion HeNe+.26
Friedrich Hund, a former assistant of Max Born, already known for his
important contributions in atomic physics, was a frequent visitor to Göttin-
gen. Hund was applying his knowledge of atoms to molecules and had pub-
lished his basic papers on molecular orbital theory in 1927. Herzberg was
by now well versed in this concept, having thoroughly studied Hund’s
papers, and had several discussions with him about his own applications to
molecular structure and spectra. From this initial acquaintance, a strong
friendship developed through their scientific interests, and it continued for
seven decades, with Hund reaching the age of one hundred. Another visi-
tor interested in molecular orbital theory was John E. Lennard-Jones (later
Sir John), Professor of Theoretical Physics at the University of Bristol. At
a young age, he had made important contributions to the study of the forces
between atoms and molecules and introduced the empirical form A/r n –
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 54

B/r m (where m and n are integers) for the potential energy of two molecules
at a distance r from each other, a relationship known by his name. He spent
six months in Göttingen and became familiar with Herzberg’s ideas on
molecular orbital theory expressed in his recent paper on the topic from an
experimentalist’s viewpoint.16 Lennard-Jones found that his own theoreti-
cal thoughts were along similar lines and suggested they might continue
discussions and collaboration if Herzberg would come to spend a year in
Bristol. Herzberg welcomed the idea and thought that a year in England
would be very worthwhile, giving him the opportunity to visit universities
and meet English scientists, as well as a chance to become fluent in Eng-
lish. Little did he realize what an enormous benefit his facility in English
would become in just a few years.
At that time the Department of Physics at Bristol was under the chair-
manship of Arthur M. Tyndall, who was determined to build a first-rate
research school in physics following those of Oxford and Cambridge, and
he and his staff members were on the lookout for promising young physi-
cists. His first priority was to bring together a group in molecular physics
to be headed by Lennard-Jones, the Melville Wills Chair of Theoretical
Physics, who personally invited Herzberg and Max Delbrück during his
stay in Göttingen. With the knowledge that the young Herzberg was
already being recognized as an authority in molecular spectroscopy, Pro-
fessor Tyndall offered him a Research Studentship at £300 per annum in
May of 1929, to begin sometime in September following his fellowship in
Göttingen.27 Although very little spectroscopic work was being done in
Bristol at that time, Tyndall asked Herzberg to provide details of equipment
he would need. He immediately replied, requesting the loan of a grating
spectrograph if possible, a vacuum pump and transformer for operating a
discharge tube, and a comparator for measurement of spectra. Herzberg
apologized for writing in German, saying that he could read English well
but he could neither write nor speak it as well as he would like and would
work very hard to learn. Because only prism spectrographs were available,
the grating instrument would have to be built. Within a month, Herbert
W.B. Skinner, a young lecturer at Bristol, was in contact with Herzberg to
plan the building of a two-metre vacuum spectrograph, with gratings to be
ordered from the National Physical Laboratory in Teddington. Skinner’s
own research was in X-rays, but he was a consummate experimentalist and
sufficiently interested in Herzberg’s vacuum spectrograph to want to design
and build it himself.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      55
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 55

56
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Towards the end of the summer semester, Professor Paul Ehrenfest of
Leyden visited Göttingen with Hendrik Casimir and George Uhlenbeck,
two of his students, both of whom became famous physicists. They spent
three weeks in Göttingen and held daily meetings with staff and students to
catch up on the most recent applications of quantum mechanics to atomic
and molecular physics. Herzberg had a chance to review his own work with
this group and found that Ehrenfest had an incisive way of asking questions
and clarifying by them some obscure points in the discussions, a most
stimulating experience for Herzberg. August turned out to be a quiet month
in Göttingen with most of the staff and students on holidays, and Herzberg
was able to complete the last of the papers based on his work there. He left
on 1 September 1929 to spend two weeks in Nürnberg to visit Luise and
her family.
Luise’s parents were Paul Oettinger and Elsbeth (nee Eichenberg). Mr.
Oettinger was a veteran of World War I. He first worked for the export
company Eichenberg & Co. based in New Orleans but soon had his own
company, the Radium–Bronze Paint and Sheet Metal Works, and travelled
widely in the United States, Canada, and South America. Luise was born in
Nürnberg in 1906, and her sister Lotte was born four years later. Luise
attended the Realgymnasium of the Civic High School for Girls in Nürn-
berg from 1919 to 1925. She studied German, English, French, and Latin
languages along with mathematics, physics, and chemistry, as well as his-
tory, geography, and religion. Her academic record was laudable with out-
standing grades in physics, history, and geography, and she realized that her
interests were focused on science. In spite of family pressures to be “fem-
inine” she was determined to pursue a career in mathematics and science
and enrolled in the Technische Hochschule in Munich. After a year in
Munich, she left to visit relatives in Austin, Texas, and attended the State
University of Texas during the year 1927–1928. On her return to Germany
in the summer of 1928, Luise registered in the physics program at the Uni-
versity of Göttingen. She enjoyed her two and a half years there, attending
classes and seminars given by the extraordinary group of mathematicians
and physicists already mentioned. The fortuitous meeting, friendship, and
love of Gerhard was a supreme bonus.
Gerhard was warmly welcomed into Luise’s well-to-do family, and he
perceived no hesitation on their part to accept an Aryan son-in-law. As he
soon discovered, the family retained little of Jewish culture or religion,
even though Luise’s paternal grandfather had been a Rabbi and would not
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 56

have permitted close friendship with Gerhard, let alone marriage. The
young couple became engaged and planned to marry in December. By that
time Gerhard would be established in Bristol and would have completed
his Habilitation in Darmstadt, so that he would be ready to take up an aca-
demic position on his return to Germany. Luise planned to complete her
studies in Göttingen in the spring of 1929 and then join Gerhard in Bristol.
On learning of her son’s engagement, Gerhard’s mother congratulated him
on finding an educated and beautiful partner and never mentioned Luise’s
Jewish ancestry, neither did Walter. In announcing his engagement to
Alfred and Hans-Werner, Gerhard reminded them of their boyhood
discussions on the qualities in the women they would marry. He hinted
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      57
Luise Hedwig Oettinger at the time
of her engagement to Gerhard.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 57

58
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
humorously that Luise fulfilled almost all of their conditions: she was a
physicist and a pacifist and had her hair cut short in the latest vogue, but
she was not a vegetarian and she was Jewish.
On 15 September Herzberg attended the German Physical Society
Meeting in Prague and gave a presentation titled “Bonding and anti-bond-
ing electrons in diatomic molecules”. He was pleased with the reception of
this paper and the many scientists he met as a result of this work.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  11:52 AM  Page 58

4. A YEAR IN BRISTOL
Herzberg’s trip to England was his first outside of the Continent. His ship
landed at Dover on 22 September 1929, and he was permitted to proceed
to Bristol on the conditions that on arrival he obtain a Registration Certif-
icate from the police and that he not remain in the United Kingdom longer
than twelve months. He was also to check with the Bristol constabulary
every few months, noting any change of address. With these formalities
completed, Herzberg took the train to Bristol where he was met by Herbert
Skinner, who had helped to design the new spectrograph for Herzberg’s
research. Herzberg was then settled in the home of Mr. and Mrs. Painter on
42 Windsor Road in St. Andrew’s Park. He joined the group at the Uni-
versity of Bristol the next day.
The H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory
The H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory was a spacious new building located in
a fine botanical garden of the Royal Fort Estate of the University on a hill-
top overlooking the city. It was named after its benefactor Henry Herbert
Wills of the cigarette manufacturing firm of the same name. The Labora-
tory was officially opened just two years earlier on 21 October 1927 by Sir
Ernest Rutherford. On this occasion, he and other physicists of great fame,
including Sir William Bragg, Sir Arthur Eddington, A. Fowler, Pierre Lang-
evin of France, and Max Born of Germany, were awarded honorary
degrees. By 1929, the small staff comprised the chairman Arthur M. Tyn-
dall, who worked on ion mobilities with his assistant Cecil F. Powell (later,
of cosmic rays fame), J.E. Lennard-Jones the molecular theorist, S.H. Piper
and H.W.B. Skinner working on X-rays, W. Sucksmith interested in mag-
netism, and L.C. Jackson a solid state physicist, among others. Herzberg
found that Max Delbrück, his colleague from Göttingen, had also been
invited to Bristol. He recalled that Max fitted in very well with the group
of younger physicists in Bristol because of his gregarious ways and the
ease with which he made friends. Herzberg and Delbrück were the first
from the Continent to be given research fellowships in Bristol, followed
later by K. Wieland from Switzerland, W. Heitler, M. Stobbe, and H. Bethe
59
There are few hours in life more agreeable than the hour
dedicated to the ceremony known as afternoon tea.
Henry James
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:20 PM  Page 59

60
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
from Germany, C. Zener from the United States of America, and D.C. Rose
from Canada. These were all judicious choices as three, namely Bethe, Del-
brück, and Herzberg, were later awarded Nobel Prizes.
Just two days after Herzberg’s arrival in Bristol, the University was
host to a Faraday Society Meeting titled “Molecular Spectra and Molecular
Structure” (24–26 September), organized by Professors W.E. Garner of the
Chemistry Department and J.E. Lennard-Jones of Physics.1 Many of the
world authorities attended, most from foreign lands (ten from the U.S.A.,
six from Germany, four from France, and one or two from each of Canada,
India, Italy, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland, and the U.S.S.R.), and fifteen
from the United Kingdom. In all, thirty-nine papers were submitted for dis-
cussion.
This was Herzberg’s first meeting in the English language, and he was
somewhat dismayed on opening day to find that he did not understand a
word of what the first speaker, the distinguished O.W. Richardson, who
was to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics that year, was saying about
The H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory, University of Bristol.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:20 PM  Page 60

the spectrum of hydrogen.2 Herzberg began to wonder whether he would
ever be able to understand English. He soon realized, however, that the
problem was not simply his own deficiency in English, but that this great
physicist mumbled. The next speaker was Sir C.V. Raman, destined to
receive the 1930 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on light scattering and
for discovery of the effect named after him.3 As he presented his paper
“Investigation of molecular structure by light scattering”, he spoke clearly
and lucidly in beautiful English, and Herzberg could understand every
word and found Raman’s enthusiasm infectious. Herzberg had the oppor-
tunity to meet Raman several times during the meeting and to discuss with
him the meaning for nuclear theory of the intensity alternation
(strong/weak) for the even- to odd-numbered rotational lines in the Raman
spectrum of nitrogen, observed by Rasetti. Raman was very interested in
this result and understood and accepted the explanation of Heitler and
Herzberg. At the meeting, Herzberg presented a brief report on his work
with Scheibe on the continuous spectra of the methyl halides and partici-
pated in the formal discussions during the session on electronic spectra.
Although he was initially concerned about his limited speaking capability
in English, he felt that he had communicated his thoughts reasonably well
at his first public meeting in England. Also, he was pleased to meet for the
first time several senior spectroscopists with whom he had corresponded,
including E.F. Barker, R.T. Birge, G.H. Dieke, and O.S. Duffendack of the
U.S.A., C.F. Goodeve and W. Jevons of the U.K., V. Henri, J. Cabbanes,
and J. Lecomte of France, and R. Mecke of Germany, among others.
Herzberg was quite happy with his stay in England and managed to
acclimatize rather quickly to living in Bristol. At first, it was naturally dif-
ficult to get started in new surroundings with a somewhat unfamiliar lan-
guage. As might be expected, he also found differences in Anglo-Saxon
attitudes from those he was used to in Germany, far less formality among
colleagues at the university and much more open discussion and criticism
of local and federal politicians and governments. In many ways Bristol
reminded him of his home town of Hamburg. Bristol was situated at the
confluence of two rivers, the Avon and Frome, flowing into the Severn
River and the Bristol Channel. It had extensive dock facilities and was one
of England’s major trading centres since the twelfth century. He enjoyed
hikes in the wooded hills of the countryside, although he found cycling on
the steep hills of Bristol quite a challenge, even on his lightweight bicycle
outfitted with bamboo fenders.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      61
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:20 PM  Page 61

62
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
In the laboratory, he was essentially on his own because there were no
experimental spectroscopists in Bristol. However, the atmosphere at the
Wills Laboratory was relaxed and friendly, and Tyndall’s attitude and sup-
port stimulated creativity and hard work. The laboratories were spacious,
well equipped, and much better supported than even in Göttingen, and the
freedom for research was the same as in Göttingen and Darmstadt at that
time. The small staff of twelve included some brilliant physicists, although
Herzberg felt that the Bristol people couldn’t quite match some of the very
powerful minds working in Göttingen. Of course, he did not expect to find
the equal of Göttingen here, since he knew that the University of Bristol
was one of the newer universities in England, having been established as
University College Bristol in 1876 and gaining university status only in
1909. Twenty years later its enrollment was almost one thousand students
The faculty of the H.H. Wills Laboratory in 1930.
First row: W. Sucksmith, – , G. Herzberg, G. McKenzie, J.E. Lennard-Jones,
A.M. Tyndall, L. Herzberg, A.P. Chattock, S.H. Piper, H.W.B. Skinner;
Middle row: L.C. Jackson, – , C.F. Powell, M.G. Bennett, – , T. Malkin, – ,
H.H. Potter; Back row: W.R. Harper, – , –, – .
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:20 PM  Page 62

in the Faculties of Arts, Science, Medicine, and Engineering. Thanks to
Tyndall’s efforts, the university had already achieved great strength in sci-
ence. As in Göttingen, there was also much interaction between theorists
and experimentalists and, in Herzberg’s case primarily in discussions with
Lennard-Jones and Delbrück on molecular problems. Also there were
many visitors from nearby universities and the Continent, among them
Fritz London and Neville Mott, both of whom he came to know well. 
A new and particularly enjoyable experience for Herzberg was the rit-
ual of afternoon tea that brought together most of the people of the Wills
Laboratory every day at 4:30 P.M. Tea was provided by Mrs. Greed, the
porteress, who along with her other duties found time to prepare delicious
breads, cakes, scones, jams, and biscuits.4 These meetings gave the oppor-
tunity for much informal discussion of research and scientific activities
around the world and made a deep impression on him. There was never
afternoon tea in Darmstadt or Göttingen. Added to these daily gatherings
were frequent Sunday walks in the Somerset hills with Prof. Tyndall and
his staff.
The first few months in Bristol were spent in preparing a program of
research while awaiting the completion of the two-metre grating spectro-
graph. This included the installation of a discharge tube for excitation of
emission spectra of various diatomic and polyatomic molecules he wished
to study and in preliminary experiments using the two prism spectrographs
(a Hilger E1 and E2) at his disposal. He also immersed himself in review-
ing the available literature on predissociation, the diffuseness of certain
lines in a molecular spectrum, a topic which had piqued his interest at the
Faraday Meeting. In the evenings, he was preoccupied with preparations
for the Habilitation, a procedure characteristic of German universities and
the outcome of which would determine his future. It was the formal entry
to an academic career, a course in research he had set for himself long ago.
The Habilitation required a thesis and a lecture, followed by discussion and
a question period. He was scheduled to make his presentation in mid-
January at the Technische Hochschule in Darmstadt.
On 13 December 1929, the University of Bristol celebrated the instal-
lation of a new chancellor, Winston (Leonard Spencer) Churchill. He was
met at the train station by students singing “Why was he born so beautiful?
Why was he born at all?” And Herzberg joined the townspeople who lined
the streets to welcome Churchill to Bristol.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      63
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:20 PM  Page 63

64
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Marriage
Just before Christmas, Gerhard returned to Nürnberg for his marriage to
Luise on 30 December 1929. Because they were of different sects,
Lutheran and Jewish, and neither of them practised their faith, a religious
service was out of the question. They were married by a magistrate in a civic
ceremony. Only the Oettinger family was in attendance; Gerhard’s mother
was in America and Walter was working in Hamburg. After a week’s holi-
day in the Alps, the couple returned to Nürnberg and travelled to nearby
Erlangen. At the invitation of Professor Scheibe, Gerhard gave a colloqui-
um on the meaning of modern spectroscopy for chemistry. He then went on
to Darmstadt for the Habilitation which was held on 15 January. For the
thesis requirements, he submitted his paper on molecular orbital theory,
“The bonding of diatomic molecules”.5 He also gave the lecture “An intro-
duction to modern spectroscopy and its meaning for chemistry”
(Einführung in die moderne Spektroskopie und ihre Bedeutung für die
Chemie) and “Selected topics in atomic physics” (Ausgewöhlte Kapitel aus
der Atomphysik). With the successful completion of the Habilitation,
Herzberg earned the right to lecture (venia legendi), and Professor Rau,
now the Rector, offered him the post of Privatdozent at the THD, equiva-
lent to an Assistant Professorship, to begin on completion of his Research
Assistantship in Bristol. 
The newlyweds proceeded to Göttingen, where they spent a few days
with surprised colleagues, who were only then personally informed of the
marriage. Luise and Gerhard managed to attend a Physics Colloquium and
to visit and admire the new home of the Institute of Mathematics nearby,
which had been formally dedicated on 2 December. Gerhard was due to
return to Bristol on 23 January, the very day of David Hilbert’s mandatory
retirement at age sixty-eight. Luise would remain in Göttingen to continue
her studies until the end of the winter semester (at Easter) and then join
Gerhard in Bristol.
Return to Bristol
On his return to England, Herzberg was pleased that the immigration
authorities had approved a month’s extension of his stay to 1 November
1930. In Bristol, he was invited by Tyndall to give a course of lectures on
molecular spectroscopy to begin in April. At the same time, the vacuum
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:20 PM  Page 64

spectrograph was completed and ready to be tested and used. Also, Max
Born invited him to participate at the Congress of Scientific Research to be
held in Königsberg in the beginning of September, with Hund as the
keynote speaker and Herzberg to follow with a shorter paper and discus-
sion titled “The term specification of diatomic molecules”. In addition, the
first letters from the publisher Theodor Steinkopff concerning his book on
atomic and molecular spectroscopy began to arrive, inquiring when the
manuscript might be ready. There was no doubt that this would be an
extremely busy year. However, with his disciplined approach to these
duties and his determination and hard work, much would be accomplished
before returning to Darmstadt to take up his post as Privatdozent.
A few days before he was to meet Luise on her arrival in London,
Gerhard took the opportunity to visit the University of Cambridge and
King’s College and Imperial College in London. A letter of introduction
from James Franck paved the way for Herzberg to meet some of Ruther-
ford’s brilliant associates in the Cavendish Laboratory, all young men of his
own age who were to make great strides in our knowledge of nuclei. These
included P.M.S. Blackett, J.D. Cockroft, E.T.S. Walton, and the Russian
Pyotr L. Kapitsa, all future Nobel Prize winners, and M. Oliphant, who
after some years in England returned home to Australia as a professor of
physics at the National University and later served as Governor of the State
of Victoria.6 Herzberg also became acquainted with the college system at
Cambridge, which was completely different from the way of life for stu-
dents in German universities. In the King’s College laboratory of R.C.
Johnson, whom he had met at the Faraday Society Meeting, he was intro-
duced to R.K. Asundi of Pune, India, who was working on the spectra of
CO for his Ph.D. degree. He became a lifelong friend and was to introduce
Herzberg to Indian culture and philosophy in addition to Indian contribu-
tions to spectroscopy. This visit to King’s College turned out to be the
beginning of a very important connection for Herzberg, as later events were
to prove. On Luise’s arrival in London they enjoyed a few days of sight-
seeing and took advantage of the opportunity to attend some musical
events.
Back in Bristol, Herzberg gained much valuable experience with his
first grating spectrograph. This was to be of enormous help in his future
studies. He obtained definitive plates of P2 showing diffuse rotational lines,
which he correctly interpreted as caused by predissociation. While trying
out various light sources for exciting the spectrum of P2, he obtained and
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      65
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:20 PM  Page 65

66
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
identified a spectrum of CP, arising from an organic impurity, possibly
stopcock grease in the cell filled with phosphorous. He was also able to
observe emission spectra of 14N15N in an overexposed plate of 14N2 . The
isotope 15N had been detected from band spectra of NO by S.M. Naudé in
Chicago, within a year of the first discovery of the isotopes 17O, 18O, and
13C from band spectra.7 Since not much was known about the 15N isotope,
Herzberg published a brief note on his findings.8 Luise collaborated with
Gerhard on a number of these problems. This was the beginning of several
joint projects over the years, with Luise receiving full credit for her contri-
butions as a co-author in numerous publications. At Gerhard’s suggestion
she attempted to look for a spectrum of C2
+, but this was an idea before its
time, and the spectrum was only found about fifty years later.
Herzberg turned his attention to obtaining absorption spectra of poly-
atomic molecules. So as not to duplicate work being done or planned in
Göttingen, he wrote to James Franck informing him of the fine qualities of
the two-metre spectrograph and of his work on P2, CP, and N2, and inquir-
ing whether there was continuing interest in Franck’s group in the methyl
halides. Otherwise he would try to obtain improved spectra of CH3I.9 He
also wanted to look for spectra of other organic molecules such as acety-
lene (C2H2) and formaldehyde (CH2O). Franck wrote back that Scheibe
was continuing work on CH3I, but that Herzberg should certainly study the
other polyatomic molecules.10
Herzberg knew that no grating instruments were available in Darmstadt
and that his time for experimental research would be limited while prepar-
ing for his first series of lectures, so he decided to forego evaluation of
spectra while in Bristol and concentrate on obtaining good plates of spec-
tra of C2H2 and CH2O. These he could measure and analyze later in
Darmstadt. This took so much of his time that he was not able to devote any
time to the promised book. Moreover, progress in spectroscopy was mov-
ing at such a rapid pace that he realized he would have to change his orig-
inal plan of including both atomic and molecular studies in one volume,
even though this book was meant to be an introduction to the field. In fact,
his own research work and responsibilities at the THD were to prevent him
from completing a satisfactory manuscript for another four years. He also
gave up plans to participate in Born’s meeting in Königsberg because of the
travel costs involved. Instead, he attended a meeting of the British Assoc-
iation held at the same time in Bristol. The meeting itself was not very
exciting for him as most of the presentations had already appeared in
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:20 PM  Page 66

publications, but he had a chance to meet many scientists and, in particu-
lar, Robert Mulliken of The University of Chicago with whom he had cor-
responded on many occasions. They had already developed mutual respect
and admiration for each other’s contributions, and this increased over the
years, in spite of some friendly competition during their lifetimes.
As the time for their return to Germany approached, Luise and Gerhard
were assisted by friends in their search for suitable accommodation in
Darmstadt. In particular, Gretel Goldstein, the widow of Gerhard’s philos-
ophy professor Julius Goldstein was most helpful, with several suggestions
of friends who rented out rooms near the THD.11 Luise and Gerhard select-
ed the home of the Juda family when assured by Mrs. Goldstein that they
would find this household of family and roomers to be cultured and inter-
esting people. They rented two upstairs rooms with a small kitchen and
bath and were to be provided with breakfast and an evening meal, all at a
cost expected to be within their means. Costs were a concern since it had
not been possible to save much from the Bristol stipend. Also, Luise
planned to continue her studies towards a Ph.D. degree at the THD and
Gerhard’s post of Privatdozent was not a salaried faculty position, with
remuneration coming only from the fees paid by students for special lec-
tures.
Much to their delight, towards the end of their stay in Bristol, James
Franck presented the 1930 H.H. Wills Memorial Lecture “Spectroscopy
and Chemical Binding” and was awarded an honorary degree by the Uni-
versity of Bristol. The thirteen month period in England proved to be a long
absence from Germany for Gerhard. As much as he and Luise enjoyed their
English friends and living in Bristol with the sea nearby, they were anxious
to be home and counted the weeks and then the days until their return. They
left Bristol and England on 31 October 1930.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      67
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:20 PM  Page 67

68
5. PRIVATDOZENT IN DARMSTADT
The Germany that the Herzbergs returned to was one they neither remem-
bered nor expected. After only a year’s absence they found the Weimar
Republic reeling economically and threatened politically. While the heavy
burden of the Versailles Treaty of 1919 had crippled German industrial
capacity by stripping Germany of its colonies and merchant fleet, loans
from the United States had helped bring some semblance of prosperity and
stability to the country in the late 1920s. However, this was threatened by
a slowdown in business activity in 1929, and the crash of the New York
Stock Exchange on “Black Friday”, 24 October 1929, started the world-
wide Depression that hit Germany the hardest of any European country.
Loans were withdrawn after the stock market collapse, and bankruptcies
became commonplace, with three million unemployed by the end of 1930.1
The Years 1930 and 1931
In Darmstadt, the closure of printing, heating, and metal companies put
25 percent of the workforce into unemployment.2 The unemployed held
demonstrations to protest against the government, and the poverty and
despair made agitation by the National Socialist German Workers’ Party
(NSDAP, the Nazis) much easier. In the election of 1930, the NSDAP
gained 24.4 percent of the votes and became the second strongest political
party in Darmstadt. At the Technische Hochschule, students had also
become increasingly active politically, and the “People’s Students” gained
seven seats in the student elections of 1930.3
Under these severe economic conditions, Herzberg was fortunate to
have an academic position of any kind. Many of the young scientists had
to make do with postdoctoral positions, without remuneration, living on
what their families could provide.4 Privatdozents like Herzberg did not
receive a stipend either. Their only income came from the opportunity to
give special lectures from which they would receive a fee paid by the atten-
dees. These lectures were in addition to the normal course requirements
and were selected by students as electives, depending on their specialized
The characteristic danger of great nations, … which have a long
history of continuous creation, is that they may at last fail from
not comprehending the great institutions they have created.
Walter Bagehot

interests. Herzberg gave a series of such lectures in his chosen field of
spectroscopy. He had not been able to devote the necessary time to prepare
these lectures during the last few months in Bristol and now worked inces-
santly to be ready for his inaugural lecture, which he gave in mid-January.5
He chose the title “Cosmic Ultraviolet Radiation” for his course and was
disappointed with the poor attendance and the resulting low fees which he
received. He surmised this lack of attendees was owing to his choice of an
unattractive and general title for the course. A regular contribution from
Luise’s father was most welcome at this time, as was the research stipend
from the Emergency Association of German Science (Notgemeinschaft der
deutschen Wissenschaft) awarded for his first year as privatdozent. 
On returning to the THD, Herzberg’s top priority for research had been
to build high-resolution grating spectrographs for the far-ultraviolet and
near-infrared regions.6 He spent whatever time he could afford in the
design of these instruments, with the help of Herr Sting, the head of the
Physics Institute’s machine shop. Herzberg hoped to obtain gratings for
these spectrographs from Adam Hilger Ltd. in London, which had supplied
the good two-metre grating in Bristol, but he encountered difficulties. The
quality of the first grating received was a far cry from what he expected.
He tried to rectify this by letter, without much success. In desperation he
wrote to Professor Tyndall in Bristol and asked whether someone from the
department could look into this problem for him when in London. Tyndall
took up this matter himself with Frank Twyman, the Managing Director,
and within a few months a satisfactory two-metre grating was received.
Herzberg also considered alternative sources and inquired of others about
the availability of good gratings in the United States. He was informed by
Francis W. Loomis of the University of Illinois in Urbana that “gratings by
Robert W. Wood of the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore were very
good, though you could never be sure of getting a grating from Wood until
you had it in your hands”.7 Herzberg negotiated with Wood for a three-
metre grating and was told to expect one within a year. In due course, he
received a grating of remarkable quality, which Wood claimed was one of
his best; it provided high intensity along with the anticipated high resolu-
tion. Although money was tight, funding for the gratings was provided
through Rau by the Helmholtz Society for the Advancement of
Physical–Technical Research (Helmholtz Gesellschaft zur Förderung der
physikalisch–technischen Forschung) and the Association of Friends of the
THD (Ernst-Ludwigs-Hochschulgesellschaft).8
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      69

70
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
While preparing lectures and waiting for the spectrographs to be built,
Herzberg managed to resume studying some of the spectra photographed in
Bristol. On completing the analysis of the P2 spectra, he found evidence of
predissociation, a topic that had perked his interest in the Faraday Dis-
cussion Meeting. To better understand this effect and to prepare a discus-
sion for his book, Herzberg decided to write a detailed paper about this sub-
ject, including his own and other spectra as examples. He proposed this
idea to the editor of Naturwissenschaften, who immediately approved, with
the proviso that the paper be completed within a few months in order to be
included in the annual volume of new results in the natural sciences.
Herzberg managed to submit this long paper at the end of May.9
Luise had set her mind on preparing for a Ph.D. degree, with Gerhard’s
blessing. The degree required independent research, and she awaited the
completion of the spectroscopic instruments for her experimental work. In
the meantime, she enrolled in several courses in the Physics Institute of the
THD and continued her collaboration with Gerhard by measuring and ana-
lyzing some of the spectra they had recorded in Bristol. 
Within the first few months of his return to the THD, Herzberg was
invited to participate in several conferences and to give colloquia. In
February, he was invited to attend the next Faraday Society Discussion
Meeting on Photochemical Processes to be held in Liverpool in April 1931.
He declined because of the high travel costs and lack of time, but he sub-
mitted a brief paper on the absorption spectra of acetylene (C2H2) and
formaldehyde (H2CO) taken in Bristol.10 Shortly after the winter term, he
gave a one week course “The spectra and structures of atoms and molecules
and their significance in chemistry” in Erlangen. This was at the standing
invitation of Günter Scheibe, Professor of the Institute of Applied Chem-
istry, with whom he had worked in Göttingen. The course was essentially
a shortened version of his winter lectures at the THD, with much better
attendance, presumably because of the more specific title.
Several weeks later Herzberg participated in the prestigious “Week of
Physics” held in Leipzig 3–5 July.11 Peter Debye, famous for his work on
X-ray diffraction, had organized small meetings each year since 1928 deal-
ing with special fields of current research, with presentations given by the
most active researchers in the field. On the advice of his Leipzig colleagues
Werner Heisenberg and Friedrich Hund, Debye had selected the topic
molecular structure for 1931. The speakers were to be Rudolf Mecke of
Heidelberg on “Experimental studies of the band spectra of polyatomic

molecules”, Franco Rasetti of Rome on “The Raman spectra of gases”,
George Placzek of Leipzig on his newly developed “Polarizability theory
of Raman spectra”, Hertha Sponer of Göttingen on “Band spectra and dis-
sociation”, Victor Henri of Paris, who had discovered and named the effect,
on “Predissociation”, R. de L. Kronig of Groningen also on “Predissoc-
iation”, and Herzberg on “Electronic structure of molecules and valence”.
With Hund expected to be present, Herzberg chose to discuss molecular
orbital theory and its connection with valence, as well as his own version
of bonding and anti-bonding electrons.
This conference turned out to be extremely interesting for Herzberg,
particularly for the opportunity to discuss the latest developments in molec-
ular science with the participants and the many eminent Leipzig scientists.
Here, he met for the first time Werner Heisenberg, one of the founders of
quantum mechanics, who was to be awarded the 1932 Nobel Prize for this
work. He also met Edward Teller, a young Hungarian who had just com-
pleted his Ph.D. under Heisenberg. Teller’s and Herzberg’s discussions dur-
ing this meeting led to their work on an important paper on the vibrational
structure of electronic transitions in polyatomic molecules.12 This was writ-
ten within the next two years, while Teller was an assistant in Göttingen,
with frequent visits to each other’s institutes. Working with Teller was an
experience that Herzberg would not forget: Teller had the ideas and shared
them liberally, and Herzberg served as the midwife, trying to get these out
of Teller by describing experimental results. In turn, Teller developed a
great deal of affection for Herzberg. He found that “Herzberg’s systematic
approach and his great knowledge of the experimental material turned into
concrete success what otherwise would have been no more than a number
of more or less disjointed discussions. The collaboration was a great pleas-
ure due to the discipline that was evident in everything that Herzberg
undertook.”13 To Herzberg’s surprise, Teller also insisted that the authors’
names should be listed in alphabetical order on the paper, even though
Herzberg felt that Teller’s contributions were far more important and
according to tradition Teller’s name should be first. Herzberg was to follow
the alphabetical order of names in all his later publications. 
Following the conference in Leipzig, Herzberg visited the Kaiser-
Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electro-Chemistry in Berlin-
Dahlem, at the invitation of Professor Michael Polanyi, and gave a lecture at
the weekly colloquium.14 This was on the same topic as his presentation in
Leipzig, with a tutorial introduction for the benefit of the younger students.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      71

72
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
On his way back to Darmstadt, he stopped off in Göttingen to attend a con-
ference of the German Physical Society, where he met many colleagues.
These first two weeks in July, with visits to colleagues in Leipzig, Berlin-
Dahlem, and Göttingen, were very important for Herzberg, although they
occurred during an extremely busy summer term. On his return to the THD,
he lectured on selected topics in atomic physics with emphasis on radio-
activity and completed the paper for the proceedings of the Leipzig Confer-
ence.15 At the end of September he also participated in a cramming course,
preparing students for their physics examinations, a well-established sys-
tem at the THD, which also helped the assistants and privatdozents to add
to their low incomes. Before the start of the winter term the Herzbergs
travelled to the South Tyrol for much-needed relaxation.
Luise and Gerhard were delighted with their home at 4 Heidenreich-
strasse in Darmstadt. The location was ideal, in a fine residential neigh-
bourhood, near a large park with a lake, the Grosser Woog, for boating and
swimming, and bordering on a forest area that provided ample opportuni-
ties for hiking. A short walk around the lake brought them to Mathilden-
höhe on the way to the THD, or skirting the lake and through the old town
was another way to the THD. Either way, it was a pleasant fifteen minute
walk from home to the laboratory. Their attic apartment was comfortably
furnished and private for work and study in the evenings. Best of all, the
The Juda home, 4 Heidenreichstrasse, Darmstadt.

Juda family were very accommodating and friendly. Frau Juda, a widow,
and her daughter Lise ran an efficient household with the help of a cook
and cleaning lady. Several other paying guests included a banker’s widow,
a retired lawyer, a teacher, and some students. Frau Juda’s brother, known
to all as Uncle Victor, lived there, confined to a wheelchair by muscular
dystrophy. He sketched and was very good company, always full of
humour. The Herzbergs were served their breakfast and evening meal at
home. Sunday breakfasts were a special treat, with a variety of baked
goods, cheeses, jams and preserves, boiled eggs, and tea and coffee.
Sundays were spent in long walks and often writing letters to parents and
friends and working at home.
During that summer the political situation deteriorated rapidly in
Darmstadt and especially in the rest of Germany, with brutal confrontations
of Communists and Fascists. In mid-June more than a thousand SS (Schutz-
staffel), Hitler’s personal guards, in black uniforms and SA storm troopers
in brown uniforms marched into Darmstadt, a clear threat to the Com-
munists and to the local government. On 13 November the NSDAP held a
large assembly as part of an election campaign, with Adolf Hitler present,
and more than twenty thousand people in attendance.16 Gerhard and Luise
did not participate. While they had experienced hardship during earlier eco-
nomic crises in their youth, the present scene was more disturbing and
somewhat threatening. The mood was subdued in the Juda home that
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      73
Gerhard and unruly hair,
by Uncle Victor.
Luise, the Egyptian princess, by Uncle Victor.

74
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
evening; there was no discussion of the tense situation. In the election two
days later, 45 percent of the voters chose the NSDAP—an indication of the
precarious situation for the Hessian Parliament and, indeed, for the Weimar
Republic itself. With more than four million unemployed in Germany in
1931, people felt that only Hitler and his Nazi Party could save the coun-
try and return it to the strength and honour it enjoyed before the Great War.
The Darmstadt Landtag remained as the government, but Nazi propaganda,
rallies, and brawls made work in Parliament increasingly difficult. At the
THD, nineteen representatives of the People’s Student Party were elected
to the Student Government, more than doubling the strength of the right-
wing element of the university.
1932 and the New Spectroscopy Laboratory
In the new term, Herzberg was given the position of assistant to Professor
Rau, with responsibilities to oversee the experimental physics laboratories
and to advise and supervise students. His stipend was 300 RM (e.g., about
$75) per month, barely enough to cover living expenses, so the continuing
support from Luise’s father was helpful. 
“German Day”, 13 November 1931, celebrated by the NSDAP
in front of the Landesmuseum in Darmstadt.

Herzberg was now able to devote more time to establishing his labora-
tory in anticipation of completion of the two spectrographs. He also under-
took the supervision of several students proceeding to the Diplom Ingen-
ieur degree and a few working on their Doctorate degrees. Luise was con-
tinuing experimental work on the spectra of BeO, which she had started in
Bristol, and considered that this project could serve as her Doctorate thesis.
The first guest worker from North America was Dr. James Curry, a chemist
who had just completed a year with Michael Polanyi in Berlin-Dahlem and,
having heard Herzberg’s lecture there, wanted to do some spectroscopic
research.17 He arrived in January 1932 and spent eight months at the THD
studying the spectra of NO2, PN, and O2. In February Dr. Sho-Chow-Wu
of Shanghai, then at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena,
California, working with Professor R.M. Badger, asked if he could spend a
year with Herzberg.18 Wu was highly recommended by Badger and, more-
over, had a “China Foundation” fellowship, which would cover his travel
and living costs in Germany. Herzberg accepted Wu and wrote to him about
the laboratory and spectroscopic work, mentioning that Curry was there,
along with several students. Herzberg also mentioned his interest in the
challenging study of extremely weak spectra of molecules, known as “for-
bidden transitions”, and had built a 12.5-metre-long gas cell for this pur-
pose.19 Wu arrived in early summer and stayed for a year, learning the new
spectroscopic techniques while obtaining spectra of carbon disulfide (CS2).
Much was accomplished during 1932, despite having to work with the
available prism instruments rather than the two new grating spectrographs.
In particular, with the long absorption path, Herzberg observed a forbidden
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      75
Band System of the PN molecule after Curry, Herzberg, and Herzberg, 1934.

76
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
spectrum of oxygen showing structure, which later became known as the
“Herzberg Bands”.20 This transition in oxygen is of unique importance as
it gives rise to the total absorption by the atmosphere, from 2200 to 1900
Å, and provides a shield against ultraviolet radiation. Publication of this
work almost led to a quarrel with Wolfgang Finkelnburg, a colleague and a
privatdozent in Karlsruhe. Finkelnburg had earlier informed Herzberg of an
oxygen spectrum in this wavelength region taken by himself and a col-
league and felt their work had been slighted when Herzberg had not men-
tioned it in his paper. While Herzberg apologized for this omission, he was
also able to show that in fact the two spectra were quite different: one was
observed at high gas pressure and the other at very low pressure. He was to
confirm the difference later, at higher resolution. This incident made such
an impression on Herzberg that he vowed to remember details of discus-
sions with colleagues and to give proper acknowledgement where due. A
preliminary study of the spectrum of formaldehyde (H2CO) with his stu-
dent K. Franz was also published that year. This too was taken up at high-
er resolution when the grating spectrographs were completed.
Luise was nearing completion of the analysis of the BeO spectrum,
which she had first observed in Bristol. She published a brief paper on this
work and, on the basis of this study, felt it was now time to prepare for her
Herzberg’s two-metre far-ultraviolet
grating spectrograph, Darmstadt, 1932.

Doctorate degree.21 Although she had enrolled in a number of courses at
the THD during 1931–1932, it was not possible to register for a Doctorate
degree because she had not spent the years for a diploma degree at the
THD. Another university had to be found for this purpose. Gerhard wrote
to Professor Karl W. Meissner, an atomic physicist and director of the
Physics Institute in Frankfurt, enquiring whether there was such a possibil-
ity in Frankfurt. Thus it happened that Luise registered with the University
of Frankfurt in the fall semester, with her oral examination scheduled for
May 1933.
Herzberg and his group frequently attended spectroscopy colloquia held
monthly in nearby Frankfurt and Heidelberg, with Bonhoeffer, Mecke, Wei-
zel, Ebert, and Hückel, among others, present. Moreover, he also managed
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      77
Herzberg’s three-metre spectrograph for visible
and infrared regions, Darmstadt 1932.

78
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
to keep up an extensive correspondence with spectroscopists the world
over, receiving and sending reprints, and discussing fine points in nomen-
clature and the meaning of observed features in spectra. Molecular spec-
troscopy was in its infancy and flourishing, with many ideas and results to
be questioned and confirmed. Fortunately mail service within European
countries and to Great Britain was essentially an overnight matter, and pub-
lication in scientific journals took only a few weeks, so new results were
distributed rather quickly within Europe and a few weeks later in North
America. As the work of Herzberg’s spectroscopy laboratory became
known, a steady stream of visitors from various countries came to
Darmstadt, including Francis A. Jenkins of California and Robert S. Mulli-
ken of Chicago, who were in Europe on Guggenheim Fellowships. Other
events, however, were soon to intrude on this exciting period in the devel-
opment of molecular spectroscopy, and of science in general, in Germany.
1933 and the Nazi Nightmare
The first indication of possible difficulties for the Herzbergs came imme-
diately after the Nazis came into power in January 1933, with Adolf Hitler
Robert Mulliken’s visit at the THD, 1932.

as Chancellor. Two months later, Germany became a dictatorship through
the “Enabling Act”, and Hitler its Führer. Events moved quickly as the
Nazis put forward their progressively harsh anti-Communist and anti-
Semitic programs. The Communist press was banned, and house-to-house
searches and ill-treatment of leading members of the Communist Party and
Socialist Party took place, with some being murdered and others placed in
concentration camps. In the elections of 5 March, the Nazis obtained 44
percent of the vote in Germany, and 50 percent of the vote in Darmstadt.
The following day the flag of the Reich was burned at the Darmstadt Legis-
lature, and all official buildings were bedecked with Swastika flags.22 The
radio blared Ein Volk, Ein Reich, Ein Führer.
On 31 March, Jewish judges and lawyers were summarily dismissed
because of their religion. On the next day a government-sponsored
“National Boycott” took place; Jewish stores were placarded, Jews were
kept from entering their offices and public buildings, and many were beat-
en in the streets. Within a week, the “Law for the Restoration of the Career
Civil Service” came into effect, removing all non-Aryans from the civil
service. Because the government funded the universities and held authori-
ty over them as part of the civil service, “non-Aryan” scholars and scien-
tists and “politically unreliable” persons were dismissed from their univer-
sity posts, twelve hundred in the first two years and seventeen hundred by
the end of 1935. “Non-Aryan” included anyone with a Jewish parent or
grandparent, or who practised the Jewish religion. Exempted were “non-
Aryans” who were in office before the beginning of the Great War, those
who had fought at the front, and those whose father or son was killed in the
war. The term “politically unreliable” referred to people who had conduct-
ed themselves in what was considered a communist manner, whether or not
they were in any way connected with the Communist Party.23
At the time, the 600,000 German Jews constituted barely 1 percent of
the population of 65 million. Most families had lived in Germany for sev-
eral generations, had fought its wars and contributed to its renowned cul-
ture, and thought of themselves as Germans first; many had converted to
Protestanism. The majority lived in cities and were thus seen as a larger
proportion of the civic population, amounting to about 7 percent in Berlin
and 1.5 percent in Darmstadt. While anti-Semitism was prevalent in most
of Europe, with growing animosity especially in Poland, Austria, Germany,
and Hungary (where anti-Semitism had been legal since 1920), the con-
certed charge by Hitler and the Nazis that Jews were the cause of all of
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      79

80
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Germany’s past and present problems unleashed a simmering hatred that
was unchecked by any form of civility or law.
No organized movements or societies existed in Germany to help the
dismissed scholars, and they had to look outside their homeland for assis-
tance in finding employment and in continuing their careers. In 1933–1934,
650 scholars and their families emigrated. As a result, physics proved to be
one of the most severely damaged disciplines, with a loss of at least 25 per-
cent of its 1932–1933 personnel, including many of the finest scientists in
Germany.24 Albert Einstein, in America on a lecture tour when the Nazis
came to power, resigned his membership in the Prussian Academy of Sci-
ences, stayed in Belgium on his return, and vowed never to return to a
Germany that no longer observed civil liberty, tolerance, or equality of cit-
izens before the law. He was invited to join the Institute for Advanced
Study in Princeton University, where he remained until his death in 1955.
Michael Polanyi relinquished his senior post in the Kaiser-Wilhelm Insti-
tute in Berlin-Dahlem and accepted an appointment in Manchester. Erwin
Schrödinger, who was not Jewish, left Berlin disgusted by the Nazi regime
and went successively to Oxford, Graz, and eventually to Dublin, to head
the School of Theoretical Physics in the new Dublin Institute for Advanced
Studies. 
Herzberg was shocked to learn that most of the students and a consid-
erable number of the faculty of the University of Göttingen supported the
Nazi Party. A further blow was the resignation of James Franck and the
exodus of Max Born, along with their assistants Walter Heitler, Edward
Teller, Heinrich Kuhn, and Hertha Sponer (not Jewish), with all of whom
Herzberg had collaborated. More recent arrivals in Göttingen, Eugene
Rabinowitch and Arthur von Hippel were also affected. Max Born, who
had never felt particularly Jewish, found his name in the Göttinger Zeitung
on 25 April, along with those of the mathematicians Felix Bernstein,
Richard Courant, and Emmy Noether, as being unsuitable to be civil ser-
vants and teachers because of their Jewish descent and were placed on
leave.25 Born left Germany the following month for the Italian South Tyrol.
He accepted an invitation by Cambridge University for a year and then
spent half a year at Raman’s Institute in Bangalore, India, before joining
the University of Edinburgh, where he remained until his retirement sev-
enteen years later. 
James Franck, whose Sephardic Jewish forebears had lived in Ham-
burg for over two hundred years, was a patriotic German and Nobel Laur-

eate and was awarded the first and second Iron Crosses for bravery in the
Great War. He could have remained at the university for the time being
because of service to his country, but he protested publicly and his was one
of the rare voices to be raised against the new laws. On 17 April Franck
resigned his distinguished post.26 He stressed to the Rector of the Uni-
versity, “We Germans of Jewish descent are treated as aliens and enemies
of our Fatherland. It is required that our children grow up with the knowl-
edge that they will never be allowed to prove themselves as Germans.
Those who fought in the war are granted permission to continue to serve
the State. I refuse to avail myself of this privilege, even though I understand
the position of those who consider it their duty to remain at their posts.”
Next day, the text of Franck’s resignation was published in the Göttinger
Zeitung, and forty-two members of the University, mainly from the Faculty
of Agriculture, condemned his public resignation as an act of treachery to
inflame anti-German propaganda.27 On learning of Franck’s resignation
Herzberg immediately wrote a strong note:
Highly esteemed dear Professor Franck: 
In these days in which by your magnanimous decision you show the
world where the insane oppression of the Jews leads to, I as one of your
students would not like to be missing among those who declare their sin-
cere thanks and unlimited veneration to you, and who especially now are
filled with the highest admiration by your present step and the reason
given by you, and who at the same time are filled with horror that such a
thing is necessary.
I am at a loss for words to express what both my wife and I always
and especially now feel for you. Please remember us to your wife and
children and accept our sincere greetings.28
Franck received hundreds of such letters from friends, colleagues, and con-
cerned strangers in Germany and abroad. He had hoped to remain in
Germany to fight the Nazis from within, but the rapidly deteriorating situ-
ation forced him to leave in the fall of 1933. He spent a year with Niels
Bohr in Copenhagen before immigrating to America. He joined the Johns
Hopkins University in Baltimore but left after three years as he found that
life there was being made very difficult for Jewish faculty. He accepted a
professorship at The University of Chicago and during the war years par-
ticipated in the Manhattan Project in Chicago and Los Alamos. 
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      81

82
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
In mathematics, Richard Courant, Felix Bernstein, Emmy Noether, and
Hermann Weyl (who had a Jewish wife), among many others, left the
University of Göttingen. The mathematician Edmund Landau was prevent-
ed from entering his classroom by about seventy of his students, some in
SS uniforms, and was requested by the Nazi student commander to refrain
from lecturing since “Aryan students want Aryan mathematics and not
Jewish mathematics”.29 Within a few months of Hitler’s ascendancy, the
internationally renowned “Mecca” of Mathematics and Physics in Göttin-
gen was destroyed. With such dismissals and departures from the principal
universities of Berlin, Munich, Leipzig, Frankfurt, and Heidelberg, Ger-
many instantly lost its preeminence in all fields of science.
In Darmstadt, these severe measures were applied more slowly, but the
THD was not spared, and several senior faculty members were dismissed,
along with privatdozents and assistants.30 Among them were Edmund
Stiasny, dean and professor of electrochemistry, Ernst Berl, a former dean
and professor of chemistry, Erich Aron, dean, and Peter Leser, privat-
dozent, both of the Department of Cultural and Political Science, Michael
Evenari, a biologist, Fritz Curtis, an architect, and William Prager, a privat-
dozent in mechanical engineering.31 Jewish colleagues closer to Herzberg
were Kurt Lion, an assistant in Rau’s research group, and Hans Baerwald,
a professor of theoretical physics who was a veteran, a baptized Protestant,
and had a non-Jewish wife. Not being a Beamte (an official civil servant),
Herzberg was not required to fill out the questionnaire giving dates of
employment, type of war service, and the racial membership of his four
grandparents. As a precaution he kept in touch with his cousin who was
collecting the material needed to prove that the Herzberg family was
Lutheran and of non-Jewish descent. He wrote to his friend Alfred Schulz
that he never would have thought that one day he might have an advantage
because of that and be able to protect Luise.32
On 1 May 1933, the President of Hesse announced a new “German
Students’ Law”, decreeing that only students of German descent and moth-
er tongue could study in the Hessian universities. Accordingly, the regis-
tered students at the THD dropped from 2,543 in 1931–1932 to 1,803 in
1933–1934 and to 1,219 a year later, and most foreign students left Ger-
many. On that day in 1933, Heinz Hackert, the THD student leader,
announced a rally and march through the city to the Marktplatz. Students,
docents, and workers at the THD did not dare miss this all-day celebration,

frequently punctuated with the Horst Wessel song, the rousing Nazi
anthem. This was followed on 21 June, at the solstice festivities, with a
torch parade to the music of an SA band and the burning of a truckload of
books of “un-German spirit” authored by Jews, pacifists, and foreigners in
a ceremony repeated all over Germany during May and June.33 The names
of squares and streets were changed, with Luisenplatz becoming Adolf-
Hitler-Platz, Friedrich-Ebert-Platz becoming Dietrich-Eckart-Platz, and
Rathenau Park becoming Horst-Wessel Park.
Very quickly, conditions at the THD became difficult for Herzberg. A
Nazi member of the Physics Institute and some students noticed that Herz-
berg had not participated in the huge May Day parade of the THD com-
munity to the city centre, or in the book-burning festivities in June. More-
over, he did not begin classes with the required Heil Hitler salute. Rumours
began circulating around the university that he had many Jewish friends
and had Communist leanings. Herzberg’s colleagues were too embarrassed
to tell him directly and asked the workshop staff to inform him that he was
no longer wanted at the THD. He felt forced to defend himself. Like many
Germans, he regarded Naziism to be a passing phase, as several earlier gov-
ernments had been. He had worked so hard to establish his laboratory, now
known and respected internationally, that he was loathe to give it up. More-
over, in his political naiveté, he assumed that his Aryan ancestry would
protect Luise in the short term. In answer to his tormentors he posted a
notice in the lobby of the Physics Institute on 6 May 1933.
In order to counter various rumours, I affirm herewith:
• that I am of pure Aryan descent and that I can establish proof of this at
any time through the necessary official documents,
• that I am prepared at any time to take an oath and declare I am not a
member of any political party nor ever was. In particular, I have never
had any relations with the Communist Party.
• The rumour that “I am a Communist” apparently stems from my cor-
respondence with some Russian scientists, which was purely about
scientific matters, and further that I received an invitation towards the
end of last year from Dr. Bach at the Karpov Chemical Institute of
Moscow State University to give lectures there on my special field,
“The Spectra and Structures of Molecules”. I did not accept this invi-
tation, and I am prepared to furnish proof of this from the complete
correspondence.34
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      83

84
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Although originally Herzberg had seriously entertained the idea of visiting
Moscow State University, he took the advice of Professor Rau that this
would be unwise and in February asked Dr. Bach for a postponement.
These events severely dampened Herzberg’s enthusiasm for work and
he became unsure of his own and Luise’s future, even though he was not
immediately affected by the new laws because he was not Jewish, as the
church records of Langensalza proved. So, despite the dire forewarnings of
the first few months of 1933, he tried to remain calm and to trust that
Germanic reason would eventually restore law and order. He was also con-
cerned about Stephan Gradstein, whom he considered to be his best stu-
dent, and his friend Kurt Lion, both Jewish. Gradstein, who was born in
Germany of Polish parents, left the THD immediately after Hitler came to
power and, on Herzberg’s recommendation, was employed by Der Natur-
forscher (an illustrated monthly journal for the natural sciences). Although
highly praised for his work, Gradstein was reluctantly discharged after only
three months as a precautionary measure against possible economic sanc-
tions under the new regime, and he fled to Holland.35 He had worked on
the fluorescence spectrum of formaldehyde at high resolution and had
applied the theory of Herzberg and Teller in the analysis. However, when
the paper was to be submitted for publication, Rau, fearing for Herzberg’s
future in this threatening political situation, recommended that Herzberg’s
name should not be included in the paper.36 While it was understandable
that a dictatorship would immediately take control of the public press and
radio and ban all publications of conflicting parties, it came as a surprise to
many that even the technical journals were being monitored by the Nazis.
Karl-Friedrich Bonhoeffer had invited Herzberg to co-author a book on
chemical spectroscopy, but the overly cautious editor refused to consider a
book with Herzberg’s name on it and received a stern rebuke from Bon-
hoeffer.
Kurt Lion had just completed his Doctorate in engineering with summa
cum laude but was dismissed as an assistant from the THD and had diffi-
culty finding employment.37 Herzberg wrote to Arthur Tyndall in Bristol
and to James Franck in Copenhagen, seeking their help in finding positions
for Gradstein and Lion. In July, Herzberg wrote to John E. Lennard-Jones,
now in Cambridge, congratulating him on being elected a Fellow of The
Royal Society and noting:
… the development of conditions here is quite depressing. It is a conso-
lation to us to know of the extraordinary generosity the English nation

shows to our dismissed scientists. We read the leading article in one of the
recent numbers of Nature with a feeling of deep thankfulness.38 I person-
ally have as yet not been affected by the new laws, since I am purely
Aryan, but it is probable that I shall lose my post in the near future. My
wife is of Jewish descendence, and that is enough according to the latest
proclamations to consider a man not worthy to serve his country and to
do scientific research.39
Lennard-Jones answered immediately, offering that “if at any time you
feel impelled to leave your present post, I should be glad to help you, and
would put your case before the Academic Assistance Council”. To which
Herzberg replied:
… even if I can keep my post for the present, the future outlook for me is
not very hopeful since according to the new laws I cannot improve my
present position which as you probably know is a very low paid and
dependent assistant post. On the other hand, working conditions are pret-
ty good here until now, and the spectroscopic outfit of this laboratory is
now quite exceptional.40
In fact, with both grating spectrographs in operation by the end of 1933 and
several students and visiting scientists working in his laboratory, the next
year and a half proved to be the most prolific for Herzberg’s research in
Darmstadt, even under these unpredictable and threatening circumstances.
Amid all this uncertainty, Luise passed the oral examination for her
Doctorate thesis “Spectrum and structure of BeO” with a cum laude on 29
May 1933. She received the diploma for the Ph.D. degree, dated 30 August
1933, from the University of Frankfurt, thanks to the sponsorship of Karl
W. Meissner.41 She was most likely the last woman, and one of the last
Jewish people, to receive the Doctorate degree in Nazi Germany.
In the spring of 1933 Herzberg received another request for permission
to work in his laboratory for a year. This came in a letter from Dr. John W.T.
Spinks, a young chemist from the University of Saskatchewan.42 On com-
ing home that evening, Herzberg showed the letter to Luise and asked,
“Where on Earth is Saskatoon, Saskatchewan?”43 They looked for it in
their atlas and found that such a place actually existed, in the vast western
prairies of Canada. That this tiny dot on the map of a far-off, unknown
country would within two years provide them with a safe haven from a tur-
bulent Germany and a welcome home was of course unforseen by them.
Spinks had graduated from King’s College, London, having worked in
photochemistry under Professor Arthur J. Allmand, and had accepted a
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      85

86
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
junior faculty position in Saskatoon in 1930. The beginning of the Great
Depression had a devastating impact on the prairie farms and on the uni-
versity. After three years of government cutbacks, the President of the
University of Saskatchewan called the younger faculty of the university to
his office and gave them two alternatives: either to resign gracefully or to
take a year off on five hundred dollars, with a reasonably good probability
of returning to a job the following year.44 Spinks chose the second alterna-
tive and decided to go to Germany to learn the language and to work in
spectroscopy. He had read Herzberg’s paper in the Leipziger Vortrage and
that of Curry and Herzberg in Nature and chose Herzberg’s laboratory as a
possible workplace. In an introductory letter to Herzberg, Spinks noted that
in order to understand the primary processes in photochemistry, he would
have to study more physics and would like to work under a physicist for a
time to extend his knowledge of light absorption and spectroscopy.
Herzberg inquired of Allmand, whom he had met on his visit to London
in 1930, about Spinks and was assured that he should accept Spinks with-
out hesitation.45 In his reply to Spinks, Herzberg welcomed him to the
group in Darmstadt, noting that Curry and Wu, who had been with him,
were now both back in their native countries and adding that there were
monthly colloquia in nearby Heidelberg and Frankfurt.46 Spinks left Saska-
toon in September, spent a few weeks with his parents in England, and
arrived at Darmstadt in mid-October. Despite the ominous political atmos-
phere, Spinks spent a most profitable eight months with Herzberg.47 He
found that working with Herzberg was just about ideal:
He was full of ideas, had excellent equipment, didn’t mind showing me
how to use it, helped me to make calculations, and was most generous
with his time. Herzberg was a hard worker, very methodical and thor-
ough, a perfectionist—every last decimal point had to be exact—and pos-
sessed of a first-class brain. He knew just what could and could not be
deduced from the information at hand. Yet he was most modest and unas-
suming, and had a pleasant and friendly approach to everyone, and a con-
stant stream of interesting visitors came to see him in Darmstadt. For my
part, I often pinched myself to reassure myself that I had been so lucky.
If you will gather from this that I had a fabulous year in Germany, you
will have guessed right, I did.48
Spinks rented a room in the same house as the Herzbergs, so they spent
much time together. Herzberg and Spinks often took a calculating machine
home and spent the weekend calculating results. Every few weeks they

finished a research project and carried out the analysis, and eventually they
wrote eight papers based on their work in 1934. Spinks and the Herzbergs
often went to concerts and operas in the Landestheater. They also attended
seminars together at neighbouring universities and enjoyed hiking in the
nearby woods. 
Spinks experienced such favourable conditions at home and in the lab-
oratory that Darmstadt seemed a most pleasant place to live. But he also
saw the coming debacle as SA men trooped through the streets, as Germany
withdrew from the League of Nations, and as new decrees by the Nazis
continued throughout the year. Looking back on his year in Darmstadt,
Spinks later wrote:
It had within it all the elements of a Greek tragedy—people going about
their daily work in a somewhat stoical fashion, yet knowing that political
activities were leading Germany along a collision course which would
inevitably and inexorably lead to wholesale destruction and tragedy for
millions. On the one hand there was a highly civilized and cultivated exis-
tence, books, music, theatre, and on the other—Storm Troopers marching
with a heavy tread through the cobbled streets, and the regular items in
the weekend papers Im flucht er so hossen—telling of a political prison-
er being conveyed to an interrogation centre who tried to escape and was,
sad to relate, shot in flight. 
On 21 October 1933 the Darmstädter Zeitung reported that the Rector
would be the Führer of the THD, and the leader of the Student Council
would be a Führer too, with a seat in the University Senate. The THD was
being politicized by the Reich Education Ministry, established that year to
govern academia and to align it with the Hitler movement. One of the THD
Professors of Philosophy, Hugo Dingler, became a prominent spokesman
for German science versus Jewish science, led by the extreme nationalists
Philipp Lenard, formerly professor in Heidelberg and now retired, and
Johannes Stark, president of the Imperial Institute of Physics in Berlin, both
Nobel Laureates in physics in the early 1900s. An even bigger shock for
Herzberg was seeing his colleague Günter Scheibe of Erlangen wearing the
Nazi emblem at a meeting in 1933.
1934–1935 and Thoughts of Leaving Germany
On the dismissal of his teacher and colleague Hans Baerwald in July 1933,
Herzberg was asked to take over the course in theoretical physics for the
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      87

88
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
rest of the year.49 This was an unexpected opportunity to delve into classi-
cal theoretical physics and include contemporary advances, an experience
he enjoyed immensely. It proved to be an important lesson for him, and he
was reminded of the Roman author Petronius Arbiter who wrote “docendo
discimus”—“by teaching, we learn”. Moreover, Herzberg was paid for giv-
ing this course.
However, the situation in Darmstadt worsened considerably for the
Herzbergs with the receipt by the Rector on 27 April 1934 of an order from
the Hesse State Ministry that all assistants must immediately (by 16 May)
submit copies of the following documents:
The birth certificate of your wife.
The marriage certificate of your wife’s parents.
Your own marriage certificate.50
Herzberg complied and wondered what the next new Nazi law would bring.
He did not have long to wait. He was informed by the local Ministry of
Education that he could not teach in the following semester, as he was
deemed unfit to teach German youth, a Jüdisch versippt (of the Jewish
clan), because of his wife’s Jewish ancestry, but he could carry on with
research work for the time being.51 Unknown to Herzberg, students peti-
tioned the Culture Ministry of Hesse for the continuation of Herzberg’s
course in theoretical physics—his lectures were so popular—and for per-
mission for him to give examinations at the end of the semester. Teaching
was denied, but he was allowed to examine students who had taken his
course. Another ominous sign was Hitler’s announcement in March 1935
of the establishment of an air force and of conscription to expand the army,
which was in direct violation of the Versailles Treaty.52
Herzberg had already launched an ambitious program of research. A
major incentive was the arrival of Spinks from Canada, Gösta W. Funke
from Sweden, and Heinz Verleger, a German, who along with Luise and the
many good students formed one of the strongest groups in the THD
Institute of Physics.53 Another plus was the discovery in 1932 of heavy
hydrogen, or deuterium, by Harold C. Urey and co-workers at Columbia
University. Herzberg immediately recognized the importance of deuterium
for the study of molecular structure. Moreover, special Agfa photographic
plates, rated as sensitive in the infrared out to 10.5 microns (µ), became
available to Herzberg (who had been a consultant to Agfa), and he found

that the wavelength range could be extended even further, to 13 µ, with
long exposure times. 
On his way to Darmstadt, Spinks had visited Urey’s group at Columbia
University and came to Herzberg’s laboratory prepared to produce some
heavy water (D2O) for use in making various isotopes of hydrogenic mol-
ecules. After several months of considerable effort, he succeeded in pro-
ducing about a teaspoonful of this precious material. Soon after, commer-
cial heavy water became available from Norway, but at a high price. During
a visit to the University of Vienna, Spinks met the chemist Franz Patat, who
was experienced in preparing deuterated compounds, and Patat joined
Herzberg and Spinks in the preparation and study of heavy acetylene
(C2HD).
With both grating spectrographs in operation, one for the extreme ultra-
violet wavelength region and the other for the visible and near infrared
regions, the spectra of many molecules were obtained. Among the diatomic
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      89
Institute of Physics faculty, students, and visitors.
From left: John Spinks, Georg Mller, Helmut Bumann, Koelsch,
– , – , Prof. Dr. Hans Rau, – , Adam Walz, Heinz Verleger,
Fralein Pfersdorf (Secretary), Werner Maurer, Herzberg, and Simon, 1934.

90
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
molecules were N2, O2, CN, CO, HCl, P2, CP, and PN. For the spectum of
O2, Herzberg set up a mirror system on the roof of the Institute to bring
sunlight into the three-metre spectrograph and, with a very long exposure
time, was able to photograph the solar spectrum out to 12.9 µ (the longest
wavelength ever recorded photographically). A variety of polyatomic mol-
ecules were studied, including CO2, CS2, HCN, H2CO, B2H6, C2H2 and its
isotope C2HD, and CH3CCH with its isotope CH3CCD. Many of these
spectra were obtained with a twenty-five metre absorption path, others in
emission, and some by fluorescence. Herzberg even had plans to excite
Raman spectra at high resolution, but time was running out for him, and
measurement and analysis of many of the spectra had to be put off for a few
years.54 
With Herzberg’s very successful research program in full swing, Rau
had been able to secure a contract from the government for him to serve as
his assistant until October 1935. In all probability this would not be
renewed, and the possibility existed that he would be dismissed even earli-
er. The decision to deny Herzberg the opportunity to teach was made by
bureaucrats at the local level, who were aware of the forthcoming “Nürn-
berg Laws” to be announced in September 1935. These laws would affect
all Jews and Germans married to Jews, making them second-class citizens
in Germany. With this rejection of teaching at the THD and only a tentative
contract as assistant, Herzberg finally realized he had no choice but to look
outside his fatherland—and better still, outside of Europe—for a research
position, or for work of any kind.
The 3-0 infrared band of HCl, after Herzberg and Spinks, 1934.

91
6. SEARCHING THE WORLD FOR AN
ACADEMIC POSITION
Gerhard and Luise could hardly believe that within three years of their
happy homecoming, their dreams would be shattered. They reached an
inescapable conclusion: the Nazis and the Third Reich would stay—they
were not just a fleeting episode in Germany’s history, as many had thought
based on the repeated changes of government in the previous decade.
Resigned to their fate but determined to succeed, Gerhard and Luise began
a worldwide search for other opportunities.
The Emergency Society of German Scholars
Abroad in Zurich
In November 1933, Herzberg began regular correspondence with the Zur-
ich office of the Notgemeinschaft Deutscher Wissenschaftler im Ausland
(Emergency Society of German Scholars Abroad), which contacted him
after learning from Max Born of his plight.1 This society for mutual assis-
tance was founded in Zurich in March of 1933 by German intellectual
exiles under the leadership of Professor Philipp Schwartz, a Hungarian who
was dismissed from his post in Frankfurt. The Notgemeinschaft was
financed by contributions from displaced scholars whom it had helped to
re-establish. An early success was its negotiation for the placement of fifty-
six German scholars on the faculty of the recently established University of
Istanbul in November 1933, with a final total of over one hundred in aca-
demic positions in Turkey. It also helped to place dismissed scholars in
Asiatic and South American countries where no national committees had
been established. With the charge to university teachers placed abroad to
look for openings for other exiles in professional life or academia, it even-
tually placed about two thousand persons all over the world. The activities
of the Notgemeinschaft were known to the Gestapo and deemed to be anti-
German. Thus a notice was sent to rectors of all universities in November
1934 requiring that all correspondence received from the Society not be
answered but be sent directly to the Reich Minister of Science, Education
and National Education in Berlin.2 Herzberg avoided this dictum by carry-
Come my friends. ’Tis not too late to seek a newer world.
Alfred Lord Tennyson
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:49 PM  Page 91

92
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
ing on all correspondence with the Notgemeinschaft from his home. In
these early years of the Nazi regime, censorship seemed rather lax, and he
survived the risk of detection.
When his colleague Professor Ernst Miescher of the University of
Basle learned that Herzberg was to attend a conference in nearby Freiburg,
in February 1934, he invited Herzberg to give a seminar at his institute,
knowing full well that this would give him the opportunity to visit the
Notgemeinschaft in Zurich.3 Herzberg accepted the invitation, gave a sem-
inar on recent research, and then made his way to Zurich. From then on, the
Notgemeinschaft continually notified him of opportunities for lecturing
and for research in theoretical and experimental physics in a number of
countries, including China, India, New Zealand, Ecuador, and Burma.
Although Herzberg was concerned about the adequacy of research facilities
at these distant institutes, in desperation he applied to all but China. He
asked that his name not be sent to Nanking, because he had already been
invited to go to Shanghai by his postdoctoral fellow Dr. Wu. Wu had just
returned home after a fruitful year in Darmstadt and on learning of Herz-
berg’s predicament had wanted to help in some way. He asked Herzberg
whether he would come to help set up a laboratory when conditions in
China improved.4 However, within a year, Wu was embroiled in his own
country’s invasion by Japan and later in the civil strife in China. In apply-
ing to the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore, Herzberg was torn by
the rumour that his dismissed colleague Baerwald had also applied for this
post, and he beseeched Raman: “As he was a teacher of mine and as I am
well acquainted with him, I would of course not like his chances to be
decreased by my application and would not apply under these circum-
stances.”5 Professor Tyndall of Bristol wrote to many institutes giving his
support for Herzberg, but he was not optimistic about Herzberg’s chances
because British subjects would be given preference in the Dominions and
Colonies in this difficult period of worldwide depression.6 As it turned out,
not one of Herzberg’s applications was successful.7
Herzberg followed advertisements for academic positions in the Eng-
lish journal Nature, and on learning of a reader position at Cambridge
University, he applied for it. Professor Lennard-Jones, who had just left
Bristol for the Chair of Theoretical Chemistry at Cambridge, supported
him, but understandably Cambridge graduates and British subjects were
preferred. Regarding an advertised Assistant Professorship at the Univer-
sity of Manchester, Herzberg chose first to ask Michael Polanyi about his
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:49 PM  Page 92

chances. Polanyi had voluntarily resigned from the Kaiser-Wilhelm Insti-
tute in Berlin-Dahlem and had been appointed to the chair of Physical
Chemistry in Manchester.8 However, the University of Manchester had
been violently attacked by the press for this appointment of a foreigner, no
matter how distinguished, and it was obvious that any new positions had to
be filled by British subjects. Polanyi replied within two days and suggest-
ed that he would write to Werner Heisenberg to ask him to look into possi-
bilities for Herzberg.9 Herzberg replied:
Of course I have nothing against you discussing my affairs with Heisen-
berg, but I do not believe that in my case the professors are to blame.
Professor Rau, the Director of the Institute, and Professor Busch, the
Rector, do indeed champion my cause. Furthermore, I had the intention of
applying for a Rockefeller Award with the possibility of going to The
University of Chicago to work with Professor Mulliken. For this the
Rockefeller Foundation requires a statement that I will again be employed
here on my return. Upon inquiry by the Rector, he was told by the gov-
ernment agent in charge that such a confirmation was completely out of
the question. Upon further inquiry as to the customary renewal of my
employment contract as assistant, which expires in the fall of next year, it
was stated that this was extremely unlikely, and that I might even be laid
off earlier. According to the Hesse Government, the renewal would mean
a new contract, which by the civil service law says that new appointments
of civil servants married to non-Aryans are disallowed. However, as
assistant I am not a Beamte or civil servant, so this does not apply to me.
It would be very gratifying if Heisenberg would succeed to bring about a
clarification on this point. Maybe the State government is more holy than
the Pope!10
A request by Polanyi11 to help Herzberg was answered by Heisenberg
within a month, after contacting Rau in Darmstadt:
According to what Rau has written to me, there are hardly any hopes for
Herzberg in Germany. It is certain that in the foreseeable future he cannot
get an academic position because of his wife’s descent. Furthermore,
according to unofficial but unfortunately quite clear statements by rele-
vant government authorities, he will lose his position as assistant, proba-
bly by October of this year. While his dismissal as assistant cannot be
explained by the law governing professional civil service, nothing can be
done legally speaking since the government has the right of giving notice
vis-à-vis non-tenured employees. Rau writes further, that so far all efforts
to find something for H.—especially with the help of the Zurich Notge-
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      93
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:49 PM  Page 93

94
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
meinschaft and the Academic Assistance Council—have not led to suc-
cess. Also the hope for a Rockefeller Fellowship has not been fulfilled
since H. would not have a definite position after such time.
We would therefore be very grateful to you if you could approach the
relevant authorities in England regarding help for H. In Germany, help is
already becoming much more difficult because the Notgemeinschaft der
deutschen Wissenschaft has now passed into the hands of Stark. I shall
look for new possibilities for Herzberg in Germany as hard as I can, but I
ask you not to count on success when making any decisions.12
Heisenberg was clearly aware of the general situation in Germany for
young scientists seeking employment and spent much time doing his best
to help. Research jobs in institutes and industry were possible by decrees
for those experiencing Herzberg’s problem, but with the rabid Nazi Johan-
nes Stark at the head of this science agency, any hope of such a job was out
of the question.13 It was clear that Herzberg had to seek opportunities out-
side Germany.
The Academic Assistance Council in London
At the suggestion of James Franck, Herzberg also applied to the Emer-
gency Committee in Aid of Displaced Foreign Scholars in New York and
to the Academic Assistance Council in London in June 1934.14 Although a
quick response from the Emergency Committee regretted that no action
was possible at present, the Academic Assistance Council immediately
offered help.15 This agency was formed in May 1933 by the heads of Eng-
lish universities and learned societies and was one of the first to come to
the aid of academics and other intellectuals who “by reason of race, reli-
gion or political views were unable to carry on their investigations in their
own country”. The aims were “the relief of suffering and the defence of
learning and science”. It had offices in The Royal Society at Burlington
House in London, with Lord Rutherford as its first President. The Council
acted in a double capacity: it served as a centre of information and as an
organization to put the teachers concerned in touch with the institutions
where they could work, and it raised funds (with many faculty members
contributing by deduction from their salaries) to be used primarily in pro-
viding maintenance for displaced teachers and in finding them work in uni-
versities and scientific institutions. As the exodus from Germany continued
and refugees from other European countries (including some from Russia)
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:49 PM  Page 94

asked for help, the Council was placed on a more permanent basis and in
1937 was renamed the Society for the Protection of Science and Learn-
ing.16
When the Council asked Herzberg what country would be agreeable to
him, he promptly replied, “I am ready to go to any place where reasonable
research facilities are available. I could take over a teaching position as
well as an experimental or theoretical physics or chemistry research
post.”17 As references, he included the names and addresses of Hans Rau,
Karl-F. Bonhoeffer, Friedrich Hund, Max Born, James Franck, Arthur M.
Tyndall, and Robert S. Mulliken. With the acknowledgment of his letter
within a week, Herzberg was informed of a position at the University of
Leningrad. Professor J. Frenkel of the Physical Technical Institute wrote to
Herzberg (via the Academic Assistance Council) that Professor Semenoff,
the Director of the Institute for Chemical Physics, would offer Herzberg a
position and that “he would find a most hearty welcome and very good con-
ditions both for scientific work and general living”.18 Herzberg was duly
informed of other positions at colleges and universities (Louisville, Ken-
tucky; Cape Town, South Africa; Ghent, Belgium; and Giza, Egypt). He
applied for all these positions, though not the one in Leningrad.19 Franck
recommended him highly stating “I really believe we have not many physi-
cists of his age who can compare with him.” Although the Louisville posi-
tion was solely a teaching post, Herzberg thought of it as a possible later
entry to the larger universities in the United States. Of these several open-
ings, only the University of Ghent offered him an appointment, a two year
research fellowship in January 1935, based on the strong recommendation
of Born, who nominated Herzberg for the position.20 Herzberg visited the
University and Professor Verschaffelt’s Institute and seemed disposed to
accept this post, even though the stipend was minimal.
Herzberg was touched by a helpful letter he received from his former
student Stephan Gradstein in Holland.21 He had written to William Prager,
a former THD privatdozent ousted from Karlsruhe University in 1933 and
now a professor in the University of Constantinople, telling him that Herz-
berg was looking for a position. Prager replied immediately that Istanbul
was not suitable, although the Chair of Theoretical Physics in Istanbul was
not yet filled, and that the new University of Teheran in Iran had many
openings. The chance of gaining one of these positions was still rather
good, though many enquiries were being received daily from Germany.
When Herzberg learned that James Franck and Richard Courant had paid a
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      95
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:49 PM  Page 95

96
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
brief visit to Turkey to check on positions they had been offered, but did
not accept, he chose not to apply to Turkey or Iran. A letter from the Dutch
spectroscopist Dirk Coster of Groningen, co-discoverer of hafnium in
1923, sadly reported his lack of success at finding Herzberg a position in
Holland, even after alerting senior scientists in his country of Herzberg’s
achievements and present plight.22
A Search in North America
Leaving no stone unturned, Herzberg contacted science colleagues in North
America for possible opportunities. One of the first to offer assistance was
Robert Mulliken of Chicago.23 However, this was based on obtaining a
Rockefeller Fellowship, for either one or two years, and it required a post
to return to. Hertha Sponer, the former senior assistant to James Franck,
remarked during this period, when she and Herzberg were working on a
joint publication and both were looking for academic positions: “Berkeley
is a thousand times more beautiful than Chicago, you should try there.”24
She, too, had left Göttingen, although she was not Jewish, because it was
clear that women had no future in the new German scientific establishment:
according to the Nazis, women belonged in the home raising children. With
Heisenberg’s help Sponer found a temporary post in Madrid and then in
Oslo, before settling in the United States in 1936. Herzberg’s search at the
University of California, Berkeley, was not successful: there was no possi-
bility because of the Depression, as Raymond T. Birge commented. Joseph
Kaplan could not give encouragement at Los Angeles, nor could Wolfgang
Finkelnburg (a Rockefeller Fellow soon to return to Germany and the
THD) in Pasadena. Herzberg’s name was suggested by H.L. Johnson to the
Chairman at Ohio State University, but he had someone else in mind for the
available position. James Franck also wrote about Herzberg to Rudolf
Ladenburg at Princeton and to Karl Herzfeld at Johns Hopkins in Balti-
more, both of whom had left Germany before the Nazis came to power—
all to no avail. On his return home to Saskatoon from Darmstadt, John
Spinks stopped off at the University of Toronto to check on possibilities
there but found no available opening for Herzberg. With the Depression
wreaking havoc in North America, any openings would naturally favour
Americans and Canadians.
As every one of these possibilities from all six continents resulted in
negative responses, Herzberg realized that he was too late. Those who had
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:49 PM  Page 96

been part of the early exodus from Germany had filled the few positions
available to foreigners. He was left with only the offer of a fellowship from
Ghent. He took this opportunity to clarify his future at the THD one last
time by writing to the Dean of the Faculty of Mathematics and Natural
Sciences. He apprised the Dean of the Ghent offer, stating that his decline
of this offer was dependent on whether the Reich Education Ministry
would extend his job as assistant for the continuation of his research and
would promise that he could lecture at least on his special field of
research.25 The Ministry’s answer to the Dean’s request and to Herzberg
was immediate and, while not unexpected, crushing: no teaching.
In the meantime, with the ever-increasing displays of brown shirts,
swastikas, and anti-Semitism at the THD and in Darmstadt, his future with
the fellowship in Ghent, or with any position in western Europe, took on
the appearance of a repetition of his present predicament. 
Recognized internationally as one of the pioneers of molecular spec-
troscopy and molecular structure at the age of thirty, Herzberg had nowhere
to turn.
PART ONE: THE EARLY YEARS (1904–1934)      97
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  1:49 PM  Page 97


PART TWO
A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA
(1935–1947)


7. GUEST PROFESSORSHIP AT THE     
UNIVERSITY OF SASKATCHEWAN
Carnegie Corporation Fellowship
A glimmer of hope was raised with Herzberg’s receipt of a strictly confi-
dential message from the Notgemeinschaft Deutscher Wissenschaftler im
Ausland in January 1935.1 This stated that the Carnegie Corporation of
New York would assist displaced German scholars by providing fellow-
ships tenable for two years in universities of the British Dominions and
Colonies, the application to be made by the university for the services of
the refugee. Herzberg immediately wrote to John Spinks in Saskatoon,
mentioning that this might be a wonderful opportunity to go to Toronto,
with its prominent spectroscopy laboratory.2 He suggested that this also
might be a way of continuing their collaboration, even though he was
aware that there was no work in spectroscopy being carried out at the
University of Saskatchewan. Herzberg fixed on the University of Toronto
and its Physics Department because he knew of the spectroscopic work on
light-scattering spectra (the Raman effect) of liquid hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen by Professor John C. McLennan, whom he had met briefly at the
Faraday Society Meeting in Bristol in 1928. He did not know that
McLennan had retired in 1932 and was living in England. Herzberg was
also familiar with the work on the Stark effect by Professor J. Stuart Foster
at McGill University in Montreal, and he considered the best approach to
seeking a position there would be through his friends James Franck and
Hertha Sponer, who knew some of the faculty.
On receiving Herzberg’s letter, Spinks discussed the matter with
Thorbergur Thorvaldson, the Head of Chemistry in Saskatoon, and within
a day, the two notified the President of the University, Walter Murray, of
Herzberg’s difficulties in Germany. Murray had already been made aware
of the wonderfully productive year that Spinks had enjoyed in Germany,
thanks to Herzberg’s expertise and drive, and he immediately grasped the
gravity of the situation for Herzberg, as well as the opportunity for Canada
to obtain a very distinguished scientist. The next day he sent letters to
101
A sparrow in the hand is naturally better than a pigeon on the roof.
Anonymous

102
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
President H.J. Cody of the University of Toronto and to Eli F. Burton, the
Head of its Physics Department.
Dear President Cody:
A member of our University staff spent last year in Germany work-
ing under Dr. Herzberg at Darmstadt. Dr. Herzberg is a very brilliant
physicist, who is recognized as an international authority on spec-
troscopy. He has, according to Hitler’s standards, the misfortune of hav-
ing married a Jewish woman and is now rated as a second-class citizen of
Germany and barred from promotion in German institutions. His appoint-
ment terminates this June of this year. He has the prospect of receiving a
fellowship at a university in the British Dominions, … conditional upon
a university making application for his services.
Your equipment for spectroscopic work is the best in Canada and you
could give him a much better opportunity than any other university.
Should you not wish to invite him to come, kindly let me know and I will
take the matter up with Dr. H.M. Tory and Dr. R.W. Boyle of the National
Research Council. Should neither be willing to invite him, we would do
so with joy, although we have not the equipment that is worthy of his abil-
ity and his work.
I believe this is one of the opportunities of securing a very brilliant
scientist, and he will make a very acceptable member of the university
forces in Canada.
Would you kindly let me know as soon as possible what you think of
this suggestion? Dr. Herzberg’s letter arrived the day before yesterday and
action should be taken somewhat promptly.3
While Murray had no idea if Herzberg would consider an appointment at
Saskatchewan, he did not wish to lose this rare occasion to add to Canada’s
scientific stature. On the other hand, although he knew that his own uni-
versity was without funds, being a most resourceful person, he felt that
something could be worked out to build up science and research in Sas-
katoon.4
Spinks immediately informed Herzberg of Murray’s interest in secur-
ing Herzberg for Canada and of his letters to Toronto and Ottawa.5 Spinks
also added: 
Dr. Thorvaldson wrote a short appreciation of your scientific reputation,
and I wrote something from what I had seen of you and what I heard of
you from other physicists and chemists in Germany and other countries.

Just now, having no thought for your blushes, I can say that what I wrote
was sufficiently glowing to serve as your passport should you be thinking
of going to Heaven at any time!—and I think that I never wrote anything
with greater pleasure, apart from the slight embarrassment caused by the
fact that I was writing about someone so much brighter than myself!
The University of Toronto was already aware of the Carnegie Fellow-
ships and was involved in obtaining support for Bernard Haurwitz, a math-
ematical meteorologist from the Geophysical Institute of Leipzig, to join
the Physics Department. In fact the Physics Department had been urged by
the French physicist Leon Brillouin to accept two refugee students, Michel
Magat and Walter M. Elsasser. Toronto applied to the Carnegie Corporation
for Haurwitz and the young Elsasser.6 President Cody replied to Murray
that if the Carnegie Corporation acceded to the present request, he could
not ask for further support, and as for McLennan’s replacement, Burton had
in mind a brilliant young Canadian spectroscopist, now in Europe.7 At that
time, only the appointment for Haurwitz was granted by the Carnegie Cor-
poration; a position with the Dominion of Canada Meteorological Service
was to be made available to him after his two year appointment as a guest
professor.8 Later that year, the University of Toronto succeeded in obtain-
ing a second Carnegie Fellowship for Peter Brieger of the University of
Breslau, a historian of fine art and architecture, who helped to establish the
Department of Fine Art at Toronto.9
Murray’s letter to President H.M. Tory of the NRC also brought a neg-
ative reply: “I am sorry but there is no possibility at present of our using
Dr. Herzberg’s services. We have no work going on in spectroscopy, nor
have we any equipment at the moment for such work.”10 In February,
Herzberg himself wrote to the University of Toronto and to McGill
University, and he learned that James Franck in Copenhagen and Karl
Herzfeld of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore had also written to give
their support and that Niels Bohr had discussed Herzberg’s plight with
McLennan—all to no avail.11 Enquiries on Herzberg’s behalf at McGill by
Hertha Sponer and James Franck, through the Danish physicist Dr. Svien
Rosseland who was visiting McGill, elicited a similar negative reply from
Professor J. Stuart Foster.12 Meanwhile, weekly letters between Spinks and
Herzberg kept each side informed. The letters were also full of science, of
their joint research papers submitted for publication, and of proofs or
reprints received, along with local news.
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      103

104
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Offer from the University of Saskatchewan
On learning that there were no possibilities for Herzberg’s employment at
Canada’s major research centres, Murray called in Spinks and asked if he
was absolutely certain of his high recommendation of Herzberg.13 On hear-
ing Spinks’s assurance, Murray instructed him to send Herzberg a telegram
offering him a position as Guest Professor in the Department of Physics at
the University of Saskatchewan. Murray realized that his university did not
have sufficient means to provide him with proper equipment for his work,
but he was certain that a man of Herzberg’s power and resource could make
much of little. He was not to be disappointed.
Spinks had already laid the groundwork for acceptance of Herzberg in
Saskatoon by talking incessantly about his wonderful year in Darmstadt,
mainly because of Herzberg. He had also addressed the Faculty Club in
November of 1934 on his year in Darmstadt, attesting to Herzberg’s bril-
liance and pioneering research. He wrote about the occasion to Herzberg,
“I culled for them passages from my diary bearing on German universities,
the civil service, theatre, cinema, experiences, and jokes. It seemed to keep
them interested for a couple of hours and a lively discussion followed. Fifty
profs including the President and Dean turned out to hear the baby of the
faculty, so I felt duly flattered.”14
Spinks later wrote Herzberg a long and forthright letter, noting that a
look at a map would show him that Saskatoon was a long way from any-
where and that visits to and from research centres in Canada and the United
States were apt to be few and far between.15 Moreover, there was no appa-
ratus for his particular work, although the Department of Chemistry had a
Hilger prism spectrograph and a calculating machine. A good workshop
and an instrument maker were also available. The University Library had
the usual technical journals and even some from Germany. Spinks sent him
photographs of the campus and the Physics Building and commented that
Dr. Ertle L. Harrington, the Head of the Department of Physics, was a
pleasant, rather shy, individual. Spinks also described the northern lights
and drew “sun dogs” and other optical phenomena prevalent in the
extremely cold winter in Saskatoon. “For our sake, I hope you will come,
and if you have nothing better in view, at least this will give you a two year
breathing space in which to look around North America.”
In the meantime, Murray clarified the conditions and stipend of the
Carnegie Fellowship with J.M. Russell, Assistant to the President of the

Carnegie Corporation.16 He learned that the Corporation had not set up a
formal system of fellowships but would consider, on their merits, propos-
als from individual universities in the British Dominions and Colonies.17
The conditions were that “if the German scholar will fill a gap on the staff
of the university as a guest professor, and if the university believes there is
a reasonable possibility of providing a permanent position for him, then the
Corporation will be glad to give consideration to a grant to cover the salary
of a guest professor for a period not to exceed two years”. Murray imme-
diately applied for a grant to cover the salary of a guest professor, with pri-
ority given to Herzberg, also mentioning Dr. T. Plaut, formerly of Ham-
burg, who would fill a position in the Department of Economics.18 On 8
March, Murray was informed of the resolution adopted by the Carnegie
Corporation that the sum of $4,500, payable in two annual instalments of
$2,250, be appropriated to the University of Saskatchewan for a professor-
ship in Physics.19 The money was to come from the British Dominions and
Colonies Fund, established by Andrew Carnegie in 1912 (with the first
grant awarded a year later to Queen’s University in Ontario).20 Spinks sent
Herzberg a telegram with this news, and Murray formally offered Herzberg
the Guest Professorship, to take effect from 1 July 1935. Herzberg was to
report for duty on 15 September “to do some teaching and be given such
opportunities for research as are available in our laboratories”.21 He ended
the letter by noting that Spinks could give him a better idea of the facilities
for research, and almost as an afterthought, he mentioned that he had spo-
ken about this matter to Dr. Harrington, the Head of Physics, who had con-
curred with the invitation. 
Herzberg welcomed the firm commitment of President Murray and
cabled Spinks on 15 May that acceptance was probable.22 Yet he was wor-
ried about the conditions for research at the University of Saskatchewan, so
far removed from any of the large research centres in Canada or the United
States. Also he was somewhat taken aback that all of these hurried negoti-
ations for a senior appointment in the Department of Physics had been car-
ried out by the president himself with a junior staff member of Chemistry,
not with the Head of Physics. Before accepting this offer, Herzberg wrote
to Hertha Sponer about his concerns and as a last resort asked her if she
would telegraph Rosseland at McGill and implore him one more time to
check on Toronto. Feeling somewhat at a loss that the only offer had come
from the University of Saskatchewan, Herzberg added that as much as he
would have preferred Toronto or Montreal, Anderseits ist naturlich der
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      105

106
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Sperling in der Hand besser als die Taube auf dem Dach (“on the other
hand it is naturally better to have a sparrow in the hand than a pigeon on
the roof”).23 As luck would have it, the very next day a letter arrived from
Karl Herzfeld of Johns Hopkins University, noting that he had had a reply
from Eli Burton in Toronto “that in view of its present state of finances, the
University of Toronto could not assure the Carnegie Corporation that it
could take a visiting professor on its permanent staff after the two year
term.”24 As this dashed any further hope of an appointment at Toronto,
Herzberg promptly informed Hertha Sponer of this message and reviewed
the offer from Saskatchewan.25
During this period of indecision, Herzberg was in constant communi-
cation with James Franck, who was at the Bohr Institute in Copenhagen
and himself at the point of deciding whether to leave Europe for America.
In mid-March, as he groped for a solution to his problem, Herzberg was in
very low spirits and summarized his future in a cheerless letter to Franck.
In Darmstadt, he had built an outstanding spectroscopy laboratory, but
when his probable departure loomed, the only offers he had were for two
temporary positions in laboratories far less well equipped than his own. In
a long letter to Franck, he concluded with a note of resignation: 
The outlook for me in Darmstadt is extremely uncertain. Even as I write
to you, my Privatdozent may be taken away. If I am permitted to stay
longer, sooner or later I will be dismissed and forced to leave Germany,
and by then it will be far more difficult to be accepted in a foreign coun-
try. So which is it to be, Ghent or Saskatoon? The facts for Ghent are:
essentially better spectroscopic means are available; the nearness to
Germany; further, the physicists and physical chemists there, and those
nearby, are interested in the modern questions. For Saskatoon: mainly
better possibilities from there to find employment in the United States; the
considerably better financial situation (at the present exchange rates, a
factor of two); on this basis, most probably without further arrangements,
I could go for a week to a research centre in the United States (for exam-
ple, Chicago) at least once a year, whereas from Ghent, a trip to even a
neighbouring institution would be difficult without financial help. The
fact that in Saskatoon there is no spectroscopic equipment at present
doesn’t mean that this will always be the case. Once there, I can evaluate
plates that I would bring with me. Besides I can obtain new spectra as a
visitor to some American institution, and I can devote some time to
theoretical problems. Finally, it is not necessary that I spend all my life

working on molecular spectra; with modest means, I can try to begin
something else.26
This last thought must have been excruciatingly difficult to consider and to
write about, but it indicated the seriously depressed state Herzberg was in.
Franck answered the next day, urging him to take up the Saskatoon post
with both hands; he tried to comfort him with the remark that being young,
Gerhard and Luise had little furniture to transport but could pack much
good humour.27 In the meantime, on the basis of this new offer from Can-
ada, Rau approached the Hesse Ministry to get a more secure position for
Herzberg, but his effort was in vain.28
Acceptance of Guest Professorship
Herzberg accepted the University of Saskatchewan offer on 2 April. He
cabled Spinks and sent Murray a letter stating “It was extremely kind of
you to make enquiries about the possibility for me to come to Toronto. I am
certain however that I shall spend a very profitable time at your University,
and I hope that I may be of some use to you.”29 When he learned that the
Board of Governors of the University had confirmed the appointment,
Herzberg wrote to Murray, “I am extremely glad to accept your kind invi-
tation. I shall be in Saskatoon on 15 September, the date mentioned in your
letter. I am looking forward to my work at your University. Thanking you
again for your very kind endeavours.”30
During all of this period of looking worldwide for a research position,
Herzberg kept his friend Alfred Schulz informed of his many failures and
finally of the offer from the University of Saskatchewan, along with his
concerns. Alfred tried to console him with the thought that a smaller uni-
versity might give him a better chance to do his own work, but also noted
that he couldn’t find Saskatoon on his map. Gerhard wasn’t too surprised
but chided Alfred that if he couldn’t find the province of Saskatchewan
either, then he must have a rather bad map. He added that the university
seemed all right, even if not important, and the possibility of going to the
United States from there was much better than from Darmstadt. What
would be very different was the winter climate with temperatures of –40°C
not a rarity, and there were no beautiful forests, as in Germany, for hiking.31
Herzberg realized that he now had at most four months in which to
wind down his research and responsibilities at the THD; to complete his
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      107

108
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
book on atomic and molecular spectra and conclude arrangements for its
publication; to plan whatever he could for any research activities in Sas-
katchewan; and to proceed with details of immigration to Canada and the
organization of his passage to the New World.
Herzberg immediately informed Professor Verschaffelt of his decision
to go to Saskatchewan and thanked him for the offer of a research fellow-
ship in Ghent.32 He wrote to Max Born, James Franck, Karl-F. Bonhoeffer,
and many other colleagues of his acceptance of a guest professorship in
Canada, thanking them for their concern and assistance during this difficult
period. From the many letters he received from Hertha Sponer in Norway,
Herzberg learned that in September of 1935, Edward Teller would be on his
way to join George Gamow at George Washington University, and she to
Duke University in January 1936, so that they could all meet in the U.S.A.
some day. She noted that “my Duke is in North Carolina and seems to be
as significant as your Saskatoon”.33 Duke University had been founded in
1924 as an expansion of Trinity College in Durham, North Carolina, and
President William P. Few used the support provided by the New York based
Emergency Committee in Aid of Displaced German Scholars to bring six
major figures to the university. Sponer was the first in Physics, with the the-
oretical physicist Lothar Wolfgang Nordheim, her colleague from Göt-
tingen, arriving in 1937. A year later the pioneer in quantum chemistry and
superconductivity, Fritz London, joined them. These three helped to estab-
lish the Physics Department at Duke as an important centre for graduate
studies and research.
Herzberg also notified the Academic Assistance Council in London and
the Notgemeinschaft in Zurich that he had accepted a Carnegie Guest Pro-
fessorship at the University of Saskatchewan.34 He thanked them for their
kind and effective help while looking for a suitable post and asked them not
to drop his name from their lists, since for the time being, the post in
Saskatchewan was not a permanent one. Being uncertain of his future in
Canada after the guest professorship of two years, he did not resign from
the THD but formally requested of the Rector a leave of absence for the
period 1 September 1935 to 31 August 1937.35
His next step was to write to Dr. E.L. Harrington, the Head of the
Department of Physics in Saskatoon, who had also written Herzberg—their
letters crossed within a day of each other.36 Herzberg suggested that he
could give courses in atomic spectra and structure, molecular spectra and
structure, nuclear physics, radioactivity, and atomic physics in general, as

well as wave mechanics or advanced optics or electrodynamics, with the
selection left completely up to Professor Harrington. In his letter Harring-
ton wrote: “Perhaps you would like a word of greeting directly from the
Department of Physics. While I had no part in making the arrangements
which culminated in your decision to join us next autumn, I do want to
assure you that your welcome here will be no less cordial on that
account.”37 He then went on to suggest that Herzberg could give two cours-
es (rather than the usual three) of three one-hour lectures each week, one in
general physics and half courses in theoretical spectroscopy and wave
mechanics. He also recommended that Herzberg should consider supervis-
ing one or two students working towards the Master’s degree (the univer-
sity was not yet prepared to offer Doctorate degrees). He ended with “If I
can be of any assistance in a personal way, in facilitating your adjustments
to the life and work in this new atmosphere, feel free to mention anything
you would like for me to do.”
On receiving this surprisingly friendly and cordial letter, Herzberg was
relieved and sensed that he would get along well with Harrington. This
feeling of helpful co-operation was strongly confirmed as letters continued
to flow back and forth, dealing primarily with the availability or possible
purchase of laboratory equipment. Herzberg was bringing special optics to
build a fluorite prism spectrograph for the far-ultraviolet region but needed
a comparator for the measurement of spectra. He also inquired about the
possibility of obtaining a grating, of building mountings for a grating spec-
trograph, and of procuring space for a three-metre instrument.38 Harrington
sought gratings at the universities of Toronto, Chicago, Michigan, Iowa,
and Minnesota without success, but a room was available for the grating
instrument. He also visited the Gaertner Company in Chicago concerning
the comparator and received authorization from President Murray for Herz-
berg to choose one and order it. Harrington also suggested that Herzberg
visit The University of Chicago on his way to Saskatoon to discuss grating
availability and price with Dean H.G. Gale; the two of them could then
present the matter to President Murray.39 Herzberg was surprised to expe-
rience such instant rapport with someone he had not met.
Preparations for Emigration
Unexpectedly, emigration matters proceeded smoothly in Germany.
Officials saw only that a German Guest Professor was off to Canada for
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      109

110
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
two years. He would be a Tarnkappe, a good ambassador for the Fatherland
who would spread the gospel of pan-Germanism and help to counter the
anti-Nazi propaganda that was being spread by the Canadian media.
Nevertheless, Herzberg was informed that while he could purchase return
passage in Marks, including the ocean crossing and train to Saskatoon,
each traveller was permitted to take only 10 M cash (i.e., $2.50) out of the
country. Indeed, the purchase of return fare seemed a good idea at the time;
after all, this whole Nazi situation might be over in a year or two, and if
not, the tickets could be sold later. As a Guest Professor, he found that the
customs inspection was perfunctory and he was allowed to ship books,
optical equipment, photographic plates, and other small apparatus that he
felt would help him in his research. From Saskatoon he was informed that
such shipments sent directly to the university would be duty-free.
Herzberg was completely unaware of the strict immigration rules in
force in Canada at that time.40 When his application for entry into Canada
was received, A.L. Jolliffe, the Commissioner of the Department of Immi-
gration and Colonization, wrote to Murray informing him that Herzberg
would not come within the classes ordinarily admissible to Canada under
existing immigration regulations. To determine whether special facilities
would be warranted on behalf of the Herzbergs, he asked for assurance that
the appointment as Guest Professor of Physics was correct and, if so,
whether his term with the University would be limited to a period of two
years.41 Murray assured Jolliffe that Herzberg’s appointment was for two
years, with salary to be paid by the Carnegie Corporation, and arrange-
ments were made for temporary admission on a non-immigrant basis for
two years.42 After making numerous enquiries of the Canadian Immi-
gration Office concerning the delay in receiving visas, the Herzbergs final-
ly learned on 29 July that they were granted temporary entry into Canada
under non-immigrant status for a period of two years.43 With passage
booked on the SS Hamburg leaving Hamburg for New York on 22 August
and the return fare as well as train fare to Saskatoon paid for in Marks,
Herzberg turned his attention to scientific matters at the THD. 
His first concern was the status of the book on atomic and molecular
spectra. Originally this was to be a brief elementary introduction to the
subject for the beginner in the field, based on the courses he had given in
Göttingen, Bristol, and Erlangen. However, even the part on atomic spec-
tra was now over two hundred pages, and the preliminary draft of molecu-
lar spectra was at least twice as long. Herzberg decided to split off the

atomic part to stand alone as Atomspektren und Atomstruktur, even though
several books on atomic spectra had already appeared in German as well as
in English in the early 1930s. Having obtained the approval of Th. Stein-
kopff, the publisher, Herzberg proceeded to complete the smaller volume
on atomic spectra to his satisfaction, with the intent of submitting it for
publication before leaving Germany. This he succeeded in doing on 30
June, with the hope that he would not be asked to shorten it.44
In spite of the meagre equipment he expected to find in Saskatoon,
Herzberg was determined to build a spectroscopy laboratory to rival the
best available. Since it would take several years to duplicate some of his
Darmstadt instruments in Saskatoon, he now concentrated on obtaining
photographic plates of high-resolution infrared spectra of oxygen, the
deuterated acetylenes, and methylacetylene for a number of studies he had
in mind. These plates would be measured and analyzed in Saskatoon and
would keep him active in research while the fluorite prism and a grating
spectrograph were being built. Also as time permitted, after classes and lec-
ture preparations, he planned to continue writing his book on molecular
spectroscopy and molecular structure, on which a very good start had
already been made in Darmstadt.
Farewell to Family and Friends
The time for embarkation arrived all too soon. The Herzbergs had brief vis-
its with friends in Darmstadt and with the Oettinger family in Nürnberg.
Luise was particularly concerned about the future welfare of her parents,
living in this national shrine of the Nazi. However, her father felt they were
exempt from the anti-Semitic turbulence because he was a war veteran, and
he was determined to continue managing the growth of his company. The
Herzbergs then spent three days in Hamburg, their port of departure. Visits
with brother Walter and longtime friends Alfred and Hans-Werner were a
disheartening reminder of their carefree years at the Johanneum and of hik-
ing in the mountains and forests in the summers. Now they discussed the
unthinkable—the low level to which their once great country, the bastion
of Western culture, had sunk in a few short years. Education was no longer
the high ideal of German youth; the attendance at universities and gymna-
sia was dramatically reduced, and the outstanding Johanneum of Hamburg,
their Alma Mater, was reduced to a training centre, with many of its famous
professors driven out, in conformity with the Nazi hygienic policy, to be
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      111

112
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
replaced by those embracing the National Socialist Party. It was unbeliev-
able that all of this could be happening in the country of Heine, Goethe,
Schiller, and Beethoven.
Walter and Alfred wondered how was it possible that a Herzberg whose
family had lived in Germany almost four hundred years was now consid-
ered a traitor and forced to leave his homeland. Walter was also experienc-
ing difficulties: he had lost most of his piano students and a recent concert
was poorly attended simply because of his name. The Hamburger Tage-
blatt, organ of the National Socialist Party, reviewed Walter’s concert as
“No idea about art”, although the Hamburger Fremdenblatt gave a very
favourable review. Alfred, too, was having difficulty continuing with his
research for the Historical Reichscommission and was given a teaching job
at the so-called Jewish school, the famous Heinrich-Hertz Gymnasium.
Later, because of his hearing impairment, he was moved to the Library of
the Hochschule for Teachers’ Education. Gerhard saw his friend Hans-
Werner Döring only briefly. Although Hans-Werner had no socialist lean-
ings, his father was an ardent Nazi and kept pushing him to join the Party
so he could get a teaching job. Hans-Werner was obviously sensitive about
the discussions of present-day Germany and sadly left this gathering at
Alfred’s home early with the excuse of a previous appointment, staying
only long enough to catch up on the latest news and to bid his friend a safe
journey and auf wiedersehen. 
For Gerhard and Luise, not knowing what the future would bring, and
to be so far from friends and family, meant that leaving Germany with only
a few personal belongings was an acutely painful experience. There was lit-
tle to look forward to: they were headed for a small university in an isolat-
ed prairie town in far-off Canada where they knew only one person, their
friend of one year, John Spinks. As they boarded the SS Hamburg on 22
August, Gerhard clutched his luggage containing letters from friends and
colleagues which he had saved and cherished as his only mementos of the
lonely, yet happy years in his homeland, now a godforsaken country. A
telegram with “Best Wishes” from their friend Walter Heitler, meant to
cheer them on their way, only reminded them of the many friends they were
leaving behind as they sailed out along the Elbe River to the North Sea and
into the boundless Atlantic Ocean. Little did they realize how extremely
lucky they were.

Arrival in the New World
The Atlantic crossing proved uneventful, except for rough seas on the first
day followed by dense fog for several days, with better weather only after
passing the Gulf Stream.45 Arrival in New York seven days later was on
schedule on a beautiful clear morning with the imposing skyline familiar
from the many postcards sent by visiting friends. The Herzbergs were met
at the dock and brought to their hotel by James Curry, his first postdoctor-
al fellow in Darmstadt, now working at Columbia University. A thoughtful
advance from the University of Saskatchewan and a gift from Luise’s sis-
ter Lotte and husband Hans Thurnauer, who had settled in the United States
a year earlier, awaited Gerhard and Luise on arrival. This money made it
possible for them to spend a few days in New York and to make some addi-
tional trips in the eastern part of North America. For the next two days they
toured downtown New York, marvelling at the large number of skyscrap-
ers, the blazing lights of Times Square, and the onrushing cars and pedes-
trians. They viewed the sea of slim towers and houses from atop the newly
built Empire State Building, which they had been told had 102 stories and
was higher than the Eiffel Tower.
On Sunday, 1 September, Luise left by train from the Pennsylvania
Station to visit Lotte in Chattanooga, Tennessee, while Gerhard started on
a series of rapid trips with brief visits to various universities and research
laboratories in the northeastern United States and in Montreal, Canada.
Early September proved to be an unfavourable time for such visits, as most
people were still on vacation just before the start of the new academic year.
Nevertheless, he encountered a number of scientists, some of whom he had
met in Germany and England, and was able to see many spectroscopy lab-
oratories. On this whirlwind tour Herzberg managed to squeeze in visits to
ten research institutes of spectroscopy, fearing that it would be a long time
before he might have the opportunity to come east again. He was also
pleased that he had managed to make these visits at minimal expense, with
hotel costs ranging from $1.00 to $1.75 per night.46
His first visit was to Columbia University, which impressed him with
its vast extent and its Physics Department housed in the Pupin Tower. There
he met for the first time Isidor Rabi of atomic-beam fame and Harold Urey,
Nobel Laureate in 1934 for the discovery of heavy hydrogen. Urey had just
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      113

114
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
been named editor of the Journal of Chemical Physics, a new journal
devoted to publications of interest to chemists and physicists, and he asked
Herzberg to referee a submitted paper. This was a new experience for
Herzberg since papers in the German Zeitschrift für Physik were not refer-
eed. Next, he was in Boston and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
where he was shown the activity in the new field of electronic computers.
He took an overnight train to Montreal and visited J. Stuart Foster at Mc-
Gill University and discussed his work on the Stark effect. He also met the
chemist Edgar W.R. Steacie, who was to play an important role in Herz-
berg’s career many years later. Another overnight train took him to Prince-
ton University where he visited Edward U. Condon (of the Franck–
Condon principle). This was a fortuitous meeting, as Condon had just taken
on the job of general editor of a series of physics texts to be published by
the Prentice-Hall Company. When he learned of Herzberg’s book Atom-
spektren und Atomstruktur, he immediately invited Herzberg to produce an
English translation for publication in the series.47 At Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity in Baltimore, Herzberg saw the grating ruling engine of Robert W.
Wood but missed him as well as James Franck, who had recently accepted
a professorship there. In Washington, Herzberg toured the extensive labo-
ratories of the National Bureau of Standards and walked to the Capitol and
to the Lincoln and Jefferson monuments. In Pittsburgh he visited his for-
mer colleague Ernest Berl, who had been dismissed from the THD in 1933
and was now a Professor at the Carnegie Institute of Technology. He and
his wife had adapted quickly to the American way of life and felt entirely
at home in the United States. A day’s visit to the Ohio State University in
Columbus was followed by one to the University of Michigan in Ann
Arbor. Herzberg enjoyed the latter visit best of all because the work in
Michigan was almost exclusively spectroscopic and he sensed the pleasant
co-operation within the group headed by Harvey M. Randall and David M.
Dennison. At the University of Illinois in Urbana, he visited Francis M.
Loomis, with whom he had corresponded for several years about gratings
and spectrographs. Herzberg was disappointed on finding no one at The
University of Chicago, not even Robert Mulliken. Next morning, he await-
ed Luise’s arrival from her visit in Tennessee.

On to Saskatoon
The Herzbergs left Chicago at noon on Saturday, 14 September, on the
“Hiawatha”, the fastest train in North America, which covered the eight
hundred kilometres to Minneapolis in five hours. Unfortunately, the trains
to Winnipeg, Regina, and Saskatoon did not move with even half this
speed, so that they did not reach their destination until Monday morning,
16 September. The trip was not as dull as they had expected because the
vast wheat fields of the Prairies and the farm houses and barns with tall
silos were all new to them. Nevertheless they became increasingly con-
cerned as the train often stopped at places with only a few houses, and they
began to wonder what Saskatoon would be like. But when they arrived in
Saskatoon in splendid sunshine, they were pleasantly surprised to find an
attractive small city, decked out in beautiful autumn colours. This welcome
impression of their new homeland was enhanced beyond measure when
they saw their friend John Spinks waiting for them at the railway station.
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      115

116
8. BEGINNINGS IN CANADA
Gerhard and Luise instantly felt comfortable in Saskatoon and never forgot
the kind hospitality and friendliness with which they were received by fac-
ulty members and neighbours. Within three weeks of their arrival, they sent
off letters to friends in Germany describing their new homeland:
9 October 1935
Saskatoon was a pleasant surprise for us. The city lies on the South
Saskatchewan River, which is as broad as the Elbe at Dresden, which of
course does not mean that I want to compare Saskatoon to Dresden. There
are five bridges across the river, two of which are very beautiful. The
riverbed lies rather deep, and consequently the coastline looks very nice.
The university is on the opposite side of the river from the main part of
the city, and its institutes are built far apart, so there is still a lot of room
for additional buildings. The physics building is relatively large, about as
large as the Institute in Darmstadt, but the biologists are also housed in
the building, and many more rooms than in Darmstadt are used for class-
room purposes. Moreover, teaching takes over a much larger share of
time, indeed I have to lecture for six hours, and other colleagues even
teach nine hours. I have a very nice office, and already two students want
to take their Master’s degree for research work in spectroscopy. The
means for research are, however, rather limited, but everyone here shows
the utmost accommodation for my wishes. All of the people here are espe-
cially nice. With the English lectures I manage quite well, but of course it
is more work.
The first fourteen days, we stayed in a small hotel since the apartment
we found was not available until October 1st. We now have a furnished
apartment with a kitchen–dinette, a bedroom, and sitting room.
On our second day here, we saw a wonderful display of Northern
Lights, in several colours, very bright and constantly changing. Northern
Lights are frequent here since we are rather close to the north magnetic
pole, which lies in northern Canada. Nevertheless, Saskatoon is not much
more northerly situated than Berlin. A few days later, we had a tempera-
ture of –8°C at night, but during the day it is most pleasant since the sun
is shining most of the time. About the winter with its –40°C, we have
already been told all kinds of things, although some say it is not so bad—
well, we shall see.1
The University of Saskatchewan is apparently half a century ahead
of Cambridge in science and of Oxford in common sense.
George Bernard Shaw
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 116

Saskatoon and its University
Within a short time, Gerhard and Luise learned the early history of this
remote community and the founding of its university. Settlement in the dis-
trict of what was to become Saskatoon began in earnest in 1882 when the
Temperance Colonization Society received a land grant from the Dominion
Government, with the colony to be settled within five years. The townsite
was named Saskatoon, a shortened version of the Indian name Mis-sask-
quah-too-min, meaning “carpet of flowers”. Within a few years the colony
became a supply base for government troops, and men were employed as
farmers, freighters, couriers, and scouts for the rapidly expanding north-
west. By 1890 the railroad had reached Saskatoon, and the first railway
bridge was completed across the South Saskatchewan River to serve this
village of 113 souls in 1901. The Province of Saskatchewan was formed in
September 1905, and the City of Saskatoon was inaugurated a year later,
after losing a hard-fought campaign to the City of Regina as the provincial
capital. Nevertheless, railway activity continued with the building of tracks
in all directions from the village, then another bridge, and a railway station
and yards, making Saskatoon by 1907 the “Hub City” and the “Hub of the
Hard Wheat Belt”. After another lengthy political battle, Saskatoon was
awarded the University of Saskatchewan in April 1909. This decision was
greeted with the ringing of church bells, the blowing of steam whistles, and
the shouts and screams of half the population in a torchlight parade of burn-
ing brooms.
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      117
Saskatoon, 21st Street, facing east to the railway station.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 117

118
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
With the granting of the charter for the University of Saskatchewan and
the selection of the beautiful site overlooking the city, the prestige of a uni-
versity added a new pride to this pioneer community of 12,000 inhabitants
and advanced its cultural life. An extensive building program at the uni-
versity and city brought trade, increased capital, and skilled labour to the
city, and Saskatoon enjoyed a period of booming growth up to the time of
the Great War.2
Walter Charles Murray (1866–1945) of Dalhousie University was
selected as the founding president of the University of Saskatchewan in
August 1908. He was born in Studholm, New Brunswick, and was educat-
ed at the University of New Brunswick. He distinguished himself in phi-
losophy at the University of Edinburgh and, after a brief period of study in
Berlin, returned to his alma mater at the age of twenty-five to take up the
Chair of Mental and Moral Philosophy and Political Economy. Within a
year he was offered and accepted the George Munro Professorship of Phil-
osophy at Dalhousie University, the leading university of the Maritimes.
During the next sixteen years he carried out his university teaching and
administrative duties with distinction and served the Church, the School
Commission, and the City Council; he wrote about educational and munic-
ipal affairs and was active in many clubs and committees. In a farewell
The campus of the University of Saskatchewan, 1935. At lower left is the
chemistry building, then the physics, administration, and arts buildings.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 118

tribute, his friend of Edinburgh days, James Falconer, wrote in The Dal-
housie Gazette:
But as attractive as he is as a lecturer he is yet more noteworthy because
of his broad humanity. Few in college had a larger circle of friends than
he; and these were drawn from every quarter. He was persona grata in
every society. He would breakfast with philosophers, dine with doctors,
and sup with theologians, and whenever he came his happy laugh and
ingenious discussions were the life of the company.… He is essentially a
peacemaker; and whether in college or city council or church courts, it is
ever the same that he refuses no labour, counts nothing too much trouble,
if only he can bring people to see eye to eye. Energetic to the last degree,
ready for hard work, sane in judgement, he is a man who is always sure
to come to the front in the counsels of men.
Such was the man chosen to build the University of Saskatchewan.3
Murray came with firm ideas on the nature of the university he would build:
What is the sphere of the university? Its watchword is service—service of
the State in the things that make for happiness and virtue as well as in the
things that make for wealth. No form of that service is too mean or too
exalted for the university.… Teaching, Research, and Extension are the
three forms of its service. As it cares for the different phases of public
well-being it increases in usefulness and merits the support which the
people generously give.
Although Murray originally strongly supported Regina as the site of the
University of Saskatchewan and expressed his disappointment with the
decision to locate it in Saskatoon, he was quickly reconciled. Murray envi-
sioned a large university with faculties of arts, science, engineering, agri-
culture, education, law, medicine, and probably dentistry and commerce.
He understood the importance of agriculture to the people of Saskatchewan
and stressed this in his plans:
The College of Agriculture, while distinct from the other Faculties and
probably more isolated and independent, should yet be within the Uni-
versity, receiving from the liberal studies a humanizing influence and giv-
ing to the whole life of the University a close relationship between the
daily life of the people and the pursuit of the scholar and the scientist.
The early 1900s was an exciting period in the Canadian West. “A mood
of exhilarating optimism was abroad in the Prairies. Nearly everyone was
young, and had come from some other part of the world to seek new
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      119
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 119

120
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
fortune in a land of promise. Immigrants were fanning out from Winnipeg
to take up homesteads, and abundant harvests were yielding quick returns.
Life was one long, expanding boom with advances and recessions it is true,
but nobody dared to place any limits on the possibilities of the future.”4
While Murray hailed from the more cultured Maritimes with close ties to
Great Britain, he easily fell in step with this adventurous mood of the West
and fuelled its spirit at the University. The establishment of a first-class
university in the service of the people of Saskatchewan became his life’s
mission and a challenge as the population of Saskatoon increased to 25,700
in 1921 and to 43,300 a decade later. By the time the Herzbergs arrived in
Saskatoon, the major work of planning and building the first phase of the
campus had been accomplished, and about two thousand students had
already been awarded degrees.
The Department of Physics
Within two weeks of arriving in Saskatoon, Herzberg was teaching two
courses, one in elementary mechanics to undergraduates and the other in
atomic and molecular spectroscopy to students in the Master’s degree pro-
gram, the highest degree given at the university. Having spent a year in
Bristol, he was comfortable lecturing in English. But he found it rather hard
work to prepare the undergraduate course and especially to set problems for
the students and provide solutions to them—something he had never done
in Darmstadt, where much less time was devoted to problem-solving by the
students. To his pleasant surprise, he found the standards at this little uni-
versity to be remarkably high; the pioneer immigrants in the farming com-
munity believed that their children should have a good university education
and sent them to university in spite of economic hardships. These were
eager students who competed strongly to see who would be at the top of
their class, and they performed exceptionally well for the Bachelor’s and
Master’s degrees and in postgraduate studies in the United States or the
United Kingdom. Herzberg learned that of the almost two thousand stu-
dents who had graduated in the past twenty-five years, over eighty had
gone to other universities to obtain Doctorate degrees and were employed
in universities, colleges, and national laboratories. Of the sixteen Rhodes
Scholars from Saskatchewan, nine had received Firsts and Higher degrees
at Oxford and none less than a Second, a better performance than Rhodes
Scholars from any other province.5
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 120

Among the students in his first graduate class were William G. Schnei-
der and Henry Taube from neighbouring farms in Wolseley, Saskatchewan,
both enrolled in chemistry. After his Master’s degree, Schneider obtained a
Ph.D. in physical chemistry at McGill University; he carried out research
at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute in Massachusetts from 1943 to
1946 and then joined the NRC in Ottawa and served as its President from
1967 to 1980. Taube obtained his Ph.D. at the University of California at
Berkeley, and being unable to find a position at a Canadian University, he
joined Stanford University. He received the 1983 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
for his work on the mechanisms of electron transfer reactions, especially
metal complexes.
Herzberg’s colleagues in the Department of Physics were Ertle L. Har-
rington, the Head of the Department, Balfour W. Currie, Newman Haslam,
and Charles MacKay. They taught physics to a total of about eight hundred
students, a large proportion of the less than three thousand enrolled in the
university. In addition to lectures, the students specializing in physics spent
much time in laboratories that were well equipped, so they had very good
background training in experimental as well as theoretical physics. Student
interest in physics was encouraged by the activities of the Physics Club,
with biweekly supper meetings of staff and graduate students. Papers were
read by student members, and special experiments were performed by staff,
with the annual highlight being the Physics Show, essentially an open
house full of striking demonstrations for the audience.
From its beginnings in 1910, the department focused on teaching as its
first duty and pioneered new undergraduate courses in electron theory and
atomic structure in 1924, in medical physics in 1928, and in meteorology
and climatology in 1936–1937, long before some of the larger universities
took up these themes. On completion of the Physics Building in 1921, the
first research activities were studies of soil temperatures at various depths,
with results of interest to soil scientists, and of the motion of curling stones
and the effects of sweeping, which stirred up considerable publicity for the
university. Notable recognition for research came to the department with
George R. Henderson’s research in radioactivity and Thomas Alty’s work in
surface physics. Alty was the Research Professor of the department for ten
years and left Saskatoon on being appointed Kelvin Professor of Applied
Physics at the University of Glasgow, at the time of Herzberg’s arrival.
Harrington headed the department from 1925, and through his inspired
leadership and planning, the University of Saskatchewan became widely
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      121
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 121

122
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
respected in physics. He was raised on a farm in Missouri and was educat-
ed at the universities of Missouri, Harvard, and Chicago. He was a con-
firmed gadgeteer and believed that students from the farms made the best
physicists because they were practical and resourceful and could construct
almost anything with a piece of barbed wire, angle iron, and a stick of
wood. Along with his administrative duties and teaching, Harrington was
noted for his development of new apparatus and for building the first radon
plant in Western Canada. Atmospheric physics and studies of the auroras
and earth currents were Currie’s main interests. Haslam had returned to the
university in 1935 after obtaining his Ph.D. at McGill under John Foster
and spending two years in Leipzig with Werner Heisenberg of quantum
mechanics fame.
As Currie noted, among the various universities to which Herzberg
might have gone, one of the most unlikely was the University of Sas-
katchewan.6 The university lacked suitable equipment for spectroscopic
research, and funds to purchase equipment and make additional appoint-
ments to the staff were almost non-existent as the university was operating
under drastically restricted budgets because of the Great Depression and
the years of drought leading to a succession of poor crops for the province.
The Physics Club, University of Saskatchewan, 1936.
Front row: Prof. Haslam, Prof. Harrington, Dr. L. Herzberg, Prof. MacKay, 
Prof. Herzberg, Prof. Currie. Second row: G.G. Milne, L.G. Mundie,
G.J. Thiessen, R.B. Sutton, J.G. Fox, R. Anderson, R. Fournier, K.N. Barnard, 
J.L. Stewart. Third row: S. Standen, A.E. Douglas, K.T. McLeod, A. Morrison,
W.C. Fisher, B. Stannard, C.M. Penner, R.F. Pattison.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 122

These problems were well known to Herzberg, but after some initial hesi-
tation he accepted this temporary position since it was the only safe haven
he had been offered. Moreover, with the full support of Harrington, Herz-
berg was allotted $1,800 to equip his laboratory and to purchase a com-
parator for the measurement of the spectra he had brought from Darmstadt;
secretarial services were provided for the writing of papers and books, and
he was given space to build a large spectrograph when adequate funding
became available. He could not ask for more!
Research Professor of Physics
Harrington immediately recognized the good fortune of the department in
the new recruit, and within a month of Herzberg’s arrival he was strongly
recommending to President Murray an increase in Herzberg’s salary. Herz-
berg had already set up an active laboratory with the equipment Harrington
had ordered for him and the optics he had brought from Germany. His
lectures were well received by the students in spite of his accent, and he
worked long hours, regularly and efficiently. As one of his students recalls:
Oh, Herzberg was a marvellous fellow. I always appreciate people who
have super-brilliant minds, which Herzberg obviously had, and yet who
are down-to-earth and human. And he was also, I think, a very kindly
man.… There were several of us in this first year class, who quite plain-
ly belonged to the Awkward Squad, and while Herzberg didn’t have to, he
organized extra classes for us at 4:30 in the afternoon. And I think that
was a very generous thing for him to do, to help out people who were hav-
ing all sorts of trouble.7
Luise, too, was warmly welcomed to the Physics Club and was able to pur-
sue her interests in spectroscopy and work with Gerhard in the laboratory.
President Murray himself was much impressed and wrote to Professor
Alty in Glasgow that Herzberg “is proving to be a genuine treasure”. Just
three months after Herzberg arrived, and much to his surprise, he was
called to Murray’s office and given a permanent faculty appointment with
the title of Research Professor, together with a very substantial raise in
salary.8 The Herzbergs could hardly believe their good fortune: all of their
worries about the future were eliminated. This was a most welcome relief
from the thought of having to return to a troubled Germany after the two
years as Guest Professor. Life in Saskatoon turned out to be rather special
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      123
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 123

124
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
for them. They quickly came to know the hundred or so faculty members
and became close friends with many of them. They were invited to Sunday
afternoon teas and to musical evenings at friends’ homes. Even the chal-
lenge of the severe winter did not daunt them. They walked across the 25th
Avenue bridge many mornings and evenings when bus service was dis-
rupted because of heavy snows. There was now no doubt in their minds that
Canada was to be their home. It was time to start a family.
Having decided to remain in Canada, Herzberg applied for permanent
landing in January 1937, long before the expiry of the temporary visa as
Guest Professor. This provoked serious enquiries from A.L. Jolliffe, the
Canadian Commissioner of Immigration, who instantly wrote to President
Murray asking for an explanation.9 He wanted to know whether Herzberg’s
position had been made permanent and, if so, the nature of the appointment
and whether he would be displacing any Canadian resident. Murray
responded immediately.10 He explained that on the departure of Dr. Alty for
the University of Glasgow, his position was taken up by Drs. Herzberg and
Haslam and that the arrangement was working out well, with the depart-
ment now having five staff members in place of the previous four. In a sec-
ond letter Murray came straight to the point in his usual effective manner:
The first winter in Saskatoon, 1935.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 124

In your letter of January 26th you raise an interesting question. You ask if
Dr. Herzberg would be displacing any Canadian resident. Does that imply
that a Canadian University cannot appoint to its staff any person, no mat-
ter how distinguished, who would in any way displace a Canadian resi-
dent? Does it mean that we are restricted to Canadian residents for the fill-
ing of academic positions unless no Canadian resident has the peculiar
qualifications required? If so, I fear it may prove fatal to higher education.
While we are all most anxious to give our Canadian students a good
chance and in making appointments actually give them a preference, we
must from time to time bring in from outside of Canada distinguished
scholars to strengthen our staff. Does this suggestion mean that from
Great Britain we should not bring scholars if it displaces a Canadian res-
ident, or from the United States, or from any country in Europe? If this is
a matter of settled policy its seriousness for higher education and research
in Canada is very great.
Jolliffe replied that in view of Herzberg’s special qualifications, the depart-
ment had decided to extend favourable consideration in the matter of a per-
manent landing. However, because the Herzbergs did not come within the
ordinarily admissible classes, it would be necessary to make a special rec-
ommendation to Council on their behalf, an action he had already taken
up.11 Landed-immigrant status was authorized by Order-in-Council on 17
March 1937 to Gerhard and Luise, thanks to Murray’s strong intervention.
No sooner was Herzberg’s two year leave of absence over (on 1 September
1937), and with him not having returned to Darmstadt, the Rector of the
Technische Hochschule notified him that his position as Privatdozent no
longer existed.12 In 1936 Herzberg began to repay his student bursary in
Germany by sending 16 M at a time to the Reichstudentenwerk until 1939,
and he contributed $30 quarterly to the Emergency Society of German
Scholars Abroad in Zurich for help to other refugees.
Elsbeth Oettinger, Luise’s mother, was granted permission to visit the
family in Saskatoon for several months in the summer of 1936, and she was
delighted to be there for the birth of her grandson Paul Albin, born on 23
September 1936. She had sailed from Hamburg to Halifax on the luxury
liner St. Louis. One of the passengers happened to be Henry R. Calvert, one
of the many visitors at the University of Göttingen in its heyday, who
remembered Herzberg making the daily rounds with Professor Franck. He
wrote to Herzberg that he enjoyed the company of Mrs. Oettinger as they
dined at the same table on the St. Louis. Calvert also mentioned that on this
trip he had revisited the Institute of Physics in Göttingen, but sadly all of
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      125
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 125

126
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
the familiar faces were gone. Mrs. Oettinger’s visit in Saskatoon was
extended to the end of 1936 when Gerhard accompanied her on the long
train trip to her daughter, Lotte Thurnauer, in Chattanooga, Tennessee.
After a brief visit with Lotte’s family, she sailed home to an increasingly
troubled Germany. Two years later, Luise’s parents would plead for help to
arrange for their immigration to Canada.
A daughter, Agnes Margaret, was born on 12 December 1938. The
growing Herzberg family then moved to a small house at 813 Colony
Street, within easy walking distance of the university. Both Paul and Agnes
were baptized in the United Church as protection against future “Nazis”,
even though Gerhard and Luise were not keen on the religious aspect, nor
did they expect to return to Germany or Europe. In fact, the Herzbergs were
for all intents and purposes atheists, but they could not acknowledge this
since it would raise problems even with the educated people in Saskatoon.
There were strict observances of religious decorum in this city of many
churches, one precept being that tennis could not be played before noon on
Sundays. During the next few years, Luise gave up her work in the labora-
tory to take care of the children, yet she managed to keep abreast of devel-
October 1936                                               May 1937
Proud parents with Paul.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 126

opments in spectroscopy and to contribute to some of Gerhard’s research
by preparing figures and tables for his books. She was often sighted on
campus during good weather, wheeling the baby carriage, then the stroller,
as the family visited Gerhard and brought him lunch.
Invitations to Scientific Meetings
The constant stream of letters to and from friends and scientific colleagues
in Europe and North America was quickly resumed in Saskatoon. From
colleagues who had to leave Germany, he received inquiries about the
Carnegie Guest Professorships and of the chances of academic or research
posts in Canada. He informed Hans Beutler of his own experiences, and
Beutler, who had applied to universities around the world, eventually
joined Mulliken’s group in Chicago. When Herzberg learned from letters of
Hertha Sponer that Eugene I. Rabinowitch was at loose ends because his
fellowship from Imperial Chemical Industries had expired in London, Eng-
land, Herzberg asked Rabinowitch for a vitae and publications list to help
in an inquiry at the University of British Columbia. However, no positions
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      127
Grandma Elsbeth Oettinger with Paul,
October 1936.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 127

128
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Uncle Victor’s greetings on the birth of Agnes.
Luise and Agnes, March 1939.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 128

PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      129
materialized in Canada, and Herzberg wrote that he would discuss
Rabinowitch’s problem with colleagues at Princeton University.13 Finally
an opening at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology became available
and Rabinowitch thanked Herzberg for his help. Herzberg was also
informed by Sponer that Edward Teller had visited Duke University, that
Lothar Nordheim, her former colleague from Göttingen, was to join Duke
as theoretical physicist in 1937, and that Fritz London, who along with
Walter Heitler pioneered the field of quantum chemistry, was to come a
year later as a guest professor.14 In fact, London remained at Duke until his
untimely death in 1954, and his contributions to the physics of extremely
low temperatures, superconductivity, and superfluidity won him much
acclaim and helped raise the stature of physics at Duke University.
Soon after his arrival, Herzberg was invited to participate in scientific
meetings in Canada and the United States. In spite of the long distances
involved and having to pay his own costs, he took every opportunity to
attend, as long as his absence from home was brief and the time away did
not interfere with his classes. The latter restriction didn’t hinder him undu-
ly, since most science conferences were held during school breaks at
Christmas, Easter, or summer holidays. His first chance to travel came in
June 1936, when he attended the Seattle–Victoria Meeting of the Astro-
nomical Society of the Pacific and combined this with a visit to his moth-
er in Seattle, Washington. At this conference he met many American and
Canadian astronomers for the first time, among the latter were Carlyle S.
Beals and Andrew McKellar of the Dominion Observatory in Victoria,
British Columbia, who were soon destined to make important contributions
in astronomy and would become Herzberg’s close friends.
He visited his mother whom he had not seen since her brief visit in Ger-
many, at least ten years before. In the meantime, she had met and married
Oscar Svendsoy, a longshoreman in Seattle, and had raised a daughter. Herz-
berg met his half-sister Charlotte but, having little in common with her or
Oscar, did not relate well to them on this visit, as noted and commented on
by his mother. On the journey home, he visited the Observatory in Victoria
and came to know a few more Canadian astronomers and their work.
Herzberg was invited to participate in a conference on molecular struc-
ture, organized by the American Chemical Society and being held in Prin-
ceton, New Jersey, in January 1937. He presented the results of recent work
on the spectra of methyl acetylene and diborane. There he met the leading
American astronomer Henry N. Russell of Princeton University and dis-
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 129

130
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
cussed with him a project of possible importance in astronomy concerning
the absorption of radiation in the infrared region by water vapour in the
atmosphere. Herzberg’s point was that in the Saskatoon winter with tem-
peratures as low as –40°C, the water vapour in the air would be frozen out,
so that the radiation from the Sun would not be absorbed, and there would
be a good chance of extending our knowledge of the Sun’s spectrum.
Russell was very interested, thought this a good idea, and suggested that
Herzberg apply for a grant from the Penrose Fund of the American Philo-
sophical Society, which he would support.15
On the basis of his paper at the Princeton meeting, Herzberg was invit-
ed by H.D. Smyth, Chairman of the Physics Department, to join Princeton
for the second term (10 February to 18 June 1937) to give a graduate course
on molecular spectroscopy, but he declined because of his duties and grad-
uate students at the University of Saskatchewan.
Herzberg’s next conference proved to be an important introduction into
the circle of American astronomers. It was held at Yerkes Observatory in
Williams Bay, Wisconsin, from 22 to 25 June 1938. The conference was
organized by Robert Mulliken of The University of Chicago and Otto
Struve, the Director of the Observatory, with discussion on “Recent
Progress in the Interpretation of Molecular Spectra and in the Study of
Molecular Spectra in Celestial Objects”. This was the first of several such
conferences at Yerkes Observatory with astronomers, astrophysicists, and
physicists in attendance.16 Herzberg met many American spectroscopists
and astronomers and was re-acquainted with Edward Teller, Robert Mulli-
ken, Hans Beutler, and John Winans, all of whom he had last seen in Ger-
many. He presented the paper “Forbidden Transitions in Diatomic
Molecules”. In particular, he predicted the possibility of detecting molecu-
lar hydrogen in planetary atmospheres by investigating an extremely weak
spectrum, known as the quadrupole spectrum, a major discovery he was to
make a decade later by simulating the extremely long depths of planetary
atmospheres in the laboratory.
That year, Herzberg had to forego meetings in Pittsburgh and Berkeley
because of travel costs and visa problems. The following year, he was
invited by the American Chemical Society to visit the universities in Minne-
apolis, Madison, Urbana, Lafayette, Columbus, and Ann Arbor where he
lectured on a variety of molecular topics. This was a whirlwind trip lasting
from 8 to 17 May 1939 and was a good introduction to many American
chemists and physicists. Within three years of his coming to North America,
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 130

Herzberg had visited most of the very active centres of spectroscopy and had
met many of the distinguished astronomers, chemists, and physicists.
Early Accomplishments
Along with his teaching duties and the analysis of spectra he had brought
from Darmstadt, Herzberg kept busy writing and revising the volume on
diatomic molecules. In the meantime he reviewed the galley proofs of the
German edition of atomic spectra, and the book was published in 1936.
With the help of John Spinks this was translated into English, and Atomic
Spectra and Atomic Structure was published by Prentice-Hall Company in
New York a year later, with due credit being given on the title page to
Spinks for the translation. The first volume in the series Molecular Spectra
and Molecular Structure, titled Diatomic Molecules, was published in 1939
in both the English and German editions. Herzberg then turned his atten-
tion to the second volume in the series, on polyatomic molecules, writing
in longhand at every possible opportunity.
In addition to the time-consuming work of reading and correcting
proofs and writing, Herzberg was most anxious to begin experimental
research. Two students began research work on his arrival in September,
and he wanted to get them started right away and to spend as much time as
possible with them. J.G. Fox set up a high-voltage discharge cell for study-
ing the emission spectrum of CO, and L.G. Mundie built an absorption cell
2.5 metres in length and examined spectra of NO. Fox completed his Mas-
ter’s degree in the spring of 1937, and Mundie in the fall of that year. W.S.
Herbert and G.A. Mills (graduate students in chemistry) worked on active
nitrogen during the summer months of 1936. In the meantime another two
students joined the group, C.M. Penner studying the emission spectra of B2
and Si2 and R.B. Sutton who helped in setting up the new grating instru-
ment. A steady stream of students asked to join in Herzberg’s research, and
he elected to have two working in the laboratory at any one time, along
with Luise and himself.
With strong recommendations from Henry Russell and James Franck,
Herzberg was awarded $1,500 by the American Philosophical Society to
build a spectrograph for his molecular research.17 It was the first research
grant he received in North America and opened the way for his early stud-
ies in high-resolution spectroscopy. He chose to design and build a six-
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      131
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 131

132
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
metre grating spectrograph to provide sufficient resolution for the problem
he had discussed with Russell and to study the spectra of other molecules.
He used $500 for a grating, which he ordered from R.W. Wood of Johns
Hopkins University who had supplied him with the efficient grating for the
instrument in Darmstadt. The rest was needed for the shopwork in building
the instrument. This was efficiently pursued by the technician Bert Cox,
who had joined the department in 1924. Herzberg was in constant contact
with Wood about details of the grating and was assured in early June 1938
that it was finished and that it was a “beauty”. Finally, after four years in
Saskatoon, Herzberg had the necessary equipment, and the best instrument
in Canada, to continue his spectroscopic studies. He first carried out the
experiment he had proposed to Russell, only to find that there was no dif-
ference in the summer and winter spectra of the Sun. The explanation was
that even though the winter temperature on the ground was –40°C, there
was an inversion layer in the upper atmosphere at about +10°C so that the
water vapour contained there still blocked out part of the Sun’s spectrum in
winter as it had in summer.
Although this project seemed to be a complete flop at the time, it later
proved to have some importance for astronomy. Astronomers were constant-
ly on the lookout for the best locations for observatories, places far away
from city lights and atmospheric disturbances. When the American astron-
omer Gerard Kuiper was making a survey of various possible locations for
observatories with better viewing, he used Herzberg’s results to decide that
there was no use in going to colder places to observe, rather one must go to
higher places. In this way he found Mauna Kea at an altitude of four thou-
sand metres in Hawaii to be an ideal place for astronomical observations,
and over the years, a large number of observatories were built there.
A major result for the understanding of chemical bonding was the
discovery by Herzberg in 1937 that the length of the C–C single bond was
dependent on its environment. When the spectra of methyl acetylene
(CH3CCH and CH3CCD) taken in Darmstadt were finally analyzed, the
length of the C–C single bond was not found to be constant at the value
1.543 Å accepted for ethane (where the C–C bond is surrounded by six
single bonds). In methyl acetylene, the C–C bond is adjacent to three sin-
gle bonds on one side and to a triple bond on the other, and its length is
shortened to 1.460 Å.18 This was the first recognition that the C–C bond
length depended on the number of adjacent atoms, a topic that was pursued
by Herzberg and his colleagues and by several other groups. The difference
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 132

in bond length was so striking that Linus Pauling, who was developing his
theory of the chemical bond, did not believe this result until it was con-
firmed by R.M. Badger of the California Institute of Technology.19
During the period 1935–1939, Herzberg published twenty papers, half
were based on spectra he had taken in Darmstadt, many of which had been
analyzed in Saskatoon, and the rest were based on experimental research
carried out in Saskatoon. Luise completed the analysis of an infrared spec-
trum of HDO that she had produced in Darmstadt and published the results
as her last paper in German.
With these many accomplishments in the few years that Herzberg had
been in Canada, his colleagues and friends decided it was time to nominate
him for Fellowship in The Royal Society of Canada. Harrington submitted
the nomination papers, supported by Gordon M. Shrum and Frank B. Ken-
rick, along with the following letter:
Professor Herzberg is now in his fourth year with us as Research Pro-
fessor in the Department of Physics, having come to us in 1935 as a
successor to Professor Alty. His work in spectroscopy has been of such
outstanding importance that little comment is necessary, particularly in
view of the fact a complete list of his publications is being submitted.
While of German training, he had already spent a year in England before
coming to Canada. He is a most excellent lecturer, speaking clearly with
well chosen words and having the gift of knowing whether or not his
audience is able to understand what is being said. He is very popular with
the research students and with other members of the staff, as well as with
faculty members outside our department. He is most cooperative and tact-
ful in his dealings with everyone.
His book on atomic structure has been well received and is published
in both English and German. A second volume is in proof stage. This too
will appear in both English and German editions. I believe there are com-
paratively few who can be considered such an authority on atomic and
molecular structure. His several invitations to participate in symposia is
ample recognition of his standing. I consider him to be not only well qual-
ified, but thoroughly Canadian in his outlook and interests.20
Although there were twelve nominations that year, the Selection Com-
mittee put forward three, with Herzberg as the leading candidate. There
was some comment regarding the fact that he had been in Canada only
since 1935 and was not a Canadian citizen, but the Committee felt he was
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      133
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 133

134
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
so outstanding, and according to Harrington would remain permanently in
Canada, that a mere counting of years was not of importance. When this
slate of candidates was announced to the Fellows, a very strong objection
was raised by Eli F. Burton of the University of Toronto, who sent a letter
to all members of Section III (the scientists in the Society). He raised the
point that Herzberg had been in Canada only a few years, and although
there was nothing in the by-laws of the Society confining membership to
Canadian or British citizens, he thought it very unfortunate that this choice
should be made in view of the fact that there were a great number of Can-
adian scientists who deserved election and whose nominations had been
renewed year after year and who now were being passed over for a com-
parative newcomer. After stating that this matter should be given very care-
ful consideration by the Society, Burton added that if the election of this
candidate was carried through at the present time and confirmed by the
Society, in justification of his interest in Canadian scientists, he would
resign as a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada.21
To some members, Burton’s objection smacked of anti-Semitism, an
attitude deplored by many who found it to be gaining ground in Canada.
This was perhaps an unjustified criticism of Burton’s concern, who was
told pointedly that Herzberg was not Jewish, and one colleague even went
so far as to state that Herzberg was a good Christian. The strong support for
Herzberg’s many contributions assured his election to Fellowship in The
Royal Society of Canada that year at the age of thirty-four, one of the
Society’s youngest members. Burton attended the Annual Meeting of the
Society, was polite to Herzberg, and did not resign.
Volume I of Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure, Spectra of
Diatomic Molecules, was finally completed to Herzberg’s satisfaction and
immediately translated into English by Spinks. Luise prepared all of the
drawings and tables, with the final figures being drafted by Lorne Gray, an
engineering student (who many years later became the President of Atomic
Energy of Canada Limited). Gray was recommended to Herzberg by Chal-
mers Jack Mackenzie, the Dean of Engineering (who left the University of
Saskatchewan in 1939 to become Acting President and in 1944 President
of the NRC in Ottawa). Again, Haslam read the proofs and contributed
many stylistic improvements to the text. The German and English versions
were published in early 1939 by the same publishers that produced the
books on atomic spectra. This volume was dedicated to Walter Charles
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 134

Murray, First President of the University of Saskatchewan. On receiving a
copy of the book, Murray was overwhelmed:
Dear Dr. Herzberg:
I cannot tell you how much I appreciate the great honour which you
and Dr. Spinks have done me in dedicating your book to me. The beauty
of its external appearance is far surpassed by the beauty of your gracious
act.
You and Dr. Spinks have brought great honour to this University by
your researches and your teaching.
Dr. Spinks has the added honour of having brought you to this
University. Everything which he said about you has been more than jus-
tified by what you have done since coming to Saskatchewan. Like him,
you have contributed much to the life of the University as well as to
Advancement of Knowledge.
May this University long enjoy the benefit of your great services is
the sincere wish of your grateful friend.22
Family Reunion
As conditions in Nazi Germany steadily degenerated and became unbear-
able for the Oettingers by September 1938, they sought the help of the
Herzbergs to emigrate to Canada. One might wonder why they made this
decision so late, yet one could understand their inner turmoil. They were
both Germans, born and bred in Germany, he was a front-line veteran of
the Great War, his company was flourishing, and they retained little of
Jewish culture and religion. Yet living in Nürnberg, the national shrine of
the Nazi, with the pomp and glory of torchlight parades and Hitler often
addressing zealous crowds of one hundred thousand or more, they should
have realized much sooner that their presence would not be tolerated for
long. The disastrous Kristallnacht all over Germany on 10 November
1938, the atrocities that followed, and the mandatory use of the names
“Israel” and “Sara” after their first names on all official documents shat-
tered any dreams they may have had for their continuing survival. The
final blow was Paul “Israel” Oettinger’s ouster from his own company by
his Aryan partners.
Herzberg’s first enquiry on seeking entry of Luise’s parents as
permanent residents brought an immediate reply from A.L. Jolliffe, the
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      135
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 135

136
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Commissioner for Immigration, that the Oettingers were not in a position
to comply with the Immigration Regulations and that Canada was being
inundated with such requests.23 Walter Murray, now retired from the pres-
idency but ever active, stepped in again with his strong support. The Invest-
igative Officer in Saskatoon reported that circumstances were favourable
for admission of the Oettingers but that special authority would have to be
secured by Order-in-Council, and Jolliffe informed Herzberg that appro-
priate action was being taken. In view of the terrible news of Kristallnacht,
Herzberg sent a night letter asking for acceleration of the final papers, only
to be told that because of the large number of such requests, the Depart-
ment could not give precedence to the Oettingers. On 8 December, Murray
sent Herzberg a telegram stating that he had been to the Immigration
Department in Ottawa and that a cable would be sent to Germany regard-
ing permission for the Oettingers to come to Canada. After further delays,
Murray was informed that the Order-in-Council had been passed and that
the Canadian agent in Hamburg had been informed to proceed with the per-
mits for entry into Canada. Passports stamped with a large red “J” were
issued in March, and the Oettingers finally sailed from Hamburg on 22
March, arriving safely in Halifax on 3 April 1939.
Thanks to the persistent and persuasive efforts of Murray, the Oettin-
gers found a safe haven in Canada. One might well have asked why would
Murray have gone to so much trouble? As his successor, President James
S. Thomson wrote of Murray: “There was a phrase that often slipped from
him as he spoke about the practical solution to some problem—It’s the
human thing to do.”24
The Oettingers moved in with the Herzbergs, but living conditions with
two young children and grandparents in their small home proved difficult
for all, and the increased expenses became a concern. A move to a larger
house at 814 Temperance Street a year later eased the strain somewhat.
Also, Lotte and her husband, now American citizens, were able to con-
tribute a monthly allowance towards the living expenses of her parents. To
Gerhard’s surprise, he found that Mr. Oettinger expected much more than
just a home: he insisted on total devotion and service from Luise. Thus, she
essentially had to give up any thought of serious scientific work for a few
years, until her parents moved to Ottawa in 1943. Although only English
was spoken at home after Paul and Agnes were born, Gerhard and Luise
now felt they had to switch to German since Elsbeth was not comfortable
in English. Luise’s father on the other hand spoke English fluently and in
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 136

1943 was offered a job as a Censorship Examiner in the Department of
National War Services in Ottawa. The Oettingers became naturalized Brit-
ish subjects in 1945.
As the daily newspapers reported increasingly ominous news from
Germany, Herzberg worried about Walter, whose infrequent letters told lit-
tle about his employment and even less of living conditions in Hamburg,
presumably because of fear of censorship. The main personal news was
that he had not joined the National Socialist Party, nor was he drafted into
military service because of an arm injury in a motorbike accident in 1939.
Gerhard wondered how long it would be before Walter would be mobi-
lized.
Life in Saskatoon
The small university community was a friendly, close-knit group that
organized picnics in the northern lake district, visits to each others’ homes,
and a children’s Christmas party in the President’s home. After Murray’s
resignation in 1937, these parties were hosted by the Physics Department,
with Mr. Oettinger being Santa Claus in 1939 and 1940. The Herzberg fam-
ily enjoyed outings to Lake Waskesiu and Emma Lake, still in their natural
state, and the good hiking in the forests around them, where the silences
were broken only by the sound of a loon or the splash of fish. They attend-
ed the winter series of concerts of the young Saskatoon Symphony
Orchestra and the art exhibits and other cultural events that toured Western
Canada, giving them the opportunity to meet colleagues and distinguished
guests. Through Spinks, Gerhard struck up a friendship with the artist
Ernest Lindner and was invited to the “Saturday Night” salons at the Lind-
ner’s home on 9th Street. These were attended by professors from a variety
of departments, Spinks from Chemistry, David from French, Steinhauer
from German, Bentley from English, and Saunders from Biology, as well
as by people from the press, the cooperative movement, school teachers,
visiting dignitaries, and artists. Discussions during these long evenings
were intense and animated and covered a broad spectrum of topics, philo-
sophic, religious, scientific, and artistic.
Gerhard was especially moved by a radio broadcast by Lindner on
the theme “No Civilization without Creation”. His concluding remarks
resounded strongly with Herzberg’s ideas, which years later he would
espouse at university convocations:
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      137
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 137

138
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Let us not just be contributors to the world’s stomach with our wheat, and
to the world’s industry and armament with our minerals. Let us contribute
to the world’s cultural life with our thoughts, with literature, music, folk
songs, handicraft, and art—grown on our own native soil. Only if we do
that, will we live a full life, will we truly appreciate the accomplishments
of other nations and other times and become a full member of the family
of the great nations of the world.25
Others who became best of friends of the Herzbergs in a short time
were Rudolph and Anni Altschul, Austrian refugees who arrived in Saska-
toon in 1939, having survived the torpedoing of the liner Athenia. He was
a neuropsychiatrist in private practice in Vienna but switched to anatomy
in Saskatoon since it was the only position available at the time. He became
internationally recognized for his research in arteriosclerosis, the hardening
of the arteries in humans, as well as experimentally induced arteriosclero-
sis in animals. Frederick Mendel was another Jewish refugee who settled
in Saskatoon just before the start of the war. He had operated a meat pro-
cessing plant in Czechoslovakia and soon started the very successful Inter-
continental Pork Packers plant in Saskatoon. He donated the Mendel Art
Gallery to the city, a noteworthy cultural centre for exhibiting the work of
Canadian and international artists.
The prospects of better crops towards the end of the thirties encouraged
a mood of optimism at the university and in the city and province, and this
mood was strengthened in Saskatoon with the major celebrations for the
Royal Visit of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth in June of 1939. With-
in three months this jaunty atmosphere was shattered as Germany pounced
on Poland to precipitate the Second World War and the Saskatoon Light
Infantry embarked for Great Britain with the First Canadian Division in
December 1939.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:18 PM  Page 138

139
9. THE WAR YEARS IN CANADA
Friendly “Enemy Aliens”
As soon as Canada declared war on Germany on 10 September 1939, the
Herzbergs became “enemy aliens”. They reported to the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police each month and remembered it as a friendly affair. They
were not maltreated in any way by the university community or neighbours
because they were known to be refugees from the Nazi regime that had now
started the Second World War. Before long, they became accustomed to the
rationing of food; however, restrictions on gasoline and liquor and the
“meatless Tuesdays and Fridays” did not affect them, as they did not own
a car, were teetotallers, and most of their meals were vegetarian, with Luise
adding the occasional meat supplement to her diet. Like their neighbours,
they tended a small garden plot in the area used as a skating rink in winter
and canned much of the produce. 
By September 1940, the Herzbergs had lived in Canada for five years,
the necessary period to claim citizenship. In fact, they could have applied
a year earlier because they had spent a year in England. Herzberg submit-
ted an application, supported by a strong letter of recommendation from
President James S. Thomson, who noted that Herzberg was a scientist of
great international distinction, a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada,
and one who was much impressed with the democratic character of Can-
adian life.1 Herzberg was informed that the Court would hold a sitting in
Saskatoon to consider his application for naturalization in January 1941.
The Court gave its approval but the certificate was not granted at that time.
A possible reason for the delay was stated in a letter received by Thomson
in October 1940 from the Under Secretary of State:
When the present Secretary of State assumed office on May 1940, he laid
down the policy that he would not sanction the issue of certificates of nat-
uralization to persons of enemy nationality and has extended this to
nationals of countries contiguous to countries in the war zone. This ruling
may be regarded as being to some extent provisional and temporary, but
the Minister has not felt it expedient up to the present to make any excep-
tions. It is quite possible that in the course of the next few months the pol-
icy may be reviewed and certain exceptions permitted.2
I’m a great believer in luck—and I find the harder I work
the more I have of it.
Stephen Leacock
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 139

140
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Another request was made by Herzberg two years later, and once again
in May 1945, stating that his father-in-law, who had come to Canada four
years after himself, had already received his certificate of naturalization.3
This long delay in the Herzbergs’ naturalization was explained away as a
loss of his application, which had never been received from the Court in
Saskatoon.
Conferences and Molecular Astronomy
During the war years, travel to conferences in the United States became
much more difficult, but still possible. In May 1940 Herzberg spent a week
at Purdue University as visiting lecturer and was especially pleased to find
Edward Teller there. Their host K. Lark Horowitz, an Austrian refugee,
invited both to his home for dinners to catch up on news and to enjoy
evenings of discussions as well as Teller’s virtuoso piano performances.
Teller had not lost his musical touch from the last such sessions that
Herzberg remembered attending in Göttingen in the early thirties. That
summer, Herzberg returned to the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor for
the months of July and August to give a summer course on molecular spec-
troscopy. His hosts at this centre for infrared spectroscopy were Harvey
Randall and Edward F. Barker, both pioneers of this field. While there,
Herzberg had the help of a technician to search for emission infrared spec-
tra of HD+ and H3
+in an electrical discharge, but without success. This visit
gave him the opportunity to attend the famous Summer School in Michi-
gan, with lectures by prominent physicists, Enrico Fermi and John Wheel-
er among them. Much of the discussion pertained to nuclear physics, high-
lighted by the newly discovered fission of uranium, and to the possibility
of a sustainable chain reaction. Leo Szilard, a refugee Hungarian and one
of the first to suggest a chain reaction, was there too, and he proposed that
all work on chain reactions should be kept secret and not be published
because it might help the Germans develop an atomic bomb.4 This was the
first indication to Herzberg that there might be research on production of
an atomic bomb. Only after the war’s end did he learn that John G. Fox and
Roger B. Sutton, two of his students, had worked on the bomb project in
Los Alamos, New Mexico. Fox later wrote to Herzberg about having expe-
rienced the first test on 16 July 1945 in New Mexico, when he felt the heat
and blast of the explosion even though he was nine miles away, lying flat
and face down.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 140

On his next visit to The University of Chicago in late 1940, with the
United States not yet involved in the war, Herzberg noticed that much of
Mulliken’s laboratory was closed off. He was unaware that Fermi and oth-
ers had moved to Chicago for work on fission and atomic energy in the so-
called Metallurgical Laboratory. On the way home, Herzberg was taken off
the train at Emerson, on the border between Minneapolis and Winnipeg,
and informed that the American government had decided to close the bor-
der to all aliens and that he, travelling with a German passport, was not eli-
gible to leave the country. The immigration officer was a kindly old man
who didn’t want to lock Herzberg in a jail cell but told him he would lose
his job if Herzberg walked across the border and escaped. Herzberg didn’t
attempt to escape but became rather nervous as it took three days to
straighten out his predicament, with negotiations between Saskatoon, Chi-
cago, and Washington.5
One of Herzberg’s most important meetings turned out to be a small
informal conference at Yerkes Observatory on interstellar molecules, held
in June 1941. This was organized by Otto Struve and was attended by a
group from Chicago including Mulliken, Teller, and Beutler, Pol Swings (a
distinguished astronomer from Liège, Belgium), Herzberg, and the small
staff of the observatory. The purpose was to discuss a series of spectral
lines at wavelengths near 4000 Å that had been observed in the absorption
spectra of distant stars by the astronomers Theodore Dunham and Walter S.
Adams at Mount Wilson Observatory in 1937.6 In the same year Swings
and Rosenfeld had identified one of the lines to be due to the diatomic mol-
ecule CH, and its presence in the interstellar medium was confirmed in
1940 by the Canadian astronomer Andrew McKellar.7 That year McKellar
also established the presence of the diatomic molecule CN in interstellar
space through his identification of three lines found by Adams.8 CH and
CN were the first molecules to be identified in the interstellar medium, and
their discovery proved to be a major breakthrough for astronomy. However,
four lines found by Dunham and Adams remained unidentified and their
origin posed an important puzzle for astronomers and spectroscopists. At
the meeting, Swings suggested they might belong to an ionized diatomic
molecule such as C2
+,CH+, CN+, NH+, or NO+, whereas Mulliken, who was
then working on his theory of spectra of polyatomic molecules, thought
they could be due to the free radical CH2. Herzberg and Teller had good
reason to favour the ion CH+ instead. Although its spectrum was unknown,
they surmised that it would have an electronic band of the required type
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      141
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 141

142
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
near 4000 Å because of the similarity of CH+ to the iso-electronic molecule
BH, whose spectrum was known to be in this wavelength region. The solu-
tion to this spectroscopic puzzle was certainly worth pursuing.
On his return to Saskatoon, Herzberg decided to try to reproduce these
unidentified lines in the laboratory. The six-metre grating instrument was
ready, he had a good student, Alex Douglas, and apparatus for the study of
spectra of various gases and mixtures of gases was available. Within a short
time, a discharge in helium with a trace of benzene produced a spectrum in
the region of the unidentified lines. The spectrum was clearly of a molecu-
lar type, and closer examination showed that three of the lines (the only
three expected to occur at the extremely cold temperatures of space) were
exactly at the positions of the unidentified interstellar lines.9 There was no
doubt that the laboratory spectra duplicated the interstellar line spectra.
However, the question remaining was what molecular species produced
Graduate student Alex Douglas preparing for the
spectrum of CH+, University of Saskatchewan, 1941.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 142

these lines? Further experiments and analysis convinced Herzberg and
Douglas that the spectrum was due to the ion CH+. This result was pub-
lished and was of great interest to astronomers because it was the first
molecular ion to be identified in the interstellar medium.10 This discovery
was even reported in The New York Times. Such publicity was a rare event
for Saskatchewan, and Herzberg only learned of this news when he met a
delighted Chairman of the Board of Governors of the University, who
noted: “I’ve seen an article in The New York Times where you were men-
tioned about CH+.”
The next meeting at The University of Chicago was a conference on
spectroscopy organized by Mulliken, Struve, Franck, and Weldon G.
Brown, held from 22 to 25 June 1942. There, Herzberg met Brown for the
first time and learned that he was a graduate of the University of Sas-
katchewan. This meeting dealt with a variety of problems in atomic and
molecular spectroscopy, including the spectra of comets, of planetary
atmospheres, and of dyes and large organic molecules. Herzberg presented
two papers: one was on a new effect he had discovered in the spectra of
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      143
Spectrum of CH+ obtained by Douglas and Herzberg, 1941.
The R(0) lines labelled 4232 and 3957 Å are two of the lines
found in interstellar absorption.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 143

144
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
polyatomic molecules, which he called l-type doubling, and the second was
on evidence for the presence of CH2 in comets.
Alone in the Laboratory
Herzberg’s work on CH2 first started when he received a letter (and a pho-
tograph of spectra) from Pol Swings in Belgium stating, “We observed in a
comet a group of features around 4050 Å, and we can’t understand what
they are.11 Can you tell us what these spectra are?” Herzberg was just then
writing his book about polyatomic molecules and thought that the spectrum
looked like that of a triatomic molecule. One of the simplest triatomic mol-
ecules is CH2, and he had the idea that this 4050 Å group of lines in comets
might be due to CH2, a free radical with a very short lifetime.
He decided to try to reproduce the spectrum of the 4050 Å group and
started experimenting with a discharge of methane (CH4), thinking that as
the methane was destroyed in the discharge, at some stage there might be
some CH2 formed. He carried out these experiments by himself since he
had no students after 1941. The young people no longer stayed on for
Master’s degrees but enlisted in the military services or became involved
in the war effort. W.R. Ham and G.G. Milne completed their degrees in the
spring of 1940, A.E. Douglas and N. Olson in the fall of that year, and W.J.
Hushley and A.S. McKay were his last students receiving their degrees in
1941. With some of the professors giving courses in radio and radar to the
armed services, Herzberg was asked to give an extra undergraduate course.
His contributions to teaching and research continued to be appreciated and
he received a salary increase to $4,500 per year, with an additional $500 for
research purposes.
Herzberg’s initial experiments on the comet bands were a total failure,
with production of only H2 and CH spectra. However, he noticed that the
colour of the discharge looked very different at the moment the discharge
was turned on than when it ran continuously. So he obtained spectra as he
turned the discharge on and off about two hundred times by hand. To his
surprise a new feature in the spectrum (apart from known H, H2, and CH
lines) appeared at 4050 Å, identical to that observed in comets. Having
observed the spectrum from a discharge in CH4, it seemed natural to
assume that it was due to CH2, although he did not rule out CH3 or CH4 at
that time.12 This result on the comet bands and the earlier identification of
CH+ in interstellar space quickly established Herzberg’s reputation among
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 144

the astronomers. Even so, his identification of the 4050 Å group with CH2
was shown to be wrong about seven years later, but it forced Herzberg to
continually think about the free radical CH2 and to search for its spectrum
until he discovered it two decades later.
With no graduate students to supervise, Herzberg had more time to
devote to writing his book on polyatomic molecules, and he pressed ahead,
completing a first draft in English by early 1942. Having achieved this
major goal, Herzberg decided to give himself a treat. He had always loved
music and had played the violin before attending university, his brother was
a pianist, and his gymnasium friends were good musicians. In Darmstadt
he had taken every opportunity to attend concerts and opera. Now he decid-
ed it was time to take up a hobby, something he would do for pleasure,
away from his work. He chose to take singing lessons. He found a good
teacher, Mrs. F.B. Morrison, and began taking lessons to control and make
the most of his resonant bass–baritone voice. The more he sang, the more
he enjoyed it. He became especially fond of Schubert lieder, songs based
on the poetry of Heinrich Heine, whose work he enjoyed as a youngster in
Hamburg. Later he took up lieder by Brahms and arias by Mozart and
Verdi. This hobby was a closely kept family secret. Being naturally very
shy, Herzberg insisted on closing all of the windows at home during
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      145
The 4050 Å group found in a comet and the
spectrum obtained by Herzberg, 1942.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 145

146
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
practice so that neighbours would not hear him singing. In time, his regu-
lar absences from the university for one or two hours while at singing les-
sons were noticed and commented on, raising some eyebrows. However,
all was clarified when he gave his first concert, much to the surprise and
delight of his friends.
In the summer of 1942, Gerhard’s mother Ella came for a brief visit.
She was delighted to see her son, meet Luise for the first time, and to cod-
dle her grandchildren. This was also her first meeting with the Oettingers,
Luise’s parents. While catching up on news of life in Seattle and in Sas-
katoon during wartime, their thoughts naturally centred on Walter and his
family in Hamburg. Neither Ella nor the Herzbergs had heard from Walter
since the start of the war, and so far, there was no inkling of the coming
devastation of German cities by Allied bombing. For the time being, they
could only hope that Walter was not actively involved in the war.
Explosives Research
In 1943, Herzberg was invited to take up work on the spectroscopy of
explosives by George Wright, Professor of Chemistry at the University of
Toronto, who had invented some new explosives. Wright convinced
Grandparents Elsbeth and Paul Oettinger and Ella Svendsoy
with Paul and Agnes, summer 1942.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 146

E.W.R. Steacie, Chairman of the National Research Council Committee on
Explosives, that such secret war work could be carried out in Saskatoon
even though Herzberg was technically an “enemy alien”. Herzberg signed
an Oath of Secrecy, and Wright arranged for Herzberg to attend classified
meetings on explosives in the United States by using a Certificate of
Identity issued by the Department of External Affairs instead of his German
passport.13 These meetings were organized by the U.S. Navy Bureau of
Ordnance, and Herzberg met several of the key explosives scientists,
including George B. Kistiakowski of Harvard University, Henry Eyring of
Princeton, George Gamow of Carnegie Technical University, and Bryce
Crawford of the University of Minnesota. Herzberg was astonished to see
that his former student John G. Fox was also a member of this group. At the
end of the war Herzberg learned that many in this group were participants
in the Los Alamos Laboratory.
By July of 1943, Herzberg had a bunker built at the back of the Physics
Building, with walls made of sand bags and a roof of loose planks. In an
adjoining hut were housed a fast rotating mirror camera for photographing
spectra at one microsecond intervals, and delicate detecting instruments. As
his colleague Currie noted, “While this research was classified as ‘secret’
it did not go unseen and certainly not unheard.” The explosions were
remembered as a feature of day-to-day life by the citizens of Saskatoon,
who could hear a “whoomp” from the university campus from time to time.
On campus, these explosions would go off without warning, and the planks
were propelled upward and off the bunker by an acoustic wave that rattled
and sometimes cracked windows in nearby buildings. Finally, in order to
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      147
Bunker and lab for explosives research,
University of Saskatchewan, 1940s.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 147

148
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
alert those on campus of the coming boom, Herzberg’s assistant, George
Walker, who happened to be a bugler, would sound the “Last Post” before
each detonation. One of Herzberg’s first year students, Bill Cameron,
described one such occasion:
Dr. Herzberg was lecturing away in his usual fashion and suddenly his
assistant came charging across the space between the little shack and the
back door of the Physics Building and came running into the classroom.
And there was an urgent and unintelligible conference between Dr. Herz-
berg and the assistant, at which Herzberg excused himself in great haste,
and the two of them went charging out the door and into the little shack.
They came out running four times faster, charged into the classroom, hair
dishevelled, a smudge of dirt on Dr. Herzberg’s face. And just as they got
in the door, there was a tremendous explosion. The planks of the bunker
went right up in the air and quietly settled back again. Herzberg breathed
a profound sigh, turned to the classroom and said: “My! Dat vas a good
one, vasn’t it?”14
The results of this research were published in classified reports and finally
in a brief paper in Nature.15 As Herzberg was to say on later occasions,
although this explosives work was challenging and interesting scientifical-
Agnes and Paul on a visit to Daddy in physics.
Herzberg in front of the
physics building.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 148

PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      149
ly, it did not help to end the war. Yet this research must have been useful
since it was carried on for two years after the war had ended and Herzberg
had left Saskatoon.
Herzberg continued to work at his office on Sunday mornings, and Paul
and Agnes would go to the university to take him home for lunch. They
threw pebbles at his window to alert him of their arrival and he would hand
them a chocolate bar while he packed his briefcase with work for home.
Sometimes the family would visit the bunker or the university farms to see
the animals before heading for home. They spent the afternoons tending
their vegetable garden or walking along the river banks.
Offer from Yerkes Observatory, The University of
Chicago
There is no doubt that Herzberg’s contributions in the several meetings at
The University of Chicago, and especially his work on CH+ and CH2, had
impressed astronomers, particularly Otto Struve, Director of the Yerkes
Observatory. Thus as Struve thought of the possibility of increasing
research activity in astrophysics after the war, if not in the interim, Herz-
berg was much on his mind. After discussing his thoughts with Mulliken in
the Department of Physics, he wrote to Herzberg enquiring informally, yet
rather specifically, whether he would be interested in joining The Uni-
versity of Chicago:
In connection with our spectroscopic work at the McDonald and Yerkes
Observatories the question has often been discussed whether it would not
be possible and advisable to secure for our group someone who, like
yourself, is a recognized authority in band spectroscopy and line spec-
tra.… I have nothing very definite in mind, but it occurred to me that in
view of your phenomenal success in solving certain astrophysical prob-
lems you might not be averse to establishing a closer connection with the
astronomical kind of spectroscopy. I know that Robert Mulliken and other
members of the physics department would be tremendously interested in
some such arrangement, though under the present wartime conditions all
of their own time is, of necessity, devoted to war work.… What I am say-
ing is based purely upon two or three casual conversations which I have
had with Mulliken. In so far as the astronomy department is concerned,
however, I can assure you that President Hutchins would be exceedingly
enthusiastic about the plan and would welcome an arrangement whereby
you could work in our organization.…
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 149

150
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Please feel entirely free to tell me how the matter strikes you. Perhaps
you are perfectly happy in what you are now doing, in which case I shall
certainly not try to induce you to give up your connection with the Uni-
versity of Saskatchewan. On the other hand, if a change should be indi-
cated it might be profitable for me to know that fact and then go a little
more into the matter with the university administration on one side and
members of the physics department on the other.… It is more than likely
that President Hutchins would also like to meet you and talk to you, if and
when a definite proposition can be made to him.
It is probably premature to discuss further details, but I might say that
the rank of Professor Swings (who left the observatory some months ago
to undertake research on war problems) was that of a visiting full profes-
sor, with the understanding that the designation “visiting” referred to his
express wish to return to Belgium. It is entirely possible that this could be
dropped in your case, though, of course, I am without authority to speak
for the administration. I can only say that, in the past ten years they have
been extremely favourable to our department and have usually acted in
accordance with our recommendations.…16
This letter came as a complete surprise to Herzberg. For him this would
be the ideal situation, an opportunity to be a member of a major research
institution, to interact daily with world-class scientists of similar interests,
and to become an astronomer, a career he had dreamt of long ago. More-
over, it would be a welcome change from the present loneliness he was
experiencing in his laboratory without students. Yerkes Observatory
seemed to be very active scientifically even during wartime. On receipt of
Struve’s unexpected letter, and in his excitement considering it to be a pro-
posal, he replied immediately:
I am delighted to have your very kind offer to join the staff of the Yerkes
Observatory. It is a great honour for me that you have considered me for
such an appointment. While I have here a position that is in many ways
very satisfactory, I have always envied those working in the larger
research institutions with large research funds and their possibilities of
ready exchange of ideas with other workers in the same field. The history
of the identification of the interstellar CH+ lines has demonstrated to me
particularly strongly how necessary for one’s work personal contacts with
others interested in the same subject area are.
Even before my recent astrophysical work, I had always hoped that
one day I might have a much closer connection with astrophysics and
these hopes have been greatly enhanced by this recent work. Thus I
am greatly attracted by your plan and I shall be very glad to accept it
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 150

provided that the questions explained below can be satisfactorily settled
as I trust they will be.…
You will realize that my position here is quite permanent in charac-
ter and that I would be somewhat reluctant to accept one that is not per-
manent no matter how attractive it would otherwise be. However, I take
it from your letter that the appointment offered to me is a full professor-
ship and as such permanent.…
May I again express my sincere appreciation for your very kind offer.
I am looking forward with keen anticipation to your further letters in this
matter.17
Herzberg went on to raise several conditions, such as desiring to set up a
spectroscopy laboratory for the study of molecular spectra as well as astro-
physical problems, and enquired about salary.
In further letters, Struve suggested that he would be only too glad to
have Herzberg do some laboratory work at Yerkes but that the original
spectroscopy laboratory had been completely dismantled twenty-five years
ago, and he wondered whether a new facility could be organized without
undue expense. Struve also indicated that Mulliken hoped Herzberg would
spend two-thirds of his time in the Physics Department in Chicago after the
war, but that this division of time could be left open for the time being. Of
more immediate concern was that President Hutchins wished to meet Herz-
berg in view of the requested permanent position at the full professor rank.
A visit was planned for early December.
In the meantime in order to obtain a visa, various forms had to be com-
pleted and notarized, and letters from sponsors (Struve and Mulliken) were
requested by the State Department. Also, Herzberg wanted assurance from
the Canadian Government that he would be re-admitted to Canada. Finally,
all was in order for Herzberg’s brief visit to Chicago. Together with Struve
he met Hutchins and was charmed by the man and his directness. He visit-
ed James Franck, Weldon Brown, and Mulliken and the staff of Physics and
Astronomy, and in both departments he gave colloquia that were exceed-
ingly well attended. Herzberg was thoroughly satisfied with all aspects of
his visit and was particularly impressed with the Astronomy Department
and its faculty. On returning home, he wrote to Struve thanking him for
making the arrangements and for his kind hospitality, noting that he appre-
ciated the definiteness and straightforwardness of Struve’s proposals and
was looking forward to an intimate association with him and his colleagues
at the Observatory.18
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      151
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 151

152
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
But this enthusiasm was cut short just at Christmas by the return letter
from Struve, accompanied by copy of a letter from Arthur H. Compton,
Dean of the Division of Physical Sciences. In this letter, Compton asked
Struve to invite Herzberg to come to The University of Chicago as Assoc-
iate Professor of Astronomy at a salary of $5,500. Struve was clearly
embarrassed and regretted that the administration did not accept his rec-
ommendation for a full professorship. He noted that the complication with
the rank arose solely in the Physics Department and bore no relation to the
appreciation Herzberg would receive in the Astronomy Department.19
Herzberg was sorely disappointed and obviously offended by Compton’s
letter. In his confidential reply to Struve the following week, and contrary
to his usual good nature, Herzberg expressed his chagrin in no uncertain
terms:
Naturally Dean Compton’s letter was a great disappointment to me, the
more so since I was entirely unprepared for such a turn of events.…
If I were to accept Dr. Compton’s offer as it stands I could not help
feeling, particularly in view of our conversation with President Hutchins,
that in a way my association with The University of Chicago would start
with a demotion. Certainly Hutchins, at the time, did not say anything that
in the least could be construed as his not agreeing with your recommen-
dation of a full professorship for me.… I remember clearly that Hutchins
made it a point (quite unexpectedly to me) that steps should be taken that
I would not be just one of Mulliken’s men. Obviously Dr. Compton’s
offer represents a step in exactly the opposite direction. I think I would
enjoy greatly collaborating with Mulliken and I believe it would be to the
good of spectroscopy, but I do feel that it should be on an equal footing.
Accepting an associate professorship would certainly put me in an
awkward position toward the administration of this University who have
treated me in the most generous fashion and given me a senior professor-
ship with a salary near the top for that rank. Naturally everybody here will
agree with me that the standing of The University of Chicago is far supe-
rior to that of the University of Saskatchewan. But will they agree that it
is so far superior that an associate professorship there is much more desir-
able than a full professorship here, or will I not by my acceptance imply
that I consider the standing of this University to be very low and thus seri-
ously offend people who have been real friends to me? I might add here
that C.D. Ellis (the well-known collaborator of Rutherford), who a few
years ago visited all Canadian Universities staying at each for a week or
more expressed the opinion to the sponsors of his trip that the science
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 152

PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      153
departments of the University of Saskatchewan are at or certainly near the
top of all in Canada (including Toronto and McGill). Other competent
observers have expressed similar opinions.…
With regard to a future promotion Dr. Compton says “that we con-
sider the way open to him for advancement in rank as he takes his place
in the activities of the department”. It is very difficult for me to under-
stand the exact meaning of this clause.… Does it simply mean that I
would become one of four (or more) physicists waiting for promotion to
full professorship, but the one with the least seniority, looking the
youngest, with the least desirable citizenship, and with the least aggres-
siveness in these matters, working in a field least interesting to the head
of the physics department, and so forth? …
Does Compton’s offer leave me the option to be full-time with the
Astronomy Department even after the war (without of course losing con-
tact with the Physics and Chemistry Departments)? … Should I see my
way through the difficulties against accepting an associate professorship,
I would want to be full-time with the Astronomy Department—since I
would rather be where I am really wanted and appreciated, quite apart
from the fact that it has always been my desire to become an astronomer.
I do feel that I would be happy in your department and that a harmonious
and fruitful collaboration would ensue.20
On receipt of Herzberg’s letter Struve replied immediately, noting that
because of the Christmas holidays he had not been able to discuss the mat-
ter with the university authorities. Also he did not feel justified in urging
Herzberg to accept an associate professorship but had to send him Comp-
ton’s letter. Nevertheless, he hoped that it would be possible for Herzberg
to come in spite of this disappointing restriction. Struve informed both
Mulliken and Compton of Herzberg’s hesitancy in accepting the offer and
urged them to write to Herzberg, particularly to clarify the wishes of the
Physics Department.
Weldon Brown wrote to Herzberg immediately: “I think they played a
hell of a trick on you but it doesn’t surprise me. It is rather typical of Comp-
ton’s style of administration.”21 James Franck wrote a long letter trying to
explain Compton’s decision and suggesting that the title was not important.
He thought that Herzberg would not like everything in Chicago; the town
was dirty and the climate was disagreeable, but living in that nice place at
Lake Geneva with his family would be something that could be enjoyed,
and he would have nice colleagues and a real scientific atmosphere. Later
he wrote again:
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 153

154
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
One thing I may mention since there may be a misunderstanding on your
side. You regarded Dr. Struve’s letter as an offer, while it was none; he
only made preliminary contacts with you to find out if you would be
interested. He mentioned his opinion that the position would probably be
a full professorship and apparently he was too optimistic. You are there-
fore not quite right in stating that the “offer” was changed.22
It must be remembered that while these negotiations to bring Herzberg
to The University of Chicago were proceeding, but unknown to Herzberg,
Compton, Franck, and others from the university were intensively involved
in the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos, New Mexico, working on the
atomic bomb. With Compton away from Chicago, Mulliken answered
Herzberg that according to his understanding, 
The department would leave the path open for your free collaboration in
the work of the department both in research and in teaching, … and the
time spent in Chicago will depend primarily on you. Many of us here
(witness the audience at your colloquium talk) are hoping that it will
prove to be a considerable fraction. I want to express again my sincere
hope that you will decide to join the faculty of this University. I person-
ally am sure that you will have a real opportunity whether at Williams
Bay or at Chicago to continue and extend your fine work of past years.23
Within a few days, Mulliken wrote again that he had shown this letter to
Compton and that it agreed very closely with Compton’s point of view.
Struve also forwarded a copy of a letter from Compton stating explicitly
that Herzberg should be informed at once that an appointment to the rank
of associate professor had the same implication of permanence as an
appointment to a professorship and that Herzberg could be assured of a cor-
dial welcome by the physicists and could divide his time between the
Astronomy and Physics Departments by mutual agreement of all con-
cerned. Struve sent a long letter to Herzberg reviewing the complete situa-
tion and question of rank from his first discussions with Mulliken. He
emphasized that he would accept with good grace if Herzberg should
decide that under the conditions suggested in Compton’s letter he could not
accept, but if on the other hand he could accept, Struve would do every-
thing in his power to bring about a promotion.24
On receipt of these quick and friendly replies to his several concerns,
and after considering what Franck had written and Struve’s detailed review
of the circumstances, Herzberg accepted the position of associate professor
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 154

PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      155
but chose to work in the Astronomy Department, noting that he would pre-
fer a title of Associate Professor of Spectroscopy.25 Now remained the task
of applying for and gaining entry into the United States for the purpose of
employment. This turned out to be a formidable task during wartime.
Herzberg applied to the Canadian National Selective Service for a Lab-
our Exit Permit. He was duly informed that the Wartime Bureau of Tech-
nical Personnel recommended that a permit not be granted “in as much as
there is no evidence that Dr. Herzberg’s proposed transfer will be in the
National interest, and there are no grounds other than personal desires”.
Herzberg appealed to the Unemployment Insurance Commission, giving
his reasons that the President of the University of Saskatchewan did not
offer any objection to his leaving the university, the appointment at The
University of Chicago was in response to an unsolicited invitation, his war-
time research could be carried out at The University of Chicago, and
indeed, scientific teachers in Canada had been granted permits, e.g.,
Dr. J.L. Synge of Toronto had gone to Ohio State University and Dr. Ralph
Hull of the University of British Columbia had moved to the University of
Nebraska. 
The appeal was denied since Herzberg was in the category of Science
and Technical Personnel so his movement was controlled exclusively by
the Wartime Bureau of Technical Personnel and a ruling had already been
made in his case.26 The University of Chicago also made a strong presen-
tation to the Canadian representative in Washington, noting that Herzberg
would be given space and facilities to pursue his war research on explo-
sives at the university. Finally, Herzberg appealed to the Director of the
Wartime Bureau—but all of these efforts were in vain—he would have to
wait until the war’s end.
On 23 March 1945, Walter Charles Murray, President Emeritus and
Founding President of the University of Saskatchewan, died at the age of
seventy-nine. The Herzbergs recalled the crucial role he had played in their
lives in a letter to Mrs. Murray:
Dear Mrs. Murray,
The sad news of Dr. Murray’s passing came as a great shock to me
and my wife. We realize the magnitude of the loss that you have suffered.
To us his passing means a very personal grief since it was Dr. Murray who
gave us a secure haven and a new home here when we could not stay in
our own country. This and the recognition that Dr. Murray gave me from
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 155

156
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
the very beginning have meant more to me than I can express in words.
His kindness and humanity have been an inspiration that neither my wife
nor I will ever forget. It has been a very real privilege to have known him
and to have worked under him.27
Gerhard Herzberg
With Walter Murray’s passing a momentous era had come to a close in Sas-
katoon. In his honour the university was closed on the day of his funeral.
Walter C. Murray (1866–1945),
President of the University of Saskatchewan (1908–1937).
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:22 PM  Page 156

10.INTERLUDE AT YERKES 
OBSERVATORY, THE UNIVERSITY
OF CHICAGO
With the approaching end of hostilities in Europe, the Herzbergs had sev-
eral concerns on their minds, not only the possibility of an eventual move
to Williams Bay and the Yerkes Observatory, but especially of the welfare
of family and friends in Germany from whom they had not heard for over
five years. Had Walter and his family survived the saturation bombing of
Hamburg in 1943, and if so, had he been mobilized in the final futile effort
to defend Germany from the Allied onslaught? Answers to these constant
worries would have to wait.
Once again, Herzberg inquired of the Wartime Bureau of Technical
Personnel what his chances were for release by the National Selective Ser-
vice in order to take up the position he was offered at Yerkes Observatory.
He was informed that chances were excellent for lifting of the manpower
restrictions as soon as the European war was over. When the end came in
May 1945, formal proceedings for entry to the United States moved rather
quickly. First, Herzberg was notified by the National Selective Service that
he was exempted from obtaining a labour exit permit before departing from
Canada, and he was authorized to leave Canada not later than 1 November
1945 with permission to remain outside Canada indefinitely.1
He informed Otto Struve of this news and made plans for a quick visit
to Williams Bay in early July to look into the housing situation. This visit
was conveniently arranged to coincide with a conference of the Explosives
Group of the U.S. Navy Bureau of Ordnance at Cornell University, which
Herzberg was to attend. In Struve’s absence Herzberg was met at the rail-
way station in Williams Bay by Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, whom he
had met on earlier visits and who was to become his closest friend at
Yerkes. Herzberg looked over the housing on the Observatory grounds and
in the nearby area but found that the only available accommodation con-
sisted of three houses, all rather large and all for sale. He felt that the cost
of buying any of the houses was beyond his present means and decided that
it would be best to rent a cottage while waiting for the university to provide
157
Good scientists study the most important problems they
think they can solve.
Sir Martin Rees

158
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
something better. He also spent several hours touring the entire Observ-
atory building with W. Albert Hiltner to check on the available space and
consider the possible location of the new spectroscopy laboratory.2
In the meantime, Gerhard and Luise were granted naturalization cer-
tificates and became Canadian citizens on 28 June 1945, having waited five
years since their first application in October 1940.3
Astronomer Herzberg
Herzberg received an official notice of appointment as “Associate Pro-
fessor in the Department of Astronomy at The University of Chicago, on
indefinite tenure from 1 September, 1945, on a full-time four-quarter basis,
with a salary of $5,500 per annum” and accepted the position, although he
would have preferred the title Associate Professor of Spectroscopy.4 He
had finally achieved his boyhood ambition of becoming an astronomer.
With the necessary papers for crossing the U.S. border in hand, he then
wrote to President Thomson:
As you know, it is only on account of the special opportunities for
research in my field offered in Chicago that I am leaving this University.
The ten years of my stay here have been very pleasant and fruitful indeed.
I have greatly enjoyed my work here and the associations with the mem-
bers of the staff have been very stimulating.
Many special considerations have been given me by the University
authorities in providing opportunities for my research work and for these
I am most grateful. I shall never forget the fact that this University gave
me a safe haven when I came here as a refugee. Please be assured of my
continued interest in, and affection for, the University of Saskatchewan.5
Harrington was disconsolate at losing a friend and stimulating col-
league and wrote to President Thomson: “No matter how long one has
expected the death of a friend—the event always comes as a shock, so too,
with respect to the news of the loss of Herzberg from the department.”6 As
their many friends came to wish them well and with a large group to send
them off at the railway station, the hurried leave-taking in Saskatoon was
almost heartbreaking for the Herzbergs. They arrived in Williams Bay on
20 September 1945 and were met by Struve and his driver, who took them
to the Rest Cottage Resort, where Herzberg had rented a cottage for the
first few months while awaiting renovations in one of the faculty houses.

Yerkes Observatory7
Yerkes Observatory was located next to the village of Williams Bay on
Lake Geneva in Wisconsin, about one hundred miles northwest of Chicago.
The Observatory was built on a vast expanse of flat land, separated from
the lake by a wooded hill. It had good viewing, with little smoke or bright
lights because of the relatively low population density and the absence of
factories. George Ellery Hale (1868–1938) had designed and built Yerkes
Observatory and was its first director. Hale and William Rainey Harper, the
founding president of The University of Chicago, were successful in con-
vincing Charles Tyson Yerkes, the patron, to fund the building of the 40-
inch telescope on fifty acres of land donated by John Johnson, Jr., a wealthy
Chicago real-estate speculator. At the time, Yerkes had the largest telescope
in the world and indeed the largest refractor ever used (since a larger lens
would begin to distort because of the pull of gravity). The Observatory was
in operation and dedicated on October 1897. Its main purpose was research
in astrophysics, the study of the nature and composition of planets, stars,
and nebulae. It was the first observatory devoted to such studies, in contrast
to the more usual work at observatories of that time of determining posi-
tions and motions of heavenly bodies. Only six years later, Hale left Yerkes
to follow his lifelong ambition to build a succession of the world’s largest
telescopes: the 60-inch reflector (1908) followed by the 100-inch reflector
(1919), both on Mount Wilson, and the 200-inch reflector completed in
1948 on nearby Mount Palomar in California. To honour this pioneer of
astrophysics, the 200-inch was named the Hale Telescope, and the obser-
vatories on Mount Wilson and Mount Palomar were named the Hale Obser-
vatories.
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      159
Yerkes Observatory, winter 1945.
Geneva Lake from the Observatory, 1945.

160
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Otto Struve (1897–1963) was the director of both the Yerkes Obser-
vatory and the McDonald Observatory in Texas at the time of Herzberg’s
stay at Williams Bay. Struve, who was born in Kharkov, Ukraine, was the
fourth generation of an eminent astronomical family and was a refugee,
having survived the civil war of 1919–1920 in Russia. He was given an
assistant position at Yerkes in 1921 on the basis of the high regard for his
family held by Edwin B. Frost (1866–1935), who took charge of the obser-
vatory when Hale left. Struve was appointed director in 1932 at the age of
thirty-five and is credited with assembling one of the world’s finest groups
of theoretical and observational astrophysicists at Yerkes. Struve also
assumed editorship of the Astrophysical Journal. He was instrumental in
the negotiations and the building in southwest Texas of the McDonald
Observatory with its 82-inch reflector. The University of Texas paid for the
land and observatory, and The University of Chicago provided the staff and
salaries. On its completion in 1939, the McDonald Observatory was oper-
ated jointly by the two universities, with Struve as director of both obser-
vatories. He accomplished these tasks with his phenomenal drive and bril-
liance and the full support he had gained from the young president of The
University of Chicago, Robert Hutchins, who was himself a powerful
personality.
Immediately after World War II, Yerkes was a thriving research centre
with a large and dedicated staff and many visitors from abroad. It was strong-
ly oriented towards research, with very little teaching. This was the golden
age at Yerkes with exceptional scientific output on stars, interstellar matter,
and planets. During those years, the staff consisted of the Director Otto
Struve, who worked at every opportunity on spectroscopic binaries and mas-
sive stars, William W. Morgan with interest in the hottest, bluest stars, and
Gerard Kuiper concentrating on planetary astrophysics. Subrahmanyan
Chandrasekhar worked on the theory of radiative transfer in stellar atmos-
pheres and quantum mechanical calculations of the opacity of H–. Other
members of the staff were Jesse L. Greenstein, W. Albert Hiltner, George Van
Biesbroeck, Thornton L. Page, Louis G. Henyey, Guido Münch, William P.
Bidelman, and Herzberg. Visiting professors for various periods of time
included Bengt Strömgren and Kaj A. Strand of Denmark, Pol Swings of
Belgium, and Marcel Minnaert, Jan H. Oort, Hendrik C. van de Hulst, and
Adriaan Blaauw from Holland. Postdoctoral fellows such as George H.
Herbig, who came from Lick Observatory, and many graduate students
complemented this illustrious group of astronomers and astrophysicists. 

Struve also dreamt of building another large telescope and made plans
with Robert Mulliken for an Institute of Spectroscopy on the Chicago cam-
pus after the war. Instead, based on its wartime success in atomic energy,
The University of Chicago chose to establish an Institute for Nuclear
Physics headed by Enrico Fermi and an Institute for the Study of Metals led
by Harold C. Urey on their return from Los Alamos.
Life in Williams Bay
Williams Bay was a very small village situated on the north shore of lovely
Lake Geneva. It was the location of the summer residences of many
wealthy Chicago families and was exclusively a summer resort. The small
permanent population of about seven hundred was mainly of Scandinavian
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      161
The staff at Yerkes Observatoroy, May 1946.
Front row, left to right: Mrs. S. Deutsch, Mrs. M. Carlson, Ann Underhill, 
Guido Munch, Doris Blakely, Mrs. W. Krogdahl, Nancy Roman, Carleton
Pearson; Middle row: P. Swings, G. Herzberg, L. Herzberg, W.W. Morgan,
O. Struve, J. Greenstein, G.P. Kuiper, S. Chandrasekhar, G. Van Biesbroeck,
L. Henyey; Back row: Paul Ledoux, Arne Slettebak, Mrs. J. Phillips,
F. Pearson, John Phillips, Armin Deutsch, Roy Wickham, Merle Tuberg,
Wm. Bidelman, Marshall Wrubel, Irene Hansen, Mrs. W. Breen,
Arthur Code, Alice Johnson, Gertrude Peterson, Mrs. G. Van Biesbroeck,
Carlos Cesco, Edith Janssen, Victor Blanco, John Vosatka, Harold Bernstein.

162
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
stock, with their primary occupation being tourism. Understandably, there
was very little in the way of intellectual life outside the Observatory in this
village, so the faculty and their families formed a small, close-knit group.
Most of the faculty lived in homes on a handsomely treed avenue bor-
dering on the extensive lawns of the Observatory, in an area known as
Frost’s Woods, between the lake and main building. Students were housed
in dormitories on the third floor of the Observatory and took their evening
meals at the Van Biesbroeck home. The location was an ideal neighbour-
hood and playground for the faculty children, with nearby swimming and
picnic areas, along with hiking trails along the lakeshore and nearby
woods. Just before winter, the Herzbergs moved into the old home of the
former director Edwin B. Frost, which had been renovated to form two
apartments. The Hiltners occupied the second apartment. Paul and Agnes
soon found congenial and constant friends in their neighbours Emily and
Billie Morgan; they walked together to school in the village and enjoyed
many ball games in the playground, so much so that Paul’s early ambition
was to become a baseball player—a shock for his parents. There, Paul and
Agnes learned how to ride bikes and to make and fly kites with their dad.
On Sunday evenings the family would gather around the radio to listen to
Edgar Bergen and Charlie McCarthy, with Mortimer Snerd being Gerhard’s
favourite.
The Herzberg home on the campus of Yerkes Observatory,
shared with the Hiltner family.

A warm friendship developed between Gerhard and Chandrasekhar
(called Chandra by students, colleagues, and friends), which they both val-
ued highly and continued for the rest of their lives. Luise and Lalitha
Chandrasekhar also became good friends, and Dr. Chandra and Mrs. Chan-
drasekhar became Paul’s and Agnes’s favourite seniors. Agnes recalled that
“the children of Dr. Chandra’s colleagues liked him, and said he was
‘magic’, because once on a picnic, everyone had rolled up their shirt-
sleeves in the hot afternoon. In the cool evening hours, when they rolled
down their sleeves, everybody’s sleeves had a crease but not Dr. Chan-
dra’s.”8 An annual treat for the faculty children was an Easter egg hunt
organized by Dr. Chandra in the Morgan’s large garden. Another yearly
event enjoyed by families, visitors, and students was Thanksgiving Dinner
at the Hiltners, with tables featuring roasts and vegetables, and cakes and
pies prepared by all the participants.
Some of the Yerkes faculty took part in the local politics of Williams
Bay to ensure a voice in village affairs and especially to make sure that
adequate schooling for their young children would be provided. The
Herzbergs limited their visits in the village to the barber, baker, and grocery
store. They found that the townspeople viewed the strange mix of Russian,
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      163
Otto Struve, Carl Beals, and Lalitha and Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar.

164
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
German, Dutch, Indian, Mexican, and South American population of the
Observatory with some amusement and continued to charge them all year
long what the traffic would bear for groceries and supplies in the busy
tourist season.9 What troubled the Herzbergs most about the villagers was
that on arrival, shortly after the war’s end with some rationing still in effect,
they found a flourishing black market all over town.10 This was in complete
contrast to Saskatoon where they had not detected any such underhanded
dealings throughout the war years. Astronomers with cars purchased their
groceries and furnishings in the nearby towns of Elkhorn and Delavan,
where they obtained far better value for their limited funds.
The Spectroscopy Laboratory
Herzberg’s new laboratory was set up in the basement of Yerkes Observ-
atory between the two small domes.11 The funding provided by Struve,
$5,000 for establishing the spectroscopy laboratory and $3,000 for ancil-
lary instruments, was sufficient for the essential equipment. A replica of the
21-foot grating spectrograph he had built in Saskatchewan was installed in
such a way that with the aid of a heliostat and one mirror, the solar spec-
trum could be studied. The grating was supplied by R.W. Wood and had
excellent concentration of intensity in the first-order of 11 000 Å or second-
order of 5500 Å. An infrared spectrometer with photoelectric detection,
built by G.P. Kuiper, was sometimes brought from the McDonald Observ-
atory for specific studies. A medium Hilger quartz spectrograph was also
purchased for work at lower dispersion. Other much needed instruments
were borrowed for limited periods.
In order to emulate planetary atmospheres, Herzberg designed and
built two cells to provide extremely long absorbing paths. One was a glass
cell of 150 centimetres length and 5 centimetres radius, and the second was
an iron pipe 22 metres long and 25 centimetres radius, the latter running
under the ceiling, through almost the whole length of the observatory base-
ment between the two small domes. Each cell was fitted with concave mir-
rors that were carefully aligned and adjusted to produce multiple traversals
of the cell and thus provide extremely long absorbing paths.12 The mirrors
were fabricated at the observatory’s optical shop by Fred Pearson, who
years before had been Albert Michelson’s optician in the Physics Depart-
ment on the Chicago campus. Up to 40 traversals were obtained with the
short tube, giving a path length of 60 metres, and up to 250 traversals, or a

path length of 6000 metres, was obtained with the 22-metre tube. These
long optical paths made possible the study of absorption spectra of astro-
physical interest and quickly became the standard method for laboratories
involved in reproducing planetary spectra, as well as for the study of very
weak or forbidden spectra. 
Herzberg supervised the research of two graduate students and two
postdoctoral fellows. His first student was K. Narahari Rao, who had
received a three-year fellowship from the Government of India to develop
skills for the future benefit of India, which was about to gain independ-
ence.13 He chose to work in spectroscopy with Herzberg and completed his
Ph.D. in 1949 with a thesis on spectra of CO and CO+. When he returned
to India to take up a position at the National Physical Laboratory, he found
that there was no plan to make use of his training, and after two years he
returned to the United States. He spent a year as Research Associate with
Dr. Sponer at Duke University and another year at the University of Ten-
nessee before joining the Department of Physics at The Ohio State Uni-
versity in Columbus, Ohio. There, Rao built an internationally renowned
laboratory for infrared spectroscopy, developing reliable wavelength stan-
dards for the infrared region and supervising the research of more than fifty
Ph.D. students. Together with Harald H. Nielsen of The Ohio State Uni-
versity, he started and established The Journal of Molecular Spectroscopy,
which quickly became the most important international journal in spec-
troscopy. For about forty years Rao continued to organize the annual Inter-
national Symposium on Molecular Spectroscopy. This was always held in
Columbus, Ohio, and continues today, contributing immensely to the field
of molecular spectroscopy.
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      165
Schematic diagram of a multiple-transversal gas cell.

166
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
John G. Phillips, Herzberg’s second student, was initially given the
problem of checking whether a broad interstellar absorption line at 4430 Å
was due to the iron hydride molecule FeH. However, this problem proved
to be intractable. This feature was one of several broad bands, known as the
diffuse interstellar bands, first observed in 1910 and shown to be interstel-
lar two decades later. Its identification was to haunt Herzberg and many
others up to the present day. Phillips earned his Ph.D. in 1948 working on
the spectrum of the carbon molecule C2. On the basis of the analysis,
Herzberg pointed out that this spectrum arose from a fundamental transi-
tion in C2 and labelled it the Phillips system.14 As noted by Phillips, “this
designation became ingrained in the subsequent literature according my
name an immortality enjoyed by few others. Any lesser thesis adviser
would have found a way to take credit for himself. It was a lesson I have
taken to heart.” Phillips remained at Yerkes until June 1950, when he joined
the Astronomy Department of the University of California at Berkeley.
There, he had a distinguished career in spectroscopy and astrophysics.
Harold J. Bernstein, a Canadian and new staff member of the NRC in
Ottawa, was a Research Associate. He had been interned during the war
while on a scholarship in Copenhagen, where he worked with George
Placzek, and survived five years of malnutrition in prison camps in Den-
mark and Germany. E.W.R. Steacie, the Director of the Division of Chem-
istry at the NRC, suggested that while Bernstein waited for space and
equipment to establish his own laboratory in Ottawa, he should join Herz-
berg at Yerkes to catch up on progress in molecular spectroscopy. He
arrived in January 1946 and remained for almost a year, helping to set up
the long absorption cell and carrying out the first experiments with it. On
his return to Ottawa, he led a group in infrared and Raman spectroscopy
and later in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. S.P. Sinha, another
postdoctoral fellow, who was from Patna University in India, joined the
group for a year in 1947 to gain experience in molecular spectroscopy.
Luise was also a member of the group; she served as a Volunteer
Research Associate and took up the study of the atmospheric bands of oxy-
gen. In the exciting scientific atmosphere of Yerkes, Herzberg’s group
flourished and carried out many important studies in astrophysics and
molecular spectroscopy.
Within six months of his arrival at Yerkes, Herzberg’s laboratory was
in full operation, photographing a variety of molecular spectra of interest
in planetary astronomy. His group began by examining spectra of carbon

dioxide, CO2, observed on Venus and of methane, CH4, observed on Jup-
iter. These spectra were reproduced in the laboratory with remarkable fidel-
ity using the long absorption cells, permitting estimates of gas pressures and
depths of the planetary atmospheres. Studies were also made of the ultra-
violet spectrum of oxygen, O2, important for upper atmosphere physics.
In 1946, the Office of Naval Research (ONR) was founded as the first
U.S. government agency to support basic research in universities. This new
source of funding provided a much needed boost in morale to the universi-
ties, which were desperate for funds to replenish laboratory equipment and
finance the many students enrolling in graduate studies in science and engi-
neering in the postwar period. The ONR immediately began to solicit pro-
posals for research grants and contracts. Struve submitted applications for
three grants on behalf of his staff: one for a photoelectric project to be
developed by Greenstein, another for an infrared study suggested by
Kuiper, and a grant for Herzberg to help equip his new spectroscopy labo-
ratory.15 This would be a good opportunity to purchase much needed ancil-
lary instruments for the laboratory and to assist graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows. Discussions with ONR personnel indicated that only the
grant for Herzberg had any chance for approval. Herzberg applied for
salaries of a research assistant, a laboratory technician, and an occasional
stenographer, capital equipment and supplies, and travel to conferences, the
total amounting to almost $25,400. Eventually, even Herzberg’s proposal
was turned down, much to the surprise of the university administration and
to the utter disappointment of Herzberg, who wondered whether the impor-
tance of spectroscopic work for astrophysics was appreciated in the U.S.A.
This negative result left an indelible impression in Herzberg’s first year at
Yerkes, especially when he learned of the success of other spectroscopists,
Mulliken among them, in obtaining generous ONR grants. He began to
wonder if he had made the right decision in coming to Yerkes.
Early Misgivings
No sooner were the Herzbergs settled in Williams Bay when letters began
to arrive from many friends in Saskatoon emphasizing how much they
were missed. Mention was also made that Professor Harrington, Head of
the Physics Department, would retire in a year or two, and colleagues want-
ed Herzberg to take up the position. In fact, Herzberg received an offer
from Harrington himself in March of 1946.16 However, in all fairness to the
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      167

168
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
efforts and expenditures that Struve had made in bringing him to Yerkes,
Herzberg could not possibly consider such an immediate departure from
Yerkes.17 The move to Yerkes was a good one scientifically, and moreover,
in June of 1946, he was informed that the promised promotion to Professor
of Spectroscopy would become effective 1 September, with indefinite
tenure, at a salary of $6,500 per annum. Even so, he was beginning to have
qualms about remaining at Yerkes after the rejection by ONR, and on sev-
eral occasions, he called himself a fool for leaving Saskatoon, a place with
so many friends and opportunities and a nice home. His yearning to return
to Canada manifested itself when after decades of good health, he was sud-
denly stricken with a bad flu. The severe pain caused him to think the end
was near, and with Luise at his bedside he implored her to take the children
back to Saskatoon. This illness passed as quickly as it came, and he was
back at work the next day. Nevertheless, following this episode and after
barely a year at Yerkes, he wrote to the Canadian Naturalization Depart-
ment of his desire to remain a Canadian citizen and asked about the regu-
lations for this purpose.18 He mentioned that after having a few years’
experience at a large institution like the Yerkes Observatory, he would like
to return to Canada if a suitable position at a Canadian university should be
offered. He was assured there would be no problem in retaining Canadian
citizenship.
At the same time, in September of 1946, his staunch friend John Spinks
wrote that he had attended a physics conference in Montreal, where many
friends had asked about Herzberg:
We wondered how we could get you back to this country, by fair means
or foul. Don’t be shy about letting us know of any change of heart on your
part.19
The receipt of such letters reinforced the recurring thoughts of Gerhard and
Luise of returning to Canada, much to the astonishment of their American
friends, who joked about the Herzberg’s desire to return to living in an igloo.
While they enjoyed their new home and the wooded countryside around
Lake Geneva, which formed an ideal place for raising their children, the tiny
village lacked the amenities of music and theatre that the Herzbergs valued
so highly. Apart from visits from a few close friends, Williams Bay turned
out to be a lonely and impersonal community. Moreover, they were becom-
ing concerned about the lack of adequate educational opportunities beyond
public school in the vicinity of Yerkes for Paul and Agnes.

Activities at Yerkes and The University of Chicago
During Herzberg’s stay at Yerkes, he taught a course on atomic and molec-
ular spectra. His students liked him, considered him to be a good teacher, a
person who knew his subject well, worked hard, gave good lectures, and
was fair and friendly.20 His office was on the first floor of the Observatory
next to the main telescope, affording the students easy access, and Chan-
dra’s office was across the hall. Being of like mind and both being prodi-
gious workers, they soon developed a very close and lasting friendship. To
Herzberg the close association with Chandra was the most rewarding result
scientifically and personally of the years he spent at Yerkes Observatory:
Sometimes when Chandra felt he needed a break he came to my office
and we had a long chat either there or on a walk along the shore of Lake
Geneva. We usually discussed some of his work or mine, or indulged in
some reflection of the history of our subjects. Chandra, with his incredi-
ble memory, was able to recite almost verbatim some of the conversations
he had with Eddington, Milne, Rutherford, Chadwick, Blackett, etc., dur-
ing his Cambridge years, which coincided with one of the most exciting
periods in physics.21
Chandra was one of the greatest theoretical physicists and astrophysi-
cists of modern times. Born in 1910 in Lahore, India (now Pakistan), he
was educated in Madras, receiving a Bachelor’s degree with honours in
physics in 1930 and a Government of India scholarship for graduate stud-
ies in Cambridge, England. He obtained his Ph.D. degree there in 1933 and
was elected a Fellow of Trinity College for the period 1933–1937. In 1936,
Chandra returned to India to marry his college friend Lalitha, and they
came to the United States where Chandra had been offered a position by
Struve as a Research Associate at Yerkes Observatory. He was soon invit-
ed to join many other universities and accepted an offer from Princeton but
finally chose to remain with The University of Chicago, moving from Yer-
kes Observatory to the main campus and the Department of Physics in 1952.
Chandra had a unique style of work best described in his own words: 
After the early preparatory years, my scientific work has followed a
certain pattern motivated, principally, by a quest after perspectives. In
practice, this quest has consisted of my choosing (after some trials and
tribulations) a certain area which appears amenable to cultivation and
compatible with my taste, abilities, and temperament. And when after
some years of study, I feel that I have accumulated a sufficient body of
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      169

170
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
knowledge and achieved a view of my own, I have the urge to present my
point of view, ab initio, in a coherent account with order, form, and
structure.22
In this manner, Chandra contributed notably to theoretical physics and
astrophysics, publishing seven seminal volumes on a variety of topics in
the period from 1939 to 1983. Herzberg thought of Chandra as a mathe-
matical genius; his brilliance had been amply demonstrated when Chandra
worked out the limit of star mass while on his long voyage from Bombay
to Cambridge, when only nineteen years old. His theory opened the way to
the present theories of neutron stars and black holes; this was the first time
in the history of physics that the theories of gravitation, quantum mechan-
ics, and relativity were used simultaneously in deriving a formula.23
Chandra received the 1983 Nobel Prize in Physics (shared with the astro-
physicist William A. Fowler) for his theoretical studies of physical process-
es of importance to the structure and evolution of stars. The main body of
this work was accomplished in the early 1930s when Chandra was nineteen
to twenty-six years of age, with additional contributions to this topic in
1964 and 1970.
Herzberg also developed a close friendship with Gerard Kuiper, who
spent much of his time at the McDonald Observatory in Texas applying his
infrared spectrometer to the study of planetary atmospheres. When Herz-
berg joined Yerkes Observatory, Kuiper had just returned from service with
Alsos, an American intelligence mission that entered Germany in late 1944
to ferret out and destroy any German fission project. Kuiper told much
about the conditions he found in Germany and its universities at the end of
the war. Among other events, he mentioned how he had encountered Max
Planck among some refugees and saw to it that he was installed in Göt-
tingen, where Kuiper also helped in re-establishing the university, once the
world centre of mathematics and physics. Kuiper was a pioneer of solar
system astronomy and was the first to detect a Martian atmosphere of car-
bon dioxide and an atmosphere of methane on Jupiter and the outer plan-
ets. He also examined many mountain sites as possible locations of obser-
vatories and selected six superior sites where major observatories stand
today. He and Herzberg shared their interests in planetary spectra, and later
Kuiper used the long-path absorption tube built by Herzberg to compare
laboratory spectra with those of Venus and Jupiter.

Herzberg attended seminars on the main campus, occasionally giving
talks on his own research, and spent time with Mulliken and his group,
keeping in touch with the newest advances in spectroscopy. He was pleased
to resume discussions on molecular problems and astrophysics with Ed-
ward Teller, who left Los Alamos in February 1946 to return to teaching
and basic research at The University of Chicago. It amused Herzberg to
find that Teller also participated in the World Federalist movement and
worked hard giving lectures across the country on world government and
world peace, so much so that his colleagues in the Physics Department
were upset that he was neglecting his duties.24 However, after about six
months Teller gave it up, and in 1952 he helped to develop the Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory, a second nuclear weapons laboratory. Tel-
ler was soon to become known as “the father of the hydrogen bomb”, a
label he disliked, and he maintained that his greatest contribution was in
molecular spectroscopy, especially on “the vibrations of polyatomic mole-
cules” and wished he could have spent more time on it.25 Among his many
contributions in molecular physics, all in the 1930s, are the Jahn–Teller and
Renner–Teller effects, the Teller–Redlich product rule, and the paper he
wrote with Herzberg on the vibrational structure of electronic transitions in
polyatomic molecules. Herzberg claimed he only served as the midwife for
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      171
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, 1947.
Gerard Kuiper, 1948.

172
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Teller’s brainchild. He recalled Teller’s early brilliance, his complete
unselfishness and sincerity, and the freedom with which he gave ideas to
others, without worrying about credit and priorities. The theorist Eugene
Wigner, another of that eminent group of Hungarian physicists who came
to the United States of America and served in the Manhattan Project, said
of Teller, “He is the most imaginative person I ever met—and this means a
great deal when you consider that I knew Einstein.”26 In the late 1980s,
Teller convinced President Ronald Reagan to launch the Strategic Defense
Initiative (SDI), known as the “Star Wars” program, designed to destroy
incoming missiles before reaching their targets. This plan was severely crit-
icized by scientific colleagues, and Teller responded with Better a Shield
Than a Sword.27 Herzberg always thought it most unfortunate that one as
truly gifted as Teller, and from whom he had learned so much in the early
years of his own scientific development, would spend his life supporting
the military establishment and that his other great contributions to our
knowledge should not be recognized and rarely be mentioned.
Herzberg often visited his mentor and friend James Franck, supervisor
of his year in Göttingen, who had also returned to The University of Chi-
cago to resume research in photosynthesis after having led the chemistry
division at Los Alamos during the war years. Franck’s wife had died soon
after their arrival in the United States, and in 1946 he married his former
pupil, co-worker, and family friend, Hertha Sponer, then Professor of
Physics at Duke University in Durham, North Carolina. Franck divided his
time between Durham and Chicago and moved to Durham on his retire-
ment in 1949. Just before the test of the first atomic bomb on 16 July 1945
at Alamogordo in New Mexico, Franck had submitted to the Secretary of
War what became known as the “Franck Report”, urging the U.S Govern-
ment to consider the use of the bomb as a political decision and not mere-
ly as a matter of military tactics, and “to reveal the bomb to the world by a
demonstration in an appropriately selected, uninhabited place.” However,
this was not to be, and the dire predictions of the Franck Report came to
pass, “If the United States were to be the first to release this new means of
indiscriminate destruction of mankind, she would sacrifice public support
throughout the world, precipitate the race for armaments, and prejudice the
possibility of reaching an international agreement on the future control of
such weapons.”28
In 1947, Yerkes Observatory celebrated its fiftieth anniversary, and
Science, the weekly magazine of the American Association for the Advance-

ment of Science, devoted most of its 5 September issue to articles written
by the faculty on the history of Yerkes and on astrophysical research.29
Herzberg contributed a brief paper on the early history and present revival
of spectroscopy at Yerkes, noting that Hale had realized the importance of
laboratory investigations for the elucidation of astrophysical problems and
had designed the building with space for laboratories in experimental
physics, chemistry, and spectroscopy. Two conferences added to the anni-
versary celebrations.30 “Stellar Atmospheres” was organized by Struve at
the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society and was held in
nearby Northwestern University. This was followed by an expedition to
Yerkes and a second meeting, “Planetary Atmospheres”, organized by
Kuiper. The papers of both conferences were published in the books Astro-
physics: A Topical Symposium31 and The Atmospheres of the Earth and
Planets.32 Herzberg’s paper “Laboratory absorption spectra obtained with
long paths” appeared in the latter.
Thoughts of Leaving Yerkes
In spite of the many scientific activities and a light teaching load, Herzberg
soon came to realize there was little possibility of enlarging his group in
spectroscopy, since Yerkes was primarily an observatory. Also, the budget
was limited, and it took time to obtain equipment and supplies. Most per-
plexing was the constant problem of waiting for supplies, since Williams
Bay was inconveniently far from the large cities of Madison, Milwaukee,
and Chicago. Herzberg complained strongly when he ordered liquid air
from Milwaukee and found that half had evaporated by the time it arrived
at the laboratory. The rejection of his grant application by the Office of
Naval Research continued to trouble him.
Herzberg was anxious to have more personal contact with colleagues
interested in fields other than his own. As a student, he had originally set
his sights on being an astronomer, but now he found that to live only with
astronomers at an isolated observatory was not what he had expected: he
longed for the daily discussions with chemists, physicists, and humanists
he had enjoyed in Saskatoon, and this was not possible at Williams Bay.
His contacts with colleagues Struve and Kuiper even for scientific discus-
sion were all too few, and only his friend Chandra had broad general inter-
ests in literature, philosophy, and music. Visits with Mulliken, Franck, and
Teller on the distant Chicago campus turned out to be a rare experience,
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      173

174
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
since Herzberg did not drive, but travelled by bus or train. He was contin-
ually being invited to join the Physics Department of The University of
Chicago, but living in the centre of this huge city did not appeal to him or
Luise. Moreover, his colleague Mulliken had already established a large
theoretical and experimental spectroscopy group on the Chicago campus,
and it would neither be wise nor possible to duplicate this effort.
To these concerns were soon added the noticeably increasing anti-
Communist feelings being propagated in the United States with the esca-
lating cold war.33 In 1946 Herzberg learned that Eugene Rabinowitch, who
had joined the Manhattan Project during the war, was denied the security
clearance needed to become Head of the Chemistry Department of Clinton
Laboratories at Oak Ridge. That same year, Harlow Shapley, a prominent
astronomer at Harvard University, was subpoenaed to appear before the
House Committee on Un-American Activities. Both had been outspoken in
their criticism of the cold war and of postwar anti-Communism. In March
of 1947, President Harry Truman barred Communists (or those aiding or
sympathetic to Communism) from the Executive Branch, and the Taft–
Hartley Act, passed in June 1947, over Truman’s veto, denied the facilities
of the National Labour Relations Board to unions that failed to file affi-
davits affirming that their officers were not Communists. A year later Ed-
ward U. Condon was attacked by the House Committee on Un-American
Activities but was successfully protected by the Emergency Committee of
Atomic Scientists. These events raised many unpleasant memories of the
activities of the Nazi regime in Germany and set Gerhard and Luise to won-
dering whether they were in the right place.
The culminating reason for Herzberg’s decision to leave Yerkes so
soon after his arrival came with the rising tension among his colleagues
amid plans for a re-organization of the Department of Astronomy proposed
by Struve. If accepted by the University, these plans would have far reach-
ing consequences for the department. As Struve wrote in a confidential let-
ter to Herzberg in January 1947, he wanted to recognize the brilliance of
Kuiper and Chandrasekhar and the fact that the department had grown and
needed a new structure.34 Thus, he proposed that Kuiper be made the
Director of both the Yerkes and McDonald Observatories and Chandrasek-
har be made the Director of an Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics. Hilt-
ner would remain as Assistant Director of the observatories, and Morgan
would become the Managing Editor of the Astrophysical Journal. Struve
mentioned that he deliberately refrained from suggesting that Herzberg’s

laboratory become a separate group because it would look like an inde-
pendent department of physics was being set up at Yerkes. This would
arouse jealousies on the Chicago campus, and the administration would
almost certainly refuse. For himself, Struve wanted to be relieved of the
many day-to-day administrative duties, so that he could spend more time
on his own research. These suggested changes were all laudable: Struve
had served as Director of Yerkes for fifteen years, during difficult times,
and had advanced it to world recognition. It was time for him to hand over
responsibilities to others so that he could pursue his research.
However, Struve also maintained that he should be the “Chairman” of
the new structure and have control of general policy, overall planning, and
final responsibility for budget, personnel, and promotions in the depart-
ment. As might be expected, the strong personalities of the senior group at
Yerkes, with their egos and ambitions, could not accept the suggestion that
Struve should retain supreme power. Nevertheless, the re-organization at
Yerkes came into effect in July of 1947. It brought dissension and acrimo-
ny to the small staff of the Observatory, an atmosphere which Herzberg
deplored but could do little to alleviate.
With the receipt of Struve’s letter and foreseeing the divisive conse-
quences of the restructuring plans, Herzberg finally accepted the thought
that his stay at Yerkes would be short-lived, dependent on when he felt he
had adequately discharged his obligations to Struve and the Observatory.
On receiving an enquiry that January from E.W.R. Steacie, Director of the
Division of Chemistry at the NRC, as to his possible interest in a research
position in Ottawa, Herzberg pursued this unexpected opportunity with
alacrity, and within a few months his return to Canada in the following year
was assured.35 Several of the younger members of the Yerkes Observatory
were also lured away within the next two years, and in 1950 Struve himself
resigned to become Chairman of the Astronomy Department at the Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley.
Having made the decision to return to Canada, Herzberg immediately
turned his attention to the formalities for crossing the border and to the
attainment of his research objective at Yerkes, namely the search for the
so-called quadrupole spectrum of hydrogen, a very weak and normally
forbidden spectrum. He was also determined to complete the revision of
the second edition of Diatomic Molecules. These concerns were reminis-
cent of those he had faced on leaving Darmstadt for Canada over a decade
earlier.
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      175

176
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
The Final Year at Yerkes Observatory
In the laboratory, Herzberg was successful in observing the quadrupole
spectrum of hydrogen, and this turned out to be his major achievement dur-
ing his brief stay at the Yerkes Observatory. While hydrogen is the most
abundant element in the universe, molecular hydrogen (H2) is difficult to
detect because it is transparent in the infrared region, where its vibrational
spectrum is expected to occur; its absorption spectrum is exceedingly weak
because a molecule consisting of two identical atoms interacts negligibly
with infrared radiation. He had predicted ten years earlier that the large
amounts of H2 present in planetary atmospheres would make up for the
weak quadrupole spectrum and had set his heart on finding this spectrum
of hydrogen in laboratory experiments.36 He had built the long absorption
tube expressly for this purpose.
No one had yet reported the observation of a quadrupole spectrum, and
he considered its detection to be a major challenge. In his mind, this would
be the only way to confirm the presence of molecular hydrogen in plane-
tary atmospheres and in interstellar space. His two students Phillips and
Rao were busy with their own research problems, so Herzberg worked on
the experiment by himself. For the 3-0 band, which he calculated would
occur in the 8000 to 8600 Å region, he adjusted the mirrors in the 22-metre
cell for 244 traversals to give an effective path length of 5370 metres and
raised the hydrogen gas pressure to 9 atmospheres. He observed four of the
lines in their predicted positions. Another four of the expected lines were
found for the 2-0 band (11 300 to 12 400 Å). All eight lines were extreme-
ly sharp, as anticipated for a quadrupole spectrum, even at the high pres-
sures used in the experiments.37 This observation proved that it would
require high-resolution instruments to detect these sharp lines in the spec-
tra of the outer planets, whose atmospheres were expected to contain large
quantities of hydrogen.
It was to be another twelve years before the H2 quadrupole spectrum
was observed in the atmospheres of the giant planets, first in Jupiter and
somewhat later in Uranus.38 Later still, this spectrum was observed in
emission in the Orion nebula and in the hot gases of other nebulae, plane-
tary ionospheres, and superluminous galaxies.39
Herzberg also photographed the spectra of several polyatomic mole-
cules, namely CH3CF3, CH3I, and N2O, for study and analysis at the NRC
while waiting for completion of the instruments being built for the new

laboratory. The spectra of the two latter molecules were measured and ana-
lyzed with the help of Luise, and they published the results as joint authors.
A thorough analysis of high-resolution spectra of the atmospheric oxygen
bands photographed at the Mount Wilson Observatory was carried out by
Harold D. Babcock and Luise and remains today as one of the most impor-
tant papers on the oxygen molecule.40 Over the years many spectroscopists
have mistakenly credited this paper to Gerhard Herzberg.
Long after Herzberg’s departure from the Yerkes Observatory, his
friend Chandra was to summarize Herzberg’s accomplishments there:
The years after World War II were years of exceptional growth in the
physical sciences at The University of Chicago; and Herzberg’s appoint-
ment as a professor of spectroscopy in the Astronomy Department at the
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      177
The quadrupole spectrum of H2: (a) the 3-0 band, (b) the 2-0 band,
after Herzberg, 1948. (In each case, the bottom strip shows the
spectrum obtained with H2 and the upper strip with air.)

178
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Yerkes Observatory contributed in no small measure to that growth. Even
though Herzberg’s association with The University of Chicago was short
and lasted only three years, it is startling to realize the many lasting ini-
tiatives of those years besides what was accomplished.
In two years, Herzberg built up a laboratory that was capable of
unique and important experiments involving long absorption paths. An
absorption tube 75 feet long was built with an optical arrangement that
could achieve many traversals (as many as 250 in some of the later exper-
iments); and with this tube Herzberg was able to study the absorption
spectra of many molecules of astrophysical interest including CO, CO2,
NO, C2H2, and CH4 with path lengths comparable to those in planetary
atmospheres. For example, the CO2 bands in the spectrum of Venus were
reproduced with remarkable fidelity.
The methods which he initiated and developed at the Yerkes Obser-
vatory have since become standard in laboratories devoted to the study of
planetary spectra.… While many results of significance on individual
molecules were obtained at the Yerkes Observatory, perhaps the most
spectacular accomplishment was Herzberg’s observations of the 2-0 and
3-0 bands of the quadrupole spectrum of the hydrogen molecule: a prize
that had been sought in vain before.
The Yerkes Observatory and The University of Chicago can hardly
lay claim to any substantial fraction of Herzberg’s total accomplishments
… but they can, with some justice, lay claim to the deepening of his inter-
ests in spectroscopic problems with astrophysical overtones.41

11. NEWS OF FAMILY AND FRIENDS IN 
WAR-TORN EUROPE
With the end of the war in Europe in May of 1945, the Herzbergs immedi-
ately tried to contact Walter and their many friends in Germany, particular-
ly those who had lived in Hamburg, Darmstadt, Frankfurt, and Berlin when
these cities were devastated by aerial bombardment. However, communi-
cation by mail or telephone to any of the four occupied zones of Germany
was not possible until almost a year later.
First News
The first news from Europe came from Herzberg’s former student Stephan
Gradstein, who had fled to Holland in 1933 and whose last letter in 1940
ended, “War is on—have suitcases ready!” Now a postcard dated 13 Au-
gust 1945 arrived, just as the Herzbergs were preparing to leave Saskatoon
for the Yerkes Observatory.1 They learned that Stephan had a Dutch wife
and that she and their two children had lived through the war and the Ger-
man occupation with her parents in a small village, and Stephan, who was
Jewish, had survived by lying in hiding with them for the four years. After
the war, he was quickly reinstated in his editorial job with the Philips Com-
pany, and the family was now waiting for the repair of their bomb-damaged
home in Eindhoven. Herzberg immediately answered, thankful that
Stephan and his family were alive, and then added some news of their
youngsters Paul and Agnes and the move to Yerkes. He asked Stephan to
note in his next letter what items of food or clothing would be helpful. On
receipt of a list of small supplies the following month, the Herzbergs sent
a package to the Gradsteins and were gratified to learn that it arrived safely:
Dear Dr. Herzberg:
Perhaps you do not know that the 6th of December is the day of Santa
Claus, which is always greatly celebrated in this country by surprising
one another on that day with little gifts of all kinds. Well, this parcel of
yours was one of the most capital Santa Claus surprises I have ever seen.
179
A curse on this false fatherland, teeming
With nothing but shame and dirty scheming,
Where every flower is crushed in a day.
Heinrich Heine
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:33 PM  Page 179

180
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
I suppose it must be somewhat difficult to make you understand with
what joy a box of shoe-polish, say, or a little sewing cotton, safety pins
and shoe laces, or some knitting wool may be welcomed! All these things
are very, very helpful, and my wife and I thank you very sincerely for the
trouble in assembling these different articles.2
Later, the Herzbergs sent clothing and shoes to the family and a parcel of
children’s clothes to the astrophysicist Jan H. Oort, also in Holland, for dis-
tribution to the needy. Herzberg also tried to reach his brother and friends
in Germany through these Dutch colleagues and through friends in Switz-
erland, but learned that this was still not possible even from these neigh-
bouring countries. 
The Destruction of Darmstadt and the Technische
Hochschule
When mail service to and from Germany re-opened on 1 April 1946, the
first letters came from former colleagues at the Technische Hochschule in
Darmstadt. General Patton and the Third Army had liberated Darmstadt,
which was now in the American zone of Germany. Letters from Hans Rau,
his supervisor, Heinz Verleger, a co-worker in 1934–1935, and Oswald
Walther, Professor of Mathematics, with a long letter from Walther’s wife
to Luise on life in Darmstadt, told of unbelievable conditions in the bomb-
ravaged city.3–5 In one night of saturation bombing on 11 September 1944,
using a new system called Der Todesfacher, “The Death Fan”, 80 percent
of the city was destroyed by fire, with over 8,000 dead and most of the
Technische Hochschule in ruins. Further bombings demolished the chemi-
cal works and increased the death toll to about 12,000.6 Half of the popu-
lation had abandoned Darmstadt, and because the city was not expected to
be reconstructed, the capital of Hesse was quickly moved to Wiesbaden. 
Miraculously, the Juda house on Heidenreichstrasse, where the Herz-
bergs had lived for five years, was the only one to survive in the immedi-
ate area. However, the Juda family had left their home after the horrors of
Kristallnacht (10 November 1938) and lived in Paris with Frau Juda’s
brother Otto for several months. This had been described by Hedwig Juda
in a modest and understated letter to the Herzbergs in November 1939, as
usual without any mention of the hardships they had suffered but inquiring
of Paul and Agnes and life in Canada. A year later, when France was
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:33 PM  Page 180

attacked by the Germans, the Judas moved to the village of St. Sulpice in
the middle of France as a measure of safety from aerial bombing. This was
the last message to be received from the Judas.7 During the occupation of
France, Uncle Victor died in his own bed, but Frau Hedwig Juda and her
daughter Lise perished in Auschwitz just a month before hostilities ended.
Of the 1,427 Jews living in Darmstadt in 1933, about half had left for North
and South America or Palestine by 1938, and only 360 remained in 1940.
And with Himmler’s proclamation of the “Final Solution”, they were trans-
ported to Theresien Concentration Camp in 1942 and 1943.8
Although no specific reason for the destruction of Darmstadt was given
by Bomber Command, it was known that the Technische Hochschule was
involved in V-1 and V-2 rocket development and that the chemical works
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      181
The remains of the Technische Hochschule Darmstadt
after bombardment, September 1944.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:33 PM  Page 181

182
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
were of strategic importance, and on the night of 11 September, a munitions
train was left at the railway station. Immediately after Germany’s surren-
der, some of the university’s senior professors, Hans Rau, Oswald Walther,
Carl Wagner, a professor of physical chemistry, and Richard Vieweg, the
Rector, were taken to London, England, and interrogated about the rocket
program. They were invited to go to the United States with the first group
of rocket scientists, but only Wagner accepted. The others returned to
Darmstadt with the hope of restoring the university. In spite of the ruined
buildings, classes were soon in progress in the old workshop and in what-
ever rooms were usable in the main building, with students sitting on the
floor or on chairs found in gardens and bombed restaurants. The letters of
Rau and Verleger informed Herzberg that the spectroscopy laboratory was
completely destroyed, including all of the instruments, and that the metal
coatings on the gratings had evaporated in the heat of the fire bombing.
Herzberg could never forget Rau’s kindness and unfailing encourage-
ment in the difficult days, so Rau’s letter was especially heartwarming; yet
its beginning was momentarily puzzling:
Dear Dr. Herzberg:
Your letter took a long time for its journey; it not only had to cross
the vast space but also an almost endless time-span. It was indeed a greet-
ing from a different world, and an especially great joy. I am very happy
that you not only succeeded to save your family from a great danger,
whose whole atrocity only became clear after the war, but that you obvi-
ously have found working possibilities over there, that you could hardly
ever have found in Germany, even under different circumstances.3
As Herzberg thought deeply about this last statement, he finally came to
understand its meaning. All of his professors and colleagues at the Tech-
nische Hochschule in Darmstadt, as well as in Göttingen, and all of the sci-
entists he met in Germany were offspring of professors, bankers, or doc-
tors, the “Mandarin” families of Germany. He was clearly not one of this
elitist group; without a father, with a mother working in America, and with
no family background in learning to speak of, he obviously did not belong
in this upper class. No matter how hard he would have worked in Germany,
only a miraculous discovery in science could have led to an opportunity for
him to rise to the rank of a research professor in a major university, even
though he was recognized internationally as one of the pioneers in molec-
ular science.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:33 PM  Page 182

Heinz Verleger was having difficulties in de-Nazification and in resum-
ing his former position in the University of Tübingen, which was in the
French Occupied Zone. He asked Herzberg for help by writing to the
administration in the American Zone to support his transfer to a university
post there. If possible, of course, he would prefer to be permitted to enter
Canada or the U.S.A.4 Unfortunately, Herzberg’s letters were of no help in
getting him transferred or in finding him a job, even though Herzberg
vouched for his character and made it clear that to the best of his knowl-
edge, Verleger had not the slightest sympathy for the Nazi cause. The
problem was that after his year with Herzberg in Darmstadt in 1934–1935,
Verleger had the misfortune to be employed until 1941 at the Physikalisch-
Technischen Reichsanstalt in Berlin-Charlottenburg, under the supervision
of the fanatical Nazi Johannes Stark, and this was not readily forgotten or
forgiven by the Allied military governments. After receiving letters from
French and American authorities, who had investigated the wartime activ-
ities of Verleger, even Herzberg began to have some doubts of his former
friend’s sincerity. Eventually, Verleger found an academic position in South
Africa.
Hans Baerwald, Herzberg’s teacher and friend, had survived a difficult
period in England during the war years, shuttling from one year teaching
posts at the universities of Aberdeen, St. Andrews, and Cardiff and living
alone as his Aryan wife remained in Germany. At the end of the war, he
returned to Darmstadt and sought reinstatement to his former position as
theoretical physicist, but because he was past the retirement age of sixty-
five, this was denied. He died in England in 1946. Another colleague Hans
Jüngst, a Privatdozent in geology and minerology at the THD, who was
horrified at the atrocities of the Nazis, was conscripted and killed in action
towards the end of the war.
Herzberg was sympathetic to the difficulties experienced by G. Valt.
Schmitt, one of his former undergraduate students, who wrote asking for a
letter to help in obtaining a certificate of exoneration towards his de-
Nazification. Much to his surprise, Herzberg learned that in 1934 Schmitt
had petitioned the Culture Minister of Hesse to permit Herzberg to contin-
ue teaching the theoretical physics course and moreover had asked the
examination commisioner to let Herzberg undertake the examination of the
candidates in the course. In time, this petition became an obstacle for
Schmitt, and he was not able to find a job in spite of his excellent academ-
ic record. Finally, against his inner conviction, he became an SS candidate
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      183
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:33 PM  Page 183

184
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
in order to gain “political correctness” but left voluntarily in 1938. He
served in the war for six years and was wounded. After rehabiltation he
returned to the THD to improve his standing in mathematics for entry into
teaching.
Herzberg was also informed of some colleagues who had joined the
Nazi Party. One was Wolfgang Finkelnburg whom Herzberg had intro-
duced to Rau and to the Technische Hochschule Darmstadt. On being
appointed Chief Assistant at the Physical Institute in Darmstadt in 1936,
Finkelnburg had been pressured by the Rector, Karl Lieser, to join the Nazi
party in order to moderate the activities of the “Aryan physics” group with-
in the THD and in the University Teachers League. In 1947 he wrote a
friendly letter to Herzberg mentioning that he and his wife loved Rau and
his fatherly kindness and that Rau was now in better health. He then
described his own scientific activities following the war, writing a large
textbook on atomic, nuclear, and molecular physics. He said that he was
unemployed, because former National Socialist Party members had under-
mined his efforts in academia. Herzberg did not reply. Quite by chance they
met at the Watergate Opera in Washington, D.C., in 1951, when Finkeln-
burg was a consultant to the Engineering Research and Development Lab-
oratories in Fort Belvoir, Virginia, but Herzberg was not inclined to renew
their former friendly relationship.9 Only many years later did Herzberg
learn of the courageous role Finkelnburg had played in an offensive against
the proponents of “Aryan physics”, who had enjoyed immense political
influence in academic affairs on Hitler’s rise to power. In 1940 Finkelnburg
had accepted the leadership of the University Teachers League under the
condition that he could use his position to combat the threat posed to pro-
fessional physics by the “Aryan physics” proponents. By this time, he was
director of the Institute of Physics in Strassburg and had the power to
organize a debate in Munich with the best young physicists left in Germany
to confront the politically minded Aryan physicists led by Lenard and
Stark. The outcome began a splintering of the ranks of the Aryan physics
adherents and eventually led to the demise of politicized physics in acade-
mia in 1943–1944.10
Although this defeat of the Aryan physicists came long after the deci-
mation of the scientific establishment in Germany, it nevertheless helped to
maintain some semblance of professional recognition among the remaining
scientists and may have led to an earlier acceptance of German scientists
into international conferences and organizations after the war.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:33 PM  Page 184

News from Hamburg
Finally, Herzberg received news of his brother Walter and friends in
Hamburg. Walter and his family, living in the outskirts of Hamburg, had
survived the saturation bombing of their city in 1943. Alfred Schulz had
also survived and lived with his sister Hertha, whose husband was declared
missing. Neither Walter nor Alfred had served in the war, both being
declared unsuitable for military service: Alfred was almost totally deaf, and
Walter had damaged an arm in a motorbike accident but was conscripted
towards the end of the war for the defense of Schleswig-Holstein. After the
war, Alfred was more withdrawn than ever, isolated by his deafness and his
heavy responsibilities in taking care of an ill mother, an unemployed father,
and a widowed sister. Without children of his own, Alfred became very
attached to Monika, aged six, the daughter of his sister. The needs of his
family required all of his attention. 
Hans-Werner Doering, Gerhard’s and Alfred’s former close friend, had
served with the army on the Russian front and was wounded three times;
he had lost one eye in 1944 and was left with only partial vision in the other
eye. In his first letter, Hans-Werner emphasized the wonderful and endur-
ing friendship they once had and noted how difficult it was to renew their
relationship after these many years, and after what had happened, “Perhaps
he was crossed off the list of Herzberg’s friends.” His letters were full of
guilty feelings as he tried to recount his life in those terrible years. He was
married with two children, a son and daughter. He did not understand or
share his father’s rigorous belief in the Nazis, and as a teacher and civil ser-
vant, Hans-Werner was himself put under moral pressure; a summons from
the authorities forced him to become a party member and he finally joined
the National Socialist Party in 1937. He understood Herzberg’s compassion
with the terrible fate of the Juda family and wondered if this caused Herz-
berg to be disinterested in finding out about other friendships in this unholy
land, this country of ruins, misery, hunger, and desperation. Although he
and his family were profuse in their thanks when food parcels arrived along
with two hundred cigarettes, Hans-Werner wondered whether the parcels
were really a sign of redemption or just a generous gesture of charity
towards the needy and miserable without wanting to have anything more to
do with them. He thanked Herzberg for his sympathy in the loss of his
mother and brother-in-law and recalled the purity and happiness of their
innocent youth in the hope of renewing their old friendship.11 Herzberg
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      185
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:33 PM  Page 185

186
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
found it difficult to answer such sad letters of despair and regret and hoped
that time would help to heal Hans-Werner’s conscience of the terrible years
of the Nazis and the war.
Parcels of Food and Clothing
In early 1946, an appeal was launched by James Franck and a group of col-
leagues and was sent to President Truman, the State Department, and mem-
bers of Congress of the United States. The appeal asked that relief should
be provided and charitable organizations be admitted into the occupied
countries to reduce suffering in Europe. This was signed by 180 distin-
guished scholars, scientists, and artists of German and Austrian origin, all
enemies and victims of Naziism who had found refuge and opportunity in
free America.12 Herzberg was one of the signers. Soon a limited program
of relief to Germany by private welfare agencies was announced, and Ger-
hard and Luise spent whatever time and money they could afford in prepar-
ing and sending a series of parcels of clothing and food packages to their
relatives and friends in Hamburg, Langensalza, Darmstadt, Frankfurt, and
Berlin.
Herzberg’s cousin Emmy Langemak, a dentist in Frankfurt, had lost
her home twice during the war, once in bombardment and again to America
troops for use as an operations office. She had survived the bombing of
Frankfurt along with her daughter Christa, but her son Fritz had been con-
scripted after graduating from the gymnasium. He was sent to the eastern
front and was missing since February 1945. The Herzberg’s sent her a series
of parcels with food to tide them over, as well as several packages of dental
instruments and supplies so that Emmy could resume her professional
practice.13
Herzberg also wrote to Karl-Friedrich Bonhoeffer to offer his sympa-
thy on the execution of his brother Dietrich, the theologian and Confession
Church leader, and of his brother-in-law Hans von Dohnanyi, a former
Reich Supreme Court Counsellor.14 Dietrich had returned to Germany after
lecturing for a month in New York in July 1939. He gave up his own safe-
ty to take care of his theologian students and to organize a church-based
resistance group, calling on clergymen to oppose Adolf Hitler as the
“Antichrist”. He also took part in one of the most active resistance centres
in Germany, founded by Dohnanyi, who had served in military intelligence
(the Abwehr) and who along with Colonel Hans Osler, his superior, had
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:33 PM  Page 186

organized an underground railroad for Jews to escape Germany. All three
were imprisoned in 1943 for their role in the plot to assassinate Hitler and
were sentenced to death by an SS tribunal. They were hanged in April
1945, just a month before the war ended.15 Later, Herzberg was to learn
that other members of the Bonhoeffer family, namely the jurist Klaus Bon-
hoeffer and brother-in-law Dr. Rüdiger Schleicher, had been executed by
the Gestapo that April.16 Karl-Friedrich managed to avoid incarceration,
although he knew about the plot against Hitler, and he succeeded in pro-
tecting the remaining Bonhoeffer families, all ardent anti-Nazis, from the
Nazi regime. He was in poor health after a heart attack in 1946 and had to
care for the large number of children of his dead relatives as well as his own
four children.17 Food parcels were quickly sent to the Bonhoeffer family.
Food parcels were invariably dispatched to former colleagues who had
many young children, even though Gerhard and Luise did not know of their
political beliefs or activities during the war. As they added their thumbs in
the tying procedure, young Paul and Agnes were impressed with the heaps
of boxes being packed and neatly wrapped on evenings and weekends. And
they wondered about the many people their parents knew in Europe.
PART TWO: A SAFE HAVEN IN CANADA (1935–1947)      187
Uncle Victor’s last greeting, Christmas 1941.
working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:33 PM  Page 187

working copy.qxd  25/06/2002  2:33 PM  Page 188

PART THREE
THE GOLDEN YEARS
(1948–1971)


12. RETURN TO CANADA
In the two decades following World War II, Canada was a country of great
optimism economically and culturally. Its abundance of natural resources
was a boon to international trade, and the vast growth of its industrial plant
symbolized the promise of a country on the move to major achievement.
Science also enjoyed this spirited progress, and because of its accomplish-
ments during World War II, the National Research Council of Canada
(NRC) became the engine to drive science to greater heights in academia,
government, and industry. This period was justifiably called the “Golden
Age” in Canadian science.
In early 1947, only a little more than a year after his start at Yerkes
Observatory, Herzberg received an offer from the NRC in Ottawa that was
an opportunity not to be missed: he was invited to establish a major spec-
troscopy laboratory for basic research. Matters quickly came to a head with
visits to Ottawa and much correspondence, culminating in his appointment
as Principal Research Officer in the Division of Physics. The position was
to be taken up in mid-1948. At the NRC, Herzberg would realize his full
potential.
How Did This Happen?
Again, Herzberg’s good friend John Spinks played a key persuasive role. In
the words of Chalmers Jack Mackenzie, President of the NRC at that time:
To some not familiar with scientific research in Canada, it may seem
rather unusual that Dr. Herzberg should have given up an established pro-
fessorship at The University of Chicago and returned to a Canadian gov-
ernment research institution, where at that time, facilities in his special
field were limited. This occurred not by any elaborate planning but by a
series of fortuitous events and timely interlocking personal associations
very similar to those which first brought Dr. Herzberg to Canada.
John Spinks, after a wartime stint with the Royal Canadian Air Force,
had been attached to the NRC’s atomic energy project for some time
before returning to the University of Saskatchewan. Dr. E.W.R. (Ned)
Steacie had become Director of NRC’s Division of Chemistry in 1939. In
191
A great day in the history of the NRC and of Canadian
science in general.
C. Jack Mackenzie

192
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
the fall of the same year, I had left the University of Saskatchewan, where
I had been associated with John Spinks and Gerhard Herzberg, to become
Acting President of NRC. Consequently, the three of us were familiar
with the operational flexibility and working environment of NRC. Also,
we were all friends and admirers of Herzberg and collectively possessed
intimate knowledge of his research activities and, in addition, had the
power to get quick action.
Finally, it should be noted that the wartime performance of the NRC’s
scientific staff had won general public approval, and generous financial
support for post-war research became available. During the post-war
reconstruction period, the most immediate and urgent task facing the NRC
was reconversion to its original civilian status. During the war, the Physics
Division had been deeply and almost exclusively involved in important
applied research projects. At war’s end, several senior scientists left for
other posts, and others were approaching retirement. The need was obvi-
ous: reorganization of the research units and strengthening of work on fun-
damental research. The immediate decision was to find a distinguished and
active reseach physicist to stimulate original work and possibly succeed
the Director when the latter retired. The search was on.1
While in Ottawa in January 1947, John Spinks mentioned to Macken-
zie and Steacie the long-term hopes of the Herzbergs to return to Canada.
This confirmed the recent message Steacie had received from Professor
Donald LeRoy of Toronto, who had learned from his close friend Harold
Bernstein that Herzberg felt badly about having left Canada and would like
to come back.2 Steacie immediately wrote to Herzberg:
Dr. Spinks told me that he had recently had a letter from you from which
he got the impression that you wished you were back in Canada. Is there
any possibility that you would be willing to work here if a suitable offer
could be made? You would, of course, have complete freedom to do what
you wished, and I am sure that anything you wanted in the way of equip-
ment could be obtained.
We would very much like to have you with us.… As Bernstein has
probably told you, we have succeeded in building up a very good group
in the Division of Chemistry. It is absolutely essential that we do likewise
in Physics, and it would be of inestimable value to us if we could get you
here.
I hope you will excuse my writing to you on the basis of a mere
rumour, but I felt that we shouldn’t pass up the opportunity if there was
the slightest chance of your being interested.3

Herzberg replied instantly:
I was very glad to have your inquiry with regard to the possibility of my
joining the Research Council. I should say at the outset that I am indeed
interested in such a possibility and would seriously consider a suitable
offer if one were made.…
There are of course many questions that arise in my mind in connec-
tion with your suggestion. For now, I will only mention two of them:
Would the appointment be of a permanent nature? And precisely how
great will the freedom of choice of my research problems be? Or, in other
words, for what routine matters would I be responsible, and how much
administrative work would be involved?  I should perhaps say that I have
very little experience in administrative work.
In concluding, may I express to you my sincere appreciation of your
thoughtfulness in considering me for a position at the National Research
Council. I am sure that I would profit greatly in my scientific work by an
association with you and your group.4
Mackenzie then took up the correspondence:
Dr. Steacie has shown me the correspondence which he has had with you,
and I am very interested in the possibility of your returning to Canada and
joining the staff of the National Research Council.…
The two questions you raise can be very definitely answered; first,
the appointment would be definitely permanent, and secondly, you would
not be responsible for any administrative work and you would have, with-
in very broad terms, complete freedom of research problems. Dr. Steacie
in his Division of Chemistry is operating under a similar scheme.…
In brief, our philosophy is that in every Division there should be a
modest group of scientists who are essentially engaged in fundamental
work which is in no way directly focused on practical problems. We feel
that not only will such a group make valuable contributions to science,
but in addition, the presence of such activity will maintain higher stan-
dards in other sections of a more applied nature and generally stimulate
scientific work in the Division.
I will be very glad to hear from you as to whether or not you would
be interested in such a position, and if you are, I think it would be a wise
plan for you to come to Ottawa for a day or so in order that you could look
over the situation in detail.5
In the meantime Herzberg had received several other unofficial offers.
In March of 1947, Carl S. Beals, the Acting Dominion Astronomer, who
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      193

194
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
had recently moved to Ottawa, wrote to Herzberg that the position of Head
of the Solar Division of the Observatory in Ottawa would be vacant. He
asked Herzberg to write to him confidentially if he would be interested.6
The following month, Herzberg was approached by Dean A.H.S. Gillison
of McGill University about his possible return to Canada and the
University, and somewhat later, Professor W. Bentley asked whether or not
he would let his name stand as Professor of Physics and Director of the
Electronics Research Laboratory at McGill.7,8 Herzberg was also
approached by Dr. N.S. Gingrich of the University of Missouri regarding
an appointment there.9 Later he even received an enquiry from the Ministry
of Education of North Rhine – Westphalia concerning a full professorship
at the University of Bonn, which had an established tradition in spectros-
copy.10 This he declined.
Herzberg focused his efforts on the NRC and visited Ottawa in April.
He had a long discussion with President Mackenzie that continued through
lunch, and he spent the afternoon with Steacie.11 He was won over by the
activity and excitement in the Division of Chemistry and with the potential
in the Division of Physics, although he only met briefly with R.W. Boyle,
its Director. Mackenzie noted Herzberg’s visit in his diary: “I was very
much impressed with him and there is no doubt of his quality, and if he
comes to us, it will be a great triumph.” While in Ottawa, Herzberg took
the opportunity to speak with Beals about the various offers he had
received. He thanked Beals for inquiring whether he had any interest in a
position at the Observatory but considered that he would be out of place as
a solar astronomer. Also, the McGill position did not quite fit in with his
immediate plans. Herzberg felt that after the interruption because of war
work and the time spent writing his books, he was just beginning to hit his
stride in research and was concerned that even a small teaching load would
divert him from his main interests. Moreover, the offer from McGill includ-
ed the policy that first contracts were only for a limited time, in spite of the
fact that Herzberg had had tenure at the Universities of Saskatchewan and
Chicago and was an internationally renowned scientist.
There was no doubt in Herzberg’s mind that the NRC offered the best
opportunities for spectroscopic research and for freedom in research.
Moreover, he and Luise had found Ottawa to be very much to their liking;
the city was a comfortable size, in a lovely setting of rivers and canals, and
there were good schools for their children. Proceedings moved quickly by
correspondence and another meeting in Ottawa, and issues of budget, staff,

freedom from administrative responsibilities, salary, and moving costs
were discussed and resolved.
Acceptance of Appointment as Principal Research
Officer
In June 1947, Herzberg informed Mackenzie that he was ready to accept
the position in the newly created category of Principal Research Officer in
the Division of Physics, and he summarized the various conditions of his
appointment as agreed to in their personal discussions.12 Briefly, these
included appointment on a permanent basis with a starting salary of $6,500
per year. He was to carry out research in fundamental physics and allied
subjects, with the choice of problems left entirely to him, and would have
no routine duties of the type being carried out in the sections dealing with
applied physics or applied chemistry. Space and funds would be available
to set up a new Section of Spectroscopy in the Division of Physics. An
annual budget of $25,000 exclusive of salaries was estimated to be ade-
quate, with an additional $50,000 over the first two years for installation of
the laboratory. Funds would also be available to hire research staff, perhaps
two at the outset increasing later to four or five, and service personnel such
as laboratory technicians and helpers for computational and secretarial
work. Such magnanimous support would have been impossible to obtain as
a university professor through the usual granting channels. Finally, and per-
haps most surprising of all for someone in his prime of activity, Herzberg
asked for and was to be provided with an opportunity for continuing his
scientific work after retirement at the age of sixty-five. The appointment
was to be taken up about July 1948. 
Within a week, Mackenzie replied that he was delighted with Herz-
berg’s acceptance and agreed that all of the conditions regarding freedom
in research, facilities, staff, and work after retirement represented his own
understanding of NRC’s offer.13 Also, Luise would be welcomed in every
way to pursue research interests with the spectroscopy group. Next day,
Mackenzie informed Boyle that Herzberg would join the NRC. In summa-
rizing this happy turn of events, Mackenzie later commented:
I have always thought that Dr. Steacie’s advice and persuasions were the
clinching factors in Herzberg’s decision, as he probably became con-
vinced that if the conditions of work were agreeable to Steacie he could
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      195

196
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
accept our offer with confidence. As President of NRC, I had the respon-
sibility alone of recommending the appointment to the Right Honourable
C.D. Howe who promptly (22 July 1947) obtained formal Government
approval.… This was a great day in the history of the National Research
Council and of Canadian science in general.14
On receiving Mackenzie’s letter, Herzberg confirmed his acceptance of the
appointment and added: “I feel certain that I have made the right decision and
I do hope that I will be able to justify the confidence you have put in me.”15
Notice of Impending Departure
Herzberg immediately notified Otto Struve (who was carrying out obser-
vational work at the McDonald Observatory in Texas at the time) about his
decision to take up the position at the NRC in about a year’s time: 
I have had some further correspondence with Ottawa.… Naturally, I have
thought the matter over very carefully and many times. I fear that the rea-
sons for accepting the Ottawa offer outweigh by a considerable margin
the many reasons that would induce me to stay at Yerkes.… I would cer-
tainly not want to resign from my appointment at Yerkes earlier than July
of next year and possibly as late as September.
I am confident that in the next twelve months the laboratory will
yield some worthwhile results, which in themselves will justify the
expenditures that the University undertook in establishing the laborato-
ry.… Therefore, I do hope you will not feel that the time and thought you
have spent on establishing this laboratory and getting me here (with all
the troubles involved in that) were wasted, even if I should leave after
only three years’ stay. I for my part have found this time exceedingly
stimulating. It has increased my knowledge of, and interest in, astrophys-
ical problems and I am sure that I shall continue to be interested in them.16
When Mulliken learned of Herzberg’s decision to leave Yerkes Obser-
vatory, he personally did his best to persuade Herzberg to come to the
Chicago campus, and he strongly recommended to the President that
Herzberg should be given a Professorship in the Department of Physics:
I feel it would be a tragedy if we did not make every reasonable effort to
keep at this University a man who, I am convinced, is one of the best in
the Physical Sciences Division.… I have no hesitation in expressing the
opinion that Herzberg is the most competent and productive worker in his
field today.17

Herzberg thanked Mulliken for his endeavours to arrange favourable con-
ditions for him to join the Physics Department since it would have offered
the possibility of close collaboration with Mulliken and the other molecu-
lar physicists there, but he regretted that considerations of a personal nature
made him decide in favour of the position in Ottawa. However, he hoped
that there would continue to be many opportunities of contacts, stimulating
discussions, and collaboration.18
It was arranged that Herzberg would resign his position as Professor of
Spectroscopy at the Yerkes Observatory as of 1 September 1948; he would
take his year’s vacation during August and therefore leave Williams Bay
sometime between August 5 and 10. This would also mean the resignation
of Luise Herzberg as Voluntary Research Associate on the same date.
Herzberg next checked with the Immigration Branch in Canada as to
the necessary steps he should take in order to ensure his and the family’s
re-admission into Canada in 1948 to take up the NRC position. He was
informed not to anticipate any difficulty in re-entering Canada.19 This news
was a most welcome relief, and Herzberg turned his complete attention to
his obligations to Struve and Yerkes in the remaining year at Williams Bay.
To this commitment was added the need to plan the new Spectroscopy Lab-
oratory and to decide on the staff and begin to order equipment. The search
for a suitable home in Ottawa was also on his agenda.
While actively pursuing his ultimate research on the spectrum of
hydrogen, Herzberg was considering who he might like to have as his prin-
cipal assistant in Ottawa. He immediately thought of Alex Douglas, whom
he regarded as his best graduate student at Saskatoon. Douglas was
employed by the NRC in the Acoustics Section of the Division of Physics
but had taken a leave of absence after the war to complete his Ph.D., work-
ing with David Rank at Pennsylvania State University. Rank was a noted
optical physicist with an interest in infrared spectroscopy and light scatter-
ing. Herzberg wrote to Douglas in late 1947, informing him of his plans to
set up a spectroscopy laboratory at the NRC and inviting Douglas to join
him. Douglas expected to complete his thesis on light scattering by the end
of May 1948, but he had resolved not to return to his position at the NRC
because of unsatisfactory Council policy and low salaries, which caused
many of the best scientists to leave the Division of Physics after the war.
Following an exchange of several letters in January and a visit with Herz-
berg, Douglas realized that promising changes were taking place to
improve the situation at the NRC. He was willing to return to the NRC to
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      197

198
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
work with Herzberg in a pure research position provided that he was
allowed to transfer to this new Spectroscopy Section and that the salary
was adequate. Within a month, Herzberg had discussed Douglas’s situation
with President Mackenzie and was able to inform Douglas of his promo-
tion to Associate Research Officer in the Spectroscopy Section with an
annual salary of $4,050. This was gratefully accepted by Douglas, and
Herzberg was delighted and relieved to know that he had a brilliant co-
worker to get the Spectroscopy Laboratory started.20 They met on several
occasions in Ottawa and at Yerkes to plan the new laboratory and to discuss
staff and equipment.
Just a few months before the Herzbergs’ return to Canada, Luise’s sud-
den deteriorating health was the cause of much anxiety. Gerhard and the
children were stunned to learn of her serious illness. A biopsy proved Luise
had breast cancer, and an operation was performed at Billings Hospital,
affiliated with The University of Chicago. Life at home was quiet and lone-
ly for Paul and Agnes without their mother and with their father’s frequent
visits to the hospital. While Luise was recuperating at the hospital and at
home, Herzberg took on the household chores of shopping and laundry, and
he even became adept at braiding Agnes’s hair. Cooking was not such a
problem since the vegetarian meals were simple, and he and the children
often dined at the Van Biesbroeck home, along with the graduate students.
Lalitha Chandrasekhar was a constant companion to Luise during this
stressful period.
Farewell the Astronomer
A most memorable event was a farewell garden party at the home of
Chandra and Lalitha, and many members and children of the Yerkes com-
munity were present. On the morning of 8 August 1948, the Herzbergs
were accompanied to the railway station at Williams Bay by Chandra and
Lalitha and Gerhard’s students Rao and Phillips. After fond farewells, they
boarded the train for Chicago and spent the afternoon and evening visiting
with friends at the university. The next day, they attended the Chicago
Railway Fair, where they admired the different locomotives and coaches of
the past. Then they were off on the return trip to Canada. As Paul remem-
bers: “After we had crossed the border and had completed all the immigra-
tion matters, Mom and Dad sat together on the Pullman car seat and were
smiling and very pleased to be back in Canada. I don’t think I understood

PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      199
or appreciated at the time how much this meant to them, but I was struck
with their obvious satisfaction.”
On Arrival in Ottawa
Anxious to get to their new home as quickly as possible after a brief stop
in Toronto, the Herzbergs  took an overnight train to Ottawa. This skirted
the north shore of Lake Ontario, passing through many small towns to
Kingston, and then headed north through flat farmlands, with glimpses of
the Rideau Lakes and Canal system all the way to the west end of Ottawa.
The train then crossed the Ottawa River at the Chaudière Falls Bridge into
the city of Hull, with its lumber mills, huge pyramids of logs, and piles of
yellow sulphur, and then circled back to Ottawa via the Royal Alexandra
Bridge. As the train chugged slowly into the Ottawa Union Station, there
was a stunning view of the limestone cliffs of Parliament Hill crowned with
the majestic Peace Tower of the Parliament Buildings.
Aerial view of the Parliament Buildings, War Memorial,
Chateau Laurier Hotel, and the railway station in foreground.

200
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
The Herzbergs were met by Alex Douglas and Adair Morrison, former
students of physics at the University of Saskatchewan, both working at the
NRC. On emerging from Union Station on the south side of Rideau Street,
Paul and Agnes had a quick first look at the hub of their new city. Across
the street was the grand Chateau Laurier Hotel, to the west was the impos-
ing War Memorial on Confederation Square, and beyond they had an
oblique view of the Parliament Buildings dominated by the high Peace
Tower of the Centre Block. Once settled at home, a visit to this highest
point in Ottawa would give them a bird’s-eye view of the city and sur-
rounding countryside.
With luggage bags packed in two cars, Douglas and Morrison drove the
Herzbergs to their new home on Sunnyside Avenue in Ottawa South. This
house was purchased sight unseen after months of careful real-estate
searching by Adair Morrison and numerous letters back and forth describ-
ing the family needs and details of the property. It proved to be satisfacto-
ry in most respects, with nearby schools for Paul and Agnes, although it
was somewhat distant from the NRC Laboratories situated in the north end
of the city.
Within a week of their arrival in Ottawa, letters went between Luise
and Gerhard and their cherished friends Lalitha and Chandra.
Dear Lalitha:
I do not want to let this first week pass without writing to you.… First
of all, I would like to thank you and Chandra for the friendship and great
kindness extended to us during our time in Williams Bay, and especially
during my illness last month and then before we left. We enjoyed very
much the party you gave for us.
I am very pleased with the house. It is in very good condition, every-
thing smooth and modern. It should be easy to run once we are organ-
ized.… The only serious drawback is that it seems to take Gerhard about
forty minutes to get to and from the laboratory.…
I hope you will pardon me for saying at this occasion, that having
come to know you and Chandra is the most enjoyable and valuable expe-
rience we had during our time in the Bay. On your account we regretted
very much to leave. We now hope that you will soon make good your
promise to visit us here.
Life here seems to flow rather quietly and peacefully. It is an advan-
tage for a nation not to be burdened with the responsibilities that come to
the mighty.21
Luise

Dear Chandra:
Strange to say, we arrived here on schedule, and without the slightest
difficulty with customs or immigration.
At home we are fairly well settled, but at the Council I have thus far
only a provisional office. My plates and other office equipment which
were sent by express have not yet arrived, but the plates which came with
my luggage are unharmed. I have measured the H2 plates and expect to
write up the note for Nature in the next few days.…
Luise has already expressed our appreciation for all you and Lalitha
have done for us during our stay at Yerkes Observatory and particularly
during the last months. It was a great experience for me to have so many
opportunities of discussions with you, and I shall certainly miss them
here. Your gift will always remind us, if that were necessary, of your
friendship.22
Gerhard
Dear Gerhard:
I have kept your and Luise’s letters for the past three weeks, feeling
utterly inadequate to say how much your letters have meant to me and
Lalitha. We have been long enough in this country to appreciate kindness
and kindliness and to value friendship when it rarely comes. Luise has
kindly said that knowing us was one of the things you cared for, during
your time in the Bay; on our side, it is most certainly true that Lalitha and
I have valued the friendship you generously gave us, more than any other
personal experience during our twelve years of “exile” here. You know
this country and you know Yerkes well enough not to require any elabo-
ration on the dryness of the air which can choke one here. And now that
we are again left alone, I am beginning to wonder, what I had not for three
years, whether it is worth giving up all things personal for the abstraction
of science. I am afraid this sounds dangerously close to self pity: but there
is always an ingredient of self pity in any feeling of personal loss: and
your leaving has been one, deeply.…
I forgot to acknowledge your letter enclosing a copy of your letter to
Nature on the “Quadrupole Rotation—Vibration Spectrum of the Hydro-
gen Molecule”. It is certainly something Yerkes can be proud of; it
crowns, fittingly, your record of achievement here.23
Chandra
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      201

202
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Dear Chandra:
It was a very great pleasure indeed to have your letter and to find in
it your fine expression of friendship. Both of us certainly hope that our
mutual visits will not be too rare events and that perhaps, as we suggest-
ed once before, we could even spend our vacations together at some nice
place in the mountains.
We had Boenhoffer here three weeks ago. He is a very fine person.
Steacie offered him a position similar to my own. Boenhoffer would like
to hold out in Germany unless the Russians make that impossible. He
stayed with us at the house, and one night told us some of the gruesome
story that led to the execution of his brothers. It is a miracle that he him-
self survived since he knew all along about the plot against Hitler and
helped the conspirators.…
Kindest regards to you both, also from Luise.24
Gerhard
Canada’s Capital and Home of the NRC
No sooner were the Herzbergs comfortably settled in their home towards
the end of August, when they were visited by the Thurnauers from
Chatanooga, Tennessee, Lotte (Luise’s sister) and Hans with their children
Peter and Dorothy. Lotte especially wanted to catch up on the latest news
of Luise’s health and to see her parents, Paul and Elsbeth Oettinger, who
had moved to Ottawa in 1943. This proved to be a timely visit, since Els-
beth died a year later.
The visit was a lively one for the children, since Paul and Agnes were
about the same age as Peter and Dorothy. One sunny Sunday, the two fam-
ilies decided to explore the downtown area of government buildings and
then visit the NRC Laboratories. The first order of business was to view the
city from the balconies atop the Peace Tower of the Parliament Buildings.
Once there, just under the clock face and sixty metres from the ground and
about a hundred metres above the Ottawa River, all of the Capital City lay
before them outlined by its several waterways, many parks, and abundant
greenery. With a map of the city in hand, they immediately located the
NRC building on the south banks of the Ottawa River and noted its loca-
tion relative to various landmarks and major buildings. The Ottawa River
flows from the northwest, pours down the Chaudière Falls at Hull, and car-
ries on to the horizon in the east on its way to meet the grand St. Lawrence

River. The Ottawa River is joined by the Rideau Canal with its eight locks
between the East Block of the Parliament Buildings and the Chateau
Laurier Hotel, and further east the Rideau River drops fifteen metres into
the Ottawa River. On the north side of the Peace Tower, the Gatineau Hills,
foothills of the Precambrian Shield, dominate the view, with Brewery
Creek pouring into the Ottawa River at Hull and the Gatineau River with
its many logs joining it east of the NRC Laboratories. On the south side
could be seen Wellington Street with the United States Embassy opposite
the Tower. Past the city, at the rapids at Hog’s Back, the Rideau River and
Canal separate on their different paths through the city.
Apart from the striking Supreme Court Building and classic Confeder-
ation Building, both on Wellington Street just west of the Tower, most of
the interesting parts of the city appeared to lie on the east side of the city.
Clearly, the centre of the Capital was Confederation Square with its War
Memorial, around which all traffic circled whether going south, east, or
west in the city. Past the locks and the Chateau Laurier Hotel with Major’s
Hill Park behind it lay the long and curved Sussex Drive with the Bytown
Market and some of the oldest buildings in Ottawa. Following north on
Sussex Drive the Herzbergs noted the grey wooden “temporary” buildings,
built during World War II to house the expanding government and still in
use. Just where Sussex Drive makes a sweeping turn eastward stood Notre
Dame Basilica, a prominent landmark of Gothic design with high twin
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      203
Grandpa Paul, Agnes, Grandma Elsbeth, Peter, Dorothy, Hans, Lotte,
Paul, and Luise, during a visit of the Thurnauers in Ottawa, 1948.

204
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
towers. Further east, the large NRC building was situated in a park-like set-
ting near the Rideau Falls, with Earnscliffe, the home of the British High
Commissioner, on its west side and the Embassy of France to the east. Next
along Sussex Drive was the residence of the Prime Minister, and east of it
on the south side of Sussex was Government House (Rideau Hall) with
guarded gate and vast parkland, the home of the Governor General of Can-
ada, resident representative of the Crown. The NRC Laboratories building
was on the ceremonial route from Rideau Hall and the Prime Minister’s
home to Parliament Hill.25
One might well wonder as the Herzbergs did, why the city of Ottawa,
far from the main population of this vast country, would be chosen as the
capital of Canada rather than the larger cities of Montreal, Quebec, or Tor-
onto. As early as 1610, French explorers had navigated the Ottawa River,
and the first white settlement was established only two hundred years later,
on the north shore at Chaudière Falls, by Philemon Wright, an American
from Massachusetts. Loyalists and others from the Thirteen Colonies set-
tled in the area and developed a thriving timber industry. However, after the
British–American War of 1812, a large garrison was established in the area
as a defensive measure against further attacks by American forces, and in
order to deploy the army quickly to the border regions, the Rideau Canal
system was built to connect Ottawa to Kingston and Fort Henry. Work
started on the canal in 1826 and was completed in 1832 under the direction
of Lt.-Col. John By. At that time, the city was known as Bytown, formerly
Richmond Landing, and finally in 1857 was named Ottawa after the origi-
nal native tribe of the area, the Algonkin or Outaouais in French.
Ottawa became the capital city of the United Province of Canada in
1857. Earlier, the capital had been moved from Quebec City to Toronto and
back again. Finally, Ottawa with a population of about ten thousand Eng-
lish, French, Irish, and Scots was selected by Queen Victoria as the perma-
nent seat of the future government since it combined more advantages than
any other place in Canada. Ten years later, with its population doubled and
growing, Ottawa was confirmed as the Capital of the Dominion by the Brit-
ish North America Act. With expansion of the Dominion and the necessary
growth of the federal government, especially during and after two world
wars, the city flourished, and by 1948 its population numbered almost two
hundred thousand. Ottawa was to be the Herzbergs’ home for the next half
century.

Much to their surprise the Herzbergs found that Canada’s Capital did
not possess a theatre or concert hall. But with their love of music, they
attended many of the concerts held in the auditorium of Glebe Collegiate
on Monday evenings under the auspices of the “Morning Music Club”
(founded in 1892). Concerts by Glenn Gould, the Virtuosi di Roma, the
Melas Ensemble, and American and Continental trios and quartets would
pack the auditorium. From time to time, concerts were also held in the
Capitol Theatre (one of the great movie palaces of North America, seating
twenty-three hundred), with some of the world’s major artists, the small
Ottawa Philharmonic Orchestra, and the beautiful singing of Paul Robeson,
Marion Anderson, Lois Marshall, and Maureen Forrester being memorable
occasions for the Herzbergs. They saw some plays at the Ottawa Little
Theatre (a former church) and especially enjoyed the performances of the
Canadian Repertory Group directed by Amelia Hall at the De Lasalle
Academy, next to Notre Dame Basilica.
At Home in Ottawa
After two years of travelling back and forth between home and the NRC by
bus, Herzberg decided it was time to buy a car and learn to drive. With
much practice under the watchful eyes of friends, he finally became rea-
sonably comfortable driving in traffic to the NRC. While he felt that this
saved some time and was convenient, since he could readily return to the
office in the evenings when necessary, he missed all of the reading he used
to do on the bus.
In a short time, the Herzbergs found their home to be too small. Visits
from Gerhard’s mother from Seattle in the summer of 1949 and from Chan-
dra and Lalitha in 1950 convinced them that they could use more space to
properly host visitors. They built a new house near their first home, but this
part of Ottawa South soon became heavily populated and noisy as many
houses were built, all very close together. The Herzbergs then bought a spa-
cious lot in Rockcliffe Park, a quiet and wooded, rural neighbourhood, and
had a split-level home built by Heinrich Kroeger, one of Ottawa’s best-
known developers.26 After several delays the Herzbergs moved into their
new home at Christmas in 1955. They came to enjoy long walks through
the woodland around MacKay Lake and along the Ottawa River, and swim-
ming in the lake in summer was an added pleasure. While the Rockcliffe
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      205

206
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
home was too far from the NRC to walk on a daily basis, the meandering
drive along the Ottawa River and wooded area to Sussex Drive, past
Rideau Hall, the Prime Minister’s home, and the French Embassy was a
welcome change from the earlier heavily travelled routes through the
downtown and market areas of Ottawa.
The new Herzberg home, 190 Lakeway Drive,
in Rockcliffe Village, 1955.
Gerhard holding a skein of wool for
his mother in Ottawa, 1949.
Gerhard, Agnes, and Grandma Ella
on a boat tour in Montreal,
summer 1949.

At home in the evenings, Herzberg would review technical papers and
reports he had brought from the office and then relax by playing chess with
Paul and practising his singing for half an hour, accompanied by Luise on
the piano. He especially enjoyed reading biographies and listening to his
favourite recordings of vocal and orchestral music. He would seldom spend
much time with newspapers or the radio, except for listening to broadcasts
of the Metropolitan Opera performances on some Saturday afternoons.
There was no television in the home; he felt that one could become addict-
ed and waste much time with this medium. There were much better ways
to use any spare time, especially outdoors, walking, jogging, mowing the
lawn, working in the garden, and shovelling snow from the walkway and
driveway in winter, usually helped by Paul and Agnes.
He took singing lessons once a week, usually on Sundays, with his
vocal teacher Dave Galbraith. One year he also attended the master class of
the choral impressario Nicholas Goldschmidt. At a meeting of the Canadian
Association of Physicists in Vancouver in 1965, on an evening featuring a
recital by physicists and members of their families, Herzberg sang Schubert
lieder and arias of operas by Mozart and Verdi. This being his first public
performance, he was surprised that he was not as nervous as he expected.
He sang at Kingsway United Church in Ottawa several times and sang
Handel’s “Judas Maccabaes” with a choir at Ottawa’s Jewish Community
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      207
Decorating the Christmas tree, 1955.
A game of deep thought.

208
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Centre. His singing became familiar to members of the NRC since he was
often invited to perform at staff parties and at Christmas, but carols were
not in his repertoire. Often when interviewed for radio and television he did
not hesitate to add an aria or two.
Vast improvements were soon to take place in cultural and sports facil-
ities across Canada as the country prepared for Expo’67 in Montreal and
the celebration of Canada’s Centennial in 1967 with a new flag. In Ottawa,
a new city hall was built in 1957 on Green Island, just east of the NRC; a
broad east–west expressway, the Queensway, was dedicated by the Queen
and opened in 1965; and in 1969 the National Arts Centre with its magnif-
icent Opera House seating twenty-three hundred was opened. Ottawa also
became the home of Carleton University in 1964 at the city’s southern
extremity on the Rideau River, a welcome addition to the University of
Ottawa, which was established in 1910 in the city centre. Later, Herzberg
was to play an important role as Chancellor of Carleton University where
the Physics Building would be named in his honour.

13. NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL OF
CANADA: THE TEMPLE OF SCIENCE
The National Research Council (NRC) had been in existence for only three
decades when Herzberg joined it in 1948. Prior to its establishment, Can-
ada’s scientific resources and manpower were meagre in most sectors of
the country and non-existent in some. Industrial research was essentially
unknown, and the supply of scientists and engineers was woefully inade-
quate. Even university research was rare, so that talented students carried
out their postgraduate studies in foreign universities, usually never to return
to Canada. Thanks to dedicated and determined leaders who foresaw the
needs of the country for research in science during war as well as in peace-
time, the young NRC survived the debilitating years of the Depression and
thrived during World War II to become a major scientific resource for
Canada and an institute admired around the world for its research in basic
and applied science. 
A New Era For Research In Canada1
As early as the mid-1800s, the Canadian Government had established sev-
eral scientific organizations to deal mainly with the country’s natural
resources. Some of these agencies are still in operation today, although
under different names or departments. The earliest were the Geological
Survey of Canada for mineral exploration, the Meteorological Service for
gathering climate data, the Central Experimental Farm for agriculture, the
Dominion Observatory as a time service, and the Marine Biological Station
for fisheries.
The genesis of the NRC was a recommendation from the British Advis-
ory Board in 1916 that each Dominion should set up an organization to
develop scientific and industrial research. This charge was based on the
experience that Germany’s superior organization in scientific research had
209
The NRC was one of the striking examples of the
growth of national spirit in Canada after 1914.…
This successful experiment of the NRC seems to me one
of the miracles of our modern Canadian democracy.
Frank H. Underhill

210
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
given it a distinct military advantage over the Allies. In Canada, an Hon-
ourary Advisory Council was appointed by the Government in the autumn
of 1916 and given the mandate “to promote and undertake scientific and
industrial research” for national development. It was to report to the
Minister of Trade and Commerce. Eleven members made up the Council,
mostly university scientists and a few representatives of business and
industrial interests. The Council’s general functions were threefold: to
advise the government on matters of science in general; to encourage and
promote fundamental science, especially in the universities; and to operate
laboratories of its own, especially in fields that were not the responsibility
of government departments and with reference to the problems of second-
ary industry.
In a 1917 survey of existing research facilities across the country, the
Council found that there were fewer than fifty full-time researchers in the
physical sciences in Canada; that scientific research was practically con-
fined to the laboratories of two or three universities and one or two gov-
ernment departments; and moreover, that there was little research activity
to co-ordinate in Canada. As a result, the Council stressed the need to estab-
lish a program of grants and scholarships to encourage students to remain
in Canada for postgraduate research. Also foreseen was the need to devel-
op a central research institute for fundamental problems and standards.
From its inception, the Council also conceived of the novel idea of
Associate Committees—advisory panels of leading authorities in Canada
set up to examine specific problems facing industry and the country.
Committee members would review the state of knowledge about a topic by
organizing a conference of the foremost experts, then propose a research
program for its solution, and recommend by whom and where the research
should be carried out. The services of the advisory members were volun-
tary and unpaid, except for travel expenses to meetings. In the early years,
committees on long-standing concerns in chemistry, mines and metallurgy,
grain research, and forestry were established. Special committees for time-
ly problems such as tuberculosis, animal and plant diseases, biology, flax
cultivation, cold storage research, and underground water in the prairies
were some of the first to be activated. By 1952, there were thirty-two
Associate Committees in operation, and thirty-six ten years later. This
mechanism proved to be an efficient and economical way of using the best
expert advice in the country, and much of the progress in scientific and

industrial research in the early years of the NRC was thus a free gift of busy
men and women.2
Henry Marshall Tory (1864–1947), a mathematical physicist and
founding president of the University of Alberta, was appointed the Coun-
cil’s first President in 1924. He assumed the role at a difficult time, when
many on the Council were discouraged with the lack of support for science
by some powerful members of Government. The Senate had rejected a cen-
tral laboratory as being too costly, older senators saw no need for research,
and the Civil Service was fearful that the Council would undertake work
that government departments could be doing. At age sixty, Tory accepted
the post with the statement: “I believe with all my heart and mind that Can-
ada needs today more than any other thing, the multiplication of scientific
work in connection with our natural resources and our industrial develop-
ment.” 
The name National Research Council (NRC) was authorized in 1925.
The NRC was set up not as a Department of Government but as a Crown
Corporation outside the Civil Service, with a governing body of the most
distinguished scientists in Canada. This was an unprecedented move by
the Government of the day. Tory set the tone for the operation and control
of the NRC by scientists, namely, people who understood what it was for;
they set the regulations for appointments, promotions, and salaries. In the
early decades, the NRC enjoyed “arm’s-length” treatment from the gov-
ernment, which left it free from many of the normal aspects of government
control and interference. This independence was deemed to be absolutely
essential for the operation of a first-rate scientific organization and was the
vital element that helped the NRC to promote and nurture science in
Canada.
In-house research was started in 1925 in rented quarters, and research
activities gradually increased, so that four years later the National Research
Laboratories were created with Divisions of Chemistry, Physics and Engi-
neering, Applied Biology, and Research Information. In 1929, Tory inau-
gurated the Canadian Journal of Research for dissemination of the results
of research from universities and the NRC. After years of pressing for a
major national laboratory, but experiencing considerable opposition in Par-
liament, Tory finally succeeded in persuading Prime Minister W.L. Mac-
kenzie King of the necessity of central laboratories, and a new building was
approved by the Government in 1928.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      211

212
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
The National Research Laboratories
The magnificent building of the National Research Laboratories at 100
Sussex Drive sits on a ten acre plot on the high banks of the Ottawa River,
immediately west of the Rideau River and Rideau Falls, overlooking the
Gatineau Hills to the north. Construction of the building began in 1930, but
by the time the building was completed, the Depression and a change of
Government produced severe cuts in budget, and the laboratories were not
adequately staffed or equipped. The dire circumstances were compellingly
described by the historian Wilfrid Eggleston:
Perhaps nothing illustrates more vividly the desperate state of the times
and the hopeless nature of the unemployment problem—especially for the
younger men and women just entering the labour market—than the pro-
vision which was made in the spring of 1933 for “employing” persons in
the new laboratories without pay.3
Under these conditions the new laboratories made little impact on the
national science scene in the early 1930s.
Nevertheless, for the official opening of the NRC Laboratories on 10
August 1932, at the time of an Imperial Economic Conference in Ottawa,
The National Research Laboratories on Sussex Drive, 1935.

addresses were given by the Governor General, His Excellency the Earl of
Bessborough, by the Prime Minister, the Right Honourable R.B. Bennett,
and by NRC President H.M. Tory, with the proceedings broadcast to the
Empire. Obviously, great importance was attached to the new building, and
the Canadian press named it “The Temple of Science”. A bronze plaque
was unveiled in the front hall to proclaim the Laboratories’ mission:
This building was constructed for the purposes of fostering the scientific
development of Canadian industry for Canadian needs and for the exten-
sion and expansion of Canadian trade at home and abroad.
On Mackenzie King’s return as Prime Minister in late 1935, the words
he had originally chosen for the new building were carved into the stone
high above the main entrance of the Laboratories: they gracefully convey
the essence and wonder of research.
NATIONAL RESEARCH LABORATORIES
GREAT IS TRUTH, AND MIGHTY ABOVE ALL THINGS:
IT ENDURETH, AND IS ALWAYS STRONG:
IT LIVETH AND CONQUERETH FOR EVERMORE
THE MORE THOU SEARCHEST, THE MORE THOU SHALT MARVEL.4
This building was to be NRC’s home for research activities until World
War II, when the rapid increase of staff and new programs, mainly in
applied research, necessitated expansion to a new four hundred acre site,
the NRC complex on Montreal Road, about ten kilometres east of the Sus-
sex Laboratories. The cornerstone for its first laboratory, the Aerodynamics
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      213
Front lobby and entrance.
Corridor, showing laboratory doors of
steel and glass panels.

214
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Building, was laid in July 1940. By the end of the war, the new campus was
thriving as a home to nine new laboratories.
The War Years
General Andrew G.L. McNaughton (1887–1966) served as the second pres-
ident of the NRC from 1935 to 1944. He obtained Bachelor’s and Master’s
degrees in electrical engineering from McGill University in 1910 and 1912,
respectively, enlisted in the Great War, and advanced as an artillery officer
to the rank of Brigadier-General. He joined the permanent forces and
became Chief of the General Staff. In this role he became familiar with the
NRC by frequently drawing on its resources and by being the driving force
in establishing Associate Committees in surveying, radio, and aerial navi-
gation. As President of the NRC, his inspired foresight that war was immi-
nent, and that scientific research and technology would play a major role,
helped to prepare the NRC for research that would prove to be indispensa-
ble in war. Two years before World War II erupted, he encouraged work in
radar, ballistics, gas masks, optics, chemical warfare, and aeronautical and
medical research, among other projects. During the war, the NRC staff
swelled from three hundred to three thousand, and all of the facilities of the
NRC were directed to research on defence problems. The main task for the
NRC was to serve as science adviser and research wing for the Army, Navy,
and Air Force, and Canadian scientists and engineers rose to the challenge.
When war broke out, the NRC had its one laboratory operating on an
annual budget of $900,000. Immediately after Canada declared war on
Germany, McNaughton left the NRC to assume the position of Officer
Commanding the First Canadian Division. It was Chalmers Jack Macken-
zie (1888–1984), Herzberg’s colleague and former Dean of Engineering in
Saskatoon, who as Acting President (1939–1944) steered the NRC through
this dramatic epoch, which in essence was its formative period. At first,
there seemed to be scant progress in executing wartime programs because
of government inertia in providing the needed funds. However, with the fall
of the Low Countries, Norway, and France, a gift of $1,300,000 from a few
patriotic and wealthy Canadians was made available for war research,
without strings of any kind. Work was immediately started on many proj-
ects, without the need to justify expenditures. Radar was given highest pri-
ority, and work accelerated with a quarter of the “free fund” and a staff of
two hundred. Mackenzie kept McNaughton well informed of the activities
of the staff and progress in wartime projects, and he noted:

One thing which pleases me very much is the realistic view which all
members of the staff here take. We all feel keenly that unless our endeav-
ors produce equipment and findings of use to the man in the field we will
not be achieving our fundamental purpose, for we all realize that in mod-
ern warfare based on science, technology and mass production, there are
three stages—research and development, production, and use in the
field.5
Towards this end, the NRC helped in setting up twenty-one additional
research laboratories, manufacturing companies, and test sites from the
Atlantic to the Pacific. One of the foremost successes was Research Enter-
prises Limited, established in Toronto as a major radar and optical factory.
Many sophisticated devices were developed there, including radar, gun
sights, and magnetometers for anti-mine and anti-submarine defence.
Many important contributions in aeronautical engineering and aviation
medicine, explosives, chemical warfare, protective clothing, nutrition, and
packaging and transportation of foods were credited to the NRC. As the
war proceeded, there was a crucial need for the transfer of research in
atomic energy from Britain and France, and teams of nuclear scientists
came to Canada to develop a nuclear reactor and eventually to set up the
Chalk River Laboratories. 
The Climate for Postwar Research
During World War II and immediately after, Canada was fortunate to have
two great men at the helm of the NRC, C.J. Mackenzie and the chemist
E.W.R. Steacie (1900–1962), on whom Mackenzie relied heavily for
advice. Mackenzie became President in 1944, serving as such to 1952, and
Steacie served as Vice-President from 1950 to 1952 and then as President
until his untimely death in 1962. The two were outstanding individuals,
exceptionally talented administrators, and acknowledged leaders in their
respective fields of expertise. They envisioned a bright future for Canadian
science and saw eye-to-eye on the methods to bring this about. With their
leadership and vision, Canadian science came of age during World War II.
The wartime accomplishments of the NRC staff were praised by the
military and politicians and won strong support for increased research
activity in peacetime. Suggestions were even put forward that all of the sci-
entific laboratories of the federal government should be placed under the
aegis of the NRC. Mackenzie wrote about this to McNaughton:
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      215

216
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
The work of the Research Council during the war years has created
a favourable impression and the Government as a whole is kindly dis-
posed to us and rather favours all scientific work being done under our
auspices.6
However, Mackenzie believed that the NRC’s most productive role would
be to return to its prewar objectives of fundamental research in the natural
sciences and expansion of applied research to assist industry. In keeping
with this belief, Mackenzie later also declined an invitation for the NRC to
be responsible for social science research. The Minister accountable for the
NRC was Clarence Decator Howe (1886–1960), also an engineer, who had
the highest regard for Mackenzie. After much discussion, he was convinced
that Mackenzie was right about what should be done by the NRC in the
period of reconstruction after the war. According to Mackenzie: 
As victory became certain, the most important immediate task was to pre-
pare specific estimates for the first postwar budget. After discussions with
Mr. Howe, I appeared before Treasury Board, outlined our long-term
plans, and submitted the following recommendations for immediate
action:
1. Continue the budget for the NRC on the same scale of expenditures as
in the last year of the war, on the understanding that it would be dou-
bled within five years as the necessary staff of competent scientists
became available.
C. Jack Mackenzie (1888–1984),
NRC President (1944–1952).
E.W.R. “Ned” Steacie (1900–1962),
NRC President (1952–1962).

PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      217
2. Give highest priority to the setting up of a military research organiza-
tion to take over  responsibilities for defence research policies.
3. Continue and expand our existing nuclear-energy programs for the
peaceful use of atomic energy.
4. Expand medical research.
5. Establish new research divisions of building research, radio and elec-
trical engineering, applied chemistry, and applied physics, and labora-
tories in the Prairie and Maritime regions, to serve the special needs of
those areas of Canada.7
The government accepted in principle this postwar science policy and pro-
vided the budget to cover the immediate expenditures to bring an expand-
ed NRC back to peacetime activities. In a radio broadcast to the nation on
13 October 1944, among other news, Prime Minister Mackenzie King
announced that research would be extended and more liberally supported
in the postwar period, a commitment never before made by any Canadian
politician. Given such unstinting encouragement by Government, science
and engineering experienced unprecedented growth of research in univer-
sities and government institutions and a modest beginning in industry.
Mackenzie was impressed by the ease with which the NRC staff
changed to war work and back again to peacetime research with a mini-
mum of serious disruption.8 Not long afterwards, the off-shoot programs
envisaged in items 2, 3, and 4 began to be separated from the NRC accord-
ing to plan; they became the Defence Research Board in 1947, the Atomic
Energy of Canada Limited situated in Chalk River, Ontario, in 1952, and
the Medical Research Council in 1960. In 1947, the Electrical Engineering
Section in the Division of Physics became the Division of Radio and Elec-
trical Engineering, the Division of Building Research was formed, and the
Technical Information Service was assigned to the NRC. In 1952, the
applied research branch of the Division of Chemistry became the Division
of Applied Chemistry. These new divisions were all housed on the NRC
Montreal Road campus at the eastern end of Ottawa. The Prairie Regional
Laboratory was established in Saskatoon in 1947, and the Maritime
Regional Laboratory in Halifax in 1952 (with a name change to the Atlantic
Regional Laboratory in 1955). Eventually, the aeronautical research of the
Division of Mechanical Engineering was re-organized as the National
Aeronautical Establishment in 1959 and was located near the Ottawa
airport.

218
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
One of the spectacular achievements of the NRC was to catapult
Canada into the forefront of nuclear science and peaceful uses of atomic
energy.9 This began serendipitously in wartime, when Winston Churchill
and Franklin Roosevelt at the Quebec Conference in 1943 agreed that the
development of a heavy-water reactor system should be carried out in
Canada in cooperation with Britain and the United States. The NRC was
already involved in nuclear research, with provisional laboratories at the
University of Montreal where scientists from Britain and France were
working on designs of reactors. Even earlier, George C. Laurence had
attempted to build the first man-made chain reaction at the NRC Labor-
atories using uranium and graphite. Once Canada’s responsibility for the
heavy-water project was authorized, NRC’s priority was to find a major
new site as quickly as possible, away from populated areas and near a large
water supply. In 1945, the Chalk River Nuclear Laboratory was established
on the Ottawa River, about two hundred kilometres north of Ottawa, and
was operated by the NRC under the newly created Atomic Energy Control
Board. Under the leadership of the English scientists John D. Cockroft
(who received the Nobel Prize in 1951 for transmutation of atomic nuclei)
and W. Bennett Lewis, the Chalk River Laboratory became a centre for
leading-edge research in nuclear physics, chemistry, and biology. Among
its many successes was the development of NRX, an experimental atomic
pile with the highest neutron flux density of any pile in the world. This led
to Canada’s pre-eminence in the field of neutron scattering in the 1950s,
resulting in the award of the Nobel Prize in Physics to Bertram Brockhouse
in 1994. Also the CANDU atomic-power system was designed and built at
Chalk River, and CANDU reactors now supply most of the electric power
in Ontario, about 15 percent in Canada, and are in use in several other
countries. Mackenzie served as president of the Atomic Energy Control
Board (1948–1961), and following his retirement as president of the NRC
in 1952, he was president of Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. in 1953–1954.
The NRC Postdoctoral Fellowships
Another laudatory initiative of the NRC was the Postdoctoral Fellowship
Program, which was to have far-reaching consequences for research both
at the NRC Laboratories and in Canadian universities.10 It began in 1946
through the efforts of Steacie, who never forgot his exhilarating experience
of spending a year in Europe and England in 1934–1935. Steacie had

earned his Ph.D. in physical chemistry in 1926 from McGill University and
continued his research as a postdoctorate fellow. He accepted a position as
Lecturer and was promoted to Assistant Professor in 1930. In the summer
of 1934 he took a leave of absence and spent half a year in Frankfurt,
Germany, working with Karl-F. Bonhoeffer at the time that Herzberg and
his Darmstadt group attended seminars there. Steacie then joined the labo-
ratory of A.J. Allmand at King’s College, London, for several months in
1935. On returning to McGill, he was promoted to Associate Professor, and
four years later he accepted the appointment as Director of the Division of
Chemistry at the NRC.
With the rapid expansion of the NRC after the war and the increasing
need for scientific manpower, Mackenzie discussed with Steacie the prob-
lems of finding inspiring leaders for the new divisions and sections, main-
taining an active youthful staff, and providing a stimulating atmosphere as
experienced by the NRC during the war years. He was concerned about the
possibility that, in time, an aging permanent staff would become less effi-
cient and less creative. 
Steacie’s year in Europe and England had impressed him with the
opportunity of meeting many scientists, young and old, some very famous,
others upcoming, all having different interests and expertise and willing to
talk about their work and share their experiences. Based on this experience,
Steacie was confident that what was needed to keep the NRC dynamic was
a continual flow of young talent with top-notch education in modern sci-
ence and engineering from universities and research institutes in Canada
and abroad. Thus was born Steacie’s scheme of postdoctoral fellowships,
tenable in the NRC Laboratories for up to two years. Mackenzie quickly
endorsed the Program, and with final approval of Council and Government,
the Fellowship Program was launched in 1948, just before Herzberg’s
arrival in Ottawa. This Program proved to be so successful at the NRC that
it was expanded in 1949 to include the funding of postdoctoral fellowships
tenable in Canadian universities.
Growth of University Research
In order to meet the needs of a developing nation, the vital prerequisites
were the education and training of first-class scientists and engineers,
which required the build-up of robust research infrastructures in universi-
ties across the country. This became Mackenzie’s and Steacie’s objective,
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      219

220
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
and they continually emphasized throughout their years in office the need
for increased scholarships and grants-in-aid for university research.
Before the existence of the NRC, only McGill University and the Uni-
versity of Toronto had research programs leading to the Ph.D. degree,
while eleven universities granted Master’s degrees in Arts or Science. It
was understandable that most graduates seeking further advancement
would continue their studies in the United Kingdom, the United States, or
Europe. One of the first tasks of the Honourary Advisory Council was to
promote graduate research in Canadian universities, to assist students
showing superior ability and interest in order to keep them in Canada, and
to expand the use of science in Canadian industry. Thus began the NRC
program of grants and scholarships. By 1931, scholarships had been award-
ed to 324 students, and of these 303 had obtained Master’s degrees and 152
Doctorate degrees, having published about twelve hundred scientific
papers. By 1939, the total budget for grants and scholarships had increased
to about $250,000 and remained almost constant until the end of World War
II. With increasing enrollment and the return of many veterans to universi-
ties, the grants and scholarship allocation rose to about $2 million by 1952.
At that time there were fifteen institutions offering Master’s degrees in the
sciences and seven of these had Ph.D. programs in research.11
There is no doubt that NRC’s support of grants for the provision of
equipment, facilities, and assistants for research, as well as scholarships for
postgraduate studies and research, played a crucial role in building up
Canadian graduate schools in science and engineering. From 1954 to 1963,
the number of institutions carrying on graduate work in the sciences
increased to twenty-four, and the expenditures for scholarships and grants
increased dramatically by an average of almost 30 percent each year, reach-
ing $34 million by 1966. This raised the standard of scientific and engi-
neering faculties and accelerated the quantity and quality of university
research. Moreover, as the schools turned out graduates with experience in
research, a supply of trained scientific workers became available for gov-
ernment, university, and industrial laboratories.
A World Centre for Basic and Applied Research
Mackenzie and Steacie cherished the freedom of scientists and engineers to
pursue their own ideas. They stressed the work of the individual over that

of team research and opposed organization by projects. Moreover, they
insisted that administration was there to serve the scientist and engineer:
The fundamental feature of the administration of the NRC … is to make
sure that the administration can never issue any instructions to scientists
in connection with any technical subject whatever. It is the exact oppo-
site of the administration of most government departments, where the
administrative head is in charge.… It is up to the administration to make
sure that things can be worked out with the scientific divisions, so that
the administration acts as a service to the divisions, rather than as a
control. The result is a highly decentralized organization.12
Steacie in particular was outspoken about this credo and reiterated his
belief in it at every opportunity. He went on to say:
In the operation of a scientific laboratory, nothing matters much except
the competence of the staff: the fundamental policy is to write the
organization chart after you have employed the staff and to ignore it
beforehand.… I think that the NRC is almost unique from the point of
view of scientific organizations, and I might say that almost every gov-
ernment research laboratory in the world is trying to copy it—in some
cases successfully, and in other cases, unsuccessfully.
Both Mackenzie and Steacie were held in such high regard by the sci-
entific community and by politicians and bureaucrats that the NRC was
allowed the freedom to operate without undue interference by the Govern-
ment. This independence in planning and operation of research was to last
almost two decades after the end of World War II. During this unparalleled
era, Mackenzie and Steacie were able to establish the NRC as the principal
scientific resource of Canada and as an international centre of basic and
applied research. The recruitment of Herzberg proved to be one of the
major ingredients in their plans for he epitomized the dynamic leadership
and basic research focus that was needed to bring world recognition to the
NRC Laboratories.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      221

222
14. THE SPECTROSCOPY LABORATORY
The NRC Spectroscopy Laboratory was to be Herzberg’s fifth and final
laboratory following his earlier initiatives at Bristol University, the Tech-
nische Hochschule Darmstadt, the University of Saskatchewan, and Yerkes
Observatory. His constant dream had been to establish a major spec-
troscopy laboratory and he now was given this opportunity. The NRC
Spectroscopy Laboratory would become recognized as one of his supreme
accomplishments and the one of which he was justifiably most proud.
New Developments in Spectroscopy
The years immediately following the end of World War II, referred to by
many as the physicists’ war, were propitious for the establishment of a
spectroscopy laboratory. Many new devices and techniques developed dur-
ing the war were now available for peacetime use. The most important for
A noted English chemist has said that the only institutions
which have previously played such a role were the Caven-
dish Laboratory in Cambridge and Bohr’s institute in
Copenhagen.
Stig Claesson
Herzberg in his laboratory.

spectroscopy was radar, developed primarily in the United Kingdom and
the Radiation Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
manufactured in Canada by Research Enterprises. Radar’s offspring was
microwave spectroscopy, which opened a whole new field for precision
measurements of rotational spectra of molecules, leading to knowledge of
the dimensions of molecules. Several laboratories in the U.S.A., including
those of Duke University, Columbia University, and the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, and Cambridge University in the U.K. were pio-
neers of these techniques. Extremely sensitive detectors for the infrared
region and photomultipliers for the visible and ultraviolet regions had also
been developed and were now available for general use. Such detectors
would be essential for high-resolution instruments, which normally have
very low light-gathering power. There was also substantial improvement in
the sensitivity of photographic plates for the visible and ultraviolet regions.
For light-scattering experiments, a powerful mercury arc lamp was pro-
duced at the University of Toronto. All of these developments helped to
once again bring research in atomic and molecular spectroscopy to the
forefront of science. The invention of masers and lasers a decade later
would provide sources of unimagined high intensity and monochromaticity,
rekindling this advance.
Planning the New Laboratory
Given the encouragement by President Mackenzie, with substantial finan-
cial support and space, Herzberg seized this opportunity to establish a
major spectroscopy laboratory, second to none in quality. It would concen-
trate on studies of fundamental problems, mainly in spectroscopy and the
structure of simple gaseous molecules, but also would include some atom-
ic spectroscopy and make use of the most modern techniques available.
Thus, the new spectroscopy laboratory was being planned to achieve the
highest resolution possible, with access from the longest to the shortest
wavelengths of the optical spectrum.
Herzberg had recruited Alex Douglas, who was working on his Ph.D.
at Pennsylvania State University, to be his principal assistant. They met
several times at the Yerkes Observatory and in Ottawa to plan the new lab-
oratory and to discuss the main equipment to be designed and built. Plans
were made for three major spectrographs to cover the infrared, visible, and
far-ultraviolet regions of the spectrum. All were to be high-resolution
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      223

224
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
instruments and so would make use of diffraction gratings. While smaller
spectrographs were available commercially, and some were ordered for
survey work at lower dispersion, any laboratory expecting to do forefront
research in high-resolution spectroscopy of gases had of necessity to build
its own instruments. This would take time, be expensive, and be dependent
on obtaining good gratings.
For the spectral region 2000 to 12 000 Å, a 7-metre concave grating
spectrograph was designed, similar to those Herzberg had built in Sas-
katoon and Yerkes. A 3-metre concave grating was chosen for the vacuum
ultraviolet below 2 000 Å, and a plane grating for the infrared region with
wavelengths longer than 12 000 Å. The infrared spectrometer was designed
to incorporate the most recent developments in sensitive detectors and to
operate under vacuum in order to eliminate absorption by water vapor in
the air.
While adequate space had been allotted for the Spectroscopy Labora-
tory in the NRC Laboratories on Sussex Drive, this turned out to be on the
third floor of the building, absolutely unsuitable for the large instruments
being planned. Thus, time-consuming building alterations became neces-
sary to house the spectrographs in the basement, where heavy concrete
foundations could be built on solid bedrock to ensure stability for the grat-
ings and the other optical elements of these sensitive instruments. On com-
pleting his Ph.D., Douglas returned to the NRC in May 1948, three months
before Herzberg’s arrival in Ottawa, and began to supervise these alter-
ations. He also ordered much of the necessary ancillary equipment with the
help of two senior scientists, Donald Rose, Head of the Cosmic Ray Sec-
tion, and Leslie Howlett, Head of the Optics Section.
At the time of Herzberg’s arrival in Ottawa, two spectroscopy labora-
tories were already operating in the Division of Chemistry. One group
under the direction of R. Norman Jones was engaged in the study of
infrared and ultraviolet spectra of large molecules, with particular interest
in molecules of biological significance. The second group, led by Harold J.
Bernstein, who had worked with Herzberg at Yerkes, concentrated on
infrared and Raman spectra of simple molecules with emphasis on meas-
urements of intensities of Raman spectra. Both groups were well equipped
with commercial spectroscopic instruments of low to medium resolution,
suitable for their research programs. While the interests of the three spec-
troscopy laboratories were focused on different problems, all three were
located in the same building, and the scientists began to co-operate as part-

ners by lending equipment, helping with techniques, and often collaborat-
ing on research problems of common interest.
The Founding Staff
With the building of the major instruments being overseen by Douglas, the
major task facing Herzberg on arrival was finding the key scientific and
technical staff for the extensive laboratory he had in mind. He was deter-
mined to establish a group of active young scientists who had shown prom-
ise of working independently and who had expertise in fields and tech-
niques of modern spectroscopy that would complement his and Douglas’
competence in the visible and ultraviolet regions. Based on his own expe-
rience and bolstered by the advice of Steacie, Herzberg’s plan was to find
the best scientists and allow them the freedom to work on atomic and
molecular problems of their own choosing. Thus, for the founding staff,
Herzberg sought an experimentalist to set up a laboratory in the new field
of microwave spectroscopy, another with expertise in the infrared, and one
to work in atomic beam spectroscopy. Each was to be assisted by a techni-
cian and up to two postdoctoral fellows. Finally, in order to operate effi-
ciently, the laboratory would require a small machine shop with two or
more staff members, as well as a secretary and later, possibly, an assistant
for computational work.
Herzberg was intent on getting the Spectroscopy Laboratory into oper-
ation expeditiously, in spite of the required renovations and building of the
large spectrographs, but other urgent matters intervened. He had barely set-
tled in a temporary office in the chemistry end of the building when he was
reminded of the upcoming retirement of the Director of the Division of
Physics and was strongly urged by Steacie to accept the directorship when
it was offered to him. Such an administrative commitment was never in
Herzberg’s plans, but finally he was persuaded to accept this position when
given considerable administrative assistance to look after the day-to-day
business affairs of the Division. But in spite of this support in management,
the added responsibilities inevitably delayed his bringing the laboratory
into an active mode as quickly as he would have liked.
Alexander Edgar Douglas, FRS, FRSC (1916–1981) was one of an
eminent band of scientists raised on homestead prairie farms and educated
at the University of Saskatchewan who played a major role in the develop-
ment and enrichment of science in Canada. He was born near Melfort,
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      225

226
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Saskatchewan, and lived with three siblings in a log farmhouse with no
running water or electric power and with a wood-burning stove for heat. He
attended a one room country school and then high school in town, taking
one year by correspondence to save expenses during the Depression. First
year university courses were also completed by correspondence and sum-
mer school, before he attended the University of Saskatchewan, taking
physics courses with Herzberg. Douglas graduated with honours in 1939
and received a National Research Council bursary to continue studies for a
Master’s degree in physics. He was accepted by Herzberg for research in
molecular spectroscopy and published papers on spectra of B2, as well as
on BN and BH.
After spending only half a year on Ph.D. courses at the University of
Minnesota, Douglas returned to Saskatoon to work with Herzberg during
the summer. It was at this time that he obtained the spectrum of CH+, four
lines of which coincided with an unidentifed interstellar spectrum. This
was proof that the ion existed in interstellar space. He then decided to enlist
in the Armed Forces but was persuaded by Harrington, the Head of Phys-
ics, and by Herzberg to join the National Research Council, which was
Alex Douglas analyzing a spectrum.

recruiting new staff for wartime research. Douglas worked in the Acoustics
Section, spending four years on anti-submarine research during the war,
followed by one year in echo sounding for geophysical exploration. He
then carried out research on light scattering with David Rank at Pennsyl-
vania State University and obtained his Ph.D. within two years. Herzberg
contacted Douglas at about this time to tell him of his plans for the Spec-
troscopy Laboratory at the NRC, and Douglas agreed to assist him in this
new venture. Douglas served as Head of the Spectroscopy Section from
1949 to 1969, while Herzberg was Director of the Division of Physics and
then the Division of Pure Physics.
Thus began the fruitful collaboration in the development of the Spec-
troscopy Laboratory of the NRC, which propelled Canada into the forefront
of research in molecular spectroscopy and structure. This close intellectual
friendship was to last Douglas’ thirty-three years with the NRC (having
also served as Director of the Division of Physics in 1969–1973), a period
of which Herzberg wrote, “Douglas made a towering contribution to the
Spectroscopy Laboratory as well as to the NRC and to Canadian science
generally”.1 Other examples of two outstanding scientists working in such
harmony in the same field and in almost daily contact over so many years
are extremely rare.
The next member to join the group was Donald Allan Ramsay, CM,
FRS, FRSC. He was born in 1922 in London, England, and educated at
Latymer Upper School before going on to St Catharine’s College in the
University of Cambridge. There, he came under the influence of Fred S.
Dainton and Gordon B.B.M. Sutherland, two of England’s notable
chemists, and obtained his B.A. in 1943 and Ph.D. in 1947. At the time,
there were two major laboratories for infrared spectroscopy in England,
one in Cambridge under the supervision of Sutherland and the other in
Oxford under H.W. Thompson, both involved in wartime research and in
friendly competition. Ramsay studied the infrared spectra of a series of
sugars for his Ph.D. On being offered several research opportunities in the
U.S.A., Australia, Sweden, and Canada, Ramsay chose to work with R.
Norman Jones at the NRC and arrived in July of 1947. His research con-
cerned the intensities of infrared spectra of steroids, on which he presented
a paper at the Molecular Spectroscopy Symposium in Columbus, Ohio, in
June 1948. There, he heard a paper by Herzberg and was so impressed that
when he learned of Herzberg’s appointment to the NRC, Ramsay discussed
with Steacie the possibility of transferring from the Division of Chemistry
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      227

228
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
to Physics. Ramsay joined Herzberg’s laboratory in July 1949 and worked
with him in developing a flash-photolysis apparatus (first used by Reginald
G.W. Norrish and George Porter at Cambridge University) for the produc-
tion and detection of free radicals.2 The first free radicals to be identified
in Ottawa were NH2 and HCO, and while Ramsay went on to analyze their
complex spectra and to produce others, Herzberg pursued his intensive
search for spectra of CH2 and CH3. In the early 1960s, Ramsay became
head of a separate group devoted to the study of spectra of large molecules
and later (1984–1988) served as Head of the Spectroscopy Section.3
Hin Lew, whose parents had immigrated from China, was born in 1921
and educated in Vancouver, obtaining his B.A. at the University of British
Columbia. For graduate studies, he joined the University of Toronto in
1941 but found little research in progress because of the war and so
obtained a Master’s degree by taking courses. He was employed by the
National Research Council in Ottawa a year later to work on ultrasonics
with Arnold Pitt, and it was there that he met and became friends with Alex
Douglas. Lew left the NRC in September 1945 for the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), where he received his Ph.D. (1948) on
research with atomic beams under the supervision of Professor Jerrold R.
Zacharias. During the following year, which Lew spent as a Research
Don Ramsay (right) and his assistant Werner Goetz lining up a spectrograph.

Associate at MIT, he was contacted by Douglas with news of Herzberg’s
Spectroscopy Laboratory and the suggestion that he apply for a position
there. At the interview with Herzberg, the main question asked was “Are
you sure that you can build an atomic- and a molecular-beam apparatus?”
Since Lew had built and operated a beam machine at MIT, he was confi-
dent that he could and was hired to begin in September 1949.
On arrival in Ottawa, Lew was given a huge empty room (10 metres by
10 metres), a completely free hand in the design and building of the neces-
sary apparatus, a full-time technician, and no fixed budget but full support
by Herzberg and Douglas to build a molecular-beam machine as quickly as
possible. Who could ask for anything more!
Cecil Clifford Costain, FRSC (1922–1991), given the name C3 (i.e., C
cubed) by his colleagues at the NRC, was another of the graduates from
Saskatoon to seek his fortune in Ottawa. He was born in Alberta, and when
the family moved to neighbouring Saskatchewan, he studied physics at the
University of Saskatchewan and obtained a three year B.A. degree. Having
attended Herzberg’s classes during those years, Costain later remarked
“Herzberg made scientists of us farm boys.” In 1941, Costain instructed
recruits of the Royal Canadian Air Force at the university and a year later
joined the Canadian Navy as a Radar Officer. He rose to the rank of
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      229
Hin Lew and his atomic beam apparatus.

230
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Lieutenant Commander in the British Admiralty at age twenty-two and was
awarded the Distinguished Service Cross. He returned to the University of
Saskatchewan for his Master’s degree and then joined Cambridge
University to work with Professor G.B.B.M. Sutherland in microwave
spectroscopy. In 1950, Sutherland transferred to the University of Michi-
gan in Ann Arbor, taking a group of students with him. Costain received an
NRC scholarship and completed his Ph.D. in Michigan in 1951. He eager-
ly accepted the opportunity to establish a microwave laboratory in the
Spectroscopy Laboratory and arrived in Ottawa in the autumn of 1951. His
wartime radar experience served him well, and his laboratory soon became
recognized as a major centre for the accurate determination of molecular
structures and was a home to many postdoctoral fellows. Costain left the
Spectroscopy Laboratory in 1972 to head the Time and Frequency Section
of the NRC, where his group developed Canada’s primary standards of
time, cesium clocks, with accuracies equivalent to those of the U.S.A.,
France, and West Germany with which they were compared.4
An excellent technical staff was also acquired, beginning with James
Potter who joined Douglas in the summer of 1948 and assisted him in
planning the building renovations and setting up the first spectrograph.
Potter was an acknowledged master in solving mechanical problems of the
most intricate laboratory apparatus and was instrumental in designing and
supervising the construction of most of the large spectrographs. Frank
Doren and Paul Frechete managed a small machine shop and took care of the
Cec Costain, Boris Stoicheff, Gerhard Herzberg, and Don Ramsay.

immediate needs for apparatus, whether machined by them or by the main
NRC workshop. Franz Alberti, Werner Goetz, Peter Flainek, and Cecil
Burgess assisted Douglas, Ramsay, Lew, and Costain, respectively, and
were of enormous help in devising apparatus and specialized techniques for
these research groups.
Herzberg was most fortunate in obtaining a superb technical assistant,
Jack Shoosmith, a senior technician at King’s College, London, who was
keen on coming to Canada. Shoosmith was highly acclaimed by Professor
A.J. Allmand, who had recommended John Spinks to Herzberg years earlier.
Herzberg found Shoosmith to be efficient and intelligent and a self-starter.
He helped Herzberg achieve many experimental successes, as indicated by
the acknowledgements in countless papers as well as by being designated
a co-author on some of Herzberg’s most important papers. Shoosmith
worked with Herzberg for twenty years, until his retirement in 1969.
In the early years of the Spectroscopy Laboratory, Luise Herzberg was
a guest worker, measuring and analyzing spectra that had been brought
from the Yerkes Observatory. Her insights and pleasant manner appealed to
the young women who were helping Herzberg and others in the lab by
analyzing spectra and carrying out complex calculations on desk calcula-
tors. While they were university graduates in physics or chemistry, these
women were not familiar with spectra but quickly learned the methods of
analysis and were of immense help. The first to join was Ruth Craig, who
arrived in 1950 and left three years later as the wife of Keith Innes, a post-
doctorate fellow. She was followed by Lila Howe, who could operate two
desk calculators simultaneously and was so quick in their use that she often
had to stop to let them cool down. Howe also served as receptionist for the
lab office, tending the telephone and ensuring that the office ran smoothly.
Her usual salutation in answering the telephone was “Hello, Molecular
Spectroscopy”. One day, with sudden silence at the other end of the call,
she repeated her greeting, only to be asked to her surprise “Does anyone
speak English there?” She was appointed to the scientific staff and during
her eight years was a co-author on several papers with Herzberg and Doug-
las. Beulah Wadsworth and Izabel Dabrowski joined the laboratory later
and became proficient in the use of computers in analysis of spectra.
Dabrowski worked with Herzberg for almost thirty years. She became a
member of the scientific staff in 1984, and through her skill in analysis of
spectra of hydrogen and rare-gas hydrides, she co-authored several series
of papers with Herzberg.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      231

232
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
The First Research and Publication
Herzberg was anxious to put the new laboratory on the scientific map as
quickly as possible. Once the first spectrograph had been completed (the 7-
metre grating instrument), he immediately put it into service, making use
of a grating borrowed from the University of Saskatchewan. This loan
made possible the functioning of the laboratory one year earlier than would
otherwise have been the case. Herzberg decided to attempt an experiment
he had had in mind for some time, namely the determination of the nuclear
spin of the helium isotope 3He; a value of 1/2 was expected from theory but
an experimental measurement had not yet been made.
With the help of W.B. Lewis of the Chalk River Laboratories, Herzberg
obtained a small sample of this rare isotope from the U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission, and Douglas photographed the spectrum of the molecule
3He2 in record time. From the measured intensity alternation of 3:1 of suc-
cessive rotational lines, it was established conclusively that the spin of the
3He nucleus is 1/2. The first paper from the new spectroscopy laboratory,
authored by Douglas and Herzberg, was submitted for publication as a
Letter to the Editor in the Physical Review on 5 October 1949 and appeared
a month later with the title “The Nuclear Spin of 3He”.5
Lila Howe
Izabel Dabrowski

The other spectrographs for the extreme ultraviolet and infrared
regions were completed and in use within three years. Other spectrographs
were soon designed: one a larger vacuum ultraviolet spectrograph using a
10-metre concave grating, and a smaller instrument for the visible region
making use of a large-aperture plane grating to increase its light-gathering
power and thus permit the photography of normally very weak spectra.
Postdoctorate Fellows 
Herzberg approved wholeheartedly of Steacie’s plan of postdoctoral fel-
lowships, and by early 1949, young postdoctorate fellows, or PDFs, began
to arrive in the Spectroscopy Laboratory. They played important roles in
many phases of the development and research of the laboratory, bringing
special skills and knowledge from the best laboratories around the world.
They were productive scientists during their stay at the NRC, and while
some chose to remain in Canada, the majority returned to their homelands
(some with Canadian wives) singing the praises of the lab and Canada. In
1949, six PDFs joined the laboratory from Canada, England, India, New
Zealand, and South Africa. Another four were added in each of the next two
years, and on average there were five newcomers each year until the
Postdoctoral Program was phased out at the NRC in 1975 to be replaced by
appointments of Research Associates (RAs).6 By that time, over 130 PDFs
had participated in the work of the Spectroscopy Laboratory, and later
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      233
The first research of the Spectroscopy Laboratory, 1949,
spectrum of He2 showing intensity alternation.

234
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
about two RAs per year joined the group. Most of the PDFs came from the
United Kingdom, Canada, India, and Japan. Over the years, a small num-
ber of them were offered permanent positions in the Spectroscopy Lab-
oratory: I was one of these lucky ones.7 Other PDFs appointed by Herzberg
before he retired from administrative duties in 1969 included George T.
Ritter, John W.C. Johns, Jon T. Hougen, Takeshi Oka, Klaus P. Huber,
Philip R. Bunker, and George D. Chapman after a fellowship in Oxford. In
later years, several more PDFs were appointed to the scientific staff,
including A. Robert W. McKellar and James K.G. Watson, along with sen-
ior scientists Michel Vervloet, Takayoshi Amano, Paul Marmet, and Benoit
Simard.8
I first met Herzberg in 1950 when he visited the University of Toronto.
At the time, I was completing my Ph.D. thesis in molecular spectroscopy
under the supervision of Harry L. Welsh, a good friend of Herzberg. My
intention was to do postdoctoral research in the high-pressure laboratory of
the University of Amsterdam. However, on hearing Herzberg’s outstanding
lecture on the quadrupole spectrum of hydrogen and how it might be used
Staff and first group of postdoctorate fellows at tea, 1950.
From left, top row: D. Sharma, J. Shoosmith, A.V. Jones, D.A. Ramsay,
C. Reid, M. Feast, J. Potter. Middle row: P. Frechette, Freddy Willans,
C. Pallett. Front row: A.E. Douglas, Ghislaine Le Cours, J. Casey,
Barbara Davidson, Joan Galligan, Liola Mason.

to detect hydrogen in the planets and interstellar medium, I began to won-
der, “Why should I go to Europe when we have such an exciting person
here in Canada?” So, I applied for an NRC Fellowship, visited the Spec-
troscopy Lab, and joined the group in late 1951. I quickly realized how
extremely lucky I was to be a member of the group of Alex Douglas, Don
Ramsay, Hin Lew, and Cec Costain with a “boss” possessed of boundless
energy and a resounding laugh, whom we affectionately came to know as
“GH”, a revered colleague.
On my arrival at the NRC, Herzberg’s secretary knocked on his door
and then ushered me into his large office through two padded doors, which
no doubt insulated him from the noise of a clanking typewriter and
mechanical desk calculator. Herzberg immediately stood up from his desk,
neatly piled high with journals, and came forward to greet me. He was
resplendent in his clean, white lab coat, unbuttoned over his dark vest, as
he took my overcoat to hang in a closet. We sat on chairs in front of his desk
while we clarified some administrative details and then discussed my
planned research project. I was completely taken by surprise by this treat-
ment as an equal in his greetings and in the long discussion that followed.
As I learned over the years, this was his regular form of greeting with any-
one entering his office, whether a visiting scientist, a staff member, or a
PDF.
His office was on the second floor in a spacious room with a magnifi-
cent view of the Ottawa River and the Gatineau Hills in Quebec. This room
reminded me of a comfortable library: it was packed full of filing cabinets,
with lofty bookshelves lining the walls from cabinets to the high ceiling,
filled with journals, books, and bound volumes of scientific papers, and on
one wall there was a large blackboard covered in equations and molecular
symbols. Behind his desk stood a tall bookcase that divided the room to
provide him with a quiet area where he could study and analyze spectra. A
corner of this section was covered with portraits of famous scientists, many
of them his friends and colleagues. The outer office used by his secretary
was similarly lined with bookshelves filled with journals, and her portion
of the room was separated by a glass partition from that of Herzberg’s com-
puting assistant. In every respect, this part of the NRC building was a most
impressive section of the Spectroscopy Laboratory and a fitting tribute to
the leader of the lab and Director of the Division of Physics.
Herzberg gave guidance to the group in the lab by his own inimitable
example. He worked long hours, six days a week, and we tried to keep up
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      235

236
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
A corner of Herzberg’s office with photographs of friends and colleagues.
Top left: C.V. Raman, Max Planck, Paul Dirac. Third row: Max Von Laue,
James Franck, Max Born, Francis Simon. Second row: S. Chandrasekhar,
a group of eminent scientists, Albert Einstein. Bottom row: Alfred Kastler,
Ned Steacie, Robert Mulliken.
A view of the Ottawa River from Herzberg’s office.

with him by working day and night and weekends. He was deeply
immersed in his own inspiring research, and yet he found time each day to
talk to us about our ideas and work. To our surprise, he somehow managed
to keep abreast of the voluminous scientific literature, and he arranged for
a constant stream of scientists to visit the lab and to give seminars and so
keep us up to date on spectroscopic activities worldwide. And above all
else, the freedom Herzberg sought for himself when first approached by the
NRC, he gave to all members of the Spectroscopy Laboratory whether on
staff or a fellowship. Neither he nor Douglas directed our research, but both
were always available to keep us out of experimental pitfalls, or once lost
in them, to gently ease us out and to put us on the right track. There were
occasions, however, when we would catch only the blur of Herzberg’s
white lab coat as he raced up the stairs to his office, and we would be
reminded that other important matters, either a meeting, a budget, or a pres-
sing administrative problem, also had to be attended to. But seldom would
such obligations be allowed to intrude on the daily progress of the lab.
The attitude of mind and the readiness of Herzberg and Douglas to
raise the standards of all around them were a constant revelation to the
younger members. Each PDF was free to collaborate with a staff member
or to work independently, and there were a variety of problems to choose
from, with excellent equipment and facilities at our disposal. There was
much exciting research being done and much to be done. There were week-
ly group meetings, where we discussed our problems and progress, and
weekly seminars by visitors or members of the lab. If by chance a lay-
person had entered one of these group meetings, at times it would have
seemed like a court of law with learned discussion of Hund’s case (a), (b),
or (c) and, at other times, like a planning board for a local concert as we
contemplated the Vegard–Kaplan Bands, Cameron Bands, or Herzberg
Bands, all being the usual jargon of molecular spectroscopists.
Scientific life in the Spectroscopy Laboratory was intense, more so
than many PDFs had ever experienced. There were daily exchanges of
ideas and arguments, which were continued by the bachelor PDFs at din-
ner and on into the night. These led to constructive criticism of each other’s
work and especially of our manuscripts. Results were published independ-
ently, with only the names of direct participants as authors, in alphabetical
order, and acknowledgements of those who had assisted either technically
or in discussion. Herzberg read all manuscripts prepared by the group to be
certain that the papers were up to his high standard. But his name did not
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      237

238
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
appear on any paper unless he had contributed scientifically in a major way.
And he saw to it that his own manuscripts were read by others of the group
and inevitably by Douglas, whose opinion and comments he valued so
highly. Herzberg published many of his papers in the Canadian Journal of
Physics and encouraged members of the lab to do likewise, except when
the topic was clearly of little interest to physicists. The recognized impor-
tance of papers from the Spectroscopy Laboratory helped immeasurably in
promoting this journal internationally.
Soon after I arrived in Ottawa, I was given a completed manuscript by
Herzberg at 3 P.M. one Friday, simply to check that there were no obvious
errors in it before he mailed it to the publisher that afternoon. Herzberg
chose to ask me because the paper was on the topic of pressure-induced
absorption, an effect that had been discovered at the University of Toronto
by my supervisor Welsh and his colleagues at the time of my graduate stud-
ies there. An hour later, Herzberg returned and was somewhat taken aback
to find that I had noted three pages of comments. This no doubt was a brash
thing for me to do at that time, but I had been schooled by Welsh to read
and re-read when writing my thesis and papers in order to correct typos,
grammar, English usage, and so on, and I had assumed that I should do the
same with this manuscript. Herzberg realized that the paper would not
make the 5 o’clock mailing and asked in his usual polite manner whether
we could go over the manuscript next morning. At 8 A.M. on Saturday, he
showed up at my desk, armed with the Oxford dictionary and Fowler’s
Modern English Usage. After several hours of give and take, the manu-
script was revised to our mutual satisfaction. He was most appreciative and
generous in his thanks and, as I learned later, acknowledged my assistance
in the published paper, a magnanimous gesture to a young novice.9 As he
was leaving my room Herzberg turned to me, smiled, and said “Wait till I
get hold of your first manuscript.” And this is the way it was, friendly argu-
ments, penetrating criticism, and learning together with GH. The under-
standing and the quality of the work were always uppermost in our minds.
My planned project at the NRC was to improve the apparatus and tech-
nique of light scattering (the Raman effect) in order to make use of the
high-resolution spectrographs available in the lab, and Herzberg approved.
Since this was a new experimental method for the lab, I worked by myself
with the assistance of George Ensell, a skilled glassblower, to modify the
“Toronto” mercury lamps to produce higher intensity and with machinists
to develop a more efficient apparatus. In a year, the equipment was ready,

and the initial experiments with the 7-metre spectrograph proved to be suc-
cessful beyond my wildest dreams. It was time to try a crucial experiment,
the rotational spectrum of benzene (C6H6), to attempt to determine precise
values for the C–C and C–H bond lengths. After nursing the apparatus dur-
ing a 48 hour exposure, I developed the photographic plate, and there it
was, an extensive series of lines—the first rotational spectrum of ben-
zene.10 I came out of the dark room, and there by chance was Herzberg. He
saw that I was beaming, and when I showed him the spectrum, he held the
plate up to the light exclaiming in his excitement “By Jove, by Jove!”,
while I kept my hands below his, hoping he would not drop the plate. He
was most generous with his compliments, and to my surprise, within a few
weeks, I was given permanent appointment as a member of the staff of
Herzberg’s Spectroscopy Laboratory. In a short time, Eugene Pfitzer, a
skilled technician, joined in my research, and like the other staff members,
I was then privileged to annually choose up to two postdoctoral fellows to
work with me and to invite visiting scientists to collaborate in research.
While this type of research did not require expensive equipment or materi-
als, there was never any suggestion of budgetary restraint.
Afternoon tea at three o’clock was always a special occasion in the
Spectroscopy Laboratory. All members took part, scientific and technical
staff as well as secretaries, in a relaxed atmosphere, with discussions on
science and a variety of topics, sometimes including hockey and even
cricket. Herzberg was usually there, attentive as ever, listening and engag-
ing members in the discussions, making sure that newcomers and visitors
were introduced and felt comfortable in this setting. The informality was
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      239
Jim Watson and Bob McKellar in foreground
with Takayoshi Amano, Maynard Clouter,
and Wojtek Majewski.
Phil Bunker and GH in deep
discussion.
Afternoon tea, June 1985.

240
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
genuine, and this pause in a long day’s work was warmly welcomed. A spir-
it of friendship and co-operation made the lab a pleasant place to be a part
of, and this atmosphere extended well beyond the lab. Newcomers and vis-
itors to the lab were met by a member at the local airport or train station.
They were taken to their hotel and helped to find living quarters and
informed of local customs and activities. There were invitations to each
other’s homes for receptions or dinners, often from the Herzbergs or Doug-
lases to meet distinguished visitors. Together we organized picnics with
swimming in summer and skiing in winter in the beautiful Gatineau Hills.
Christmas parties were a special treat, as were mock weddings and chris-
tenings on appropriate occasions. For many, the friendships developed in
the Spectroscopy Lab were to last a lifetime.
Visiting Scientists
A close working relationship developed between members of the Spec-
troscopy Laboratory and several groups from around the world, mainly
brought about by common interests in molecular puzzles, both experimen-
tal and theoretical, and through personal friendships. Some interactions
were to last for several decades. In particular, three university groups in
North America were involved in exchange visits, with several of the
A party at the Herzbergs, 1951. From left to right: Ruth Craig,
Mrs. J. Shoosmith, Agnes Herzberg, Mrs. Herzberg,
Paul Herzberg, GH, J. Shoosmith, F.E. Geiger.

younger members joining the NRC as postdoctoral fellows. Robert Mulli-
ken and his group in Chicago were prominent visitors, P. Wilkinson was a
regular collaborator and guest worker at the NRC, and W. Kolos often com-
municated with Herzberg on theoretical calculations for hydrogen. At Har-
vard, E. Bright Wilson, Jr., who was interested in theory and internal rota-
tion of molecules, sent several of his graduate students to use Costain’s
microwave spectrometer, among them Jerome D. Swalen, who joined the
group as a postdoctoral fellow, and Dudley R. Herschbach, who shared the
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      241
Tea party, 1953. From left: Doris Shoosmith, Luise Herz-
berg, Cynthia Costain, Ilse Brix, and Phyllis Douglas.
Christmas party with entertainment by the “Spectroscopy
Beatles”. From left: Jon Hougen, Harry Kroto,
Neil Travis with drummer Takeshi Oka in rear, 1964.

242
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
1986 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with John C. Polanyi and Yuan T. Lee for
contributions concerning the dynamics of chemical elementary processes.
Later, William Klemperer of Harvard provided the laboratory with its first
theorist, Jon Hougen, who joined the scientific staff after a stint as post-
doctoral fellow. Alexander Dalgarno of the Harvard–Smithsonian Center
for Astrophysics shared many interests in hydrogen and interstellar mole-
cules with Herzberg. The Department of Physics at Toronto contributed a
number of postdoctoral fellows, with two of Harry Welsh’s group becom-
ing members of the staff, Bob McKellar and the author.
H.W. Thompson (later Sir Harold) of Oxford University, with his
renowned laboratory for infrared spectroscopy, recommended many of his
students for postdoctoral fellowships to the Spectroscopy Laboratory, as
did G.B.B.M. Sutherland and Norman Sheppard of Cambridge. Herzberg’s
favorite theorist, with whom he frequently interacted when on visits to
Cambridge, was Christopher Longuet-Higgins, who often came to Ottawa.
A strong bond developed with their love of music and with his expert piano
accompaniment for Herzberg’s singing. H.W. Kroto (later Sir Harold), a
postdoctoral fellow in the mid-1960s and later a visiting scientist, shared in
the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry along with Robert F. Curl, Jr., also a vis-
iting scientist, and Richard E. Smalley for the discovery of fullerenes.
Several postdoctoral fellows came from Krishna Asundi’s laboratory in
Bombay, India. Herzberg’s friendship with Asundi began when they met at
King’s College, London, in 1929 and flourished over the years with visits
to each other’s laboratories. Ernst Miescher from Basel, Switzerland,
whom Herzberg met in 1934 and had corresponded with about spectra of
Jon Hougen demonstrating molecular motion.
John W.C. Johns.

PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      243
A typical group of the Spectroscopy Laboratory, 1968, including scientific, technical, and office staff, visiting scientists,
postdoctoral fellows, and summer students. Fourth row: C.C. Costain, M. Barnett, C. Jungen, D.A. Ramsay, L.E. Geoffrey,
R.L. Fersch, P.R. Bunker, C.W. Mathews, C.M. Woodman, K.P. Huber, E. Miescher. Third row: S. Coulson, R.B. Caton,
P. Daley, C.A. Harris, R.K. Lees, A.S. Pearl, E. Thiessen, J.M. Brown, F. Alberti. Second row: T. Oka, H. Lew, A. Lager-
qvist, J. Shoosmith, W. Goetz, J.W.C. Johns, S. Krishnamachari, P. Flainek, G.D. Chapman, J.G. Potter, E.J. Blair. First row:
M.N. Bedard, M.P. Thompson, J. Poll, B.A. Mackenzie, A.E. Douglas, GH, M. Bebbs, M.B. Wadsworth, S.K. Duke.

244
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
various diatomic molecules, was a frequent visitor, and several of his stu-
dents came to Ottawa, with Klaus P. Huber becoming a staff member and
Christian Jungen a co-author with Herzberg on a series of studies on
hydrogen spectra. Among others with whom Herzberg collaborated were
the astrophysicist Boris Rosen of Liège and spectroscopist Albin Lager-
qvist of Stockholm, with whom he co-authored several papers.
Numerous other spectroscopists from major institutes around the world
were attracted to give seminars on their research and to visit and spend
some time in the Laboratory. Some came from as far away as Australia,
India, and Japan, many from Europe and Britain, and many more from the
United States.11 They enriched our activities and helped to introduce the
work and scientists of the lab to the international science community. In
this way, we younger scientists became aware of the world of atomic and
molecular science; we met most of the international players at work, at con-
ferences and socially, and before long began to feel that we were part of the
international set. This aura was enhanced by Herzberg’s encouragement
that we present papers at national and international conferences (after good
preparation and rehearsal at the lab) and visit research institutes in the host
country as well as in neighbouring countries.
Summing-Up the Philosophy of the Spectroscopy
Laboratory
The Spectroscopy Laboratory was very successful in the study of atomic
and molecular spectra and structures. In considering what led to its being
hailed as “the undisputed centre for such research”, it is worth recalling the
words of Alex Douglas who assisted Herzberg throughout the laboratory’s
development and its rise to eminence:
Certainly it was not careful organization, in the traditional meaning of the
word. By the usual standards of government managers, the laboratory was
chaotic. From the first, it was established that there would be no commit-
tee meetings and no rigid chain of command. Some who came to the lab-
oratory from more formal and structured environments found it difficult
to accept the lack of organized structures; others found it a great relief.…
But organization also stifles initiative and it is doubtful if on balance there
would have been a gain.

PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      245
Also, it is clear that it was not the priorities, carefully selected by
some guiding committee, which led to success. Certainly, individuals in
the laboratory carried on well planned programs for years to achieve par-
ticular objectives, … but there was no detailed plan guiding the individ-
ual staff members.
The achievements of the laboratory depended on a variety of factors: 
(a) The laboratory came into being and flourished in the golden years of
the NRC. These were the years when adequate financing was com-
bined with a devotion to quality to give an atmosphere most con-
ducive to excellent science. The presidents stated and followed the
principle that the administration existed to assist the scientist with his
task, … a violent reversal of policy of the public service in the past.
(b) The laboratory certainly depended upon the leadership given by
Herzberg in his energetic pursuit of important scientific goals and his
unfailing demand for quality.… The respect he commanded from all
members of the group was such that his own actions set the whole
tone of the laboratory.
(c) Many other factors followed from Herzberg’s influence and from the
NRC policies that gave full rein to that influence. Distinguished sci-
entists from other laboratories were encouraged to spend some time
in Ottawa and they inspired much new work. The flow of postdoc-
torate fellows enlivened the group and gave it excellent contacts with
most of the best spectroscopy laboratories of the world. Also of great
importance was the fact that a technical staff gave the scientific staff
time to concentrate on their programs.
(d) Finally, and perhaps most importantly, a spirit of friendly cooperation
between all members of the staff, both technical and scientific,
allowed a multitude of problems to be settled quickly and informally.12
While I wholeheartedly endorse these statements by Douglas, never-
theless I am sure that all who passed through the Spectroscopy Laboratory,
either as visitors or as temporary or long-term staff, would agree with me
that Douglas himself had a tremendous influence on us all. It was a privi-
lege to work with Herzberg and Douglas for they personified the spirit of
freedom and creativity that made this laboratory the wonderful place so
many came to cherish. It changed the lives of many of us and placed Can-
ada in the forefront of molecular science.
245

246
15. INSPIRING THE GROWTH OF BASIC
RESEARCH
Within a month of his arrival at the NRC, Herzberg was made aware that
R.W. Boyle, the Director of the Division of Physics, would retire in Octo-
ber 1948 at the age of sixty-five. Herzberg had barely settled into a provi-
sional office, awaiting completion of his own, when he received several
visits from Steacie encouraging him to accept the directorship. Steacie’s
argument was that the various Section Heads would approve of Herzberg,
but that there would be difficulties if one of them were to be made direc-
tor.1 Herzberg had thought that he would decline the directorship if he were
to receive such an offer. After all, he had just arrived at the NRC while sev-
eral of the Section Heads had played crucial roles in the development of the
Division and in the war effort. Moreover, his own interest and experience
was in research, and his main objective and reason for coming to the NRC
was to build a major research laboratory.
Dr. Robert William Boyle (1883–1955) was the Founding Director of
the Division of Physics, having arrived at the NRC in 1929, three years
before the laboratories at 100 Sussex Drive were opened. He came from the
University of Alberta, where he had been a Professor of Physics since 1912
and Dean of the Faculty of Applied Science. He had been invited to head
the Division of Physics by President Tory, who knew Boyle as a colleague
at the University of Alberta, and was impressed with his high-quality
research in ultrasonics at the university and at the British Admiralty during
the Great War. Boyle’s role at the NRC was to develop the Division of
Physics, and he succeeded admirably by selecting young scientists who had
excellent academic records and had demonstrated talent for research. All his
appointees became “prime movers” at the NRC.2
President Tory considered Boyle to be his senior director and had him
serve as second-in-command: Boyle took charge of the NRC when Tory
was away. Thus, it was expected by the staff and, surprisingly, by Tory and
Boyle that Boyle would be named president on Tory’s retirement in
1935. However, the appointment of president was the prerogative of the
I am the Director but I don’t direct.
Gerhard Herzberg

Government. Prime Minister R.B. Bennett, who had a past personal dis-
agreement with Tory, summarily dismissed Tory at the end of his second
five-year term, just a month before the newly appointed president could
take office.3 Bennett selected General McNaughton, an engineer and Chief
of the General Staff, as President of the NRC in June 1935. This was a
severe setback for Boyle. He was extremely disappointed and seemed to
lose all further interest in his responsibilities at the NRC. During World
War II, C.J. Mackenzie, the Acting President, lacked confidence in Boyle.
He wrote to McNaughton about his concern: “The situation in physics is
the most troublesome; the general administrative and professional direction
is not in keeping with the high-grade personnel.… I feel the need for some
first-class senior research directors and have canvassed the situation many
times.”4 Thus, it was not surprising that after the war, Mackenzie sought
the advice of the dynamic Steacie, Director of the Division of Chemistry,
regarding the rejuvenation of Physics rather than discussing the situation
with Boyle. There is little doubt that Mackenzie had Herzberg in mind as a
possible new Director of the Division of Physics when he appointed him
Principal Research Officer in 1947.
Appointment as Director
On being offered the directorship, Herzberg had misgivings about accepting
and sought the advice of his good friend Chandra. Finally, Herzberg began
to wonder whether it might not be better to be the boss than to be at odds
with a possibly unsympathetic one. After considerable thought and discus-
sions with Steacie and President Mackenzie, he wrote to the President:
I feel greatly honoured by the fact that you are considering me for the
position of Director of the Division of Physics. The decision is certainly
not an easy one for me to make, particularly since up to now my life’s
work has consisted mainly in carrying out my own scientific research and,
to some extent, in conducting and supervising the research of others, but
not in any appreciable administrative work.
I understand that it will be my primary duty to carry out and super-
vise research in pure physics and to raise, if possible, by example and
encouragement the quality and quantity of the scientific work of the
Division. Therefore, it is imperative (and a condition of my acceptance)
that my administrative duties be kept to a minimum.… I am very glad that
Dr. Howlett is willing to take over the direction of all the work in applied
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      247

248
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
physics as well as all the ordinary administrative work of the whole
Division so that my duty would only be a general supervision of these
activities.… I realize the high responsibilities of the office of Director and
I am keenly aware of my shortcomings which prevent me from fulfilling
all of the requirements. But I shall do my utmost to justify the confidence
you have placed in me.5
Although still uneasy about becoming a director so soon after his
arrival at the NRC, Herzberg eventually accepted the position. On learning
of this decision, Chandra immediately wrote “You sound somewhat skep-
tical about the wisdom of accepting such a position; but it is a measure of
the confidence and trust your new associates have in you, and that certain-
ly gives your friends the utmost satisfaction”.6 Among the letters of con-
gratulations was one from Dirk Coster of the University of Groningen,
whom Herzberg had not met but had corresponded with regularly about
spectroscopic matters. He had tried to find a position for Herzberg in
Holland in 1935. Coster wrote a lengthy, friendly letter ending with: “I
hope you enjoy your position at the National Research Council of Canada.
After all you may perhaps be thankful to the Nazis, that they did not let you
stay in Germany.”7
Director of the Division of Physics, NRC, 1949.

PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      249
Herzberg was officially appointed Director of the Division of Physics
on 22 December, effective 1 January 1949, to be in charge of fundamental
research, with Dr. Leslie E. Howlett as Assistant Director in charge of
applied research. Howlett, with a Ph.D. from McGill University, had been
at the NRC since September 1931 and had concentrated on problems in
photographic optics. He was instrumental in developing the Optics Labor-
atory at the NRC and in setting up standards of measurements for light and
by the use of light. This laboratory played a leading part in improvement of
aerial and night photography both during and after World War II. Moreover,
Howlett and his colleagues carried out all preliminary work in organizing
Research Enterprises Limited in Toronto, with the establishment of an opti-
cal factory for the manufacture of optical glass and instruments, as well as
radar equipment during the war. For his contributions to the scientific war
effort, Howlett was awarded the MBE.
While many wondered why Howlett would agree to carry the day-to-
day administrative load in the Division, he was an able administrator and
enjoyed it. Moreover, having carried out some spectroscopic research him-
self, he was deeply respectful of Herzberg’s accomplishments in this rap-
idly growing field. Thus, Howlett was a most helpful co-director with
Leslie E. Howlett.

250
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Herzberg, so that Herzberg spent very little time on general administrative
matters and delegated responsibilities to Howlett, to E.R. Birchard, the
Vice-President of Administration, and to F.T. Rosser, the Director of
Administration and Personnel. Herzberg noted that in his first few years at
NRC, he spent only one day on the annual budget for the Division.
The appointment of Howlett as co-director was a wise and practical
move from another point of view. In 1950 the world situation was growing
apprehensive with the intensifying Cold War, so it was not surprising that
the first few meetings of the Directors of Divisions attended by Herzberg
would concentrate on planning procedures for effective war research in the
event of war. On such matters, Herzberg was a novice. During World War
II, he was technically an enemy alien in Saskatoon, and thus his experience
was limited to basic research on explosives. Howlett, on the other hand,
played a major role in wartime projects of the NRC. President Mackenzie
and the Chairman of the Defence Research Board (DRB) discussed the
responsibilities of the DRB and the NRC and came to an agreement on how
priorities between research projects should be determined. The directors
reviewed the responsibilities of the NRC and recommended procedures on
how decisions were to be made on wartime projects and on how the NRC
could render service most effectively.
Defence projects were becoming a major part of the work in some of
the NRC Divisions, as an excerpt from the 1950–1951 Annual Report of
the NRC notes:
With the growing uneasiness in the world situation that has been so
marked during the past year, pressure on research for defence purposes has
been rising, and once again the facilities of the NRC are being turned more
and more to projects arising from the requirements of the Armed Forces.
At the present time, in addition to the atomic energy project, which always
has had a dual character, the divisions of electrical engineering, mechani-
cal engineering, and to some extent building research, applied physics, and
applied chemistry have turned almost exclusively to war work.
Another topic requiring considerable discussion among the directors was
the maintenance of high standards in the scientific staff and especially the
screening of staff in the first few years following appointment. Various rec-
ommendations were approved. The directors insisted that only the best sci-
entists and engineers should be kept on staff and recommended that three
committees, one each for scientific, engineering, and Chalk River staff, be

set up and authorized to review staff at regular intervals to ensure that high
standards are maintained.
Creating a Lively Atmosphere for Research
Herzberg felt that his first task was to become acquainted with the person-
nel and research of the various Sections of the Division, to inquire about
their objectives, and to determine their needs in staff and equipment in
order to achieve these aims. There were fourteen Sections in all, involved
in basic and applied research covering most areas of current interest in
physics. Primarily, he wanted to assist each of the Section Heads in estab-
lishing and maintaining an environment for the best research possible in
their group, within the means available to the Division. Thus, he encour-
aged appointments of PDFs, as well as invitations to special visitors for
short periods. He enticed the scientists to attend conferences and to make
their work known to the scientific communities in Canada, the United
States, and abroad. Also, recalling his own excitement when prominent sci-
entists visited and gave talks at Yerkes, Bristol, and Göttingen, he initiated
monthly colloquia for the Division to be given by major scientists from all
over the world. He also provided funds to the various Sections of the Divis-
ion of Physics to encourage established scientists to visit and give seminars
and, if possible, participate in research with colleagues at the NRC.
Theorists as well as experimentalists came from all parts of the world to
spend anywhere from a few days to some months at the NRC. Such inter-
actions often led to long-term collaboration on problems of mutual interest,
including exchange visits by NRC personnel to other countries. As research
funding for the Division increased, these various programs were imple-
mented and, along with similar activities in the Division of Chemistry,
were to develop an exciting and stimulating research atmosphere for those
fortunate to work at the NRC at that time.
Colloquia were held in the grand auditorium of the NRC, which had
seating for 290. On occasion, distinguished speakers gave public lectures
in the evening, under the auspices of the Science Association, usually to
capacity audiences. One of the first colloquium speakers was Max von
Laue from Göttingen, who originated x-ray diffraction in 1912 and man-
aged to withstand and survive the Nazi regime. Among the early visitors
were Patrick M.S. Blackett from Imperial College, England, and Edward
Teller from the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory speaking on the new field
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      251

252
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
of plasma physics, George Gamow from Washington University on the
“big-bang theory”, which he advocated, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar on
relativistic hydrodynamics, and Alfred Kastler from Paris on optical pump-
ing, all exciting speakers and all but Gamow and Teller recipients of the
Nobel Prize. Usually such visitors would spend a day or two at the NRC in
discussions with colleagues.
Herzberg always found the time to greet newly arrived PDFs and to
meet with the steady stream of visitors and scientific delegations to the
Division. While the various outreach programs and research activities blos-
somed under his guidance and with improved government funding, Herz-
berg became concerned that there were no groups in the fast developing
fields of plasma, solid-state, or theoretical physics. He set his mind to rem-
edying this situation and immediately began inquiries in Canada and other
countries for the best possible candidates to establish and lead such groups
at the NRC.
He was quickly apprised of another important task being carried out by
directors, namely the annual evaluation of research grant applications from
university professors. Applications in physics became Herzberg’s responsi-
bility, and he and Douglas spent several days reviewing the 100–200 appli-
cations for operating and equipment grants. Their method was to assess the
past performance of applicants and not to rely solely on the promises of
detailed proposals. New applicants were given $5,000 a year for two years
and then evaluated on their contribution, while those from non-research
universities were allotted small grants to at least attend physics confer-
ences. The directors’ recommendations were then submitted to the Council
for its decision.
As for his own research, Herzberg managed to find time in the
evenings and weekends to complete several papers based on spectra taken
at Yerkes and to plan his long-term research.
Theoretical Physics Section
Initially, Herzberg had the idea of adding a senior theorist to the
Spectroscopy Group and, after clearing the idea with the President, invited
Walter Heitler, his friend of the Göttingen days, to join him in Ottawa.
Heitler had left Germany abruptly in 1933 for Bristol and was appointed to
the Chair of Theoretical Physics. In 1941, he accepted a position as
Assistant Professor at the Dublin Institute of Advanced Studies, where he

succeeded Erwin Schrödinger as Director in 1946. It was in Dublin that
Herzberg’s invitation reached him. After considerable thought over the sev-
eral offers he had received, Heitler declined the NRC position noting: “I
have no doubt that the atmosphere in Canada would be very nice indeed,
and it would be delightful to be with you. In fact, there is hardly anyone I
would desire more as a colleague.”8 However, Heitler wanted to return to
a German-speaking country and one with extensive forests for he missed
his regular hikes in the Black Forest. He accepted an appointment as Pro-
fessor and Director of the Institute for Theoretical Physics in the Univer-
sity of Zurich, a chair which had been held by such luminaries as Einstein,
Debye, von Laue, and Schrödinger.9
Finding no suitable Canadian theorists in spectroscopy and astro-
physics, Herzberg inquired of American colleagues. Isidor Rabi of
Columbia University recommended Dr. Ta-You-Wu, a citizen of China and
Assistant Professor at Columbia.10 Wu had received his Ph.D. from the
University of Michigan and had taught there and at Columbia. He had pub-
lished many papers on atomic and molecular spectra and structures, as well
as some on astrophysical problems. Wu eagerly accepted an appointment
as Associate Research Officer in the Spectroscopy Section with the under-
standing that he would be able to develop a group in theoretical physics as
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      253
Ta-You-Wu and Herzberg with Prof. Paul Dirac
during his visit to the NRC in 1955.

254
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
soon as formal approval was granted by Council. He reported for work in
the autumn of 1949.
The following year a Theoretical Physics Section was formed with Wu
as a Senior Research Officer and its Head. Three PDFs joined the Section,
and in the following year a junior staff member was appointed. The Section
attracted many PDFs during the 1950s. Their interests were varied: most of
the early investigations concentrated on spectroscopy and astrophysics,
with work in solid-state physics, quantum theory of chemical reactions, and
quantum field theory being added in succeeding years. As several of the
Sections in the Division began to include theorists on their own staffs, the
permanent staff of Theoretical Physics was not increased, much to Wu’s
disappointment. He took a leave of absence in 1962 and resigned two years
later to join the University of Buffalo in New York State.11
Low-Temperature and Solid-State Physics Section
Herzberg and Howlett agreed that a solid-state physics laboratory was
needed at the NRC and quickly sought an outstanding scientist to lead it.
Francis Simon at Oxford recommended D.K.C. MacDonald, a brilliant
young scientist of thirty with Doctoral degrees from Oxford and Edinburgh
and thirty-eight publications to his credit. On a visit to the Clarendon Lab-
oratory in Oxford in 1950, Herzberg recognized the genius and energy of
Keith MacDonald.

MacDonald and offered him the position to set up the new laboratory at
NRC. MacDonald was inclined to refuse this offer, but on learning of the
Postdoctoral Program that would give him the opportunity to develop a
“school” of young colleagues to work with, he readily accepted and arrived
in Ottawa in September 1951. As one of his friends at Oxford wrote later:
In Ottawa he had to start from scratch as far as low-temperature work was
concerned, but he was backed by an immense store of good will. The
authorities at the National Research Council … did everything in their
power to help him get on with his work. The appointment turned out to
be an unqualified success. MacDonald’s tremendous drive was now
turned to one object, to make Ottawa one of the centres of international
low-temperature physics, and the result was truly remarkable.12
There is no question that the contributions of MacDonald’s laboratory
and those of the neutron scattering group at Chalk River, led by Donald
Hurst and Bertram Brockhouse, quickly put Canada in the forefront of low-
temperature solid-state physics in the early 1950s. MacDonald’s co-workers
were devoted to him for his enthusiasm, his stimulating presence, and his
tremendous appetite for work, even though they found him to be quite dif-
ficult at times. Even the mild-mannered Herzberg found MacDonald to be a
rather demanding subordinate, always wanting exemptions from adminis-
trative rules. He alone accounted for half of Herzberg’s administrative time,
but he was forgiven; his brilliance and contributions made up for his
demands. MacDonald enjoyed discussion and was an excellent teacher. He
lectured at the University of Ottawa and began a tradition of Christmas sci-
ence lectures for children and became known to the general public for his
radio, film, and television appearances. MacDonald was an inspiration to all
who knew him during his short life. The progressive atrophy of muscles dur-
ing the last six years of his life eventually led to his coming to the NRC in
a wheelchair and then on a stretcher to dictate his final and lasting contri-
butions of five books before his death in 1964 at the age of forty-three.12
Plasma Physics
Discussions with Patrick Blackett and Edward Teller during their visits to
the NRC convinced Herzberg that plasma physics was a promising new
area for basic and applied research, and he began to search for a leading
scientist to develop a group at the NRC. At first, realizing that the NRC
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      255

256
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
could not compete in building the large installations of current plasma lab-
oratories, he sought a theorist to head the group, but was not successful. He
began negotiations with Stuart A. Ramsden at Harwell, England, in 1960.
After visiting the NRC, Ramsden accepted the position for a trial period of
two to three years, arriving in Ottawa in June 1962 to set up the Plasma
Physics Section, later renamed the Laser and Plasma Physics Section.
Initial experiments aimed at the investigation of light scattering from plas-
mas established the importance of laser radiation in determining the densi-
ties and temperatures of dense plasmas. The group became involved in
building powerful, pulsed laser systems for the production of extremely
dense plasmas, as well as for their use as diagnostic tools. Large laser sys-
tems of carbon dioxide and of neodimium glass were developed and used
in collaboration with research groups in universities, industry, and U.S.
National Laboratories. A. John Alcock succeeded Ramsden, who returned
to England to head the Applied Physics Department at Hull University. In
time, the Laser Group disbanded and separated into smaller units involved
in the use of lasers in investigations of surfaces, solids, and extremely short
pulses to control the dynamics of atoms and molecules.
Divisions of Pure Physics and Applied Physics
As early as 1944, there were plans for the creation of separate Divisions of
Applied Chemistry and Applied Physics. In 1946 a Chemical Engineering
Branch was formed, re-named Applied Chemistry in 1947, and finally the
Division of Applied Chemistry. This was housed on the Montreal Road
campus of the NRC by 1952 in a separate new buiding designed for pilot
production plant functions. Perhaps it was inevitable that the splitting of the
Division of Physics would soon follow, in parallel with the separation of
the Division of Chemistry. 
Herzberg understood and accepted the splitting of the Division of
Physics into two autonomous branches in June 1952. Howlett became
Director of the Applied Physics Branch, which included the Sections of
Acoustics, Electricity, Metrology, Optics, Photogrammetry, Photometry
and Colorimetry, Radiology, Special Problems, and Temperature and Radi-
ation. Herzberg was Director of the Pure Physics Branch, which included
the Sections of Cosmic Rays, Low-Temperature and Solid State Physics,
Spectroscopy, Theoretical Physics, and X-Ray Diffraction and Electron

Microscopy. While this break-up of the Division meant that he would lose
the valuable daily assistance of Howlett, Herzberg found that he was begin-
ning to have some doubts and to quietly disapprove of some of Howlett’s
administrative decisions. More importantly, he realized that it was time for
Howlett to head a major laboratory at the NRC; Howlett was recognized
internationally for his work on photography, and there was concern that he
might leave the NRC for a much more lucrative position in industry.
In 1955, Herzberg finally accepted the definitive separation of the Div-
ision of Physics into the Divisions of Pure Physics and of Applied Physics.
But two years later, he was shocked to learn by chance that architect’s plans
existed for a new building for the Division of Applied Physics. Steacie and
Howlett had decided on a new building and had planned it for the Montreal
Road complex without including Herzberg in any of the discussions. He
complained to Steacie, pointing out that if the Sussex building could not hold
the two Divisions with their planned expansions, then he would have pre-
ferred that both Divisions be moved to one large building on the new campus.
Herzberg recognized the strong interplay between basic research and
technology and how each in turn aids the other to further advances. In fact,
the two are so closely intertwined and dependent on each other that it is dif-
ficult to see how one can progress without the other. Thus, Herzberg
strongly believed in having all of the physicists in one building, whether
working on fundamental or applied problems; they interacted very well at
the NRC and helped each other through discussions and joint seminars, as
well as technical know-how. This would no longer be possible since the
two Divisions would now be separated by about ten kilometres. Herzberg
felt that this decision was one of Steacie’s serious mistakes as President.13
It also led to a cooling of Herzberg’s relationship with Howlett. The
Division of Applied Physics eventually moved into the new building on the
Montreal Road campus in 1962.
On the retirement of Howlett in September 1968, Herzberg was asked
to substitute as Acting Director of Applied Physics until a new director was
appointed. Alex Douglas was considered to be the choice candidate, but he
was reticent about assuming this title. Only when Herzberg’s mandatory
retirement as Director came a year later did Douglas agree to succeed him,
with the proviso that the two Divisions be united to again become the
Division of Physics. In spite of this heavy responsibility, Douglas managed
to maintain some research activity in the Spectroscopy Laboratory.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      257

258
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Inspiring Leadership
As the NRC became internationally recognized as a leading centre for
research in science, technology, and engineering, world centres such as the
National Physical Laboratory in England, the Max-Planck Institute of Ger-
many, the Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique of France, and
research institutes of many other countries sent groups of scientists and
administrators to Ottawa to learn about the operation of the NRC. In addi-
tion to discussions with President Mackenzie and later President Steacie,
these groups visited some of the Divisions and laboratories and invariably
the Division of Physics and Herzberg. Taking his cue from the practice of
both Mackenzie and Steacie, Herzberg would emphasize that administra-
tion at the NRC was there to serve the working scientists and engineers.
And he liked to add his own surprise by informing visiting groups that
although he was the Director of the Division, he did not direct. He saw his
role as hiring the best scientists available when positions were to be filled
and giving encouragement to all by providing the best facilities possible for
scientists to work on problems of their own choosing. One could not ask
for a more enlightened view to bring out the best efforts in people.

16. RESEARCH AND WORLDWIDE 
ACCLAIM
Within a few years, the Spectroscopy Laboratory was in full swing and
producing new results on atomic and molecular spectra and the properties
and structures of many diatomic and polyatomic molecules. The most up-
to-date techniques in atomic beam, microwave, Raman, infrared, and elec-
tronic spectroscopy were developed and used by the staff and postdoctor-
ate fellows to obtain these data. Starting from nothing, in twenty years the
apparatus grew to become the world’s largest collection of high-resolution
spectrographs and spectrometers, and Canada’s first lasers were built there.
The spin and magnetic moments of nuclei were measured and the inter-
action between nuclear and electronic motions were studied. Spectra of
diatomic and polyatomic molecules and free radicals were obtained, many
for the first time; carbon–carbon distances were shown to be dependent on
the number of neighbouring bonds; a variety of very weak forbidden tran-
sitions were investigated; and spectra of molecular ions were observed and
analyzed. These studies were important for the development and confirma-
tion of atomic and molecular theory, as well as for determining molecular
structures in ground and excited states. They often proved to be significant
for astrophysics. In the first twenty years, over one hundred visiting scien-
tists worked in the laboratory for periods of four months or more, and their
results were presented at numerous national and international conferences
and published in over 400 papers in established scientific journals.
Favourite Research
Herzberg’s own interests and experiments in atomic and molecular spectra
continued on a broad front, but he concentrated his efforts on obtaining the
spectra of the free radicals CH2 and CH3, the cornerstones of organic chem-
istry. He was also determined to find a spectrum of H3
+, an important ion in
interstellar clouds since it appears to be the starting point for molecule for-
mation in space. Another tantalizing problem that intrigued him was an
259
In scientific discovery chance favours only
the prepared mind.
Louis Pasteur

260
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
explanation of the diffuse interstellar bands: over a hundred broad absorp-
tion lines had been observed since the 1930s, but not one had been identi-
fied or reproduced in the laboratory. While these were the main challenges
Herzberg set for himself, he made major contributions on a variety of other
problems. Some could be termed “bread and butter” research, carried out
while waiting for improvements in apparatus for the major studies. But
each investigation had good reasons to be undertaken: to either provide
more precise molecular constants or to test and confirm theory and so pro-
vide examples for his Volume III. These many studies were carried out with
the help of his technician Jack Shoosmith, an assistant, and two postdoc-
toral fellows and sometimes in collaboration with visiting colleagues. In
addition, Herzberg continually worked on his remaining treatise Electronic
Spectra of Polyatomic Molecules of the molecular trilogy and focused his
attention on it from 1960 until its publication in 1966.
Herzberg’s day at the NRC began with his arrival at 8 A.M. or earlier,
and after donning his white lab coat, he would scan with a magnifying
glass in hand the photographic plate of a spectrum he was studying at that
time. This habit of perusing the riddles of spectra, where every line
means something, gave him inspiration and set his mind on the main
research course for the day. He then visited Jack Shoosmith in the labo-
ratory to discuss in detail the results of their past few days and work out
together the best course for the next series of experiments. Next, he
would check with his computing assistant on what progress or problems
had occurred in analysis or calculation of spectra and then return to his
office to tackle administrative problems with his secretary, usually dic-
tating scores of letters and reviewing the day’s schedule of meetings,
appointments, and visitors. Any time left over was used to visit his col-
laborators, analyze spectra, write papers, prepare presentations for scien-
tific meetings, and try to catch up on reading the steady stream of tech-
nical journals and papers that crossed his desk. Yet he made a point of
joining the group at afternoon tea and of always being on call to members
of the spectroscopy staff and of the Division of Physics. The office day
would end with him piling notes and journals into a bulging briefcase and
leaving for home at about 7 P.M. Saturdays, too, were long days; Herzberg
would be closeted in his office with numerous periodicals, papers, and
tables of data while writing and revising the manuscript for Electronic
Spectra of Polyatomic Molecules.

Atomic Spectra, Experiments, and Theory
Herzberg began a lengthy program of accurate measurements of absolute
wavelengths for spectra of deuterium (D), helium and its ion (He, He+), and
ionized lithium (Li+) in the vacuum ultraviolet in order to obtain experi-
mental values to test theoretical predictions for Lamb shifts, an effect first
observed in hydrogen by Lamb and Retherford in 1947.1 For these evalua-
tions, he also needed theoretical values of specific energy levels and ion-
ization potentials, but the available values turned out to be far less reliable
than had been assumed, and so he became involved in computations using
variational methods, something quite new in his research. As told by his
friend Chandra, this all started when the two of them met to discuss the
problem during a conference of the American Astronomical Society in
December 1952, and it soon became a cause célèbre:
Herzberg explained to me the sorry state of the wavelength standards in
the far ultraviolet and inquired whether the theoretical value for the
energy of the ground state of helium obtained by the Norwegian theorist
E.A. Hylleraas could be used as a guide.
Some years earlier (1946–7) while engaged on the related problem of
the ground state of the ion H–, I had, in the course of some checking,
found an error in one of Hylleraas’s matrix elements and had concluded
that his value for the ground state of helium must be in error. And when I
told Herzberg of this fact he was visibly shocked. He told me that the mat-
ter should be brought out in the open; at his insistence, we collaborated
on a re-evaluation of the energy of the ground state of helium with a
wavefunction having eleven parameters; and this calculation showed that
Hylleraas’s value was indeed in error, and hence that the theoretical value
was substantially higher than the experimental value.
Herzberg and I later improved the calculation with a wavefunction of
eighteen parameters, and that started an avalanche of wavefunctions with
a continued crescendo of parameters. It is impossible to believe now, that
for some 25 years it was considered as firmly established that eight par-
ameters would suffice when in fact 1000 are needed.2
These results provoked many theorists to calculate the energy levels and
ionization limit of He, as well as to re-calculate corrections for the fine
structure of hydrogen, helium, and two-electron systems. Chandrasekhar
and Herzberg also evaluated the ground-state energies of Li+ and O6+, after
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      261

262
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
which Herzberg continued variational calculations of He and He-like ions
for another decade with J.F. Hart of the University of Toronto.3
In 1954, Herzberg was invited to give a lecture at the Rydberg Centen-
nial Conference in Lund, Sweden, and during the talk he mentioned his
preliminary value of the ground-state Lamb shift for deuterium obtained
from the difference of observed and calculated wavelengths for the Lyman-
line at 1215.3378 Å. The result was 25 percent lower than the theoretical
prediction. Neither Paul Dirac nor Wolfgang Pauli, two of the giants of the-
oretical physics and Nobel Laureates, nor Herzberg’s friend Walter Heitler,
could believe that the shift could be lower than the calculated shift. In fact,
Pauli in his usual critical yet friendly manner told Herzberg that his result
was “a manifestation of experimental error”. On telling of this incident
after he had made more precise measurements, Herzberg roared with
laughter saying “and Pauli was right”. When the work on the Lamb shift of
the ground state of deuterium was completed, giving a value of 0.264 cm–1
in agreement with theory (0.2726 cm–1), Herzberg sent a copy of his manu-
script to Willis Lamb for comments and congratulated him on being award-
ed the 1955 Nobel Prize for his discovery of the fine structure of the hydro-
gen spectrum.4 In his reply, Lamb added the following anecdote, which
understandably pleased Herzberg:
I don’t know if I have ever written to tell you that the first suggestion that
microwaves and hydrogen atoms should be combined came from your
book on atomic structure. I was teaching a summer session class in atom-
ic theory at Columbia in 1945 with your book as text. The footnote refer-
ring to Betz and Haase put the idea in my mind.... Of course, if I had stud-
ied Grotrian’s book in my college days I might have had the idea sooner,
but it took the war to teach me about microwaves.5
Spectrum of the 1640 Å line of He+ and observed
and predicted splittings, after Herzberg, 1956.

Herzberg was able to obtain experimental values of Lamb shifts for
excited states of He and Li+ in general agreement with theory. His meas-
urements of the separation of components of the 1640 and 4686 Å lines of
He+, which included sums of Lamb shifts of the ground and excited states,
agreed with quantum electrodynamic values of these splittings. He contin-
ued with experiments and calculations of ionization potentials until the
ground states of two-electron systems were determined with sufficient pre-
cision to confirm the theoretical Lamb shifts for 3He and 4He. He ceased
working on fine structure problems a few years later, when the new laser
techniques superseded the accuracy obtainable with photographic measure-
ments.6
Spectra of Hydrogen in the Laboratory, in Planetary
Atmospheres, and in Space
At the time of his earliest studies of the spectrum of atomic hydrogen in
1927, Herzberg became intrigued with the spectrum of molecular hydro-
gen, which overlapped that of atomic hydrogen. While H2 is one of the sim-
plest molecules, its spectrum is far from simple. Herzberg realized that
experimental data of H2 and its isotopes would be of fundamental impor-
tance for testing quantum theory and of significance for astrophysics since
hydrogen is the most abundant constituent of the universe. So began his
concerted study of the infrared and far-ultraviolet spectra of molecular
hydrogen.
With the publication of the quadrupole spectrum of hydrogen, which
Herzberg investigated at Yerkes Observatory, he turned his attention to the
mixed isotope HD. This has a small dipole moment because the centre of
mass does not coincide with the centre of charge and is expected to exhib-
it a weak spectrum. Herzberg had suggested in 1938 that such a spectrum
could be used to detect deuterium in planetary and stellar atmospheres.7 In
1950, he succeeded in observing several rotation–vibration lines of the 3–0
and 4–0 bands of HD by using a 500-metre path of gas at atmospheric pres-
sure and later obtained the 1–0 band in the infrared.8 Two decades later, HD
was observed in a spectrum of Jupiter.9
While Herzberg had expected that the presence of hydrogen in plane-
tary atmospheres would be revealed by observation of the quadrupole
spectrum that he had produced at Yerkes, the first proof came from a quite
unexpected source, and he was able to capitalize on it. In 1949, Gerard
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      263

264
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Kuiper, his friend from Yerkes, found a number of weak and broad features
in spectra of the planets Uranus and Neptune.10 These bands were not due
to methane, which was known from earlier work to be present in Uranus,
and Kuiper asked Herzberg whether he had any idea of what could give rise
to these broad bands. A feature at 8270 Å agreed closely with a line of the
3–0 quadrupole spectrum of H2 but was clearly not a quadrupole line since
these are extremely sharp. That same year, Harry Welsh and his colleagues
in Toronto had discovered in the laboratory a new, very broad spectrum of
hydrogen (the 1–0 and 2–0 bands) at high gas pressure, which came to be
known as the pressure-induced spectrum of hydrogen.11 Herzberg surmised
that the Uranus feature could be caused by the pressure-induced 3–0 band
of hydrogen. He wrote to Kuiper about his idea, telling him that he was
beginning experiments with H2 at high pressure and a long absorbing path,
cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature. Under these conditions, Herzberg
observed a broad 3–0 band, in agreement with the spectra of Uranus and
Neptune, and so established for the first time the presence of hydrogen in
extraterrestrial atmospheres, and specifically in these planets. From a com-
parison of the laboratory spectrum with that of Uranus, he was able to esti-
mate a temperature of about 80 K and a pressure of 6–8 atmospheres on the
planet.12
A decade later, the sharp lines of the quadrupole spectrum of H2 were
observed in emission in Jupiter and, later, in spectra of Uranus and Saturn
taken with high-resolution instruments.13 Such emission spectra provide a
powerful means to study the hot gases in planetary ionospheres, circum-
stellar atmospheres, planetary nebulae, and superluminous galaxies.
Finally, H2 was identified in the interstellar medium by its electronic spec-
trum in the far-ultraviolet region, first taken by rockets in 197014 and a few
years later by means of the Copernicus satellite.15 Even the spectrum of the
isotopic molecule HD was detected in the interstellar medium.16 These
matched perfectly with spectra taken by Herzberg in the laboratory and left
no doubt that molecular hydrogen is present in the interstellar medium.
Tests of the Quantum Theory of Molecular
Hydrogen
The first experimental determinations of the energy required to break
up the hydrogen molecule into two hydrogen atoms, that is the dissociation

energy, were made in 1926–1927, just at the time of the development of the
quantum mechanical calculations by Heitler and London. Improvements in
computed values were made up to 1935, but the accuracy was not high.
Two decades later, new techniques in high-resolution infrared, far-
ultraviolet, and Raman spectroscopy at the NRC made it possible to deter-
mine precise values for the energy levels of the ground and excited states
of hydrogen and its isotopes.17,18 At the same time, the availability of mod-
ern computers provided the opportunity to make calculations of these lev-
els from first principles (ab initio), and comparisons of experimental and
calculated values were extended to such basic quantities as rotational and
vibrational energy levels, and dissociation energies and ionization poten-
tials, in order to test quantum theory.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      265
H2 interstellar absorption lines near 1090 Å after Spitzer et al.15
compared with a laboratory spectrum, 1973.

266
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
In 1960, the much-improved experimental and calculated values were
in closer agreement, but discrepancies still existed for the dissociation
energy and for the vibrational energies of the ground state. Only when the
NRC 10-metre ultraviolet spectrograph became available was it possible
for Herzberg and colleagues to obtain more accurate experimental values
for the dissociation energy and ionization potential, and these were in good
agreement with theoretical values.19,20 Finally, calculations using improved
potential functions, including the interaction of the ground state with excit-
ed electronic states, gave excellent agreement between ab initio and exper-
imental data for the ground state. Herzberg continued his investigations of
the electronic spectra of molecular hydrogen and its isotopes into the late
1990s and obtained detailed data of the highly excited states of hydrogen.
From his first publications on hydrogen in 1927, Herzberg’s seminal
contributions on atomic and molecular hydrogen were reported in over
forty papers. In a presidential address given at the end of his term as Presi-
dent of The Royal Society of Canada in 1967, Herzberg chose to review the
current knowledge of hydrogen with the topic “The spectra of hydrogen
and their role in the development of our understanding of the structure of
matter and of the universe”.21 This was perhaps not the proper occasion for
such an exhaustive treatment of the subject since the Society was not sole-
ly an Academy of Science and its membership included scholars in the
humanities and social sciences. He began by quoting Victor Weisskopf that
Absorption limit (dissociation energy) of D2 near 840.1 Å, after Herzberg, 1969.

“if you understand hydrogen, you understand all that can be understood”.22
After listening to an hour-long dissertation illustrated with copious slides,
the incoming president of the Society, geologist James Harrison, in thank-
ing Herzberg, added that he believed “if we could understand hydrogen we
could understand anything”.
Spectra of Free Radicals
Free radicals are chemically unstable diatomic and polyatomic molecules
that are short-lived (transient) in the gas phase. They had long been postu-
lated by chemists as intermediates in chemical reactions, and the building
blocks of larger molecules, but had not been isolated or characterized by
the usual chemical methods. Herzberg argued that as a spectroscopist he
would naturally want to observe the spectrum of a free radical before he
could feel entirely convinced of its presence in a chemical reaction, a
flame, an explosion, or a discharge. Moreover, once the spectrum of a free
radical was obtained it would be possible to derive much useful informa-
tion about its electronic and geometrical structure and its behaviour.
Herzberg first became interested in polyatomic free radicals in 1942,
when he had reproduced in the laboratory in Saskatchewan a spectrum at
4050 Å found in comets.23 He had used a discharge in methane (CH4) and
thought he had produced the spectrum of the free radical CH2. Only seven
years later at the NRC did he have the opportunity to carry out further
experiments to confirm this result. That year, a paper appeared describing
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      267
Absorption spectrum of para-H2 showing two Rydberg series,
going to two different limits, after Herzberg and Jungen, 1972.

268
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
the results of an experiment similar to his in 1942 but using heavy methane
(CD4) instead of CH4. The 4050 Å feature was reproduced and had exact-
ly the same appearance and wavelength as that of CH4, whereas if the fea-
ture belonged to CH2 it should certainly have changed or shifted in going
to CD2. This result was a shock for Herzberg who thought he had found the
spectrum of CH2 seven years before. Within two years Douglas proved
conclusively that the 4050 Å spectrum was due to triatomic carbon (C3).24
These results posed a supreme challenge for Herzberg: what in fact was
the true spectrum of CH2? His pursuit of this question culminated in what
undoubtedly became one of his most notable and satisfying achievements,
the first observation of the spectra of the free methyl (CH3) and methylene
(CH2) radicals. Seventeen years after Herzberg’s first involvement with
CH2, his persistence and determination finally solved this puzzle. Such
tenacity was to be repeated on several other occasions and was illustrated
by Luise in an amusing incident about life at home:
Gerhard being a vegetarian and not accustomed to gourmet dishes was
quite happy with being served omelettes and potatoes for dinner, day after
day. One evening, Luise cooked spaghetti for dinner, and while Gerhard
liked it he reminded her, “Now Luise, when you have found a good thing
and like it, you stick with it!”
With Shoosmith’s help, Herzberg tried several different experimental
approaches in an effort to obtain the spectrum of CH2, all in vain. Finally
he settled on the technique of flash photolysis, which he and Ramsay were
Diagram of a flash-photolysis apparatus.

pioneering. In this technique, a long reaction vessel containing the parent
compound serves as the absorption tube. It is irradiated along its length by
a powerful pulsed flash lamp through which a condenser of high capacity
is discharged. The extremely bright flash of short duration (10–500 micro-
seconds) provides the energy to break up the parent molecules to momen-
tarily produce a concentration of fragments, that is, short-lived free radi-
cals, in the absorption tube. A very short time afterward, and this interval
can be controlled, the light from a second flash lamp (providing a continu-
um spectrum) is sent through the absorption tube and into the spectrograph
to obtain the absorption spectrum. By varying the time interval between
flashes from the two lamps while taking absorption spectra, the life of free
radicals can be determined, usually in the range of microseconds. In this
way, Herzberg and Shoosmith first succeeded in obtaining spectra of CH3
from the parent molecules Hg(CH3)2 and (CH3)2CO in 1956. Proof that in
fact the spectrum observed at 2160 Å was that of CH3 was established by
using partially deuterated samples which produced four slightly shifted
spectra arising from the isotopic species CH3, CH2D, CHD2, and CD3.25
Accolades for this work came from many colleagues, including competi-
tors such as Norrish in Cambridge, who wrote: “I greatly envy your spec-
troscopic techniques and wish that we could match them”.26 In the follow-
ing year, Herzberg presented his results on CH3 and his attempts to find the
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      269
Rotational structure of CH3 and CD3 absorption bands: (a) at 2150 Å
and (b) at 1500 Å, after Herzberg and Shoosmith, 1956.

270
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
spectrum of CH2 when invited to give the Centenary Lecture of The Chem-
ical Society in London, Southampton, Dundee, Sheffield, and Liverpool.
Two years later, Herzberg’s continuing efforts to produce a spectrum of
CH2 were finally rewarded. In this case, the parent molecule was CH2N2,
an explosive compound, and the spectrum was found in the extreme ultra-
violet region, which also posed several difficulties. Shoosmith carried out
many experiments and, on developing the photographic plate, one day
found that a prominent new feature was present at about 1415 Å. He imme-
Rotational structure of CH2, CHD, and CD2 absorption bands near 1415 Å
under high resolution, after Herzberg and Shoosmith, 1959.

diately bounded up to Herzberg’s office with the news. Herzberg was very
busy at the time, but Shoosmith insisted that he had to come to the labora-
tory now to see this plate. By the time they had raced down the two flights
of stairs to the lab, a group had gathered to see what all the excitement was
about. With one look at the spectrum and realizing this was what they were
looking for, an elated Herzberg exclaimed “Oh boy! Oh boy!” It was an
inspiring moment.
Further experiments with the partially and fully deuterated compounds
(CHDN2 and CD2N2) showed three, slightly shifted spectra (due to CH2,
CHD, and CD2), proving that the free radical had two H atoms, and final-
ly the spectrum with 13CH2N2 established the presence of a carbon atom.27
Detailed analyses of the spectra led to a non-linear symmetrical structure
with C–H distances of 1.071 Å and an H–C–H angle of 140 degrees.28
Almost four decades later, CH2 was detected in the interstellar medium,
and CH3 in the atmospheres of Saturn and Neptune and in the interstellar
medium.29–31
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      271
Herzberg, Jack Shoosmith, and M. Horani
examining a spectrum, 1969.

272
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
The proof that he had finally discovered the spectrum and structure of
CH2 was one of the most exciting milestones in Herzberg’s career. He was
immediately congratulated by colleagues around the world for this striking
achievement and was invited to give the prestigious Bakerian Lecture of
The Royal Society. He presented the results of his discovery in London in
November 1960, the year in which The Royal Society, the oldest continu-
ing scientific society, was celebrating its 300th anniversary.32
Spectra of over thirty free radicals were discovered and studied by
Herzberg, Ramsay, and other members of the laboratory during the 1950s
and 1960s.33 Their method of flash photolysis coupled with the superb
spectrographs built at the NRC changed in a dramatic manner the field of
free radicals from unobservable chemical intermediates to well-known
molecules and provided a gold mine of new molecules for study.
This long-standing problem of the spectra and structures of CH2 and
CH3 and Herzberg’s many attempts to solve it perhaps best exemplify the
manner in which much of science is actually done. Rather than the direct
methods described in published papers on a project, which usually read as
though the ideas and procedures are straightforward and lead directly to the
desired result, the actual path is often one step forward and one or two steps
back, in reality a zigzag pattern, either because of somewhat incorrect pre-
conceived ideas or for the lack of suitable equipment and techniques. But
persistence and attempts with a variety of different methods as they become
available may finally lead to success, as occurred with Herzberg and his
discovery of the spectra of CH2 and CH3 after almost two decades of think-
ing about the problem.
Molecules of Astrophysical Interest and the Diffuse
Interstellar Bands
The research of Herzberg and Douglas was often stimulated by astrophys-
ical problems and particularly by the question of what species could give
rise to the many diffuse interstellar bands found in the visible and near-
infrared regions of the spectrum. Thus, in addition to his continuing inves-
tigations of absorption spectra of free radicals, and of hydrogen, oxygen,
and carbon monoxide in the extreme ultraviolet, Herzberg studied emission
and absorption spectra obtained by a variety of sources, including hot-
cathode tubes, ordinary and flash discharges, and flash radiolysis. By these

means, he and his group found the spectra of many molecular ions, diatom-
ic as well as polyatomic. Such spectra are important for an understanding
of the electronic structure of molecules, for the study of ion molecule reac-
tions, and for the chemistry of the interstellar medium. They observed and
analyzed spectra of C2
+, CO2
+, N2O+, C4H2
+, and H2S+ and discovered the
spectrum of C2
–, the first discrete spectrum of a gaseous negative molecu-
lar ion. Douglas and colleagues investigated spectra of CO+ and N2
+, which
along with CO2
+ and CH+ occur fairly strongly in the spectra of comets and
especially in comet tails.34 However, none of the laboratory ion spectra
coincided with the observed diffuse interstellar bands. Much of Herzberg’s
future research was motivated by his continuing interest in molecular astro-
physics, especially in the quest for the elusive molecular ion H3
+and the car-
riers of the diffuse interstellar bands.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      273
Absorption spectrum of the ion C2
–, after Herzberg and Lagerqvist, 1968.35

274
17. AMBASSADOR OF CANADIAN 
SCIENCE
With the constant stream of visitors to the NRC and such an active research
program on a variety of topics, and with progress reported in an ever-
increasing number of publications from his laboratory, it was inevitable
that Herzberg and the Spectroscopy Laboratory would quickly gain inter-
national attention. He was invited to participate in essentially every con-
ference on molecular spectroscopy, usually as a keynote speaker. These
numerous invitations to give lectures took him to many countries and
research institutes around the world. He attended as many national and
international meetings dealing with molecular spectra and structures as his
NRC duties permitted, and he encouraged members of the laboratory to do
likewise. He knew that in order to keep abreast of worldwide progress and
to remain in the forefront in this rapidly expanding field, personal inter-
action with colleagues was of the utmost importance, and conferences pro-
vided the necessary forum for discussion and exchange of ideas.
North American Conferences
The International Symposium on Molecular Spectroscopy at Ohio State
University in Columbus, Ohio, was the main meeting in North America for
all active scientists in this field. This annual meeting, held for a week in
June, was organized immediately after the war by Harald H. Nielsen, an
eminent theorist at the university. The pattern of these meetings reminded
Herzberg of those arranged by Mulliken and Struve that he had attended at
The University of Chicago in the late 1930s and early 1940s. Members of
the Spectroscopy Laboratory attended the Columbus meetings on a regular
basis and presented invited and contributed papers on their most recent
research. These were exciting meetings, and many of the giants in the field
(David M. Dennison, John H. Van Vleck, Walter Gordy, Charles H.
Townes, Peter Debye, E. Bright Wilson, Robert S. Mulliken, Harald H.
Nielsen, Bryce L. Crawford, Earle K. Plyler, Richard C. Lord, Gordon
B.B.M. Sutherland, Harold W. Thompson, and Gerhard Herzberg) were
It is not to have climbed Everest that matters:
it is to have seen the Everest in oneself.
Robertson Davies

present. For the younger researchers and graduate students, the Columbus
meetings were the highlight of the year; there were discussions of many
innovations in theory and experimental techniques and especially the
chance to mingle and get acquainted with the movers in the field. Another
important set of molecular spectroscopy meetings were part of the Gordon
Research Conferences, held annually in New Hampshire in the summers.
Meetings on infrared and Raman spectroscopy and electronic spectroscopy
were held in alternate years, with technical programs organized by differ-
ent groups and attendance limited to about one hundred scientists. By the
mid-1950s, at the end of the infamous McCarthy era (the beginnings of
which had helped to persuade the Herzbergs to leave Yerkes Observatory),
many eminent European and Japanese spectroscopists were eventually
granted visas to the United States and were able to participate at these
meetings.
A special two-week symposium was held in Ottawa in June 1955 in
honour of Paul Dirac, Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in Cambridge
University and Nobel Laureate in 1933 along with Erwin Schrödinger for
the discovery of new productive forms of atomic theory. The idea for this
meeting came about because Dirac was refused a visa to the United States.
He had originally planned to spend two weeks with Ta-You Wu’s theoreti-
cal group in Ottawa following a proposed visit to Princeton University in
1954. However, Dirac wrote to Herzberg that he had been denied a U.S.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      275
Göttingen colleagues Edward Teller, Hertha Sponer, and Gerhard Herzberg
at a Gordon Conference on Molecular Electronic Spectroscopy, 1964.

276
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
visa.1 Herzberg immediately began to organize a colloquium in theoretical
physics to be held at the NRC to give Dirac’s American friends the oppor-
tunity to meet with him. Friends and colleagues in the U.S.A. were stunned
to learn of Dirac’s denial of entry and felt humiliated by the inability to be
proper hosts to foreign colleagues. One even suggested that “We should
really have our universities and institutes on Ellis Island”.
Herzberg invited senior theorists from the United States and Canada to
participate in the Dirac Colloquium, and the large attendance of theorists
and experimentalists signalled its huge success.2 Among the principal
speakers were H.A. Bethe, G. Breit, R.J. Eden, S. Chandrasekhar, V.F.
Weisskopf, G.M. Volkoff, W.H. Watson, and G. Wentzel. Some who were
not able to come because of prior commitments to be in Europe or because
of illness included Eugene Wigner, Abraham Pais, J. Robert Oppenheimer,
and Enrico Fermi, who died a month after receiving the invitation.
Unfortunately, Dirac himself was not able to attend the Colloquium
because of extended illness after a long sojourn in India. He and his wife
arrived in Ottawa a few weeks later and stayed for two months to rest and
recover, and he was able to give a series of lectures. Dirac again visited the
NRC for a month in 1959. A further outcome of the Dirac Colloquium, and
a tribute to the far-sighted Herzberg, was that it brought together for the
first time over a hundred Canadian theoretical physicists and so helped to
promote the formation of a theoretical section of the Canadian Association
of Physicists, which began to hold annual colloquia and summer schools on
timely topics in theoretical physics.
A two-day memorial symposium was held at The University of Chi-
cago in May 1966 in honour of James Franck (1882–1964), who had died
two years earlier while visiting friends in Germany. Herzberg’s opinion
about invited speakers had been sought by the organizers, and during the
planning stages he mentioned his worry that possibly among the invitees
from Germany might be some whose behaviour during the Nazi regime
Franck found especially objectionable. He suggested that the list of names
should be sent to Mrs. Hertha Sponer-Franck for her opinion.3 The
Symposium, with an attendance of two hundred, was a welcome celebra-
tion of Franck’s achievements. Some thought of it as a “Göttingen reunion”
of colleagues, as much German was spoken and many messages arrived
from Franck’s friends of the happier days in Germany. Herzberg was
invited to give the opening talk and chose to discuss Franck’s earliest
molecular research and the importance of the Franck–Condon principle to

molecular spectroscopy. Edward Teller recalled Franck’s remarkable per-
sonal qualities, as did Franck’s colleague Robert Pohl in a talk given by his
son, and Eugene Rabinowitch spoke of Franck’s political contributions,
especially the “Franck Report”.4
Visits to Europe and Germany
Herzberg’s first trip to Europe and return to Germany in 1950 was much
anticipated, with the opportunity to meet colleagues at conferences and to
see his brother and friends in Hamburg and Darmstadt. Yet he had some
qualms about his visit to Germany, particularly with the possibility of meet-
ing ex-Nazi science colleagues. He discussed his plans with President Mac-
kenzie, who immediately approved of his travel and visits to laboratories in
England and the Continent. The Department of External Affairs saw no rea-
son why Herzberg should not make these visits and obtained Military
Permits for him to visit Bonn and Hamburg in the British Zone and Darm-
stadt in the American Zone of West Germany. Herzberg had been invited to
visit and give a lecture at the University of Bonn by Professor W. Weizel,
whom he considered to be one of the few academics to hold high demo-
cratic ideals and was worthy of support by visits from scientists in the
Allied countries.
After having made all of the necessary arrangements with colleagues
he planned to visit, Herzberg cancelled the trip on learning that Luise had
to have an operation in June, only two years after surgery in Chicago. This
was another trying period for the whole family, particularly for Paul and
Agnes, since this was the end of the school year with its many examina-
tions. With Luise’s surprisingly rapid recovery, Herzberg was able to
resume plans for a part of his overseas trip, after delaying his departure by
almost two months. He spent a much shorter time away from home yet
managed to attend the Faraday Society Meeting in London and spec-
troscopy meetings in Liège and Amsterdam and to visit over twenty labo-
ratories. He met many of his scientific friends in Oxford, Cambridge, and
Bristol, as well as in Liège, Amsterdam, and Paris, and some of his former
colleagues in Darmstadt. On the whole, his brief visit to Germany was
more agreeable than he had expected, although he had to put up with the
fact that he could not avoid shaking hands with a number of known former
Nazis, who somehow had managed to remain in high academic positions.
He was especially pleased to see his mentor Rau in Darmstadt and his
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      277

278
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
brother Walter and boyhood friends Alfred and Hans-Werner in Hamburg.
Wherever he turned, he saw evidence of the wartime devastation of
Darmstadt and Hamburg, yet he found that the revival of German universi-
ties was proceeding at an accelerated pace. In particular, the Technische
Hochschule in Darmstadt, which had been almost completely destroyed,
was making very good progress; the new Physics Institute was greatly
enlarged, the equipment available was adequate, and the workshop facili-
ties were as good as anywhere.
It was during his visit to the University of Oxford that Herzberg met
the dynamic D.K.C. MacDonald and made him an offer to come to the
NRC to establish a low-temperature and solid-state physics laboratory,
which he duly accepted, arriving in Ottawa a year later. Herzberg also vis-
ited Norrish and Porter at the University of Cambridge; here they had
developed the technique of flash photolysis and were to receive the 1967
Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this achievement. Herzberg told the story of
how Norrish met him at the railway station and took him to the nearby tav-
ern. Norrish was enjoying his pint and Herzberg was having tea, when Mrs.
Norrish arrived and was furious that lunch was being ruined because they
were a half-hour late, “... but Herzberg needed a drink,” Norrish explained.
Towards the end of his brief stay in Cambridge, Herzberg received a note
from Prof. H. Fröhlich about Emil Wolf, a young Czechoslovakian refugee
who was his assistant at the time, asking for advice and help in finding
employment for him in Canada.5 At Fröhlich’s suggestion, Wolf went to
see Herzberg, who was just at the point of leaving Cambridge, but Herz-
berg was sensitive to this request and invited Wolf to ride with him in the
taxi to the railway station to discuss the matter. On his return to Canada,
Herzberg made inquiries to several colleges and universities as to whether
there were openings for this “pleasant and serious young scientist”, and
Wolf was later contacted by them. Wolf thanked Herzberg for his efforts
and informed him that he was still interested in coming to Canada but in
the meantime had accepted an invitation from Max Born in Edinburgh to
write a new book on optics. In due course, their volume Principles of
Optics, based on Born’s 1933 treatise Optik, became the celebrated classic
reference book on optics, and over time, seven updated and expanded
editions were published.
Herzberg’s next overseas trip came almost a year later and was
occasioned by his induction to Fellowship in The Royal Society of London
on 31 January 1952. He again gave lectures at many universities and

laboratories in England, Ireland, and Europe and visited his brother and
friends in Hamburg and Rau in Darmstadt, as well as Heitler in Zurich. Two
years later, Herzberg was again in England and on the Continent in June,
and this time Luise joined him for her first return to Europe and a holiday
in Switzerland. Following this trip, Herzberg was in Europe on almost an
annual basis, attending meetings, giving lectures at universities and insti-
tutes, and receiving honorary degrees and awards. On one of his visits to
Oxford University, he was urged by Francis Simon (later Sir Francis), for-
merly a research professor in Berlin, to make a claim for restitution in
Germany. But Herzberg never did. He maintained that he was better off in
Canada and was thankful to Hitler for forcing him to emigrate because he
then had much luck and everything in Canada had gone in his favour. In
1948, his father-in-law, Paul Oettinger, began attempts to obtain restitution
for the loss of his company in Nürnberg, but without success, and he died
in 1957 while in Germany pressing his claim.
With each succeeding visit to Germany, Herzberg felt psychologically
more comfortable as the scene slowly changed after the enmity and devas-
tation of the war years. Whenever possible, he squeezed in a holiday in the
Alps to enjoy his favourite outdoor activity of hiking and climbing, often
with his friends Walter Heitler or Ernst Miescher. Miescher also introduced
Herzberg to his friend the nuclear physicist Konrad Bleuler, who invited
the Herzbergs to his chalet in Saas-Fee. A close friendship developed, and
Gerhard and Luise spent many holidays with the Bleulers in the midst of
the glorious Alps and in sight of the Dom, the highest peak in Switzerland.
Herzberg was appointed to the Francqui Chair at the University of
Liège in Belgium, and he enjoyed a four-month sojourn in 1960 with col-
leagues in spectroscopy and astrophysics. His stay in Belgium also gave
him the opportunity to visit institutes in Hungary, Sweden, and Denmark
and to participate in a meeting commemorating the centenary of Kirch-
hoff’s and Bunsen’s discovery of spectral analysis, which was held in Heid-
elberg, Germany. Besides giving lectures on the work of the Spectroscopy
Laboratory, he encouraged young scientists in these countries to apply for
postdoctoral positions at the NRC.
Global Travel
Herzberg’s first visit to India, at the invitation of the Government of India,
occurred in 1957 with his participation in the 44th session of the Indian
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      279

280
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Science Congress held in Calcutta.6 A day after his arrival in mid-January,
he gave a lecture to a convention of spectroscopists, and the following day
he addressed the Congress. Herzberg was invited to visit the principal sci-
entific institutes in all parts of India and during his five week visit was
pressed to give twenty-five talks on his research and on the work of the
Spectroscopy Laboratory. His host and companion for much of his stay was
his friend R. Krishna Asundi, who took good care that Herzberg was given
time to rest between travel and the many lectures and saw to his needs for
simple vegetarian meals without the many spices normally used in Indian
dishes. Among the many scientists whom Herzberg met were the physicist
Homi J. Bhabha in Bombay, the spectroscopist S. Bhagavantam in Hyder-
abad, and Nobel Laureate Sir C.V. Raman in Bangalore. Along with visits
to scientific institutes, Herzberg explored the Ellora and Ajanta caves, mar-
veled at the sublime Taj Mahal, and spent four days in Darjeeling hiking in
the foothills of the Himalayas, where he met the Dalai Lama, who was still
in power in Tibet and was on a state visit to India.
Herzberg had met Raman in 1929 at the Faraday Meeting in Bristol,
when Raman gave a fascinating lecture on his new discovery in light scat-
tering, which came to be known as the Raman effect. During Herzberg’s
three days in Bangalore, he visited Raman at his institute, where there was
much activity on the fluorescence of crystals and spectra of diamonds.
Raman made it a habit to come to see him at the hotel each evening for a
chat and they had a good time together. It was at this time that Herzberg
learned from Raman that he was the uncle of his friend Chandra (who had
often talked about Raman with Herzberg at Yerkes but had never men-
tioned this family relationship). Herzberg also heard from Raman the story
of his Nobel Prize. When Raman was elected a Fellow of The Royal
Society in 1924 for his research on the acoustics of violin strings, the Uni-
versity of Calcutta had arranged a dinner in his honour. Raman was seated
next to the Vice-Chancellor, who complimented him on this wonderful
honour, and Raman replied: “Mr. Vice-Chancellor, it’s really nothing. The
only honour worth having in science is the Nobel Prize, and mark my
words, Mr. Vice-Chancellor, in five years I will have it.” Raman told
Herzberg, “I should have had it in 1928, but I only got it in 1930 because
Rutherford wanted Richardson to have it first”.7 This remark surprised
Herzberg, “One can wish for the Nobel Prize in one’s heart, but one doesn’t
have to tell other people about it!”

One evening, Raman asked him “Have you ever seen the zodiacal
light?” and when Herzberg said that he had not, Raman took him in his
chauffeur-driven car out into the country, where it was exceedingly dark,
and there overhead was the zodiacal light, a broad band of sunlight reflect-
ed by the dust from meteors. Herzberg was much impressed with Raman’s
personality and with his broad knowledge and interest in all aspects of
light.   As a parting gift Raman gave Herzberg a signed photograph of him-
self, but to Herzberg’s disappointment Raman did not show him his famous
diamond collection, perhaps because he thought that Herzberg was only
interested in gases.
His next visit to India in 1962 was a business meeting of the Executive
Committee of the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics, on
which he served as a Vice-President from 1957 to 1963. This meeting was
hosted by Homi Bhabha, President of the International Union. During a
recess, Bhabha showed the group a selection of his paintings and drawings
of famous scientists and personalities. Five years later, Herzberg and Luise
attended the Indian Science Congress as guests of the spectroscopist
S. `Bhagavantam and were delighted to have the opportunity to spend a
few days in Kathmandu, the capital of Nepal, surrounded by the Himalayas
and in sight of Mount Everest.
Another of Herzberg’s memorable visits was to Israel to take part in a
four-day symposium on the occasion of the opening of the Nuclear Science
Institute of the Weizmann Institute in Tel Aviv in May 1958.8 The list of
participants was most impressive, including Niels Bohr, after whom the
new institute was named, F. Bloch, S. Chandrasekhar, Herzberg, J.E. May-
er, L. Neel, J.R. Oppenheimer, G.T. Seaborg, H.C. Urey, and V.F. Weiss-
kopf. All were invited with their wives, and all expenses were paid with
travel in luxury class. The opening ceremony was attended by the President
of Israel and Prime Minister Ben-Gurion, whom they had the opportunity
to meet. Bohr gave the primary talk, speaking for over one and a half hours
to an audience of about five hundred in an auditorium that seated only three
hundred. Bohr was known to have a rambling way of speaking, and this
time it was even impossible to know the language in which he was speak-
ing, he was so hard to understand. Chandrasekhar, who was chairing the
session, asked the audience, “Are there any questions?” There was only
one, and Bohr carried on for another half hour. In a discussion with friends
afterward, Chandrasekhar commented about this occasion with a famous
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      281

282
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
epigram: “That’s the sign of a really great man—people stay for two hours
to listen to something they don’t understand!”9 On the return trip, Gerhard
and Luise stopped for brief visits with friends and some sightseeing in
Athens, Rome, Madrid, Paris, and London.
A meeting of the International Astronomical Union in Moscow in
August 1958 provided the opportunity for a visit to the Soviet Union.
Herzberg was most impressed with the caliber of the scientific work in the
institutes and observatories he visited in Moscow and Leningrad and with
the elaborate hospitality shown throughout his stay. He noted that the cap-
ital was serious and glum, without much laughter or conversation in the
streets, while Leningrad seemed to be more relaxed and more western than
Moscow. Within a year, he was again in the U.S.S.R. (July 1959) for a busi-
ness meeting of the Executive Committee of the Union of Pure and Applied
Physics. On this occasion Herzberg visited S. L. Mandelstam and his Insti-
tute of Spectroscopy. They had corresponded a year earlier when Mandel-
stam sent him a copy of the Russian translation of Atomic Spectra and
Atomic Structures, and he in turn sent Mandelstam a copy of the English
version along with a copy of Diatomic Molecules. While in Moscow,
Herzberg took the opportunity to visit the Publishing House for Foreign
Literature. He had learned of the 1949 Russian translations of his atomic
book and Volumes I and II from External Affairs in Ottawa and had writ-
ten to the publisher inquiring about royalties but had never received a reply.
With the help of an interpreter from the Canadian Embassy in Moscow, an
appointment was arranged with P. Chuvikov, the Editor , who was very cor-
dial and immediately deposited 40,000 rubles in a Soviet bank for Herz-
berg. Since these funds could not be taken out of the country, Herzberg
purchased a fine Persian fur hat for himself and, at the Editor’s suggestion,
an airline ticket from Moscow to Montreal and two return tickets from
Montreal to Zurich, all of which he returned to the Canadian office of Aero-
flot for cash. Further funds from royalties were deposited in the Soviet
bank over the years, but with the devaluation of the ruble by a factor of ten
in 1961, the balance was only sufficient for purchasing music records and
other small items on future visits.10
In 1962, Herzberg went to Japan, where he participated as plenary
speaker along with S. Mizushima, H.W. Thompson, and E. Bright Wilson,
Jr., in the International Congress on Molecular Spectroscopy in Tokyo. In
a talk titled “Recent Work on Spectra of Free Radicals”, he reviewed the
results obtained in Ottawa on spectra of polyatomic free radicals over the

past decade and discussed the spectra and structures of the free methyl
(CH3) and methylene (CH2) radicals.11 He visited universities in Tokyo and
Kyoto and through his lectures encouraged several young Japanese scien-
tists to come to the Spectroscopy Laboratory as postdoctoral fellows, the
first being Takeshi Oka, who came in 1963, became a staff member two
years later, and quickly established himself as a leading worker in the field
of molecular spectroscopy and astrophysics. Herzberg was to make sever-
al more visits to Japan, the next being in 1967 when he lectured at many
universities.
Herzberg’s travel was curtailed somewhat because of a kidney opera-
tion in July 1965, but he recovered quickly and continued on his global
journeys. He enjoyed visiting and meeting scientific colleagues for discus-
sion and giving lectures on work of the Spectroscopy Laboratory.
Wherever he travelled in Australia, India, Europe, the U.S.A., and U.K., he
gave major lectures on the work of the Spectroscopy Laboratory and man-
aged to excite candidates who applied for NRC fellowships in spectroscopy
and in other branches of the Physics Division.
In August 1971, Herzberg attended the Symposium on Fundamental
and Applied Laser Physics in Esfahan, Iran, a city resplendent with its
many colorful mosques and the motto “Esfahan is half the world”. This
small conference was organized by Ali Javan, Professor at the Mass-
achusetts Institute of Technology, who had been born in Iran and was the
principal figure in the development of the helium–neon laser at the Bell
Telephone Laboratories in New Jersey a decade earlier. The symposium
was held just a few weeks before the main celebrations of the 2,500th
Anniversary of the Persian Empire. Herzberg’s presentation “Experimental
Tests of the Quantum Theory of Molecular Hydrogen” and Willis Lamb’s
“Highly Excited States of the Helium Atom”, while not dealing directly
with laser work, set the tone for future, precise frequency measurements of
atomic and molecular spectra, which had just become possible with
lasers.12 During this conference, Herzberg and several senior scientists
were invited to tea with His Majesty Shahanshah Arya-Mehr Pahlavi and
His Excellency Prime Minister A. Abbas Hoveida.
With his many overseas journeys to numerous countries, Herzberg had
become Canada’s unofficial “Ambassador of Science” and in essence one
of the world’s elder statesmen for science. He also continually travelled
across Canada giving lectures and participating in opening ceremonies for
several new institutes in physics and chemistry. In 1970, the Canadian
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      283

284
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Meeting the Shah of Iran in 1971. Left to right: Pierre Jacquinot,
Nicholaas Bloembergen, Herzberg, Rem Khokhlov, and Alexander Prokhorov.
Opening ceremony for the new McLennan Physical Laboratories,
University of Toronto, in 1966. Left to right: Omond Solandt,
Chancellor, Harry Welsh, Chairman Department of Physics,
Jack Sword, Acting President, and Herzberg, unlocking the doors.

Association of Physicists, as part of its twenty-fifth anniversary celebra-
tions, accorded Herzberg a special honour by establishing the Herzberg
Medal to be awarded annually “for outstanding achievement in any field of
research by a physicist who in the year of the award is not more than thirty-
eight years of age”. He was genuinely touched by this tribute. On being
shown the medal at the Spectroscopy Lab Christmas party that year, Herz-
berg approved of the vibrational level diagram of the hydrogen molecule
on the one side and, on seeing a likeness of himself on the other side
exclaimed, “But that doesn’t look like me!” At this point Luise, remem-
bering Picasso’s reply to Gertrude Stein, who had made a similar comment
on seeing the artist’s painting of her, smiled and with a twinkle in her eye,
calmly remarked, “Just wait”.
When travelling or attending conferences, Herzberg would bring sheet
music of Mozart, Schubert, Schumann, Brahms, and Verdi and get togeth-
er with friends to make music. Many of his scientific friends were able
musicians, with the piano being the favourite instrument, so there were
always opportunities for him to sing, no matter where he was. In Toronto,
his accompanist on the piano was Harry Welsh; in Cambridge, then Edin-
burgh, and later Sussex, it was Christopher Longuet-Higgins; in South-
ampton, Alan Carrington played the piano while his wife and Herzberg
sang duets; in Saas-Fee, Konrad Bleuler accompanied him on the piano;
and in France, he sang duets with Gilbert Amat.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      285
In full voice in Columbus, Ohio, with Gilbert Amat and colleagues.

286
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Herzberg’s wide-ranging program of research and travel to conferences
all over the world, the preparing of papers and technical talks, along with
his administrative responsibilities and conscientious attention to answering
letters, obviously took its toll on family life. While growing up, Paul and
Agnes missed their frequently absent father; they did not realize that he
was famous and often had to be away. When he was home, he was up early
and so by habit was the rest of the family; breakfast was usually hurried.
Gerhard did not like variety in his meals, and Paul and Agnes naturally
complained about it. Luise tried to vary their dinner meals from the regu-
lar omelettes and potatoes by adding some meats and other vegetables but
countered their complaints by reminding them that she was not running a
cafeteria. On Sundays, Paul and Agnes helped their father with the many
chores around the house, planting shrubs and flowers, and mowing the
lawn. They often joined their parents in entertaining visitors at home and in
the countryside. On one occasion, Agnes remembers the family walking for
hours with Professor Dirac in the Gatineau Hills without anyone saying a
word. Then back at home with Dirac for dinner, again no one said a word,
and she thought perhaps this was how science was done.
Paul and Agnes completed their elementary and high school education
in Ottawa, and both entered Queen’s University in Kingston. Paul was
awarded a Woodrow Wilson Scholarship to Princeton University, where he
The Doctors Herzberg.

obtained a Master’s degree in physics in 1961. While enjoying his studies,
Paul realized that in taking physics, he was inadvertantly following his par-
ents’ careers. He changed to psychology and obtained a Ph.D. in 1967 at
the University of Illinois. There, in the meantime, he had met Louise
Frankel, an Australian, and they married in 1964. Agnes continued her
interest in mathematics by returning to her favourite city, Saskatoon, and its
university. She received a Master’s degree and in 1966 a Ph.D. in mathe-
matics and statistics. Both Paul and Agnes pursued academic careers, Paul
at York University in Toronto, and Agnes at Imperial College, London, fol-
lowed by Queen’s University in Kingston.
Luise continued her active interest in spectroscopy, yet she somehow
managed to take care of home and all of the family needs, even finding
time to accompany Gerhard on some trips to Saskatoon and Europe.
Originally, she served as a Voluntary Research Assistant at the NRC, then
joined the Dominion Observatory in 1952, first as a Summer Assistant then
as a Scientific Officer, with her own office and program of research and the
opportunity to attend and participate in conferences. In spite of such busy
lives, the Herzbergs were regular hosts for groups of visitors and staff,
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      287
Luise, Lalitha, and Chandra at the wedding
of Paul and Louise, 1964.
The happy bride and groom, 1964.

288
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
often at luncheons or dinners, and they took the time to attend the NRC
parties and the many formal functions to which they were invited by the
Government and various embassies in Ottawa.
While holidays were few, the Herzbergs preferred spending these
precious days in the mountains; the Lake O’Hara region in the Canadian
Rockies was a favourite of the family. In Europe, Gerhard and Luise would
often spend a week or two at Saas-Fee in the Swiss Alps. Hiking in the
mountains was the main form of exercise rather than rigorous climbing,
and at least in the early days Luise managed to keep up with him. While he
would have liked to climb the Matterhorn he never attempted it, but with a
guide, Herzberg did reach the top of the nearby Nadelhorn, only 200 metres
lower and not as difficult a climb.
By 1971, Herzberg had been awarded eighteen honorary degrees, his
first being from the University of Saskatchewan in 1953, the others main-
ly from Canadian universities, as well as from Dublin, Oxford, Stockholm,
Chicago, and Göttingen. In Göttingen, he gave a lecture in the same hall
where he had attended the seminars of many distinguished visitors in 1929.
Herzberg received many other honours, awards, and medals. In particular,
he was appointed Academician of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences in
1964 and Companion of the Order of Canada in 1968, the highest honour
accorded by his adopted country.
Luise, Paul, and Agnes at
Waterton Lake, 1947.
Herzberg at Lake O’Hara, 1952.

PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      289
The first honorary Doctorate degree, LLD,
University of Saskatchewan, 1953.
Appointed Companion of the Order of Canada
by Governor General Roland Michener, 1968.

290
18. THE CLASSIC VOLUMES
Herzberg’s talent for lecturing was recognized very early by his colleagues.
In 1929, while a postdoctoral fellow in Göttingen, he was invited by stu-
dents to informally review for them the theory of atomic and molecular
spectra and to bring them up-to-date on the topics being discussed in col-
loquia by the many distinguished visiting speakers.1 He accepted this extra
task, his purpose being to learn as well as to teach. He enjoyed the experi-
ence and early in his career gave introductory courses on spectroscopy in
Bristol, Erlangen, and Darmstadt. When encouraged to publish these lec-
tures, he again accepted the challenge in the belief that by writing for pub-
lication he would ensure that he understood the topic under discussion.
What started out to be a book of about 160 pages, finally blossomed
into four volumes, one on atomic spectra and three on molecular spectra,
totalling more than 2,200 pages. Later, when books of molecular constants
and on spectra of free radicals were added, the total reached over 3,200
pages. These six volumes were conceived, written, and brought to fruition
in five decades, while at the same time Herzberg carried out an enormous
amount of fundamental research, much of which helped to develop and
clarify the concepts of the many topics treated in these volumes.2 As his
colleague Robert Mulliken perceived, “Herzberg’s books are an expression
of his joy (and hard work) in teaching others what he had learned”.3
Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure
In 1929, Herzberg entered into an agreement with Theodor Steinkopff, a
Dresden publisher, to prepare a manuscript of his course “An Introduction
to Spectroscopy”. This was to be an elementary introduction for the begin-
ner in the field of atomic and molecular spectra. Herzberg began to write
and revise as he gave more courses on the topic, but he was also deeply
involved in research, and as “privatdozent” he had the unique opportunity
to set up a new laboratory in Darmstadt. Thus, he was long overdue on his
commitment and was regularly reminded by Steinkopff about the book. As
The debt which all spectroscopists and physical chemists
owe to Gerhard Herzberg is enormous. None of the
younger generation can realize the impact which each of
his books has had in the development of our knowledge of
atomic and molecular structure.
G.B.B.M. Sutherland

Herzberg developed his presentation, he realized that the topic was far too
extensive to treat in a single volume and decided to write one on atomic
spectra and another on molecular spectra. This division into two volumes
was approved by the publisher, although even the one volume on atomic
spectra was eventually longer than two hundred pages. Herzberg submitted
the completed manuscript in 1935 and hoped that he would not be asked to
reduce or revise it since he was on the point of leaving the Third Reich and
on his way to Canada as a guest professor.
The Herzbergs were hardly settled in their new home in Saskatoon in
September 1935, and he was just beginning to feel comfortable with his
teaching assignments at the university, when galley proofs for Atomspek-
tren und Atomstruktur arrived from Germany to be read and corrected and
any changes made as soon as possible. He immediately took up this oner-
ous task, working far into the nights, long after preparing lectures, and the
book was published in 1936.
Edward Condon, editor of a new physics series for the Prentice-Hall
Company, immediately reminded Herzberg of the promise he had made in
1935 to translate the book into English. Condon thought that Herzberg’s
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      291
The classic texts of Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure and 
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure.

292
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
book was an excellent introduction to the detailed theoretical treatise on
line spectra titled The Theory of Atomic Spectra, which he and George H.
Shortley had written and published in 1935.4 In fact, at least a dozen new
books on atomic spectra had appeared in the past decade. Yet with spec-
troscopy being a key contributor to the development of quantum mechan-
ics and with its many applications in physics, chemistry, and astronomy,
there was a great demand for elementary texts on this subject.
Herzberg felt uneasy about doing the translation himself, mainly
because he was still not confident in English and was concerned about the
time it would take from research. He managed to involve his friend John
Spinks in this task. Spinks was anxious to help and was very quick in trans-
lating the book. Their colleague Newman Haslam then read the proofs of
the entire book and helped with improvements in the presentation. The
English version, Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure, was published in
1937.
With World War II in progress soon afterwards and fewer students in
universities, the sale of texts, including Herzberg’s, decreased dramatical-
ly. Nevertheless, by 1944 Prentice-Hall had sold its original printing of
1,500 copies at approximately 200 books per year. However, the publisher
was not interested in reprinting or in a revised edition, “We cannot reprint
because we need our quota of paper for more profitable books”. The orig-
inal type had been destroyed and the copyright was returned to Herzberg
by the publisher.
Herzberg felt that at war’s end there would be a demand for books on
spectroscopy, and he sought out other possible publishers. He inquired of
Edwards Bros. Incorporated of Ann Arbor, Michigan, the G.E. Stechert &
Company, New York, and Dover Publishers, New York, whether there was
any interest in producing and distributing a litho-printed edition. Edwards
replied that it only produced at cost to the customer, who would then have
to take care of distribution. Stechert wrote that it would print 1,000 copies
and give the same royalty as Prentice-Hall, but it would be impossible to
include any corrections in a photo-offset reprint. On the other hand, Dover,
a relatively new company, was definitely interested and would include cor-
rections and up-dates of tables of data and start with a printing of 2,000
copies. The only problem was the limited paper quota allotted to Dover, not
the unquestionable merit of the book.5 Herzberg signed a contract to
receive 5 percent royalty on all paper copies sold, with 7.5 percent for the
first 5,000 cloth copies and 10 percent on all cloth copies thereafter. For

John Spinks’ assistance in translating the original German version, Herz-
berg chose to pay him 60 percent of the royalty received, as with the
Prentice-Hall edition. The publication date of this second edition was 1944,
with 3,000 copies printed in each of 1945 and 1946.
Sales boomed just after the end of World War II and amounted to about
11,000 cloth and 3,400 paper copies sold in the first decade with the print-
ing of six editions. Later copies were all paper. In 1959–1960, the book was
adopted for university courses in England and India, and sales soared to
over 10,000 per year. In 1987, Hayward Cirker, President of Dover Pub-
lications, wrote to Herzberg, “ It’s been many years since we entered into
agreement and I’m glad we are around and active.… We are delighted to
keep your fine book alive.”8 By then over 100,000 copies of Atomic
Spectra and Atomic Structure had been sold by Dover. Today, this small
volume is still in print in its original version, serving as an important  intro-
duction to atomic spectroscopy after five decades.
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure:
I. Spectra of Diatomic Molecules
Herzberg’s contract with Steinkopff in Germany was for the above book on
atomic spectra and one on molecular spectra. Before leaving Germany he
had made a good start on the molecular manuscript in about seven hundred
handwritten pages and realized that a proper treatment of molecular spec-
tra was not possible in a single volume. His writing thus far had only dealt
with diatomic molecules: it became clear that polyatomic molecules would
require another volume. The thought even crossed his mind that to explain
what was already known about polyatomic molecules might best be pre-
sented in two volumes, one dealing with rotational and vibrational spectra
and another with electronic spectra.
The 1935 contract with the Prentice-Hall Company included three vol-
umes: one on atomic spectra, a second on diatomic molecules, and a third
on polyatomic molecules. On completion of the volume on atomic spectra
in German and in English by 1937, Herzberg immediately resumed his
writing of Diatomic Spectra. While awaiting the construction of his major
spectrograph in Saskatoon, he devoted any time free from his regular duties
to writing. Over the years, he had made brief notes on index cards of pub-
lished papers he had read and of results he had heard at conferences, and
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      293

294
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
this information was of enormous help. Now he spent much time in catch-
ing up on the latest research findings, checking references, and preparing
long tables of useful data to be included in the new volume. He wrote the
book in German, by hand, and the university was very supportive by pro-
viding a secretary to type the manuscript. Luise prepared the many draw-
ings for the book, which were then drafted by Lorne Gray, an engineering
student at the University of Saskatchewan. (Gray served as President of
Atomic Energy Canada Limited from 1954 to 1965 and on meeting Herz-
berg in Ottawa told him, “I’m still proud of having done those figures for
you”.) While the writing was going on in German, John Spinks was busily
translating it into English, and Newman Haslam was helping with stylistic
improvements. Herzberg decided that this volume was to be the beginning
of a series on molecules and chose the title Molecular Spectra and Molec-
ular Structure: I. Diatomic Molecules. Both the German and English edi-
tions were published in 1939, just before World War II erupted. Understand-
ably, this volume was dedicated to the memory of Walter Charles Murray,
the first President of the University of Saskatchewan, who had done so
much for the Herzbergs. Murray was genuinely touched by this gesture.
Herzberg was commended by numerous friends for this volume.
Robert S. Mulliken of Chicago wrote:
It is a very fine book. It will hardly be possible for anyone to write a bet-
ter one serving the same purposes—at least for a long time to come. I am
looking forward to cutting down on lectures for my band spectra course,
referring the students to your book.7
In addition to The University of Chicago, several other universities quick-
ly adopted the book for graduate classes, including Berkeley, Los Angeles,
Ohio, and Wisconsin. 
Reviews of the book were all favourable. W. Jevons, an eminent Eng-
lish spectroscopist who had written a book on diatomic molecules, was
asked by Steinkopff for comments:
I wish to thank you very cordially for your kindness in sending me a copy
of Professor Herzberg’s new book on Moleklspektren etc. It is a magnif-
icent piece of work and a most fitting sequel to his Atomspektren etc.
which you presented to me about two years ago and which I had the pleas-
ure of reviewing later in its English edition.8

Excerpts from two lengthy reviews follow:
Herzberg’s powers of exposition have been shown in his previous book
Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure. Here, ... characteristics of the ear-
lier book show to even greater advantage, the orderliness of the treatment,
the avoidance of irrelevant complication, the good choice of illustrative
material, and the care taken with such accessories as indexes and captions
of figures and tables.... An excellent final chapter summarizes some of the
main results—and gives an account of applications to a wide variety of
fields in physics, chemistry and astrophysics. It is a masterly exposition,
which should meet the needs and stimulate the interest of a wide variety
of readers.9
The second reviewer began with a lengthy description of progress in exper-
imental study and theoretical interpretation of molecular spectra and of
what is contained in the text:
All this is so much in the spirit of modern physical chemistry, and yet so
difficult a field for the novice to enter, that the appearance of a compre-
hensive text-book in English on the subject by Prof. Herzberg is an event
of considerable importance. It will undoubtedly accelerate the future
development of physical chemistry.... In the earlier book Atomic Spectra
and Atomic Structure, ... we became familiar with that singular clarity of
style which makes learning a pastime and renders a comparatively short
text both suitable to beginners and sufficiently comprehensive to assist
the research worker. The new book has all the simplicity and crisp direct-
ness of the old; and it goes definitely further in the direction of compre-
hensiveness.10
The book also raised attention and comment in Nazi Germany as early as
1940. Ludwig Glaser, a former student of Johannes Stark and along with
him a Nazi and a leading proponent of the anti-Einstein and Aryan-science
movements, wrote:
This book is by an author of the Jewish clan who emigrated to a hostile
foreign country. This mental attitude is also reflected by him in the book.
It represents, as Philipp Lenard maintains, the Jewish physics of Born’s
Optik and of modern physics. An extremely unpleasant book that is to be
rejected as a German physics publication.11
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      295

296
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Nevertheless, along with the earlier volume on atomic spectra,
Moleklspektren und Moleklstruktur: I. Zweiatomige Molekle apparent-
ly sold reasonably well in Germany since some royalties accumulated. At
the end of the war, Herzberg asked Steinkopff to send these royalties to a
cousin in Langensalza.
Herzberg, now thirty-five years of age, had just begun to take voice les-
sons for relaxation, but neither this extra activity nor family obligations
stopped him from pursuing his ambition of completing the series of books
on molecular spectra. On finishing Diatomic Molecules, he simply contin-
ued with writing about what was known concerning polyatomic molecules.
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure: 
II. Infrared and Raman Spectra of Polyatomic
Molecules
World War II quickly brought Herzberg’s research at the University of
Saskatchewan to a standstill. Few students pursued graduate studies and no
papers were published in 1943–1944. Moreover, being legally an enemy
alien, he was not permitted to contribute to major wartime research until in
1943 he was invited to carry out spectroscopic work on new explosives. He
therefore turned to the writing of his second volume, Infrared and Raman
Spectra of Polyatomic Molecules. The next three years, including almost
every weekend, were largely devoted to its completion. Although Luise had
given up any idea of active research while raising her children, she was an
indispensable contributor to this volume, having produced all of the draw-
ings and many of the tables of molecular data. Paul and Agnes remember
that on many Sundays they would go to the lab to visit their dad. They
would knock on the basement window and he would give them a piece of
chocolate kept in his desk for just such occasions. As a special treat, he
would sometimes take them to the sod hut behind the physics building
where explosives were tested. Then they would walk home for lunch and
work together in the “victory” garden.
Although the original contract with the Prentice-Hall Company also
included this second volume in the series, the publisher cancelled the contract
because of the rationing of paper and the desire to use the limited supply for
more profitable books; the publisher had declined to reprint Atomic Spectra
and Atomic Structure for the same reason. This news was a serious predica-

ment for Herzberg since he had just finished the manuscript, all handwritten
in English. At the time, Charles Dollard, Assistant to the President of the
Carnegie Corporation, happened to be visiting the University of Saskat-
chewan and, on discussing with Herzberg his activities and experiences in
Canada, learned of this latest problem. Dollard promised to raise the matter
with several publishers he knew, including the Van Nostrand Company.12
Herzberg wrote a long letter to the editor of Van Nostrand asking
whether there was any interest in publishing this companion to Diatomic
Molecules. He included a table of contents, an outline of the book, gave
several reasons for the need of such a book, and sent along reviews of vol-
ume I. He also mentioned that the manuscript of about 750 written pages
(not all typed yet) was complete and that there would be 157 line drawings
and 13 halftones. Moreover, he indicated that a first version of the third
volume in the series on electronic spectra of polyatomic molecules was
essentially finished.
Within two weeks, Herzberg received an answer from Edward M.
Crane, President of Van Nostrand. “Send me the manuscript.”13 A month
later Herzberg informed Crane that he was sending the work in four batch-
es to reduce the risk of a loss and that the typing was being done by six typ-
ists. All sections of the manuscript, except for an index, were received in
the following two weeks. Two months later, Herzberg received copies of
two reviews: one favourable, the other overly critical. Crane wanted to
publish the book and suggested revisions of certain sections. He also
included a statement on the royalty to be paid: 10 percent on the first thou-
sand, 12.5 on the second thousand, and 15 percent thereafter. Herzberg
approved the royalty basis and agreed to improve the clarity and style with
Newman Haslam’s help and to accept further suggestions. But he would
not countenance another review after this revision, since he felt that with
reviewers as critical as the second one (who asked that group theoretical
methods should be included), there would be no end of revisions. As
Herzberg noted: “There are only very few brilliant theorists, of which your
reviewer is one of the most prominent (if I guess his identity correctly),
who think that avoiding group theory makes things less understandable.
Well, for them my book is not written.”14 Finally, Crane agreed to no fur-
ther reviews and felt that they understood each other, adding: “There will
be restrictions on books of fiction and other non-technical subjects, but I
cannot conceive how restrictions can be made to apply to books that are
useful in the war effort, and any branch of physics is in this category.”
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      297

298
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Haslam read the entire manuscript and proofs and K.J. MacCallum of
Chemistry also read the proofs, and both helped with suggestions. After
considerable rewriting and abbreviation of certain sections, Herzberg
received a letter of congratulations from Crane on the splendid manner in
which the manuscript was completed. Crane hoped Herzberg would agree
that the book had benefitted tremendously from this additional labor. In the
meantime, Crane appeared to have qualms about Herzberg’s suggested title
of the book, but he finally accepted the series title Molecular Spectra and
Molecular Structure: II. Infrared and Raman Spectra of Polyatomic Mole-
cules. In spite of the good will on both sides and regular friendly corre-
spondence, there were long delays in printing the book. As time passed and
in order to keep the book up-to-date, Herzberg requested changes and dele-
tions, leading to further delays and higher costs. The book was eventually
published in May 1945. When he received his first copies of the book, he
was very pleased with its general appearance.
Gerhard dedicated the volume to Luise. He gratefully acknowledged
her help in the preface: “I am particularly indebted to my wife who pre-
pared all the figures, calculated many of the tables and contributed many
improvements to the text. Without her help many a figure and table that I
believe has greatly increased the usefulness of the book, would not have
been included.” On receiving a copy of this volume, Harrington, the Head
of the Department of Physics in Saskatoon, wrote: “It is a wonderful book.
Whenever I look at it, I shall see you and Mrs. Herzberg giving long hours
in the effort to make it a perfect job”.
Once volumes I and II were published, they were recognized as stan-
dards for the field of molecular spectra, and Herzberg was much in demand
by the science community to assist in developing standards of notation,
nomenclature, and units for molecular states and spectra. Thus, he served
on several committees involved with setting standards in physics, chem-
istry, and astrophysics, including the relevant commissions of the Institute
of Astrophysics, the Inter-Union Committee on Spectroscopy, the Inter-
national Union of Pure and Applied Physics, and the International Union of
Pure and Applied Chemistry. He served for many years, becoming chair-
man of several committees, all of which required considerable travel and
much time in attending meetings and writing reports. Such commitments
took valuable time away from his own research, but he felt it his duty to
contribute in this way and gave unstintingly of his time and energy to these
various tasks, all for the sake of science.

Diatomic Molecules, Second Edition
With the end of World War II, Herzberg was anxious to move to the Yerkes
Observatory to begin his research in astrophysical spectroscopy. The
prospect of setting up a completely new laboratory at Yerkes, carrying out
research with students and visitors, and giving lectures did not curtail his
enthusiasm for completing the series of books on molecular spectra. A few
months after arriving at Yerkes, he personally received many requests for
the English edition of Diatomic Molecules, which he learned was sold out.
Since the original publisher (Prentice-Hall Company) was reluctant to con-
tinue printing the book, Dover Publishing asked for Herzberg’s permission
to reprint it photographically. However, he noted that while there was much
activity and progress in spectroscopy, no new books on the spectra of
diatomic molecules had appeared, and he decided it was time to revise the
1939 edition of volume I. He arranged for its publication by Van Nostrand.
It seems unbelievable that after writing three books and nursing them
through the publication stage, while carrying out original research and pub-
lishing many papers, Herzberg would not say “enough is enough”. But as
noted above, he had already launched into the third volume of the series on
molecular spectra. Moreover, with the field of molecular spectroscopy
developing so rapidly, he realized that revisions of volumes I and II would
be necessary. In fact, he obviously had every intention of revising these
books, because he had requested from the publishers specially bound
copies of these volumes with blank pages inserted between the printed
pages. As he kept up to date on the latest developments by personal con-
tacts, attending conferences, and reading current issues of many technical
journals, he would make notes of new results on these blank pages (instead
of on index cards as he had done earlier). In this way he had at hand the
most recent results on molecular spectra, and these references would make
revisions of the texts much more efficient.
In early 1946, Herzberg and Crane of Van Nostrand agreed on a revised
edition of Diatomic Molecules, with Crane expecting the manuscript to be
ready within a year because of the demand for the book. By January 1947,
Herzberg had rewritten about 40 percent of the old version and added many
new results, especially from microwave spectroscopy, so that more than
half of the “revised” book was new. A major feature was an extensive table
(eighty printed pages) of molecular constants of the ground and excited
states of all known diatomic molecules, which took considerable time and
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      299

300
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
care to compose. With Herzberg’s preparations to leave Yerkes Observ-
atory for the NRC in Ottawa, while carrying out his most important exper-
iment at Yerkes, there was some further delay. Nevertheless, he managed to
send the first three chapters to the publisher just before departing from
Williams Bay in August 1948, and the remainder of the manuscript was
sent a month later from Canada. 
At Yerkes, Chandra, who was himself an extraordinary worker, was
continually impressed with Gerhard’s boundless energy and productivity in
the laboratory, not to mention his astonishing appetite for writing books:
Besides building up of the laboratory and the experimental studies, a
major task which Herzberg completed during those years was the revi-
sion, towards the second edition of his already standard book on Diatomic
Molecules.... I recall the incredible discipline with which he used to set
apart the larger part of each weekend to this task. His office was across
the corridor from mine; and often on Sunday mornings, I used to interrupt
him in his work with an invitation to go for a walk along the lake. He
always acceded, though after some initial hesitation. During those walks,
he infected me with his own enthusiasm for the study of molecules;
enough for me to volunteer to read the proofs of his book: and I am still
proud of his acknowledgement to my having done so in the preface to his
book. Indeed, after Herzberg left for Ottawa in 1948, I continued to give
his course on Atomic and Molecular Spectra for some two or three years.
But alas, without his constant presence the pressure of other interests
gradually drifted me away from “Atoms and Molecules”.15
On reading the proofs of this second edition, Chandra wrote to Herzberg:
I have found your book one of the best I have ever read and I do want to
congratulate you on making an admittedly complex subject so transpar-
ent. It is so well written, that I find I can learn the subject very much more
easily than I thought I could: life would be so much simpler if there were
equally well written books on other subjects.
By the end of the year, printing of the book had not been started, much
to Herzberg’s disappointment, because of the length of time a reviewer
took to read the manuscript. On receipt of the report Herzberg quickly
accepted some of the suggestions of the reviewer and rebutted others. He
made revisions and added illustrations because of new spectroscopic
results, and then made many corrections in the proofs, so that final printing
was not completed until the end of 1949. The revised edition of Molecular

Spectra and Molecular Structure: I. Diatomic Molecules was finally avail-
able in May 1950. The book was immediately adopted by twenty-six uni-
versities and colleges for graduate courses in physics and chemistry.
Herzberg sent copies of this second edition to many friends in Europe
and one to W.P. Thompson, President of the University of Saskatchewan,
along with a letter stating: 
The first edition of my book on Diatomic Molecules was dedicated to Dr.
Murray while he was still living. In the new second edition, which has just
appeared, I have renewed this dedication to the memory of one to whom
personally I owe more than I can express in words. Since, alas, Dr.
Murray is no longer with us, it is perhaps fitting that I should send a copy
of my book to you, his successor, as a token of my devotion to the Uni-
versity of Saskatchewan and of my admiration and unfailing remem-
brance of its first president. At the same time I recall with great pleasure
the many kindnesses that you have extended to me and the support that
you have always given to my work.16
Herzberg also wished to acknowledge his friend John Spinks, who had
helped with the translation of the 1939 edition, and he arranged with the
publisher that the words “With the co-operation, in the first edition, of
J.W.T. Spinks” should appear on the title page and that Spinks should
receive 25 percent of royalty payments.
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure:
III. Electronic Spectra and Electronic Structure
of Polyatomic Molecules
This final volume of Herzberg’s trilogy had been incubating for at least a
decade, and he had even suggested a 1955 completion date to Crane at Van
Nostrand, but the book finally made its appearance in 1966. Such a delay
was to be expected; not only was Herzberg extremely busy with his many
responsibilities at the NRC, but he also felt that he should await the results
of the rapid progress being made in electronic spectroscopy during the
1950s. The developments in his own laboratory and elsewhere, including
improvements in vacuum ultraviolet techniques and studies of free radical
spectra, made possible enormous strides in the understanding of electronic
spectra of polyatomic molecules, and he continued his methodical writing
and rewriting of this volume for another decade.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      301

302
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Herzberg devoted Saturdays for fifteen years to the writing of this
book, no matter whether he was in Ottawa or on travels to conferences or
on other business. At the NRC we all understood that we would not see him
on Saturdays. He would arrive as early as 7 A.M., go directly to his office,
have lunch there, and return home at about 6 P.M. He would not appear in
the laboratory for tea, nor did we trouble him with any of our problems.
During my first years at the NRC I was allotted an office immediately
below his. Every now and then, I would hear him pacing back and forth, no
doubt trying to work out the proper wording to best express and explain a
particularly complex idea.
This third volume was undoubtedly the most difficult to write, and it
turned out to be by far the longest, exceeding the earlier volumes by
approximately one hundred pages. Understandably, the electronic spectra
of polyatomic molecules are more numerous and more complicated than
those of diatomic molecules because of the larger number of atoms. Poly-
atomic molecules have more excited states, and changes in structure of
some molecules occur as different electrons are excited to higher energies.
Thus, while Herzberg took great pains to show a variety of observed spec-
tra and to explain their meaning and analysis, this volume was meant for
the serious student of molecular spectra and structure. Herzberg acknowl-
edged the assistance and suggestions of Jon Hougen and Alex Douglas,
who read the entire manuscript, Christopher Longuet-Higgins, who had
helped with theoretical problems, and John Callomon, John Johns, and
Klaus Huber, who proofread large sections of this enormous volume.
On reading this volume, Christopher Longuet-Higgins, one of the few
who could understand every aspect of this enormous subject, wrote to
Herzberg:
Part III is quite obviously a work of no less classic quality than Parts I and
II. Your books, like the great masterpieces of music and architecture, are
among the finest monuments of our civilization. They are outstanding
among the records of modern science for the hard thought, scholarship
and attention to detail, which are evident on every page. You ought to be
very proud of your scientific achievements: would that the rest of us could
live up to such high standards.17
Herzberg sent a copy of volume III to Günter Scheibe, whom he had met
in 1929 in Göttingen:

On this occasion I remember with pleasure the first stimulus to write
these volumes which was given by you about forty years ago. Originally,
of course, you had suggested that I write one small volume on both atom-
ic and molecular spectra. In the course of these forty years the plan has
degenerated into four rather substantial volumes, and has taken a lot
longer than it should have.18
Over the years, Herzberg was amused to learn that several of his musi-
cal friends had noted an analogy of his first four books with “Der Ring des
Nibelungen” by Richard Wagner (1813–1883), which he began with the
thought of composing a single opera, but finally expanded into a tetralogy.
Herzberg’s four works evolved over a period of more than thirty years, the
last being completed in his Spectroscopy Laboratory, while Wagner’s were
finished in twenty years, with “Die Götterdämmerung”, the last in the
series being performed in Das Festspielhaus, the theatre Wagner built in
Bayreuth.
The Spectra and Structures of Simple Free
Radicals
In 1968, Herzberg was invited to present the prestigious George Fisher
Baker Lectures in Chemistry at Cornell University, which were followed
by a publication of the lectures. He chose to discuss the spectra and struc-
tures of free radicals, since much had been learned of these short-lived
species during the preceding two decades. However, for a general audience
of chemists to understand his topic, he felt it would be necessary to give an
introductory lecture on molecular spectroscopy, and this was the substance
of his first lecture. This also gave him the opportunity to fulfill his dream
of forty years earlier, when he began to write his first book, namely, to pro-
duce a small book on an introduction to the field of atomic and molecular
spectroscopy. Thus a highly abbreviated version of the material in the tril-
ogy Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure formed the basic intro-
duction to The Spectra and Structures of Simple Free Radicals: An Intro-
duction to Molecular Spectroscopy. This small volume was published in
1970 by Cornell University Press.
By 1986 the book was out of print, and Herzberg was informed by
Cornell University Press that he would be free to explore other means
of keeping it in print. Since his first book Atomic Spectra and Atomic
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      303

304
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Structure was still being produced by Dover Publications after forty years
of good sales, he approached Dover and was pleased with the agreement to
reprint The Spectra and Structures of Simple Free Radicals.
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure:
IV. Constants of Diatomic Molecules
In 1978, a fourth volume was added to the trilogy on molecular spectra
comprising an extensive series of tables of data on electronic states and
molecular constants for over nine hundred diatomic molecules and ions.
This compilation took eleven years to complete. It became a volume of
seven hundred pages, and its size is a measure of the myriad spectroscopic
studies that were carried out after the original eighty page table (and thirty
pages of bibliography) was produced for the second edition of Diatomic
Molecules in 1950. Herzberg offered to hire Klaus Huber, who was in the
last year of his fellowship in the Spectroscopy Laboratory, provided he
would spend half his time on the book. Huber began in 1965 and in later
years worked full-time on this project, preparing the final manuscript for
the photo-offset production of the volume. In this way, typographical errors
were avoided, although much time was spent carefully checking numbers
and references in the manuscript by Izabel Dabrowski, Herzberg’s assis-
tant, and Marjorie Thompson, his secretary. The volume was published by
the Van Nostrand Reinhold Company in New York in 1978. Royalty pay-
ments were split 50:50 with Huber. By 1985 the small number of copies of
the original printing had been sold, and the publisher agreed to print anoth-
er 500 copies if the authors would waive payment of royalty. Also, in order
to keep the price of the volume below $40 a subsidy of $2,500 was request-
ed.19 Huber and Herzberg consented to both of these conditions in order to
keep volume IV in print.
On receiving an inscribed copy of this latest volume, Chandra wrote:
Coming after your three magnificent treatises, this volume represents the
completion of a total effort that passes imagination—one cannot believe
it except for the fact that the fruits of that effort are here for all to enjoy.
I do not doubt that you have a feeling on completing this work, similar to
what you must feel after climbing to the top of one of the Swiss peaks you
love.20

Translations, Reprint Editions, and Sales
Herzberg’s first two texts, the first on atomic spectra and the second on
diatomic molecules, were written in German and translated into English
with the help of John Spinks. All other texts were written in English. Every
one of Herzberg’s six books was translated into Russian, and some
appeared in Italian, Hungarian, Chinese, Japanese, German, and Serbo-
Croation. All of the books in English have had good sales and are still
available, having been reprinted by the Krieger Publishing Co. Inc.,
Florida, in 1989 and 1991. Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure has sold
over 100,000 copies, while volumes I, II, and III have sold about 30,000,
25,000, and 15,000, respectively.21 As expected, volume IV, being a set of
tabular data, has sold a smaller number, only about 4,000 copies, mainly to
libraries and scientific institutions, and sales of The Spectra and Structures
of Simple Free Radicals have also been low, perhaps because of the book’s
specialized topic.
The three volumes on Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure
form an authoritative and comprehensive review of the vast literature on
molecular spectra, with countless examples presented in a style adequate
for the beginning student as well as for active research scientists. It would
be difficult to find a comparable and as thorough a compilation of such an
extensive field of science by a single individual. Many who are familiar
with the trilogy have said that these volumes are in essence “the Bible” for
this field of knowledge. Thus, it is not at all surprising to see this series on
the desks of all active molecular scientists and to hear the cry “Look it up
in Herzberg!”
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      305

306
19. CHALLENGING THE NEW POLITICS
OF SCIENCE
The importance of the sciences to governments in industrial countries led
to tremendous growth in research worldwide during the 1950s and 1960s,
forcing issues of priorities and fiscal accountability into the public arena.
All countries, and Canada was no exception, were confronted with such
problems, and there were calls for a “national science policy” in Canada.
Numerous commissions and committees began studying new mandates of
funding, organization, and management, and of directing the sciences to-
wards solving economic and social problems of the country. Given its prom-
inence, the NRC with its wide-ranging powers and historic responsibilities
for the natural sciences and engineering, was vulnerable to the closest
scrutiny, raising the spectre of bureaucratic political controls, which were
anathema to Steacie, Herzberg, and many others.1
Growth of NRC Science and Its Problems
As Canada’s needs for basic and applied research kept increasing in com-
plexity and costs, President Steacie became specially concerned about the
growth of the NRC and some direct government intrusion. In an address to
the Montreal Canadian Club in 1958, he outlined his incisive views of the
crucial problem for the future of science in Canada:
With the increasing importance of science to technology, and incidentally
to defence, science has relatively recently and suddenly begun to impinge
on government policy. Under these circumstances the need for govern-
ment facilities and permanent advisers has arisen, and there has been an
enormous increase in government science. The fact that science has
become a matter of government policy and interest has brought with it the
customary advantages and disadvantages. Public interest always means
increased support, but also means increased control and diminished free-
dom. The reconciliation of these two opposing factors in government, in
industry, and even in universities, is the most important problem facing
science in the next decade or two.2
One doesn’t tear the house down because the chimney smokes.
Galileo Galilei

Steacie’s main worry for the NRC was that any changes in the Research
Council Act could lead to reduced freedom for the NRC through “the very
dangerous activities of government planning and co-ordination, which are
usually carried out by a management that knows nothing about science, and
is controlled by accountants whose emphasis is on efficiency”.3 His appre-
hension was fuelled by a recommendation of the Heeney Report of 1958
that in the interests of uniformity and equity, all scientists, whether in
government departments or in outside agencies such as the NRC, should be
treated alike. Steacie felt that this advice was an attempt to bring the
NRC into the Civil Service Commission, to which he was “implacably
opposed”.4
A variety of studies of government research and of the need for a
national science policy were initiated in the 1960s, but Steacie did not live
to see their damaging criticisms of the NRC. After a brief terminal illness
Steacie died on 28 August 1962. He had served the NRC for twenty-two
years, the last ten as its indomitable President.5 With his untimely death,
the euphoria that had pervaded the NRC and science in Canada after World
War II came to an end. Most of the staff at the NRC knew nothing of Stea-
cie’s illness. Nor did they suspect any problem as they saw him walking
down the hallway to the east end of the building on almost daily visits with
Keith MacDonald, who was then in a wheelchair because of his progres-
sive fatal paralysis.
Colleagues and friends at the NRC, in Canada, and around the world
were stunned by Steacie’s sudden death. One who had worked closely with
him summed up his attributes: “Steacie was a rare combination of dedicat-
ed research scientist and hard-headed, no-nonsense administrator, with a
clear analytical mind, which rapidly cut through to the core of the numer-
ous problems he faced”.6 A chemistry colleague, on first meeting Steacie,
had immediately recognized his humanity: “Apart from his shrewd com-
mon sense, his greatest assets were his patent honesty, integrity and
unselfishness, coupled with a total lack of pomposity”.7
For Herzberg, Steacie’s death was one of the biggest shocks in his life:
In him, Canada has lost one of its most outstanding citizens; the scientif-
ic community of this country and of the world has lost a colleague
renowned both for his original contributions to physical chemistry and for
his deep influence on the organization of national and international sci-
entific organizations.... It was he who persuaded the Government to
increase more and more the support of universities by research grants
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      307

308
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
(almost by a factor of ten during his presidency). It was he who conceived
and initiated the post-doctorate fellowship scheme at the NRC and later
at universities and in other Government departments. It was he who rec-
ognized at an early date the need for encouraging industrial research in
Canada.... Steacie’s great gifts and his personal charm produced a won-
derful spirit at the National Research Council.8
Two major programs that Steacie had planned were brought to fruition
during his last years. One was an exchange program between the Academy
of Sciences of the Soviet Union and the NRC, which he had fostered dur-
ing his visit to the U.S.S.R. in 1959 when he was inducted as a Foreign
Member of the Academy. The other was a grants program for research in
industry, analogous to the successful NRC research grants program, which
provided financial encouragement to universities. The objective of the
Industrial Research Assistance Program (IRAP) was to enable Canadian
industry to overcome the branch–plant mentality (which accepts research
and development from outside the country) and spend money on research.
IRAP grants provided funds for salaries and wages to an amount that
matched a company’s expanded research. The program began slowly with
the Treasury Board’s approval of a sum of only $1 million, but in its first
year IRAP gave rise to sixty-two new projects involving forty-four Can-
adian companies, and the following year the government’s commitment
was tripled.9
Just before Steacie’s death, a government austerity program was
announced with the further caveat that future NRC appointments and proj-
ects be referred first to the Treasury Board. Steacie co-operated with the
financial urgency and reduced NRC’s budget by $1.5 million, but he
informed Treasury Board that financial stringency did not make the NRC
less competent or the Board more competent to judge the relative merits of
people and research projects.10 He was the guardian of the NRC’s autono-
my to the very end.
The Short Road Down
Dr. Bristow Guy Ballard, Vice-President Scientific since 1954, served as
Acting President until he was appointed President in February 1963, a post
he did not covet. A graduate electrical engineer of Queen’s University, he
had joined the NRC in 1930 and during the Second World War helped to
develop magnetic mine-sweeping equipment, for which he was appointed

an Officer of the Order of the British Empire. He was instrumental in build-
ing up the extensive Division of Radio and Electrical Engineering. His was
a difficult task to succeed the dynamic and well-known Steacie. Although
Ballard supported the growth and funding of university research, he rec-
ommended that industrial research should now become a first priority for
the NRC, but this initiative was thwarted by the Advisory Council.
Ballard’s term in office was a challenging period for the NRC and for the
country since it coincided with the election of the new minority
Government of Lester B. Pearson that concentrated on national unity but
had difficulty in accommodating itself to the political and social temper of
the 1960s. On his appointment, Ballard was confronted with the publica-
tion of the extensive Report of the Royal Commission on Government
Organization (or Glassco Report, so named after its Chairman J. Grant
Glassco). Along with its general study of departments and agencies of the
Federal Government, the Glassco Report made far-reaching recommenda-
tions for accountability and co-ordination of scientific activities of govern-
ment departments and for new structures to assist in the formulation of a
national science policy.11
The Commission made several recommendations: appointment of a
Minister to be made responsible for policy decisions in scientific research;
establishment of a Scientific Secretariat, with a small staff, to operate under
the direction of the President of the Treasury Board; and the establishment
of a National Scientific Advisory Council. This new structure would
assume the role of advising the Government, because the National
Research Council was not without a perceived conflict of interest and there
was an evident breakdown of the system as originally intended in the
Research Council Act. The Glassco Commission also argued that the NRC
was no longer broadly representative of the Canadian scientific communi-
ty and having been “built by scientists for scientists” was involved mainly
in pure research. This was an inaccurate assessment by the Commission
since their own data clearly showed that more than 80 percent of NRC
activities were involved with applied science and engineering.12 It was also
an unfortunate statement since all further studies on science policy made
use of this misleading allegation to publicly criticize the NRC for stressing
basic rather than applied research and technology.
On Ballard’s retirement at age sixty-five, Dr. William George Schnei-
der became the sixth President of the NRC. He was a chemistry graduate
from the University of Saskatchewan, having taken some of Herzberg’s
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      309

310
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
courses on atomic and molecular spectroscopy. After obtaining his Ph.D.
from McGill University in 1941, he was employed by the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute before joining the NRC in 1946. Schneider served
as Director of the Division of Pure Chemistry (1963–1965), Vice-President
Scientific (1965–1967), and President from 1967 to 1980. The first years of
his term were imbued with the exhilaration of Expo’67 and the Centennial
celebrations and by the election of Pierre Trudeau with a majority govern-
ment. But Schneider’s tenure became exceedingly difficult as the new gov-
ernment declared that “for every problem there was a rational solution....
Rational planning seemed, in 1968, like an idea whose time was long over-
due.... For four years, rational planning swept through Ottawa ...”.
According to columnist Richard Gwyn:
Hand in hand with the idea went all the shiny new tools, artefacts for
rational managers: computers, data banks, flow charts, flip charts, new
problem-crunching theologies like “Program, Planning and Budgeting
Systems”, and “Management by Objectives”, plus the awesome new jar-
gon: interface, feedback, optimize, priorize, input and output.... Ottawa
became a paper world. Out poured an interminable number of studies,
interim reports, and “conceptual evaluations” evaluating everything and
anything from taxation to urban affairs, to Indian affairs to information
itself. Each study treated its subject as if nothing had ever been said about
it or done about it before. All studies reached the same conclusion: a new
agency, or branch, or unit should be created to deal with the subject, most-
ly by studying it more.13
How could the “rational planning” of Canadian science escape in such a
pervasive climate? The NRC and Schneider and his colleagues bore the ini-
tial brunt of these bureaucratic excesses, which carried on well into Dr. Lar-
kin Kerwin’s term as President of the NRC from 1980 to 1989.
The first to jump on the rational planning bandwagon was Senator
Maurice Lamontagne. Lamontagne, an economist and former professor at
Université Laval and the University of Ottawa, was a strong believer in
planning. He then became a member of Parliament and cabinet minister
and was involved in establishing the Economic Council of Canada. In his
maiden speech in the Senate in 1967, he outlined his views on a national
science policy and within a few months won approval to set up a Senate of
Canada Special Committee on Science Policy.14 The first report, A Critical
Review: Past and Present, was launched in 1970 with a press conference,

where the Senator pronounced that “the NRC has been a complete failure
in its fifty years as a guiding force for Canadian science”.15 He claimed that
“it was the purpose of the Committee to give Canadian science policy a
shock treatment in this first volume of the Report”.16 In discussing science,
Senator Lamontagne included the “hard sciences” (physics and chemistry)
as well as the life sciences and the social sciences. To many readers of this
document, it was surprising that the Senate Committee concentrated about
a third of its Report on the history and criticism of the NRC, which was
mainly concerned with physics, chemistry, and engineering. The volume
ended with the compelling conclusion “We must develop a coherent over-
all science policy so that we can not only meet our economic objectives
more effectively but also more realistically face our mounting social prob-
lems”. The second volume, Targets and Strategies for the Seventies, speci-
fying the essential recommendations for realizing such a policy was to
appear in early 1972, to be followed by a third volume a year later.
Herzberg Speaks Out
Herzberg was admired the world over in scientific circles for his integrity,
for speaking authoritatively only about subjects in which he was conver-
sant, and for carefully listening to others during a discussion. He was
exceedingly reticent about speaking publicly on topics other than his spe-
cialty. But once the reputations of Steacie, Mackenzie, and the NRC were
impugned and the freedom of scientists was attacked, he reluctantly came
forward to air his personal views on the dangerous course that was being
taken by the numerous studies of the NRC.
His first sally was a letter to Ballard on the great concern of the scien-
tific staff of the Pure Physics Division on the attempt to introduce collec-
tive bargaining at the NRC.17 Herzberg noted that the inroads of a civil
service mentality would surely have an adverse effect on the NRC, partic-
ularly with the recommendation of the Glassco Commision that all pur-
chases, large and small, should be handled by one government purchasing
department. Members of the permanent staff, on their own, had collected
signatures of virtually all of the scientific staff on the question “Why does
the government not leave us alone and let us continue to thrive?” However,
the Hon. C.M. Drury, the President of Treasury Board, was adamant about
a centralized purchasing department, and eventually the NRC’s own Pur-
chasing Branch was dissolved in December 1969.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      311

312
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Herzberg’s first public speech “Pure Science and Government” took
place in May 1965 at a symposium at Queen’s University on the occasion
of the opening of a new physics building.18 He noted that he agreed some-
what reluctantly to participate in the symposium and came only because
“recently there have been some developments in Canada which, if not
closely watched and guided with great wisdom, may destroy the congenial
climate and the loose but effective organization of science in this country”.
He also emphasized that he was expressing his own personal views and
was not speaking on behalf of the NRC in any official capacity.
He was impressed not only with the sound way in which scientific
activities had been built up, but also by the compactness and flexibility of
scientific organization in Canada as represented by the Research Council
Act. So he was shocked that the Glassco Commission had suddenly dis-
covered that there was “a lack of a science policy in Canada and an evident
breakdown in the system as designed, ... and that the NRC was built by sci-
entists for scientists”. In his opinion, these statements were absolutely
incorrect. The NRC had a clear conception of what a science policy can and
cannot do. The first requirement for building up scientific research in
Canada was to develop first-rate research at the universities in order to pro-
vide the skilled and educated manpower that would be needed for research
in industry. This was what the NRC policy had achieved. Now that the
number of highly educated graduates per year appeared to be sufficient for
the country, it was time to encourage more industries to get involved in
research, and this too was happening with the grants program for industri-
al research (IRAP). He reminded the audience that three of the first five
presidents of the NRC (McNaughton, Mackenzie, and Ballard) were all
engineers, and many of the early employees, such as J.H. Parkin, who
headed aeronautical research, J.T. Henderson, radio and electrical research,
and R.F. Legget, building research, were engineers. Moreover, President
Steacie had received a Bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering, and
R.W. Boyle, the founding director of the Physics Division, had received a
degree in electrical engineering.
Herzberg stressed that what had made the NRC one of the best research
organizations in the world was its flexibility and capacity to depart from the
rigid lines of departmental organization, and particularly the overriding
philosophy that it is the working scientist in the basic and applied fields
who should determine what is to be done. The Glassco Commission and
before it the Heeney Commission were only interested in uniformity and

conformity, believing this would provide more efficiency in government
organizations. This was the theme of the efficiency experts for a national
science policy. Herzberg then quoted the conclusions of several adminis-
trators and scientists who had been involved in attempts to institute science
policy in their countries. One of his favorites was a recent statement of
Lord Hailsham, the former Minister for Science of the British Government:
No country in the world has ever successfully set up a Department of
Science in the sense of a Ministry directly controlling the pace, the scope
and the methods of scientific research. This is due to two considerations.
The first is that the strategic planning of science cannot be undertaken
without the full participation of the scientists themselves—and by this I
mean, not just a staff of administrators with scientific degrees, but also
men and women who actually carry on scientific work, whether in uni-
versities, government research stations, or industry.
Another quotation was from a speech by the administrator and scientist
Warren Weaver, Vice-President of the Rockefeller Foundation:
The crucial word diversify is at the heart of the dependence of science
upon the government. There are those who think that the National Science
Foundation ought to sit like an infinitely wise spider, at the centre of a
web which reaches into every governmental activity in science and pre-
sumably into every other science activity in our whole nation, planning
just how science should advance, tightening up here, slackening off
there.... There is no person, and certainly no committee, which is wise
enough to do this. We should, I think, be glad that this is so. For what
keeps the total scientific effort from being chaotic and meaningless is not
central planning or any attempt to achieve it, but a kind of grand homeo-
stasis, under which a multitude of influences interact in a natural way.
What science needs is not a lot of planning, but a lot of convenient com-
munication, so that controls may arise naturally from feedback.
The Council of the NRC had provided a system of convenient com-
munication by the early and effective use of its many Associate
Committees, one of the best examples being its joint initiative with the
Department of Agriculture to stimulate the research on the successful pre-
vention of grain rust. Herzberg’s final message, which he was to repeat on
many occasions, contained the principal reasons for the support of pure sci-
ence in Canada and elsewhere. “One was strictly mercenary, since experi-
ence has shown that pure science helps applied science and technology in
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      313

314
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
their development”, which he illustrated with examples of the discovery of
electromagnetic induction, which is the basis of all modern electric power
production, the semi-conductor chip, the laser, and nuclear physics, all
leading to major modern applications. “The other reason was that scientif-
ic research of the purest kind is an intellectual activity, which like art,
music, literature, archaeology, and many other fields helps us to understand
who we are, and what is the nature of the world in which we live.”
At a convocation address at York University in 1969, Herzberg chose
to speak on “The Dangers of Science Policy”, where he elaborated on the
above themes and added a few barbs about the Glassco Commission and its
recommendations:
Even the Glassco Commission, entrusted with the task of recommending
improvements in government organization, had reluctantly to admit that
the National Research Council had been very successful. However, the
Glassco Commission was really not interested in good science. It was
interested in good accounting. Mr. Glassco, after all, was an accountant.
There is nothing wrong with good accounting, except that it does not nec-
essarily lead to good science.... What it should have done was to enquire
what particular organizational features were the reason for the high inter-
national standing of the NRC and how this standing could be further
improved. Instead, the Glassco Commission recommended reorganiza-
tion aimed at making the set-up tidier and more amenable to accounting.
Prime Minister Trudeau recently quoted in Parliament, a Roman offi-
cial, Petronius Arbiter, who lived at the time of Emperor Nero almost two
thousand years ago, and who said “We tend to meet any new situation by
reorganizing. And a wonderful method it can be for creating the illusion
of progress while producing confusion, inefficiency and demoralization.”
I believe that the opinion expressed by Petronius Arbiter is still valid
today, particularly when attempts are made from outside to reorganize
and centralize flourishing research laboratories.19
Herzberg ended his convocation address with the following words:
May I suggest to the new graduates that they ponder the problem of our
national goals in Canada.... The countries in past history that we admire
most are not necessarily the economically prosperous ones but those that
have made major contributions to our cultural heritage. Our aim should
be to make Canada a country that is recognized throughout the world, and
throughout history, as a country that has advanced in a significant way the
progress of science, art, and literature.

He also took exception to the recommendations of the OECD report
(1969), namely that the work in fundamental research at the NRC (the qual-
ity of which it acknowledged and praised) should be stopped because the
Canadian universities were now sufficiently well developed to carry on
with this work, also that a new central granting agency, replacing the NRC,
the Canada Council, and the Medical Research Council, should direct the
efforts of Canadian scientists at universities into predetermined fields that
were likely to advance Canadian technology.
Herzberg’s point was that all such recommendations are made by peo-
ple who have not worked in the laboratory on actual research for many
years and who think that some administrator will be able to mastermind the
direction in which research should go in the laboratories.20 Moreover, he
was against the proposal of Omond Solandt, Chairman of the Science
Council, that “there should be a continuing technical audit of all science
programs”, since this would only lead to more reports—and to what pur-
pose, except to waste the time of scientists involved in research?
He was astounded by the first Report of the Senate Special Committee
on Science Policy and by its extensive publicity through an unfair and
biased press conference, especially with its focus on the NRC and past
presidents as the villains of presumed “failures of Canadian science”. He
rose to the challenge with his address “Remarks on the Report of the Senate
Special Committee on Science Policy” at the symposium “Formulation and
Implementation of a Science Policy for Canada”, held at Queen’s Univer-
sity in March 1971:
My first venture into the discussions on science policy occurred six years
ago here at Queen’s University and my opinions on the subject have not
changed much since that time. But during this period a remarkable change
has come over Canadian science. The work of scientists has been sur-
veyed and reviewed by our scientific societies, by our universities, by the
National Research Council, by a Cabinet task force, by the Science Coun-
cil, by the OECD, and by the Senate.21
Clearly he was mystified that a Committee of the Senate of Canada could
“publish such a biased report without declaring forcefully and unambigu-
ously that it intended to do so, ... and to lead the general public and all the
news media to believe that it represents a fair and objective assessment of
Canadian science”. Successes of the NRC were scarcely mentioned in
the Report, only its presumed failures. That anyone, let alone a Senate
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      315

316
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Committee, should use “such dishonesty in the presentation of the histori-
cal review of Canadian science” in order to create attention to themselves
and their opinions was completely foreign to Herzberg. This surely was not
the way to befriend scientists in a cooperative venture for the good of the
country. It was also clear that parts of the twelve thousand pages of evi-
dence collected during three years of public hearings and written briefs
were selected and printed to substantiate Senator Lamontagne’s point of
view as presented in his maiden speech to the Senate in 1967, before the
study by the Special Committee was even approved.22
Herzberg went on to question whether the Senators were sure of what
they meant by science policy. Even Sir Solly Zuckerman, who for some ten
years was Scientific Adviser to the British Cabinet, had remarked in a
lecture in 1967:
Most of us think we understand what is meant by the phrase “foreign pol-
icy”, “housing policy” or “educational policy”. On the other hand, many
of us—and I among them—find it difficult to use the term “Scientific
Policy” with any precision.
The only thing a science policy can do, in Herzberg’s view, was clearly
stated by the British Council for Scientific Policy:
Science policy does not direct the advance of scientific knowledge,
though it may well be concerned to encourage or to direct the application
of the results of scientific advances. The tasks of science policy are of
another kind: to maintain the environment necessary for scientific dis-
covery; to ensure the provision of a sufficient share of the total national
resources; to ensure that there is a balance between fields and that others
are not avoidably neglected; to provide opportunities for inter-fertiliza-
tion between fields, and between the scientific programmes of nations.
Herzberg had read with utter disbelief a statement included in the Sen-
ate Report, which he quoted to the audience: “it is evident to any historian
of technology that almost all innovations are produced from previous inno-
vations rather than from any injection of any new scientific knowledge”.23
Are we to believe that the development of the modern nuclear reactor did
not depend on the discovery of nuclear fission made by research scientists
in the search for knowledge, or that the development of modern commu-
nication and the computer industry did not depend on basic discoveries in
solid state physics, or that the discovery of antibiotics, now the basis of

much of our pharmaceutical industry, came about by industrial innovation
rather than pure research?
He stressed the obvious fact that the Senators did not appreciate at all the
relation between basic research and modern technology. Herzberg stated
his conclusions clearly and repeated them on several occasions: “The
Senators perhaps do not understand science or scientists and they certainly
do not understand how scientists work or how science is organized”. His
careful study of A Critical Review: Past and Present, the first Report of the
Senate Committee, provoked these strong vocal criticisms, which came as
a surprise to many who knew the mild-mannered Herzberg.
Herzberg sent a copy of his address to Senator Lamontagne, noting that
Senator Allister Grosart had been present at the Symposium and had
expressed satisfaction at having the point of view of a working scientist
with regard to the Report.24 While awaiting the second volume with the
specific recommendations of the Senators, Herzberg was unwilling to
spend the time in further public discussion about the Report or the methods
of the Senate Committee. But in numerous convocation addresses, he con-
tinued to express his opinion about the importance of recognizing science
as part of our culture, as is art, music, and literature. His only face-to-face
encounter with Senator Lamontagne was to occur at a symposium on sci-
ence policy in 1974.
Distinguished Research Scientist
At the time of these many reviews of the NRC and discussions on science
policy, Herzberg was fast approaching the age of official retirement.
Whether or not the NRC administrators knew of the earlier agreement
made with President C.J. Mackenzie that Herzberg would be permitted to
continue in research after the normal retirement age of sixty-five, a request
was made to Treasury Board that he be retained by the NRC. Approval for
continuation of his employment was readily given for an initial five-year
period to age seventy. President Schneider informed Herzberg of this deci-
sion in February 1968, a year and a half before Herzberg reached retire-
ment age, noting that he would continue to have secretarial, computation-
al, and technical assistance. Moreover, the appointment was to carry the
new title of Distinguished Research Scientist.25 The official announcement
was made at the conference “Free Radical Spectroscopy” in honour of
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      317

318
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Herzberg’s sixty-fifth birthday, held in the resort town of Banff, Alberta, in
June 1969. The meeting was a great success, with over two hundred of
Herzberg’s friends and colleagues from all over the world in attendance.
This meeting proved to be the inauguration of a series of scientific confer-
ences in his honour to be held every five years in different locales in
Canada.26
As planned, Herzberg offered his resignation as Director of the
Division of Pure Physics to take effect on 1 October 1969, with Alex
Douglas becoming the Director of the new Division of Physics, combining
the Divisions of Pure and Applied Physics as of old, but now operating in
two buildings about ten kilometres apart. In his usual thoughtful manner,
Herzberg added in his letter to Schneider:
In leaving my administrative position, I should like to express a sincere
feeling of appreciation towards you, your predecessors and associates in
the Executive of the NRC, who have made the administrative part of my
work at all times as easy and as little time-consuming as possible, so that
I had adequate time available for my scientific work. It has been a great
privilege to be one of the directors of the NRC. I hope that in my new
position I shall be able to justify by my work the confidence that the
Council has placed in me.27
This new position gave Herzberg the opportunity to continue his research
within the Spectroscopy Section with essentially the same financial and
technical support, although he missed the daily interaction with his long-
time assistant Shoosmith, who retired in August 1969 after twenty years of
devoted service. As a parting gift to Shoosmith, Herzberg had presented
him with a leather-bound collection of reprints of the papers in which he
was a co-author or was thanked for his contribution to the success of the
research.
An Acute Personal Loss
Herzberg’s concerns about the repeated investigations of the NRC, the
annual reductions in budgets, and the long-awaited outcome of the Senate
Committee recommendations were seemingly minor in comparison with
his traumatic experience of the sudden death of Luise in the summer of
1971. He had reduced his travel commitments that year. Yet, having
accepted an honorary degree from Cambridge University, which was to be

conferred 10 June, he had also agreed to participate at a meeting of the
French Physical Society in Evian the week before. Just as the meeting in
Evian ended, he was called home because Luise had had a severe heart
attack while at work. He arrived the following day, in time to talk with her
before she died on 3 June 1971. Gerhard was devastated. At the NRC he
remained in his office with the door closed, without seeing anyone, not
even his secretary. He was completely lost to his colleagues and his assis-
tants in the Spectroscopy Section for at least two weeks, venturing out of
his office only to attend to pressing NRC business.
Luise’s friends were deeply saddened to learn of her death. Many had
come to know her quiet manner and appreciate her warm humour. They
remembered that she had admirably managed a busy household and yet had
had the energy and enthusiasm to be active in research. In her first four
years in Ottawa, she had spent time at the NRC as a Voluntary Research
Associate whenever family and home could spare her. There, she analyzed
spectra taken at Yerkes Observatory and wrote papers with Gerhard on this
work. She then joined the Dominion Observatory where she had her own
program of research on solar spectra for seven years. In 1959, she moved
to the Radio Physics Laboratory at Shirley’s Bay in Ottawa. Her twelve
years there were scientifically her happiest and most productive. Her main
interests and contributions were in solar spectroscopy and photochemical
processes in the upper atmosphere caused by solar activity. She was espe-
cially proud to have participated in the development of the Alouette satel-
lite. She published twenty-three papers while in Ottawa, thirty-three in
total, and presented her work at conferences in Canada, the U.S.A., and
Europe. With her death, Canada lost one of its few accomplished women
physicists.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      319

320
20. NOBEL LAUREATE
There is no award in science that can match the high honour and esteem
bestowed on recipients by their peers than the Nobel Prize. World fame is
immediate. In 1971, the name of Gerhard Herzberg was propelled from
being virtually unknown, even in Canada, to one of world renown. Of
course, Herzberg was well known to the science communities in Canada
and abroad, but there was little reason for his name to be known by the cit-
izenry. Only recently had his name appeared in Canadian newspapers as he
voiced his strong objections to the Senate Report A Science Policy for
Canada. Now he was celebrated in many households in Canada as well as
in science laboratories as the first Canadian Nobel Laureate in the natural
sciences. Only two earlier Nobel Prizes had been awarded to Canadians: to
Frederic G. Banting and John J.R. MacLeod in medicine in 1923 for the
discovery of insulin and the Peace Prize to Lester Bowles Pearson in 1957
for his role in the Suez Canal crisis of 1956.
In later years, three more Canadians were to receive Nobel Prizes in the
natural sciences: John C. Polanyi and Michael Smith in Chemistry in 1986
and 1993, respectively, and Bertram N. Brockhouse in Physics in 1994. It
is not so well known that other Canadians have received Nobel Medals.
One recipient was Adelaide Sinclair, a neighbour of the Herzbergs in Rock-
liffe Park, who as Deputy Executive-Director of the United Nations Inter-
national Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) had accepted the Nobel
Peace Prize on behalf of UNICEF in 1965.1 A more recent recipient was
Dr. James Orbinski, President of Médicins Sans Frontières (MSF), who
along with Dr. Marie-Eves Raguenaud of France, accepted the 1999 Nobel
Peace Prize on behalf of the organization.2
Announcement in Ottawa
The official announcement of Nobel Prizes is often made during October,
and for Physics and Chemistry usually on 15 October. In 1971, a delay of
two weeks occurred because of the sudden illness and death on 29 October
of Arne W.K. Tiselius, the chairman of the Nobel Committee. Tiselius was
himself a Nobel Laureate, having received the Prize in Chemistry in 1948.3
Your extraordinary achievement has won you the praise and admiration
of Canadians and citizens throughout the world.…Canada is richer and
greater because of your contribution. It is with great pleasure that I
offer my congratulations and best wishes.
Pierre Elliott Trudeau

While nominations and the ensuing investigations, opinions, and recom-
mendations concerning the award of a Nobel Prize may not be disclosed,
and access to such material may be granted only fifty years after an award
has been made, it is not unusual to find that the Swedish TV and radio
media, and the local media of a prospective recipient, are aware of an
impending award a day or two before the official announcement by the
Swedish Academy. This happened in Ottawa in Herzberg’s case.
Early Monday morning on November 1st, his secretary Marjorie
Thompson and his assistant Izabel Dabrowski entered the office to ringing
telephones: reporters were asking for interviews with Herzberg to discuss
the Nobel Prize he was to receive. This took both of them completely by
surprise. Many more calls came from the media that morning to Herzberg’s
office and to Alex Douglas and the President’s office. TV crews from Swed-
en arrived at 100 Sussex Drive to film and interview Herzberg, only to learn
that he was half the world away in the Soviet Union. However, no official
word had been received at the NRC from Sweden. There was great jubila-
tion in the Spectroscopy Laboratory as the group had anticipated for more
than a decade that Herzberg would be named, and finally it seemed to be
happening. Nevertheless, it was decided not to spread the recent rumour but
to wait for the Swedish Academy to make its official announcement.
That evening, a reception and dinner of Fellows of the Royal Society
of Canada living in the Ottawa area was held at Le Circle Universitaire on
Laurier Street in Ottawa. This annual event was always a popular and well-
attended affair. Senator Lamontagne, as a duly elected Fellow for his earli-
er contributions to economics, was also present. During the reception he
took the opportunity to corner one of the senior administrators of the NRC
to expound his ideas of replacing the NRC by a central bureau dealing with
all of the government’s endeavors in basic science. After listening quietly
to this lengthy account of the newest proposal of the Senator’s Committee
on Science Policy, the officer could no longer contain his dismay. He
informed the Senator that since he was so interested in Canada’s scientific
well being, he would no doubt be delighted to know that the next day an
announcement would be made of the award of the Nobel Prize to Gerhard
Herzberg of the NRC. On hearing this astonishing news Lamontagne
turned on his heel and without another word walked out of the reception
and dinner. The Senator immediately realized that with this blow any
further criticism of the NRC and recommendations for its downfall by his
Committee would lose its punch.
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      321

322
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Canada awoke the next day to the news that a Canadian had been
awarded a Nobel Prize in science, after a hiatus of five decades. No doubt
the phone rang off the hook in Herzberg’s home, since even the Swedish
Academy did not know of his whereabouts until later in the day. Herzberg’s
office was inundated with congratulatory telegrams, phone calls, and letters
from friends, colleagues, and admirers from all over the world.4 Telegrams
arrived from the Governor General, the Prime Minister, the Premier of
Ontario, the Mayor of Ottawa, and many other Canadian politicians, as
well as from the Mayor of Hamburg, Herzberg’s birthplace. In Hamburg,
Walter Herzberg and his wife Erika were deluged with calls from friends
congratulating the family, and reporters interviewed Walter about his dis-
tinguished brother.5 The Johanneum Gymnasium proudly added the name
of alumnus Gerhard Herzberg to that of Gustav Hertz as a Nobel Laureate
on its honours list.
Notably absent were any greetings that day or later from Senators
Lamontagne or Grosart, and only one arrived from the remaining twenty
members of the Senate Special Committee on Science Policy. Senator
Joseph A. Sullivan, the one dissenting member of the Senate Report, gra-
ciously congratulated Herzberg on his outstanding achievement.6 Miss
Thompson and Miss Dabrowski posted telegrams all around office walls
and on billboards, awaiting Herzberg’s return from the Soviet Union.
Walter Herzberg in Hamburg, watching his brother on television,
on announcement of the Nobel Prize, 3 November 1971.

Celebrations, Greetings, and the Governor
General’s Dinner
For Herzberg, the first hint of the Nobel Prize award had come just after his
seminar “Spectra of Free Radicals” at the University of Leningrad. During
discussion at the informal lunch that followed the talk, his host Professor
Sergei Frish was called to the telephone for an urgent message. He quick-
ly returned to the table and excitedly announced that Herzberg had been
selected for the 1971 Nobel Prize in Physics. Herzberg sat momentarily
stunned. Could this be possible? Could he accept such a rumour? Why in
physics? Never mind, his hosts popped open bottles of champagne and
filled glasses, serving first their unbelieving, teetotal guest.
After a lengthy train ride from Leningrad to Moscow, Herzberg was
met at the railway station by Soviet colleagues Drs. S.L. Mandelstam and
Igor I. Sobel’man and by Mr. and Mrs. P.L. Trottier, Counsellor in the Can-
adian Embassy, who relayed two telegrams, one from the Nobel Found-
ation:
The Royal Academy of Sciences today awarded you the 1971 Nobel Prize
in Chemistry for your contributions to the knowledge of electronic struc-
ture and geometry of molecules, especially free radicals. Our sincere con-
gratulations.7
and one from NRC President Schneider:
The President and Members of the National Research Council meeting in
Ottawa, together with the entire staff, extend their heartfelt congratula-
tions on your award of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.8
These welcome messages confirmed that Herzberg had indeed been select-
ed as a 1971 Nobel Laureate, but in Chemistry, not Physics, and he could
finally put any doubt to rest. Although this had been a long day for him,
Herzberg knew he wouldn’t be able to sleep after such excitement. After
being interviewed by Soviet TV and radio crews, he accepted Mandel-
stam’s kind invitation to relax in his apartment. Together with his col-
leagues and Mrs. Mandelstam, he quietly celebrated the day’s extraordi-
nary news well into the night, a quite unforgettable occasion for Herzberg.9
Mr. and Mrs. Trottier invited Herzberg to their home the next after-
noon, and a telephone interview was held with the famed Peter Gzowski of
the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation in Toronto. The program, which
323

324
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
included conversations with friends in Canada, was aired across the coun-
try. Herzberg then cancelled his original schedule of visits to Paris and
Basel in order to return home as soon as possible. He flew to Stockholm for
interviews with Swedish TV and radio media, since they had missed him in
Ottawa. He also managed a brief visit with his friend Albin Lagerqvist at
the university before boarding the plane for his return home.
At his office next morning, Herzberg was overwhelmed by the bill-
boards covered with telegrams from all over the world and friendly greet-
ings from the spectroscopy group and the piles of telegrams and letters on
his desk. He read some of the messages and realized it would take days to
go through all of them, and weeks if not months to answer them, even with
the efficient help of Miss Thompson. One of the most heartwarming greet-
ings came from Jack Shoosmith:
It was with a great deal of pleasure and pride that I read of the Nobel
award. Few people know better than I how great has been your dedica-
tion, patience and perseverance through many years of research which
have culminated in this great honour. I am delighted to have had the
opportunity to associate with so distinguished a scientist and occasional-
ly to discuss gardening and the art of living.10
Herzberg at the entrance of the NRC
on arrival from the U.S.S.R.
Telegram greetings from
around the world.

The spectroscopy group had not seen such a jubilant Herzberg since late
spring, before Luise’s unexpected death. He had regained his usual com-
posure and vitality and now took the time to catch up on the progress and
research plans with each member of the group.
Much to his surprise, Herzberg was invited to a special luncheon of the
Science Council by the President of the Treasury Board, the Hon. Charles
M. Drury, and there he met with Omond Solandt, the Chairman of the
Council, Allistair Gillespie, the Minister of Science, and other members of
Government. Drury also arranged for Herzberg to attend a sitting of the
House of Commons, the Parliament Chamber of elected members, on 17
November, where the Speaker, the Hon. Lucien Lamoureux, said it was “a
rare occasion when anyone other than a member of parliament was wel-
comed to the Commons, but he was proud to introduce Dr. Herzberg, an
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      325
A welcoming office on Herzberg’s return from the U.S.S.R.

326
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
oustanding scientist who had brought great honour to himself, the National
Research Council, and all Canadians”. Herzberg stood up to acknowledge
a rousing welcome of cheers and desk thumping—the parliamentary form
of applause. This accolade from the Government of his adopted country
was an historic moment for him and for Canada.11
The Right Honourable Roland Michener, Governor General of Canada,
then hosted a festive dinner in Herzberg’s honour at Government House on
Tuesday, 30 November 1971. The eighty-five guests included Prime Min-
ister Pierre Elliott Trudeau, the Hon. C.M. Drury, Herzberg’s collaborators
past and present at the National Research Council, and Canada’s science
elite from across the country.
After the dinner, the Governor General addressed his guests:
The serious purposes of this gathering are about to be revealed. They are:
to give enjoyment to Dr. Gerhard Herzberg and to ourselves in his com-
pany, and to rejoice with him in the recognition which has just been given
by the Nobel Foundation to his great scientific achievements. Under such
conditions he would not forgive me, nor would you be happy, if I were to
embark on the eulogy he so well deserves. However, I hope that I may be
allowed to say, for my wife and myself, how happy we are to welcome
our distinguished guest to Rideau Hall.
We are equally delighted that so many of his friends and admirers
have come together, some from quite long distances, to join with us in
honouring Dr. Herzberg. What impresses me most is the preponderance
of brain power … never have the Philistines been so completely routed
from Government House.
À tous, nous exprimons notre plus chaleureux accueil. Je sais que
j’exprime non seulement votre pensée, mais celle de tous les Canadiens,
quand je dis à Docteur Herzberg qu’en lui nous rendons honneur  un
grand Canadien. Nous sommes fier qu’en 1935, alors que le climat de son
pais natal lui devenait intolérable, il ait arrêté son choix sur le Canada,
comme patrie d’adoption. Nous sommes également fiers de l’habilité, de
l’industrie, et de la détermination dont il a fait preuve dans son explo-
ration des molécules et atomes.
Son expertise dans l’enseignement et dans l’étude de la physique est
l’objet de notre profonde reconnaissance. Nous lui savons un gré infini des
services rendus à la collectivité, et, en dernier lieu, nous l’aimons en ami.
Dr. Herzberg, to say that you have brought honour to Canada in win-
ning the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for 1971 is no mere form of words. No
other Canadian has received this coveted recognition since 1957, when
the Right Hon. Lester B. Pearson, who regretted that he could not be here

PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      327
tonight, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. There was only one before
him, another great scientist, Sir Frederick Banting, whose Nobel Prize in
Medicine in 1923 was for his work with insulin. As we all know, the dis-
coveries made by Banting, Best, and Collip and others of the famous team
have been a great boon to humanity since they were announced fifty years
ago, and we know that Dr. Herzberg’s discoveries are of great use both in
industry and in science.
Dr. Herzberg, I do not profess the knowledge to appreciate fully the
work which you have pursued to such good effect inside the molecule and
the atom, or as the Swedish Academy of Science put it in its citation, ‘for
your contribution to the knowledge of electronic structure and geometry
of molecules, particularly free radicals’. I am sure that free radicals and
other activists deserve our closest scrutiny. But diatoms and polyatoms
have so far escaped my observation.
Like most other mortals, my knowledge of matter has been limited to
what is disclosed by our five senses. It is fortunate that some amongst us
have been able to peer beneath the surface of things and to discover the
secrets of our infinitely small and infinitely large environment.
As for “molecular spectroscopy” I sympathize with your daughter
Agnes. Although she desired, as good children do, to follow in their
father’s footsteps, she said at an early age that she would be a nurse, and
gave as a reason that she could not even spell “molecular spectroscopy”.
But she holds one of the four Ph.D.’s which have been earned within the
family circle.
Dr. Herzberg’s other awards, honorary degrees, medals, fellowships,
and the offices which he has discharged so well in scientific societies, are
numerous beyond recollection and put him up in the stratosphere. But his
hobbies and avocations keep him a very human and engaging person. His
love of Italian opera and a fine bass voice commend him to other music
lovers. But in mountain climbing for exercise and relaxation, one would
have difficulty in keeping up with him—he loves the heights.
In all his varied activities he has our good wishes. Will you join me
in expressing them in a toast to the health and continued happiness and
success of Dr. Herzberg, C.C., D.Sc., LL.D., F.R.S., F.R.S.C., Canadian
physicist.12
Dr. Herzberg replied:
Your Excellencies, Mr. Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen.
I am deeply touched by the honour that you, Your Excellencies, have
done me in having this delightful dinner for me, and that you, Sir, have
done me in addressing me in such generous terms. On a few previous

328
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
occasions I have had the privilege of being invited to these beautiful sur-
roundings and being entertained by Your Excellencies, who know so well
how to make your guests feel comfortable and relaxed and enjoy your
hospitality. When I came to this country with my wife thirty-six years ago
as a refugee (incidentally with exactly $2.50 in my pocket), I could not
have dreamed that one day I would be honoured in such an extraordinary
way by the Government of Canada.
It is obvious that the work that has earned me the Nobel Prize was
not done without a great deal of help. First of all, while at the University
of Saskatchewan I had the full and understanding support of successive
Presidents and of the Faculty of the University who, under very stringent
conditions, did their utmost to make it possible for me to proceed with my
scientific work. It was the first President of the University of Saskat-
chewan, Dr. Walter C. Murray, who was stimulated by a then junior staff
member, John Spinks, now President of the University of Saskatchewan,
to invite me to come to Saskatchewan. Indeed this was the only firm offer
of a position that I had at the time.
Since I came to the National Research Council twenty-three years
ago, I have had the support of the Presidents of the NRC, from C.J. Mac-
kenzie, E.W.R. Steacie, and Guy Ballard to the present President, Dr.
Schneider. I would like particularly to pay tribute to the late Ned Steacie.
As soon as he heard that I was not entirely happy in the United States, he
suggested that we have a discussion about the possibility of my coming
here; later he persuaded me to take on the Directorship of the Physics
Division. He also taught me how to direct a Division, namely not to tell
people what to do but mainly to find bright people. Last, but by no means
least, I must mention my indebtedness to all my collaborators during all
these years. I shall not name them all individually but shall mention only
one name. I was extraordinarily lucky when the most brilliant student I
had during my university career agreed to join me at the NRC right from
the beginning and help me to set up a laboratory in spectroscopy. I am not
exaggerating when I say that without Alex Douglas’s constant help, his
critical judgment and his experimental skill, I would not be standing here
now. Another person to whom I owe a great deal is my technical assistant
for twenty years, Mr. Jack Shoosmith, who helped me in all the experi-
mental work with great efficiency and devotion. I am glad that both he
and Alex Douglas and many of my other collaborators, past and present,
as well as former Presidents and the present President of NRC, are here
tonight. I appreciate, Your Excellency, the implication of your invitation
to them that this honour, the Nobel Prize, is an honour to the members of
our spectroscopy laboratory and to the National Research Council.

There has been a tendency on the part of the public and the press to
think that with the award of a Nobel Prize the international status of
Canadian science has suddenly changed. I believe that the respect for
Canadian science and Canadian scientists throughout the scientific world
has not changed one iota. What has changed is the public knowledge of
this respect. There are today just as many internationally recognized
Canadian scientists as there were five weeks ago, and among them are
quite definitely several of Nobel Prize calibre.
By building the National Arts Center and by other actions, the Gov-
ernment of Canada has shown that the people of this country are not inter-
ested in mere survival as a national goal, that they want to support the per-
forming arts, as well as the fine arts and literature. What I would like to
emphasize is that pure science is another of the activities that lifts us
above a purely mercenary status and that the support of science for cul-
tural reasons alone should not be neglected. In this connection it is inter-
esting to record that the Nobel medal which I shall be receiving next week
has a Latin inscription from Virgil, the same for all four prizes (even
though otherwise the medals are different), which is
“Inventas vitam juvat excoluisse per artes”, 
for which, in the book which was sent to me, only a French translation is
given, Qu’il est doux de voir la vie humaine s’embellir par l’invention des
arts”, or in English,
“It is wonderful to see life enriched by the invention of the arts”.
Clearly the Nobel Foundation considers the Prizes in the Sciences to have
the same purpose as the Prize in Literature, namely to reward contribu-
tions to the human spirit, i.e., to the cultural benefits of mankind.
In science, of course, such contributions often lead to material bene-
fits to mankind. Since one cannot predict discovery these material bene-
fits are usually quite unexpected and not forseen by the scientists
involved (nor of course by anyone else). The motivation of many scien-
tists working in pure science is striving for knowledge for its own sake.
Applications can rarely be forseen and are up to the technologist to find
on the basis of the work of the pure scientist.
In a speech last March, I compared the present situation in science
with the situation in the Army. I said: “Recent reports indicate that for
every private in the Army there are four of higher rank. Now it appears to
me that for every working scientist there are four persons spending their
time deciding how and where and when he should work”. Some of my
friends have warned me that after receiving the Nobel Prize I would now
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      329

330
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
belong to this higher rank. May I say that I have every intention of return-
ing to the rank of private in the army of Canadian scientists, once the first
flurry connected with the Prize is over. Indeed, my future happiness will
depend on how successful I shall be in this effort.
Thank you again, Your Excellencies, for this memorable occasion
with which you have so greatly honoured me, the National Research
Council and the many brilliant collaborators who have made our labora-
tory known throughout the world.13
The guests then mingled, talking with Herzberg and Their Excellen-
cies. This also turned out to be a very special occasion to meet Prime Min-
ister Pierre Trudeau, who asked President Schneider to introduce him to
members of the Spectroscopy Laboratory, past and present. He met each in
turn, spent a few minutes discussing their roles and interests, and then
thanked them for their contributions in bringing fame to the NRC and Can-
ada. This grand event at Rideau Hall on 30th November 1971, with its
magnificent tribute by the Government of Canada to Herzberg and the
Spectroscopy Laboratory, will never be forgotten by members of the NRC.
Next day, Herzberg sent a very moving letter to the Right Honourable
Roland Michener:
Your Excellency: The dinner last night was such an extraordinary occa-
sion for me that I find it difficult to put into words my deep gratitude to
you and Mrs. Michener for having tendered it to me. The warmth of your
reception and the very kind words you said about me will remain in my
memory for the rest of my life. The inclusion among the guests of so
many of my collaborators, past and present, on this festive occasion was
a particularly fine gesture on your part, since I owe so much to them and
am anxious to share with them the recognition that has come to our joint
efforts.…14
Herzberg also dispatched a letter to Esmond Butler at Rideau Hall thank-
ing him and his staff for the thoughtful arrangements at the dinner.
On to Stockholm
A day later, Herzberg was on his way to Stockholm by a circuitous route,
for he had a previous obligation to attend to in Seattle. He had been award-
ed the Linus Pauling Medal of the American Chemical Society months ear-
lier and wished to honour his commitment to attend the presentation. He

was especially delighted that Linus Pauling was there and that they had
time to discuss their favourite topics of molecular structure and molecules
in medicine. In the past, it had been the custom for the medal recipient to
give an award address at the banquet, but Herzberg felt that it would be a
hardship for a captive audience, some of whom were not scientists, to have
to listen to a technical talk. So he presented the technical paper “Spectra of
Simple Free Radicals in the Gaseous Phase” at a symposium in the after-
noon and a more general talk at the banquet. He chose to address the audi-
ence with “Some Remarks on Science and Culture” and began with an
introduction to C.P. Snow’s The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution
on the lack of understanding between scientists and humanists. Herzberg’s
theme was that now a third group, politicians, recognizing the importance
of the sciences for their economies, believe that this is all science is good
for—so scientists should to be told what to do. Politicians do not realize
that science, at its best, is a creative or cultural pursuit, that its prime moti-
vation is the desire to understand nature. Another group, some student
activists, don’t understand science either, because they think of technology
when they speak of science, just as politicians do. They are concerned, and
rightly so, about the consequences of technological developments of our
time, but they are fighting science when their goal is the same as that of the
sciences, namely to emphasize the cultural aspects of life, to understand
our place in the world, and to make human life worthwhile.15
Herzberg arrived in Stockholm on 6 December and to his surprise was
met at the airport by Her Excellency Margaret Meagher, the Canadian
Ambassador to Sweden, and by Professor Erik Rudberg, the Permanent
Secretary of the Royal Academy of Sciences. He was introduced to Tom
Engdahl, a secretary in the Royal Ministry for Foreign Affairs, who would
serve as Herzberg’s attendant along with a chauffer and car during Nobel
week. Herzberg was driven to the Grand Hotel, settled in a splendid suite
overlooking the harbour, and welcomed with a huge basket of fruit and
vases full of flowers. He carefully unpacked his formal attire, which was to
be worn at the main functions during Nobel week. As was his custom when
travelling, he reviewed his busy schedule of receptions, lunches, and
dinners before relaxing with a hot bath and retiring after his long flight
from Seattle.16 He was to go over his Nobel lecture and his address to His
Majesty at every opportunity in the following days.
The week of activities began the next afternoon with a press conference
at the Chancellory of the Canadian Embassy. On the morning of 8 Decem-
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      331

332
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
ber, he met his daughter Agnes at Arlanda Airport, on arrival from London.
She was to join him in the formal events to which Laureates and families
were invited. Unfortunately, his son Paul was not able to go to Sweden on
this very special occasion. Later that morning, Herzberg visited his friend
Albin Lagerqvist at the Physical Institute of Stockholm University. That
evening, Herzberg and Agnes joined the Laureates and spouses at a dinner
in the home of Professor and Mrs. Erik Rudberg on the grounds of the
Royal Academy of Sciences. Next day, they both went to the airport to meet
Monika Tenthoff, the niece of Herzberg’s gymnasium friend Alfred Schulz,
whom Herzberg had invited as his guest to the Nobel Festival. All three
attended a reception in the afternoon in the Nobel Library of the Swedish
Academy, hosted by the Directors of the Nobel Foundation.
Nobel Festival, 10 December 1971
Finally, the ceremonial day, Friday December 10th, arrived and began with
a morning rehearsal for the Laureates. The Nobel Festival began at four in
the afternoon with the city in darkness as the sun had set two hours earlier.
A stream of black limousines escorted by police left the Grand Hotel at
3:30 P.M. with the Nobel Laureates and dignitaries headed for the Filadel-
fiakyrkan (Philadelphia Church) where this year’s ceremony was to take
place, instead of the usual Concert Hall which was closed for repairs. The
drive to the church was a spectacle as the streets were lit up with Lucia
candles in every window and the twinkling lights of Christmas trees. At
4:15 P.M. the audience, in formal attire, filed into the immense hall to music
by the Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra. The hall was decorated with
garlands of flowers, an annual gift from the town of San Remo in Italy
where Alfred Nobel had spent his last years. At 4:30 the King of Sweden
entered the hall and the audience rose to honour him, the Royal Prince and
his wife, and the Royal Highnesses of Denmark and Holland. The Laur-
eates and presenters followed and stepped onto the stage to take their
places in front of red padded armchairs. They were followed by members
of the Royal Academy and the audience. It was a glittering setting of
grandeur and pageantry.17
After the opening music, the President of the Nobel Foundation, Pro-
fessor U.S. von Euler, recalled that this was the seventy-fifth anniversary
of Alfred Nobel’s death. He welcomed His Majesty King Gustav VI,

observing that as a young prince he had been present when the Prizes were
first awarded in 1901.18 The participation in 1971 turned out to be his last.
The Laureates were then presented to the King, following the overture
of Mozart’s “The Marriage of Figaro”. In his will endowing the Prizes,
Alfred Nobel had put physics at the top of the list, and so the Physics Prize
was presented first.19 Dennis Gabor, a Hungarian-born British scientist,
received it for his invention and development of the holographic method.
Then came chemistry, and Herzberg was introduced by Professor Stig
Claesson of the Royal Academy of Sciences, who began:
Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies and Gentlemen,
This year’s Nobel Prize winner in Chemistry, Dr. Gerhard Herzberg, is
generally considered to be the world’s foremost molecular spectroscopist
and his large institute in Ottawa is the undisputed centre for such
research. It is quite exceptional, in the field of science, that a single
individual, however distinguished, in this way can be the leader of a
whole area of research of general importance. A noted English chemist
has also said that the only institutions which have previously played such
PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      333
Nobel Festival, 10 December 1971, with Nobel Laureates and
presenters on the stage of the Philadelphia Church and
his Majesty and Royal Families in the front row, right.

334
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
a role were the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge and Bohr’s institute
in Copenhagen.…
One may now ask why Herzberg—originally a physicist and even
famous as an astrophysicist—finally was awarded the Nobel Prize in
chemistry.
The explanation is that around 1950 molecular spectroscopy had pro-
gressed so far that one could begin to study even complicated systems of
great chemical interest. This is brilliantly demonstrated by Herzberg’s
pioneering investigations of free radicals. Knowledge of their properties
is of fundamental importance to our understanding of how chemical reac-
tions proceed.… Many of the most important results were only achieved
after several year’s work and some of the most exciting as late as the end
of the 1960s. One can therefore note that this year’s Prize is truly an
award for contributions of great current interest.20
Professor Claesson then turned to Herzberg.
Dr. Herzberg: I have tried to explain your great contributions to molecu-
lar spectroscopy and particularly your pioneering work on free radicals.
The ideas and results presented by you—not least regarding the quantum
mechanical aspects of the interpretation of molecular properties—have
influenced scientific progress in almost all branches of chemistry.
On behalf of the Royal Academy of Sciences I beg you to accept our
congratulations and ask you to receive your Nobel Prize from the hands
of His Majesty the King.
A fanfare of trumpets sounded as Herzberg stood up, descended the steps,
and approached the King. Herzberg bowed and received the blue leather-
bound diploma and the 23-karat gold medal. There was thunderous ap-
plause as he bowed again to the King, to members of the Royal Academy
and dignitaries, and to the audience.
This procedure was followed by all of the Laureates. The next was Earl
W. Sutherland, an American scientist awarded the Prize in Physiology and
Medicine, followed by Pablo Neruda, the Chilean poet with the Literature
Prize. After a musical interlude—Rossini’s Overture to “The Magpie”—
Simon Kuznets, a Russian-born, American economist, received the
Memorial Prize in Economic Science. Willy Brandt, the Chancellor of West
Germany, was presented with the Nobel Peace Prize at the University of
Oslo in Norway on the same day. That year, the Nobel Prizes in all six
categories were awarded to single individuals. The last time this had hap-
pened was in 1948; each Prize is often shared by two and up to three persons.

PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      335
Congratulations from His Majesty King Gustav VI, 10 December 1971.
The 1971 Nobel Laureates: from left, Simon Kuznets, Pablo Neruda,
Earl W. Sutherland, Gerhard Herzberg, and Dennis Gabor.

336
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
On examining the medal, Herzberg noted the profile of Alfred Nobel
on the front and the Goddess of Nature on the reverse, holding in her arms
the horn of plenty as the Genius of Science lifts the veil from her eyes.
Along the rim there is the Latin inscription from Virgil’s Aeneid that Herz-
berg had mentioned in his address in Rideau Hall. His name and the year
of the award were on the bottom. The colourful diploma included a large
landscape of mountains, no doubt a suggestion by his Swedish friends who
knew of his love of heights. A continuous spectrum was added along the
base of the mountains. On the opposite side was Herzberg’s name and the
Prize citation in Swedish: “For his contributions to the knowledge of elec-
tronic structure and geometry of molecules, particularly free radicals”.
After the ceremony, all departed by car for the magnificent City Hall,
where the new Laureates and their families gathered in the Prince’s Gallery
to be introduced to His Majesty and to members of the Royal Families of
Sweden, Denmark, and Holland. In this way, Herzberg and Agnes had a
few personal moments with them. The Banquet then followed in the glori-
ous “Golden Hall”, dazzling with its myriad gold-leaf mosaics and filled
with hundreds of guests seated at tables covered in fine linen, flowers, and
glowing candles. Accompanied by choral music, the Laureates and imme-
diate families followed the King along the hallway and aisle to their desig-
nated places. Herzberg escorted Princess Margareth of Denmark to the
head table: she sat on his right and Mrs. Simon Kuznets sat on his left. A
fanfare of trumpets, horns, organ, and singing heralded a stream of waiters
each carrying a tray aloft as they paraded along the aisles, preceded by
pages carrying torches, banners, and gigantic baskets of flowers. Course
after course was served in this manner, while wine and water goblets were
refilled after each sip. Choral and instrumental music entertained the rev-
ellers throughout the evening.
At the Banquet, the President of the Nobel Foundation presented a
toast in honour of the King, followed by a fanfare and the Swedish National
Anthem. The Royal Prince presented a silent toast in memory of Alfred
Nobel. After the dinner a brief speech and toast to the year’s Laureates was
offered by Dr. Sture Petrén of the Swedish Academy, and the Laureates
were given the opportunity to briefly address the King and guests. When it
was Herzberg’s turn to speak, he walked to the podium accompanied by a
flurry of trumpets:

PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      337
The Nobel Medal and Diploma.

338
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Your Royal Highnesses, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is very difficult to find appropriate words to say “thank you” for an hon-
our like the Nobel Prize. It is the supreme honour that a scientist can
receive. Some of the giants in physics and chemistry have received this
prize. Rutherford, the founder of nuclear physics, received the prize in
chemistry in 1908. A number of those who have taught me either direct-
ly or indirectly are on that list: James Franck, Max Born, Peter Debye,
Harold Urey and many others. I should also like to pay tribute to two pio-
neers in molecular spectroscopy from Sweden, Heurlinger and Hulthén,
who accomplished the first difficult analyses of molecular spectra in the
1920s.
In receiving the award this year, I think not only of these giants from
whom I learned so much but also of my first teacher, Hans Rau, who guid-
ed my first steps in research, and to the many collaborators who helped
me in my later work. Of them, I should like to single out A.E. Douglas,
whose quick and critical mind was always ready to help. I also think of
my adopted country Canada, which gave a haven to me and my wife
when we arrived as refugees. I think of the University of Saskatchewan
The Golden Hall of Stockholm’s City Hall. This occasion is a banquet
at the time of Herzberg’s Honorary Doctorate Degree, 1966.

PART THREE: THE GOLDEN YEARS (1948–1971)      339
which supported my work in its early stages and the National Research
Council of Canada which provided an atmosphere so conducive to
research.
Five years ago I received the great honour of an Honorary Degree
from the University of Stockholm here in this building. It was at the same
ceremony that His Majesty the King received an Honorary Degree from
the Royal Caroline Medico-Chirurgical Insitute. I felt doubly honoured
that His Majesty was present throughout this ceremony. I could hardly
have expected at that time that five years later I would stand here again in
this building having received the great and supreme honour of the Nobel
Prize from His Majesty’s hands. I shall be forever grateful. Tak så mycket.21
A ball was held in the enchanting “Blue Hall”. Herzberg, Agnes, and Mon-
ika met briefly with the Laureates, spouses, and members of the Academy
in the adjacent Prince’s Gallery and then made an early exit as the long
night of partying was known to be carried on well past midnight.
This had been an unforgettable day—breathtaking in grandeur, and
highly emotional, yet full of charm and grace—and thoroughly enjoyable!
Further Nobel Activities
Dennis Gabor and Herzberg were greeted at the Royal Institute of Tech-
nology by a packed auditorium of scientists, students, and the general pub-
lic who had come to hear their Nobel Lectures on Saturday afternoon.
Herzberg chose for his title “Spectroscopic Studies of Molecular
Structures”, and he talked about some of the more significant results of his
studies extending over the forty-four years of his scientific life.22
That evening, the King hosted a dinner at the Palace. Again a proces-
sion of limousines brought the Laureates and families into a torch-lit court-
yard. A flight of ninety marble steps led into a stately drawing room (some
had to stop and catch their breath on the way up, but Herzberg took it all in
stride) where they were received by His Majesty, the Royal Prince and
Family, Academy Officers, and other notables. Dinner was a quieter affair
than the Nobel Banquet but full of congenial discussion.
Sunday turned out to be a day of rest, except for an informal and
impromptu TV discussion in the afternoon between the Laureates of
Physics, Chemistry, and Medicine, organized by Bengt Feldreich, the
Science Editor of Sveriges Radio/TV. In the evening, Albin and Brita

340
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Lagerqvist hosted a dinner at home for their friend Gerhard Herzberg, who
was joined by Agnes, Monika, Stig Claesson, and Bengt Feldreich.
On Monday morning, 13 December, Herzberg was awakened by an
unannounced invasion of his bedroom by the “Lucia” singers, young
damsels dressed in long white gowns and crowned with laurels of lights,
escorted by young men also in white, all singing “Santa Lucia”. They
brought a tray of pastries, ginger cookies, and hot coffee while singing car-
ols, all of which was being filmed by a TV crew. This was an initial shock
for Herzberg, and no doubt for all of the Laureates who had not been fore-
warned, followed by much amusement. Later, the Laureates had tall tales
to tell of their encounters with this annual Nobel prank. A visit to the offices
of the Nobel Foundation that morning added to the day’s enjoyment, as
arrangements were made to pick up the monetary awards or to transfer the
prize amounts to respective banks. That year each award was 447,000
Swedish kroner or about $91,000 Canadian for Herzberg.
In the afternoon, Her Excellency Ambassador Meagher hosted a lunch-
eon at her residence and invited Professors Lagerqvist and Claesson as well
as Monika to join the Herzbergs. The evening was another white-tie affair,
the annual Lucia Dinner given by the Students of Science Union of the
University of Stockholm. St. Lucia is a “patron” of Swedish winter, and her
feast falls on 13 December when the nights are darkest and longest, at a time
when the days are about to grow brighter with the promise of spring. Lucia
is a symbol of this light and the Lucia Dinner marks the beginning of the
Christmas season in Sweden. A traditional dinner was served in a candle-lit
hall, accompanied by music, singing, and hilarious skits, followed by the
Lucia singers descending the stairs singing “Santa Lucia” and Swedish car-
ols. Shortly after, the Laureates were called to the stage. Each was eulogized
mercilessly and dubbed a “Knight of The Supreme Order of the Ever Jump-
ing and Smiling Green Frog” and then were decorated with a green porce-
lain frog hanging on a ribbon, all amidst much laughter and cheering. So
ended Nobel Week, with good fun and the high jinks of students.
Herzberg completed his ten days in Sweden by visiting his friend Stig
Claesson at the University of Uppsala and on the next day Bengt Edlén at
Lund University, giving lectures at both institutes. He then spent a few days
with Alfred Kastler in Paris and with Ernst Miescher and Konrad Bleuler
in Switzerland before flying to London to be with Agnes during Christmas.

PART FOUR
LATER YEARS (1972–1999)


21. WEATHERING THE AFTERMATH
Along with the glamour and esteem, many other consequences accrue to
recipients of Nobel Prizes. In the first year or two, they are overwhelmed
with invitations to speak at universities and conferences, to address young
students and local clubs, and to participate in charitable funding appeals.
Moreover, their opinion is requested on all sorts of matters public and pri-
vate, whether or not they have any expertise on the topic. While some Lau-
reates bask in this new found glory, it has often taken its toll on others, and
some have stopped doing research altogether.
Herzberg was well aware of the added responsibilities as well as oppor-
tunities for speaking to the young about the importance and pleasures of
doing science. He was also being urged by colleagues to use his newly rec-
ognized prestige to defend Canadian science and the NRC from the attacks
by the Senate Special Committee on Science Policy. However, he was wor-
ried about the time away from his beloved research. Friends who were
Nobel Laureates tried to forewarn him. Along with his congratulations
Isidor Rabi wrote: “The Nobel Prize brings with it many problems and you
may as well enjoy it before the avalanche descends on you and interferes
with your proper work.” Alfred Kastler pointed out “the only way to sur-
vive is to learn to say no!”
Myriad of Invitations
As expected, Herzberg was swamped with invitations; they arrived two
each day in the first year and slackened off to one per day, then slowly to
one every two or three days in the following years. He couldn’t say “no” to
many of these requests since he felt he owed Canada a debt for the long-
time support of his research. In 1972, he travelled widely giving lectures,
accepting honorary degrees and awards, and participating in the ceremoni-
al openings of new laboratories. His time for research work was cut to half,
as the decrease in publications for the years after 1972 reveal, and his sci-
entific productivity resumed its normal level only near the end of the 1970s
through his dogged determination. After the first year he set aside three
343
Posterity, in time, will give us all our true measure and assign to each
of us our due and humble place; and in the end it is the judgement of
posterity that really matters.
Edward Arthur Milne

344
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
months, December to February, for which he did not accept engagements,
and with his disciplined approach to research, he managed to achieve an
enormous amount. The first celebratory occasions took place in Ottawa,
Saskatoon, and Toronto, with special lectures at the Universities of British
Columbia, Toronto, and Harvard, followed by a visit to England. All of
these activities had to be fitted in with a new lifestyle following his mar-
riage to Monika Tenthoff in 1972.
But first things first. Herzberg personally answered many of the tele-
grams and letters of congratulation from close friends and colleagues, and
others were thanked with a formal card signed by him. The letter of con-
gratulations from his devoted technical assistant Jack Shoosmith elicited
this reply:
Many thanks for your letter which reached me while in London celebrat-
ing Christmas with Agnes. I had intended to write to you for some time
but life has been very hectic indeed and still is. However, I must no longer
postpone sending you a small token, taken from the Nobel Prize, to
acknowledge in a little more tangible way my indebtedness to you for all
your efforts in those twenty years, which proved to be an important con-
tribution towards the award. Without your enthusiastic support at all times
much less would have been accomplished and it is more than a little
doubtful whether the prize would have been awarded to me. I shall be for-
ever in your debt and I realize that this small token cannot begin to repay
that debt. I hope that both you and Mrs. Shoosmith are in good health.
With all good wishes to you both.1
Along with the many invitations to speak at schools in Ottawa and at
universities across the country and in the United States, there were constant
requests to be interviewed for newspapers, magazines, radio, and TV.
Herzberg agreed to most of them. For interviews that were to appear in
print he asked to see proofs before publication and in one instance noted to
the writer: “You compare me with Rutherford, Thomson, Planck, and
Bohr—they are of such a different order of magnitude that I would feel
rather embarassed if such a comparison were included in your article.”
Often when asked “What research are you doing now?”, he would not hes-
itate to remind the questioner, adding his little chuckle, that he had very lit-
tle time for work since much of his time was spent in just such interviews.
Even so, Herzberg seemed to enjoy the attention and was pleased that sci-
ence was getting more coverage in the media.

There was one interview he especially welcomed, since it dealt with his
love of music, opera, and singing.2 He and the interviewer carried on a
light-hearted exchange, with Herzberg confessing (but not with convic-
tion): “Yes, after all is said and done, opera is my true love not science. And
now that I have won the big prize, … maybe now is the time to look at my
singing.” The interviewer then went to the trouble of contacting David
Galbraith, Herzberg’s private voice teacher in Ottawa, and two of the
world’s leading opera singers, Richard Tucker in Florence, Italy, who was
performing in Verdi’s Masked Ball, and the bass-baritone Jerome Hines in
New York. Galbraith told him that Herzberg has tremendous potential: “I
only take advanced pupils, so there you are. He’s one of my best, a fine stu-
dent.” Tucker noted: “I think it’s wonderful, marvellous. But he might be
too old for many roles. Of course there’s the father in ‘La Traviata’ and
that’s even a bass-baritone like him. I’d like to give him some pointers.
Have him call me at my private number”. Hines, too, wanted to talk to
Herzberg and gave his number: “I am a chemist myself, Master’s degree in
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      345
Serenaded by student band on a visit to the
University of Saskatchewan, with his friend 
President John Spinks, 1972.

346
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
organic chemistry from UCLA, but I knew I would be an opera singer from
the time I was sixteen. I find that science and opera satisfy contrary things
in my nature. If I had a choice I would be a chemist.”
The first celebratory occasion on Herzberg’s return to Ottawa was to be
greeted by his colleagues at a special reception to which all NRC person-
nel were invited. He was overwhelmed by this thoughtful gesture and the
warmth of the gathering. He was also delighted to receive an invitation
from his “home town” Saskatoon, with the Mayor, the President of the Uni-
versity of Saskatchewan, and the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan
honouring him at a festive dinner to be held in Saskatoon in February 1972.
There he was presented with the City Award of Merit, and Herzberg Park
was named in his honour.3 Later, the University inaugurated the Gerhard
Herzberg Fellowships of $5,000 each in the basic physical sciences, one for
the Saskatchewan campus and one for the Regina campus.
Marriage
Gerhard and Monika were married on 21 March 1972 at the Provincial
Court in Ottawa. His son and Monika’s mother served as witnesses, and a
few friends attended the civil ceremony followed by a reception at the
Monika and Gerhard at their wedding reception.

Herzberg home on Lakeway Drive. Monika Elisabeth Tenthoff was born in
1941 in Germany, the daughter of Carl Tenthoff and Hertha Schulz (the sis-
ter of Herzberg’s gymnasium friend Alfred). Monika grew up in Hamburg
living with her mother, grandmother, and Uncle Alfred. She never knew her
father: he had gone off to war, then her parents divorced shortly after the
war. After elementary and high school, Monika spent nine months in
London as an “au pair” in order to improve her English and while there
earned a “Lower Cambridge Certificate”. Back in Hamburg, she attended a
College of Commerce and then worked as a secretary for a shipping com-
pany there and later for a weekly magazine in Munich. During her child-
hood and adolescent years, Uncle Alfred was a very important person in her
life. Through this family connection, Monika had often met Gerhard while
on his visits with Alfred and had also met Luise on similar occasions.
As some of his letters reveal, Gerhard was concerned as to what his
close friends thought of his second marriage and to one so young. In a let-
ter to Harry Welsh in Toronto he wrote: “I will marry soon. I hope this will
not shock you too much.” And to his longtime friends Chandra and Lalitha
with their traditional Indian upbringing, he wrote: “All of my friends and
even Luise’s friends and relatives (in particular her favourite nephew Peter
Thurnauer, who with his wife was present at the wedding) have been very
understanding of the situation. I can only hope that you will give a friend
of such long standing the benefit of the doubt.” 
Understandably, some friends and colleagues questioned this marriage
and took their time in accepting Monika within their circle. This could have
been a lonely period for her in Ottawa, but she was immediately caught up
in the busy life of travel with Gerhard, as he felt obliged to accept many of
the invitations to give lectures, especially to young students. In time, his
friends realized this was a good marriage, enriching the lives of both over
the twenty-seven years of their life together.
Further Tributes
At the meeting of Council of the NRC in March 1972, members began to
consider how best to honour Herzberg in a permanent way.4 Suggestions
were made to name an NRC building after him and to ensure the preserva-
tion of some of the apparatus connected with his research. However,
Carleton University had pre-empted the NRC in naming its physics build-
ing, the Herzberg Laboratories for Physics. This marked a triumvirate of
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      347

348
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
NRC leaders for Carleton University with its C.J. Mackenzie Engineering
Building and E.W.R. Steacie Chemistry Building. Another suggestion was
to have a portrait painted to hang in the rotunda of the Sussex Drive Lab-
oratories, along with portraits of the NRC Presidents. It was finally decid-
ed to commission a life-size bronze bust of Herzberg for display in the
rotunda. Since the expenses for such a project could not be covered by offi-
cial funds, friends, colleagues, and NRC staff contributed towards this last-
ing tribute.5 The selected sculptor was John Miecznikowski of the Fine Arts
Department of McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario. Herzberg mar-
velled at the speed with which he worked and admired his persistence until
he was satisfied with the result. Herzberg found Miecznikowski to be an
extremely likeable person and the experience of working with him was a
very pleasant one.6 Two bronze busts were completed, one for the NRC and
one for Herzberg. The formal unveiling of the sculpture by C. Jack Mac-
kenzie took place in the NRC Auditorium on 7 August 1973.
William C. Price of King’s College, London, an eminent spectroscopist
and friend, organized an exhibit on the scientific work of Herzberg and of
Dennis Gabor at the Institute of Physics Exhibition held 13–16 March 1972,
in London. Photographs of the two Nobel Laureates were shown, along with
The Gerhard Herzberg Laboratories for Physics
at Carleton University, Ottawa.

their medals and diplomas, their laboratories, their publication lists, and
many letters from colleagues and friends extolling their achievements.7
There is a sort of purity and perfection in his work and writing which has
an irresistable appeal to the idealism of young scientists. This has enabled
him to build in Ottawa a superb school of spectroscopy which serves as a
standard of excellence by which other spectroscopists can judge their
achievements. [William C. Price of King’s College, London]
The respect and affection which Dr. Gerhard Herzberg commands are
unique. They are based on a genius for friendship and an enthusiasm
and excitement about spectroscopy which he communicates in person.
[Richard Barrow of Oxford University]
Gerhard Herzberg has always been characterized, not only by scientific
skill, but also by integrity of purpose, which has been an inspiration to
younger workers and to his colleagues everywhere. [Harold W. Thomp-
son, also of Oxford]
I find the greatest achievement has been the writing of his three books on
molecular spectra. These, besides giving a clear account of the basic
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      349
Sculptor John Miecznikowski and Herzberg at
the unveiling of the bust at NRC, August 1973.

350
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
theory, have served largely to fix spectroscopic notation and include, most
valuable of all, detailed tabulation of spectroscopic data. [A.G. Gaydon of
Imperial College, London]
To work in the Spectroscopy Laboratory after the years spent on one’s
doctoral thesis was to enter a new world. Here was a group of men devot-
ed to the pursuit of science in a spirit of the highest ideals.… One learned
so much: but perhaps three things above all. Firstly, hard facts are what
count. Secondly, humility in the face of one’s own ignorance. And third-
ly, perhaps the most enduring, that a thing of beauty is a joy forever. [John
Callomon of University College, London, and former NRC postdoctoral
fellow]
The Honourable William G. Davis, Premier of Ontario, entertained
many friends of Herzberg at a special dinner in his honour at the Ontario
Science Centre in Toronto on 17 May 1972.8 Davis presented Monika with
a gold brooch featuring Ontario’s flower, the trillium, and Herzberg with a
complete set of the recorded works of Beethoven. A special gift was the
mask worn by Renato in the Masked Ball, this being suggested by Robert
Herman, the Assistant General Manager of the Metropolitan Opera in New
York. Herzberg began his speech in a light-hearted vein, mentioning that in
the last five months he had gone through the experience of listening to quite
The Nobel Prize commemoration by the
Institute of Physics in London, England, 1972.

PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      351
a number of speeches about himself and as a result had developed a split
personality. On the one hand, he very much appreciated and enjoyed the
remarks, and on the other, he was beginning to wonder more and more
whether they referred to him or to an idealized Herzberg. He was thrilled
with the Premier’s splendid gifts, especially noting that the aria “Eri tu”
from the Masked Ball was one of his very own favourites.
The month of June found the Herzbergs in England, first in Cambridge,
where he received an honorary degree (postponed because of his bereave-
ment the year before), and then in London, where he attended the Lord
Mayor’s Midsummer Banquet in honour of those eminent in the arts, sci-
ences, and learning.
In an effort to relax from his busy schedule of research and travel, the
Herzbergs purchased a small cottage on Lynch Lake in Quebec, about an
hour’s drive north of Ottawa. They spent many a weekend enjoying the
silence of the area, with swimming and canoeing on their own lake. The
Spectroscopy Group joined them for picnics and visitors and colleagues
were invited. In the first few years, Paul and Louise came from Toronto and
stayed for a few weeks during summer vacations. Gerhard and Monika
soon found that with their frequent travels, they were not able to spend as
much time at the cottage as they would have wished, and visits there
became a rare treat.
Maintenance at the cottage on Lynch Lake in Quebec.

352
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Renewed Challenge on Science Policy
Among the stacks of letters and telegrams covering his desk in the new
year, Herzberg noted a pre-publication copy of the long-awaited second
volume of the Senate Committee. As much as he procrastinated in studying
the report during this extremely busy period, he finally succumbed to scan-
ning its forty-five recommendations, especially those of concern for the
NRC. He was astounded to read about the suggested partitioning of the
NRC’s remaining roles (the role of advising the government had already
been taken over by the Science Council).
The granting function should be separated from operation of the labora-
tories. This had been a recommendation of the OECD and Macdonald
Reports of 1969, commissioned by the Science Council and co-sponsored
by the Canada Council.
Basic research by government should be carried out by a National
Research Academy with three institutes, namely, physical, life, and social
sciences, resulting in the separation of all basic research from the applied
laboratories.9
In effect, these recommendations meant the end of the NRC as the sci-
entific institution known and acclaimed worldwide. On thanking Senator
Joseph A. Sullivan, one of the Senate Committee members, for his kind
letter on the award of the Nobel Prize, Herzberg mentioned that he was a
little surprised to see that the Senate Committee recommended the dis-
memberment of the NRC at the very time when the work of the NRC had
been acknowledged internationally.10 He also noted that Senator Sullivan’s
name was still listed among the members of the Senate Committee in the
pre-publication copy of the Report. “Of course it is not for me to make such
a suggestion, but I am wondering whether a renewed statement that you
disassociate yourself from the Report, and in particular from its recom-
mendation of dismembering NRC, might not be useful.” To which Senator
Sullivan replied:
I am fully cognizant of what you stated in your letter and both Lamontagne
and the others know that I disagree with them completely. When I saw this
final report come out, [I was flabbergasted: it was] not the dismemberment
of the NRC but the disemboweling of the NRC. I propose on a question of
privilege in the House, to disassociate myself from it completely. Again,
with warmest regards and my sincere congratulations.11

As happened a year before with the first Report of the Senate Commit-
tee, journalists across the country had a field day with the second Report.
To quote one of them:
Lester B. Pearson once said that the only thing worse than a dormant
Senate would be an active one, and now that the Senate is active, we are
beginning to see what Pearson was getting at. Through its committees, a
rejuvenated Senate has been sticking its nose into almost every aspect of
public business and bringing down reports that contain many table-
thumping recommendations. The trouble is that regardless of their quali-
ty, the Senate reports tend to contribute more to public confusion than to
public enlightenment.…
So it is with the (second) report and recommendations of the Senate
Special Committee on Science Policy, which made such a splash this
week. It was grandly titled Targets and Strategies for the Seventies. It
should have been labelled “Targets and Strategies of Some Senators”. It
bristled with urgent recommendations and dire warnings, including a
critique of the National Research Council which caused that body to
spring to its own defence, contributing to the quite erroneous impression
that something of importance had happened in high places, with grave
import for the future.12
In February, Herzberg was invited by the Science Undergraduate Soci-
ety of the University of British Columbia to a debate with Senator Lamont-
agne. Herzberg thought it unwise and declined, noting: “I have just been
reading some of the Senate Debates on the report of Senator Lamontagne
and I have come to the conclusion that scientists and senators live in dif-
ferent worlds, and for that reason also a discussion in open confrontation
would not be useful”.13 In fact, he avoided any public discussion of the two
Reports except to comment briefly during addresses at university convoca-
tions.
Only when the opportunity came to express his opinions at a sympo-
sium in the presence of Senator Lamontagne did he accept to give a formal
presentation. This occurred at a SCITEC Forum in Ottawa on 2 May
1974.14 The third volume, A Government Organization for the Seventies,
had also appeared by this time. Herzberg did not hold back his fundamen-
tal criticisms of the Senate Committee Reports. He began with:
I believe that all of us, that is the senators and the scientists, agree (more
or less) about the aim before us, namely, the improvement of science and
its contributions to technology in Canada. The difference arises in the
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      353

354
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
means suggested to arrive at this aim. The Senate Committee believes that
if we only apply the right strategy, the right bureaucratic set-up, we will
reach our aim and reach it sooner than if we do not change our strategy in
accordance with their views.
He noted that the right strategy may win a war or an election but that the
use of strategy becomes difficult or impossible when one is dealing with a
subject that depends essentially on discovery and creative thought. While
many countries envied Canada for development of the NRC, both with
regard to its in-house research and its function as a granting agency for uni-
versity research, the Senate Committee insisted on reorganization instead
of trying to support what was excellent in Canada’s scientific set-up. In
fact, Senator Grosart had said in Herzberg’s presence that “one of the great-
est impediments to establishing a coherent science policy in Canada was
the excellence of the NRC”. Herzberg emphasized that the trouble with the
Senate Committee had been all along, and quite naturally, that they did not
and could not understand how science works and how scientists work.
They could have had a simple lesson on the subject by visiting the labora-
tories of the NRC in Ottawa, but they did not. Rather, they preferred to look
at all sorts of organizations in other countries, following the Canadian habit
of belittling our own accomplishments. Had they visited the NRC, they
would also have found that there is no sharp limit between basic and
applied research: often the same person can be involved at one time in one
and at another time in the other. Close contact between basic and applied
scientists can be most important in the development of applied science and
technology, simply because it is not possible at the time of a scientific dis-
covery to predict whether or not it may be of use for practical purposes. He
illustrated this point with the laser, which was developed in studies of the
basic field of light and spectroscopy, and its importance to present com-
munication systems was not foreseen. A further misleading pronouncement
by the Senate Committee was that basic research was over-supported by the
Canadian government. This was not so according to the OECD Report
(often quoted by the Senators, but not in this case), which noted that Can-
ada was only spending per capita about one-half of what the U.S.A. was
spending on fundamental research.
Having directed these remarks as forcefully as he could to the Senator,
Herzberg was surprised on speaking with him afterwards to find Senator
Lamontagne to be a charming and intelligent man. So, he was completely
bewildered that the Senator could have spent so much time and effort in

attempting to formulate “Utopian” procedures for government science pol-
icy and, in the process, had deprecated the NRC and the sincerity of its
Presidents, who all had had the good of the country in mind. If Lamontagne
had visited the NRC he could have seen for himself the accomplishments
of the NRC Presidents: they had built up graduate schools in Canadian uni-
versities, created one of the strongest government laboratories in the world,
and supported scientific activities to the point where Canadian science had
a high international reputation. As Herzberg’s colleague John D. Babbitt,
who had made a careful study of the Reports of the Senate Committee and
had written a number of articles defending the NRC, concluded:
It seems to me that the great benefit to be gained from the studies by the
Senators … is the realization that a policy for science in the sense of a for-
mulated plan is a visionary ideal that bears little relation to the realities
either of science or of national life. If the studies of the Senators could
only succeed in impressing this lesson, once and for all, on those respon-
sible for Canadian policy and could induce them to return to an examina-
tion of those fundamental principles which enabled the NRC to become
an outstanding example of a national scientific organization, the debt that
the country owes to Senator Lamontagne and his Committee would be
immeasurably increased.15
This was a vain hope, since this viewpoint had not registered with the
Senators. Both Babbitt and Herzberg realized that their arguments were not
being heard nor would they be: as scientists they placed far too much faith
on the power of common sense and reason. Besides, they did not command
press conferences as politicians were accustomed to doing. The Zeitgeist of
the era of quantum mechanics, the high point of science in the twentieth
century, had no place in the Senators’ zeal for a centralized science policy.
Its currently strong appeal was so pervasive that it would take many more
studies and reports, as well as trials at reorganization of existing depart-
ments, before scientific activities in Canada could resume the stimulating
pace and advances of the sixties.
A Changing Role for the NRC
Over the years of these various studies (Heeney, Glassco, MacDonald,
OECD, Science Council, and Lamontagne), and partly as a result of their
recommendations, the NRC was evolving with five year programs and
more focus of laboratory research and engineering (R and D) on industrial
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      355

356
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
needs for the economic and social benefit of Canada. NRC’s traditional role
of advising the federal government on matters relating to science was ter-
minated with the revision of the NRC Act in 1966 and taken over by the
Science Secretariat established in 1964 and the Science Council of Canada
created two years later. A Ministry of State for Science and Technology
(MOSST) was created in 1971 and superseded the Science Secretariat. As
stated in the Senate Committee’s fourth volume in 1977, “we had antici-
pated that MOSST would become a dynamic agent and that action on our
other recommendations would soon follow. However, our expectations
were not realized”.16 This result was not surprising since the Ministry had
no budget and therefore little power. MOSST was eventually (1990)
absorbed into the Department of Industry, Science and Technology. The
Science Council was abolished in 1992, along with the Economics Council.
What affected the NRC most was the transfer of its university grants
and scholarships function to the newly created Natural Sciences and Engi-
neering Research Council (NSERC) in 1978. Yet, this transfer was
inevitable, not simply because there was a perceived conflict of interest in
the NRC’s role as both an operator of research laboratories and a granting
agency for university research. The rapid growth of the university research
community from a few hundred in the 1940s to tens of thousands in the
1970s necessitated this change. At the same time, the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) was formed to fund the liberal arts
in the universities.
The NRC had never been intent on building an empire of science, con-
trary to the views of politicians and even some scientists. Just after the
Second World War, when the NRC was urged to assume the administration
of all government activities in the sciences, Mackenzie and Steacie chose
to divest the NRC of military research, work in atomic energy, and medical
research. Succeeding Presidents Ballard, Schneider, and Kerwin would not
have wished to enlarge its mandate even if given the opportunity.
Dr. Larkin Kerwin was appointed President of the NRC by Prime
Minister Pierre Trudeau on the retirement of Schneider in June 1980. Ker-
win had been an active research scientist at Université Laval. His talents for
administration became recognized at an early age, with his election as
President of the Canadian Association of Physicists and later as Rector of
Université Laval. He then served as President of The Royal Society of
Canada and of the International Union for Pure and Applied Physics. His
leadership and organizational skills at the NRC helped to maintain morale

during a very difficult period of external pressure, severely reduced budg-
ets, and depletion of scientific and technical staff. At the end of his second
and final presidential term, Kerwin wrote to Herzberg that he felt very lit-
tle had been accomplished: “In spite of decades of effort in collaboration
with so many distinguished Canadian scientists, our Nation’s commitment
is really no greater than when we started. Islands of excellence are sur-
rounded by seas of indifference and neglect.”17
Despite these problems, the scientific and engineering communities in
Canada had matured by 1990, thanks in large measure to the foresight and
policies of all of the NRC Presidents and the Advisory Council. “The Can-
adian centre of intellectual gravity in industrial technology was now in
industry, and of academic sciences in the universities—precisely what the
NRC had set out to create.”18 It was time for the NRC to emphasize
research and development in new fields of science and engineering and to
work with universities and industry as equal partners in promoting such
enterprises. It was understood that basic scientific research was of crucial
importance for contributing to any progress in new fields of technology,
and fortunately Presidents Schneider and Kerwin had insisted on sustain-
ing basic research at the NRC during the difficult 1970s and 1980s.
Herzberg’s continuing contributions, prestige, and leadership in stimulating
new areas of scientific research were instrumental in this endeavour.
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      357

358
22.THE HERZBERG INSTITUTE OF 
ASTROPHYSICS
Think of the irony! As a youth, Herzberg had set his heart on becoming an
astronomer and was then advised not to study astronomy in university
unless he had private means. Five decades later, the Herzberg Institute of
Astrophysics, with optical and radio observatories and extensive laboratory
facilities, was named after him.
In 1974, at the opening ceremonies of the conference “Perspectives in
Spectroscopy” held in honour of Herzberg’s seventieth birthday, President
Schneider announced the intention of Council to set up an Institute of Astro-
physics within the NRC.1 “In recognition of Herzberg’s outstanding scientific
contributions, his interest in and contributions to astrophysics, and his distin-
guished role as a scientist and scientific leader at the NRC, the new Institute
is to bear his name. It is Council’s fervent wish that Dr. Herzberg will continue
as an active research scientist in the Institute.” Herzberg had every intention
of doing so. At seventy years of age, when most men are happy to retire
from day-to-day activities, Herzberg was as driven to do research as in the
days when he first entered a science laboratory fifty years before. The
Nobel Prize was fine, but discovery to him was by far the most satisfying
and important thing in the world. That was what Herzberg lived for!
A New NRC Institute for Basic Research
The Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics (HIA) was established formally on
1 April 1975. On being congratulated for this unique honour Herzberg
would reply: “I feel very flattered to have this institute named after me”,
and then with a resounding laugh, “but I am just a worker there”. The aim
of the HIA was to develop in Canada a centre of scientific excellence in the
field of astrophysics. In this way, the NRC planned to consolidate its
various activities in optical astronomy and radioastronomy (which had
been transferred to the NRC in 1969), along with cosmic-ray research,
spectroscopy, and laboratory astrophysics, and thus bring about increased
So the lively force of his mind won through, and he has reached out far
beyond the flaming walls of the world and ranged with his imaginative
intelligence throughout space, whence he triumphantly reports to us
what can and cannot arise.
Lucretius

interaction among scientists, as well as more visibility for Canadian
activity in this field. An added stimulus for creating the Institute was the
possible availability of an important new telescope. Four years later the
Canada– France–Hawaii Telescope came into operation. It was built on the
extinct volcano Mauna Kea in Hawaii, found by Herzberg’s friend Gerard
Kuiper to be the best observation site in the world. The telescope has oper-
ated as an international partnership of the NRC, the Centre Nationale de la
Recherche Scientifique of France, and the University of Hawaii.
With its many interests in molecular astrophysics, particularly with its
studies of spectra of free radicals and molecular ions, the Spectroscopy
Laboratory was an integral part of the HIA. Added to the earlier techniques
of microwave, infrared, visible, and ultraviolet spectroscopy was the use of
a variety of lasers and Fourier-transform interferometers. New vistas in
molecular astrophysics were being opened by recent observations of
diatomic and polyatomic molecules in the interstellar medium by radio-
astronomers. The HIA was prepared to play its part in this burgeoning field
of science.
New Fields to Explore
The spectroscopy program for the study of molecular ions provided an
important confirmation of some early ideas that comets consisted mainly of
ices, including water (H2O). Since the water molecule does not exhibit a
spectrum in emission, several attempts had been made by various groups to
obtain the spectrum of the ion H2O+ as a means of proving that water was
present in comets and in other astrophysical bodies, but without success.
Herzberg suggested to Hin Lew that he try to look for this spectrum
because of his expertise with electron filament discharges, an important
technique that is required to sustain a discharge at extremely low gas pres-
sures. Lew succeeded in obtaining a rich and complex emission spectrum
in the visible region, just as astronomers were awaiting the reappearance of
Comet Kohoutek.2 When spectra of the tail of the comet were sent to
Herzberg by colleagues in Italy and Israel, he and Lew immediately iden-
tified parts of the spectrum to be the same as the laboratory spectrum of
H2O+, thus demonstrating that Comet Kohoutek was partly composed of
ice.3 Later H2O+ was also detected in the upper atmosphere from spectra of
the twilight glow.
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      359

360
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
A major discovery of the HIA was the detection of spectra of long
carbon-chain molecules in the interstellar medium. The study began with
the measurement in 1975 of the microwave rotation spectrum of the mole-
cule HC5N (H–C–C–C–C–C–N) by Harry Kroto and his colleagues at the
University of Sussex.4 Kroto was an alumnus of the Spectroscopy
Laboratory, having spent 1964–1966 as a postdoctoral fellow working with
Cec Costain and Takeshi Oka (who had begun to work on astrophysical
problems at that time). Kroto contacted Oka with the HC5N results and
asked “Is this any good as far as interstellar experiments are concerned, and
would you be interested in collaborating in such a search?” The immediate
reply was “Yes, very, very, very much interested!” The prospects seemed
encouraging since another member of this family of molecules, HC3N, had
been found to be abundant in the interstellar medium. Oka initiated a search
for HC5N in space using the HIA Algonquin radio telescope. Within a few
months, the group was successful in detecting HC5N in space.5 Two years
later, the HIA group, including Kroto who had come to Canada for the
interstellar search, discovered spectra of the molecules HC7N (based on
Kroto’s laboratory data), and HC9N (based on a predicted rotational constant
Discussing the spectrum of H2O+ with Hin Lew.

by Oka6).7 These carbon-chain species are all linear molecules that appear
in the atmospheres of cool carbon stars, but the formation of such complex
molecules remained to be explained. In the meantime, Douglas had pro-
posed that the long carbon-chain molecules could be the cause of the dif-
fuse interstellar bands, but this had yet to be proven.8
Both puzzles fascinated Kroto, whose pursuit of the role of carbon in
space, eventually (1985) led to the discovery of “buckminsterfullerene”,
the molecule C60, consisting of 60 carbon atoms with the structure of a geo-
desic dome (or soccer ball). Kroto and colleagues Robert F. Curl and Rich-
ard E. Smalley of Rice University, where the experiments were carried out,
were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1996 for their discovery of
the fullerenes. At the 75th Anniversary Celebrations of the NRC in 1991,
Kroto gave the plenary HIA lecture in which he noted: “It could be said that
NRC’s fundamental science is particularly responsible for the discovery of
C60”.9
After having studied many aspects of the spectra of atomic (H) and
molecular hydrogen (H2) over the years, Herzberg turned his attention to
the next member in the series, the molecule H3 and its related ion H3
+ . He
concentrated on a search for the spectrum of the ion because it is the
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      361
Celebrating the award of the 1972 Steacie Prize to Takeshi Oka. From left:
Oka, President Bill Schneider, Mrs. Oka, and Past-President C. Jack Mackenzie.

362
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
simplest polyatomic molecule, consisting of three protons and two elec-
trons, and this ion was predicted to be the starting point for the creation of
most of the molecules found in interstellar space. The existence and stabil-
ity of H3
+ in an electrical discharge had been discovered by J.J. Thomson in
1911. Its great stability and the simple reaction forming H3
+ from collisions
of hydrogen (H2) and hydrogen ion H2
+ suggested to Herzberg that H3
+ must
be present in interstellar space, where hydrogen is by far the most abundant
element. However, the spectrum of H3
+ was not known; it had not been
observed in the laboratory or in space. Could H3
+ explain some of the dif-
fuse interstellar bands that were constantly on Herzberg’s mind?
There was no question that in order to probe for H3
+ in the interstellar
medium, its spectrum had to be found in the laboratory. This challenge was
another of Herzberg’s long-lived trials. He had first learned of the ion when
Heinrich Peters, a close colleague during student days in Darmstadt, was
trying in vain to observe the spectrum of H3 or H3
+ in a hydrogen discharge
tube. Herzberg himself had made a brief first attempt to look for an emis-
sion infrared spectrum of H3
+ during his visit to the University of Michigan
in the summer of 1940, but was unsuccessful. Twenty years later at the
NRC, he had searched for an absorption spectrum in the far-ultraviolet
Harold Kroto (later Sir Harold) and the buckeyball C60, 1991.

region using an electrical discharge under conditions favouring a high con-
centration of H3
+. Later, with the help of John Johns, he tried several differ-
ent discharges while looking for an absorption spectrum in the infrared, but
again without success.10 Then he began a search for its infrared emission
spectrum.
Herzberg’s discussions during the weekly group meetings of his search
for the spectrum of H3
+ and the importance of finding it intrigued Oka, who
was working in molecular astrophysics. In 1975, he came up with the idea
of looking for an infrared absorption spectrum using laser techniques.
Douglas, who was Head of the Spectroscopy Section at the time, encour-
aged him to try, and a friendly competition developed in the search for this
elusive species, with Oka looking for an absorption spectrum and Herzberg
an emission spectrum.11 It was predicted from quantum theory that H3
+ has
the structure of an equilateral triangle, with H atoms separated by 0.88 Å,
and that its vibrational spectrum should occur at about 2522 cm–1 in the
infrared region. Thus, they had an inkling of the wavelength region to look
for the spectrum and what the spacing of the rotation–vibration lines
would be.
On scanning this spectral region of the emission from a discharge
conducive to formation of H3
+,  Herzberg found some interesting features,
which turned out to be new spectra of H2, but there was no evidence of
H3
+. While he was to be away on a lecture tour in the Soviet Union in 1978,
he asked Brian Hurley, his new assistant and the successor to Shoosmith,
to photograph emission spectra of the discharge in the visible region in
order to check on the behaviour of the particular discharge they were using.
Upon his return, Herzberg was presented with a number of spectra taken
with hydrogen and deuterium in the discharge. A spectrum at 5600 Å with
very broad lines for hydrogen and sharper lines for deuterium caught his
attention. He concentrated on the spectrum taken with deuterium, but he
was baffled. It was neither a spectrum of D2 nor of D3
+ . He kept the plate
on a viewer at his desk, and every now and then over the next two months
he examined the spectrum, wondering what molecular species could have
caused it.
Finally, one morning in January 1979, Herzberg realized what it was.
The idea came out of the blue, “It was a bright flash, something you can’t
explain”, he said later. He had discovered the molecule D3 (and H3), the
neutral molecule of three hydrogen atoms (three protons and three elec-
trons). He was searching for H3
+ and had unexpectedly found H3. Earlier,
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      363

364
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
he and many others had thought that H3 was unstable, because it was
known that when H and H2 are brought together, they do not attract each
other. But he was able to explain that the molecule is stable in its excited
states, that is, when energy is added to either H or H2, they attract one
another to form H3.12 The structure was an equilateral triangle, as predict-
ed for H3
+, but with the third electron in an orbit far from the three protons.
This he called a “Rydberg molecule”. Other bands of a similar nature but
with sharper lines were found in the visible region at 6025 Å, and Herzberg
continued to question why these spectra had not been observed or reported
by earlier workers. Jim Watson of the HIA and Jon Hougen, a former mem-
ber of the Spectroscopy Laboratory, collaborated in the evaluation of the
spectra of H3 and D3. Herzberg encouraged the group at the Max-Planck
Institute for Quantum Optics in Garching to examine these and other excit-
ed-state spectra using their advanced laser techniques, and they also stud-
ied spectra of H2D and HD2.13 With the discovery of H3 and D3, Herzberg
opened up a whole new field of molecular spectroscopy, yet he couldn’t
help but wonder why this spectrum had not been observed much earlier.
The concept of Rydberg molecules also helped him to unravel a spectrum
that had lain unexplained in the scientific literature for 110 years. He
showed it to be due to NH4, another Rydberg molecule (that is, the ion NH4
+
plus an electron).14 The serendipitous discovery of these Rydberg mole-
cules was sheer joy. In 1984, the American Physical Society awarded Herz-
The 5600 Å bands of D3 and H3. The photometer curves at the top
(showing the broad lines of D3 and H3 among the many sharp lines
of D2 and H2) are compared with simulated spectra at the bottom.

berg, at eighty years of age, the Earle K. Plyler Prize citing: “With his
analysis of the Rydberg States of H3 and NH4 he has served as a role model
for all spectroscopists, an inspiration to us all”.
While H3 and NH4 were the first two polyatomic Rydberg molecules to
be discovered, diatomic Rydberg molecules were well known. These
included dimers and hydrides of the rare gases and their respective ions,
some of whose spectra were being investigated by Herzberg and his col-
leagues at the HIA and the Quantum Optics group in Garching. In view of
the known fairly high abundance of H, He, Ne, and Ar, he kept in mind the
possibility that these molecules and ions could be detected in space and
might even be the cause of the diffuse interstellar bands. He was particu-
larly interested in HeH+, HeNe+, HeAr+, KrH, KrD, XeH, XeD, ArH, and
ArD.15
Meanwhile, Oka searched for the absorption spectrum of H3
+ and, after
four years of concentrated effort, succeeded in detecting and measuring
fifteen absorption lines of its infrared spectrum in 1980.16 This accom-
plishment was a fundamental discovery for interstellar spectroscopy and
chemistry. While Herzberg was not directly involved in these experiments,
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      365
Discussing the spectrum of H3 with Wolfgang Ketterle
at the Max-Planck Institute in Garching, 1983.

366
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
he was delighted that the first observation of the long-sought H3
+ spectrum
had been made in the Spectroscopy Laboratory of the HIA. The discover-
ies of H3
+, Rydberg molecules, long carbon-chain molecules, and H2O+ dur-
ing the 1970s were the high points in the NRC search for molecular species
in extraterrestrial bodies and in the interstellar medium.
Oka immediately began the search for H3
+ in space but was unsuccess-
ful in the short term. With the dramatic improvement in sensitivity of infra-
red detector arrays, Oka and Geballe finally obtained spectroscopic
evidence for the presence of H3
+ in interstellar space in 1996. Subsequent
studies confirmed its existence in many dense and diffuse molecular clouds
in the interstellar medium.17 Much to the surprise of astronomers and
spectroscopists, the first detection of H3
+outside the laboratory was made in
1987 by the serendipitous observation of a strong emission spectrum in the
polar auroral regions of Jupiter, which was identified by Jim Watson to be
the overtone band of H3
+ .18 The fundamental infrared band was later
observed and the emission was used to monitor variations in the dynamic
Jovian plasmas. Emission spectra of H3
+ have also been observed in Uran-
us and Saturn.18
A welcome meeting with long-time
friend Ernst Miescher, 1979.
In rapt discussion with
Takeshi Oka.

Herzberg continued his attempts to explain the diffuse interstellar
bands, which he felt very strongly must be due to some molecular ion or
free radical. There seemed to be no question in Herzberg’s mind that if the
spectra were due to neutral molecules they would have been found long
before, since it was easy to produce spectra of all conceivable molecules in
the laboratory. On the other hand, ions and radicals would be favoured in
the interstellar medium, where they would be much more stable than under
laboratory conditions. So he was more inclined to look for spectra of ions
and radicals. He searched for spectra of several ions including CH4
+, since
CH4 was fairly abundant in the outer planets, and NH4
+ and HCOOH+,
since their spectra were expected to be in the region of the diffuse inter-
stellar bands, but found nothing.
Astronomers had originally suggested that the diffuse interstellar bands
had something to do with interstellar dust or grains, and more recently oth-
ers proposed large molecules of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. While
Herzberg thought that these could be interesting possibilities, there was no
conclusive proof. Since no one had yet succeeded in reproducing any of the
spectra in the laboratory, he continued his pursuit of this puzzle.
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      367
A composite spectrum of the diffuse interstellar bands (DIBS),
the enigma of spectroscopists and astrophysicists since the 1930s,
after Jenniskens and Désert.19

368
23. CONTINUING ACTIVITIES
There seemed to be no letup in invitations to give research lectures at
national and international conferences or to speak on general topics at
anniversary celebrations of friends and research institutes. Herzberg chose
carefully because of the time away from research and the rigors of travel in
his advancing years. And he would not accept some invitations to speak if
a manuscript was also requested for publication.
Requests to Lecture and Advise
In 1975 the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture of the Government
of Japan invited him to be the Honorary Advisory Councillor for a new
institute for basic research to be established in Okazaki. A year later, on a
visit to the site on which this Institute for Molecular Science was to be
built, he was asked to give his opinion on the best way to run such a labo-
ratory. Recalling the advice he had received from Steacie when he joined
the NRC, Herzberg emphasized that good researchers should be hired and
There is a time for all things, and a time to end all things.
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar
A sure sign of research activity, 1991.

given the freedom to choose their own problems. He also gave a talk on
“Recent Spectroscopic Studies of Interstellar Molecules”. He visited again
in 1979 and in 1985 when the Institute was in full operation and was being
recognized internationally for its basic contributions.1
In 1976, the president of the Max-Planck Institute invited Herzberg to
participate on the Advisory Board (Beirat) for a project on laser research
and in 1982 to be a Member of the Board for the Max-Planck Institute for
Quantum Optics in Garching.2 This he welcomed since there was much
interest in spectroscopic research at this Institute, and collaboration devel-
oped quickly on problems in H3, D3, and the ions of noble gas dimers. To
his surprise, he was invited to present a Heisenberg Lecture in Munich in
1980 (but was only able to accept for 1982), and he reported to Chandra:
“I have no idea how I was selected to do that since my contacts with
Heisenberg were few, but a talk on hydrogen has a nice connection with
Heisenberg since the topic ortho- and para-hydrogen is specifically men-
tioned in his Nobel citation”.3 Herzberg gave his lecture “Molekularer
Wasserstoff in Laboratorium und im Weltraum” in German, even though
his German was less fluent than his English.
A tradition of German Universities is to honour alumni who have made
fundamental contributions to knowledge on the fifieth anniversary of their
Habilitation. The Institute of Physics of the Technische Hochschule Darm-
stadt commemorated this event for Herzberg with a special celebration on
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      369
Monika and audience amused at the running start of a
lecture at the Technische Hochschule in Darmstadt, 1979.

370
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
2 November 1979. He gave a lecture titled “Erinnerungen an Meine Darm-
stadter Zeit” (Reminiscences of My Time in Darmstadt) and had the oppor-
tunity to meet with former colleagues and to visit the beautifully restored
city.
He accepted two invitations that proved to be rather arduous visits with
travel almost halfway around the world: one was the Frew Fellowship of
the Australian Academy of Science in 1982, the other was the first R.K.
Asundi Memorial Lecture in India in 1984. Herzberg had met Asundi in
1930 on a visit to King’s College, London, where Asundi was working on
a spectrum of CO for his Ph.D. Their scientific interests developed into a
lifelong friendship, with Asundi working at the NRC on several occasions.
Asundi accompanied Herzberg on his travels in India, introducing him to
Indian food (which Herzberg found to be too spicy), Hindu ethics, religion,
A vital lecturer at the age of seventy-five,
on the fiftieth anniversary of his Habilitation.

and philosophy, and the Indian political scene. In spectroscopy, they had
similar interests in diatomic molecules and astrophysical applications, and
several of Asundi’s students joined the NRC as postdoctoral fellows. In
memory of Asundi, Herzberg provided a comprehensive review of “The
Spectra of Molecular Ions”.4
He was invited to a medical meeting in Washington, D.C., titled “Can-
cer Causation and Prevention: Biochemical Mechanisms” to give a talk on
oxygen and the electronic state found to be an important carrier of energy
in cancer cells. He attended the meeting but claimed no knowledge of can-
cer. “If anyone had suggested fifty years ago that my spectroscopic studies
of oxygen would be important I would have dismissed the idea. But this
shows that no one can foresee the applications of basic research.” On
another occasion, he decided to forego a meeting on atmospheric pollution
but was pleased to learn that his work on free radicals seemed to be of
importance in evaluating the danger of fluorocarbons from spray cans
entering the upper atmosphere and destroying the ozone layer that protects
us from the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. In Ottawa, he accepted
membership in the President’s Council of the Civic Hospital and served as
Honorary Chairman of the Loeb Institute Advisory Committee. Herzberg
was a member of the Editorial Board of the Canadian Journal of Physics
for several decades and also participated on the Monograph Advisory Com-
mittee of the NRC Research Press.
Following the award of the Nobel Prize, Herzberg was honoured in
many different ways with fellowships and appointments as a member and
honorary member in academies and societies all over the world. He
received another nineteen honorary degrees, most of them from Canada but
some from the Universities of Drexel, Toledo, Cambridge, Hamburg, Bris-
tol, Frankfurt, Andhra, Osmania, and Delhi and the Weizmann Institute of
Science. A park in Saskatoon and a road in Kanata (a technology suburb of
Ottawa known as “Silicon Valley North”) were named after him, as were
scholarships and a lecture series at Carleton University, in addition to lab-
oratories there and at John Abbott College in Ste. Anne de Bellevue,
Quebec. His name was given to an award of the Spectroscopy Society of
Canada, to a spectrograph for the Canada–France–Hawaii Telescope on
Mauna Kea, and to an asteroid (the minor planet 3316) having an orbit of
5.5 years.
Two honorary posts in Canada deserve special mention. Herzberg
served as Chancellor of Carleton University in Ottawa from 1973 to 1980.
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      371

372
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
As titular head of the university he presided over all graduation cere-
monies, usually held in the fall and summer, and assisted the President on
request. On Canada’s 125th Birthday, 1 July 1992, he was appointed a
member of the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada. He had to cancel his
attendance at a meeting of Nobel Laureates in Lindau, Germany, when he
received a telephone call from the Prime Minister of Canada, the Right
Honourable Brian Mulroney, informing him of this appointment.5 The
swearing-in ceremony was held in Rideau Hall with presentation of new
members to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II by Governor General Ramon
John Hnatyshyn. The Privy Council is an advisory body to the Crown, to
aid and advise the Government of Canada. Privy Councillors include all
Appointed a member of the Queen’s Privy Council of Canada
by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II with Governor General
Ramon Hnatyshyn on her right and Prime Minister
Brian Mulroney on her left, Ottawa 1992.

Cabinet Ministers, all former Ministers, and distinguished individuals
appointed as a mark of honour. The exceptional appointment of the latter
group is in recognition of outstanding contribution to Canada and its peo-
ple. Privy Councillors carry the title “Honourable” for life and the initials
P.C. after their names, but meetings of the full Council are rare.
Freedom For All
Herzberg’s appeals for freedom were not confined to scientists and the
NRC, but embraced humanitarian rights for all. He participated in activi-
ties of many humanitarian organizations including the Academy of Peace,
Science for Peace, International League of Human Rights, World Citizens
Assembly, Food and Disarmament International, Committee of Concerned
Scientists, Canadian Committee of Scientists and Scholars, Canadian
Professors for Peace in the Middle East, and Congress of Nobel Laureates
for World Peace, among others. He lent his name to petitions, movements,
and projects for the liberation of unjustly detained scientists and did not
hesitate to write personal letters on their behalf to Heads of State of coun-
tries that had signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.6
As a strong advocate of nuclear disarmament, he signed Linus Paul-
ing’s 1957 petition for stopping tests of nuclear bombs. Herzberg wrote to
the President of Syria and requested that he give each member of the Jew-
ish Community in Syria the right to leave the country; he signed with Nobel
Laureates many petitions for the release of U.S.S.R. refusniks such as Vik-
tor Brailovsky, Vladimir Kislik, Yuri Orlov, and others; he wrote to the
Ambassador of Bulgaria about the detention of a scientist and the treatment
of another scientist’s family after he had left the country; and he urged
Leningrad authorities to give an exit visa to Andrei Petelin, who had asked
for Herzberg’s support when they met at Leningrad University on the day
the Nobel Prize was rumoured. Herzberg was surprised and delighted to
receive a letter, seven years later, from Petelin, living in Silver Spring,
Maryland, thanking him for interceding on his behalf.7
Herzberg’s most persistent appeals concerned the release of
Academician Andrei Sakharov, Nobel Laureate, from jail and internal exile
and did not cease until Sakharov was able to come to Canada for a brief
visit. In 1973, when Soviet intellectuals Andrei Sakharov and Alexander
Solzhenitsyn were incarcerated, Herzberg initiated an appeal for their
release signed by ninety Nobel Laureates and sent it to President Nikolay
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      373

374
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Podgorny, Chairman of the Presidium of the U.S.S.R.8 For openly criticiz-
ing the policies of the Soviet authorities, Sakharov was banished by Leonid
Brezhnev to the closed city of Gorky in 1980. Several appeals on behalf of
Sakharov were sent to Brezhnev by Herzberg, also with Linus Pauling, via
Yakovlev, the U.S.S.R. Ambassador to Canada. In a telegram to Flora Mac-
Donald (Secretary of State for External Affairs for Canada), Herzberg
indicated his shock and dismay at the detention and internal exiling of Sak-
harov and recommended suspension of the Canada–U.S.S.R. technical and
scientific exchange program.9 (The Government approved a one year sus-
pension 1980–1981, but this was adopted because of U.S.S.R. intervention
in Afghanistan.) These appeals for the release of Sakharov were followed
up with letters and telegrams to Konstantin Chernenko and to Mikhail
Gorbachev by the Canadian Committee of Scientists and Scholars with
Herzberg as its president.10
In 1983 and 1984, Herzberg participated in demonstrations in front of
the Soviet Embassy in Ottawa. He spoke to the demonstrators about the
medical needs of the Sakharovs:
You are all aware of the serious situation that has arisen with regard to
Andrei Sakharov and his wife, Yelena Bonner. We are not here to judge
the actions of the Soviet Government, but rather to appeal to it on human-
itarian grounds to release the Sakharovs.
The Soviet Government is a member of the United Nations and as
such adheres to the Declaration of Human Rights. These human rights
include freedom of movement and freedom of thought, that is freedom to
express unpopular opinions. We appeal to the Soviet Government to
apply these freedoms to the Sakharovs.…
Scientific cooperation between Canadian and Soviet scientists has
been active and has led to many advances in their respective fields. It has
not only been useful from a scientific point of view but has also given us
many opportunities to learn about the Soviet Union, and for our Soviet
colleagues to learn about our country. It would be a great pity if a serious
shadow would be thrown over these personal and scientific relations by
the Sakharovs not obtaining the freedom which they are seeking.
In 1986, Gorbachev invited Sakharov to return to Moscow and to his
“patriotic activities”. The following year, Sakharov was selected as the
recipient of the “1987 International Award” of the St. Boniface General
Hospital Research Foundation in Winnipeg for his brilliant work as a
nuclear physicist and for his dedication to world peace.11 Previous winners

of this prestigious award, inaugurated in 1976, included Dr. Jonas Salk for
discovery of the vaccine against poliomyelitis, Dr. Christian Barnard for the
first successful transplanting of a human heart, and Mother Teresa for her
work among the poorest of the poor. Herzberg wrote to Gorbachev noting:
The release of Academician Sakharov from internal exile a year ago was
greeted by the international scientific community with great satisfaction
and hope for the future. This hope and satisfaction would be immeasur-
ably increased if you should find it possible to arrange for Academician
Sakharov to leave your country for a short visit to Winnipeg. As a Can-
adian, I would be especially happy if Academician Sakharov could take
his first steps outside the Soviet Union in Canada.12
Sakharov and his wife finally came to “the beautiful, hospitable country of
Canada” in February 1989 when Sakharov thanked Canadians: “I look
back fondly on the efforts that ordinary Canadians made on our behalf”.13
Herzberg was delighted to meet Sakharov and to introduce him at the NRC,
where Sakharov gave a brief talk on his work:
Our guest of honour, Professor Andrei Dmitrievich Sakharov is known to
everybody as the foremost fighter for human rights. His remarkable and
fearless actions in this field have been justly recognized by the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1975. He has taught us that real peace can only be achieved
if human rights are established everywhere.
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      375
Demonstration in front of the
Soviet Embassy in Ottawa,
1983.
Meeting Sakharov at the NRC,
1989.

376
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
I would however like to introduce Professor Sakharov to this group
of Canadian physicists, chemical physicists, astrophysicists, as a fellow
physicist. He is surely one of the leading theoretical physicists in the
world today. He has contributed to some of the most difficult subjects of
our field....
I am not qualified to give a balanced review of his work but do know
that he contributed to the solution of the puzzle of the preponderance of
matter over anti-matter. He has also made basic contributions to high
energy physics, to black holes and to cosmology and its relation to high
energy physics. It is my great pleasure to introduce Professor Andrei
Sakharov.14
Herzberg ventured into a decidedly different topic of freedom when he
was invited to Rome along with all Nobel Laureates “to meet Pope John
Paul II and to bring to his attention the problems which the Nobel Prize win-
ners, in their respective fields of study, consider to be the most urgent for
contemporary man”. While he could not attend because of his health and
other commitments he wrote to Cardinal König, the host of the gathering:
As a Nobel Laureate, I do not feel particularly qualified to speak on
human values and development. The Prize was given to me on the basis
of my specialized work in one small section of science. If I may, however,
contribute one item to the discussion it would be the problem of over-
population: I feel very strongly that this is one of humanity’s biggest
problems from which many others are derived.... I believe that the
Catholic Church could greatly contribute to the solution of this problem,
if it would take a less rigid attitude towards the question of birth control.
I need not expound further on this problem...but if it were possible at your
meeting with the Pope to bring this concern to his attention, I believe it
would be a great step forward.15
There was no reply to his letter or suggestion and a discussion on the topic
did not take place on this occasion.
One group that Herzberg declined to support was the War Resisters
International: “I would not at the present moment serve in any weapons
laboratory, but there are circumstances such as happened during the Nazi
regime where one’s pacifist ideals must be deferred. We cannot by uni-
lateral disarmament run the risk of terrorists taking over the world”.16

Keeping in Touch with Family, Mentors, and
Colleagues
As much as Herzberg had adapted to the Canadian way of life, there was a
traditional German custom that he upheld assiduously, namely to commem-
orate important birthdays and anniversaries of family, friends, and col-
leagues worldwide. In addition to the monthly cheques to his mother and
sister in Seattle, he sent gifts on birthdays and at Christmas. He particular-
ly remembered the birthdays of his mentors Professors Hans Rau, James
Franck, and Max Born and sent them letters expressing his deep indebted-
ness for their friendly guidance in his early years, not only in physics, but
particularly in the proper attitude of a scientist to his work. In honour and
memory of Hans Rau, he published a paper in German on fine structure in
the spectrum of the helium ion, and for the festschrift on Born’s eightieth
birthday, he submitted a theoretical paper on the energy of helium and
helium-like ions.17 On C.J. Mackenzie’s eightieth birthday, he recalled with
pleasure when he first met Mackenzie in 1935 at the University of Saskat-
chewan and the significant effect he had had on Herzberg’s career by mak-
ing it possible for Herzberg to return to Canada and join the NRC.
Tributes to his closest friends were specially recognized. At a testimo-
nial dinner in 1974 honouring John Spinks after fifteen years as President
of the University of Saskatchewan, Herzberg recalled the first letter he had
received from Spinks in 1933 (inquiring about the possibility of joining
him in Darmstadt) with the puzzling return address, since he had never
heard of Saskatoon or Saskatchewan. He soon came to admire Spinks’s
qualities, the speed at which he worked (he could write a letter or scientif-
ic paper faster than anyone else Herzberg had ever encountered) and his
ability to take quick and appropriate action. Back in Saskatoon in 1935,
Spinks realized that Herzberg would lose his job in Darmstadt and had per-
suaded President Murray to offer him a guest professorship. Years later,
when Herzberg intimated he was not completely happy in the United
States, Spinks immediately wrote about this to Ned Steacie and so began
Herzberg’s return to Canada and the NRC. Herzberg went on to praise
Spinks’ scientific career and his effective presidency, underlining his fight
opposing the strong trend among provincial bureaucrats against the pursuit
of excellence in the arts and sciences.18
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      377

378
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
On the occasion of Chandra’s sixty-fifth birthday in 1975, Herzberg
recounted their first meeting in 1941 and his lifelong friendship, noting that
the close association with Chandra at Yerkes Observatory was the most
rewarding result, scientifically and personally, of the years he had spent
there. Chandra’s influence on him was immense, both by his example and
by his advice and friendship. The two families often visited each other, and
Chandra and Herzberg regularly met at science conferences. On Chandra’s
death in 1995, Herzberg wrote to Lalitha: “It is hard to imagine a world and
life without Chandra.... For the rest of my life I shall remember the frequent
joint walks that we had during my time at Yerkes and the many discussions
on scientific and many other topics. Needless to say I learned immeasur-
ably from him.”19
In 1966, Herzberg congratulated his colleague Robert S. Mulliken on
being awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, and in 1978, he participated
in a symposium in honour of Mulliken’s fifty years at The University of
Chicago, a period during which Herzberg had known him and admired his
fundamental contributions to molecular spectroscopy. Herzberg reviewed
his own and the many other spectroscopic studies based on Mulliken’s
pioneering work. Ten years later, Herzberg gave the first in the series of
“Mulliken Memorial Lectures” commemorating Mulliken (1896–1986)
John W.T. Spinks (1908–1997). President of
the University of Saskatchewan (1959–1974).

and his legacy. On this occasion, Friedrich Hund presented brief reminis-
cences (via videotaped interview) of the early days of molecular spec-
troscopy and his association with Mulliken. Among his stories he men-
tioned that he and Mulliken had had difficulty in understanding the quan-
tum chemistry of Heitler and London within the framework of molecular
orbitals. He went on to say: “It was Gerhard Herzberg who explained
chemical binding in a simple and convincing manner with bonding and
antibonding electrons”, and Hund gave his special regards and compli-
ments to Herzberg, whom he hoped was present.20 A few years later, Herz-
berg sent Hund greetings to celebrate his one-hundredth birthday.
Telegrams and letters were dispatched to recipients of Nobel Prizes.
The year 1983 was rather special for Herzberg since the Nobel Prize in
Physics was awarded to his friend Chandra and in Chemistry to Henry
Taube, a graduate student in Herzberg’s first lecture course “Atomic Struc-
ture and Molecular Structure” at the University of Saskatchewan. Top hon-
ours in the course that year were shared by Henry Taube and George
Thiessen. Thiessen joined the NRC and became Head of the Acoustics
Section, while Taube became a faculty member of Stanford University. On
receiving Herzberg’s congratulations, Taube thanked him and added: “I
want to take this opportunity also to tell you that I regard your lecture
courses at Saskatchewan as the high point in my academic career there. The
example you set in clarity in thinking and exposition has been one of the
important influences in my life”.21 Herzberg was delighted with Nobel
awards to Canadians, and he congratulated John Polanyi and Michael
Smith for their Prizes in Chemistry in 1986 and 1993, respectively, and
Bertram Brockhouse for his Prize in Physics in 1994. Telegrams with con-
gratulations were also sent to Andrei Sakharov on being awarded the Peace
Prize in 1975 and to Pyotr Kapitsa on being awarded the Prize in Physics
in 1978.
Herzberg participated in many symposia and testimonial dinners hon-
ouring his friends in Canada: Harry Thode, President of McMaster
University and an alumnus of the University of Saskatoon; Harry Welsh in
Toronto; Larkin Kerwin, NRC President on retirement from Université
Laval; and Rudolph Altschul, former colleague at University of Saskat-
chewan, and the author in Toronto. In the United States, Herzberg gave lec-
tures in honour of Walter Gordy at Duke University, Joe Hirschfelder in
Madison, Bryce Crawford, Jr., in Minneapolis, and George Kistiakowski at
Harvard, with tributes to Edward Condon and Isidor Rabi recognized with
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      379

380
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
original papers.22 He attended various functions on the retirements of
Polydor Swings and Boris Rosen in Liège and Albin Lagerqvist in Stock-
holm and on the seventieth birthday of Y. Morino in Tokyo. On Ernst
Miescher’s eightieth birthday, he submitted an account of Miescher’s basic
contributions to molecular physics, especially his immense work on the NO
molecule.23
By a remarkable coincidence, Herzberg had the opportunity to visit
China and to meet Dr. Wu, his postdoctorate fellow of 1933 at the Tech-
nische Hochschule in Darmstadt. Wu had returned to China, had survived
the Japanese invasion and the Cultural Revolution, and was director of a
research institute in Changchun, Manchuria. One of Dr. Wu’s students
came to work with Dr. Henry Mantsch of the NRC Chemistry Division, and
having learned that Herzberg was also at the NRC, he contacted Wu. This
resulted in an invitation for Herzberg to come to China, and in 1981 the
Herzbergs and Mantsch visited Wu and spent three weeks on a brief tour,
during which they also met Vice-Premier Fang-Yi in Peking.
Herzberg was also attentive in congratulating recipients of awards and
fellowships, not to mention the countless letters of recommendations he
sent for promotions, and of nominations for awards to colleagues, post-
doctoral fellows, and spectroscopists whose work he had admired. From
1971 onwards, he was punctual in his annual nomination of scientists for
the Nobel Prizes in Physics and Chemistry. He always congratulated those
On a visit to Dr. Wu in Changchun, China, 1981.

he knew on election to The Royal Society and complimented Otto Struve
and Max Delbrück when they were elected Foreign Members. Delbrück
answered in his usual charming way: “How very kind of you to write to me
on this bizarre occasion. I must admit that your letter gave me more pleas-
ure than the election. Who would have thought thirty-seven years ago when
we started our budding careers in science that one day we would both
crown ourselves with the marvelous wig of Sir Isaac Newton?”24
Thinking of Retiring
Herzberg suffered a mild heart attack (angina pectoris) in August 1977 and
this curtailed his travel somewhat, although the following year he visited
Germany and the U.S.S.R., enjoyed a holiday in Saas-Fee, and spent two
weeks in Japan, where he climbed part way up Mt. Fuji (3880 metres). On
learning of his heart problem, Linus Pauling recommended that Herzberg
take vitamin C, a suggestion Herzberg followed faithfully and was pleased
with the results. He resumed more extensive journeys in 1979, including
the opening of the Canada–France–Hawaii Telescope and a motor trip to
the top of Mauna Kea at 4215 metres. By the following year, he began to
realize that he could not keep up this pace of travel and even decided to
cancel a visit to Rome, where members of the Pontifical Academy were to
meet Pope John Paul II.
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      381
Monika and Gerhard enjoying tea with
Vice-Premier Fang-Yi in Beijing, 1981.

382
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
With Herzberg’s close friend and co-founder of the Spectroscopy Lab-
oratory, Alex Douglas, retired and terminally ill, an international “Collo-
quium on Molecular Spectroscopy” was held in his honour in Ottawa in
June 1980. This was a moving tribute attended by Alex’s many friends and
associates from around the world. Two months later, the death of Herzberg’s
long-time assistant Jack Shoosmith was announced. These losses caused
Herzberg to seriously consider slowing down, and in September 1980 he
sent a memo to Jack L. Locke, Director of the HIA, expressing his wish to
retire.25 On learning this, the newly appointed President Larkin Kerwin dis-
cussed the situation with Herzberg and convinced him to remain on staff for
the good of science and the NRC. A further blow to Herzberg was the retire-
ment of his longtime secretary Marjorie Phyllis Thompson in December
1983. He had depended on her for attending to all matters concerning his
office for fifteen years. She was an ideal assistant: in addition to the daily
tasks of typing letters, reports, and papers and of receiving and filing let-
ters and documents, she scheduled meetings, made travel arrangements,
and reminded him of a multitude of events and responsibilities. He could
not hope to find another Miss Thompson, and never did.
After Herzberg’s next heart attack in 1984, Kerwin repeated his request
that he stay on. Herzberg agreed and chose to reduce his travel commit-
ments to a minimum. Yet he often felt that he could not refuse to partici-
pate in celebratory occasions such as retirements and special anniversaries
for his close friends and colleagues. After giving the Mulliken Memorial
Lecture in 1988, he visited the Fermi Laboratory, where he had a fall and
tore a leg tendon. He lost mobility for a brief time but soon managed to
walk with the aid of a cane. During this period and afterwards, he was driv-
en to the NRC and home by John Johns and Henry Mantsch. Linus Pauling
wrote to suggest that he increase his vitamin C to 4 grams per day and also
take 4 grams of lysine per day in order to gain complete control over the
angina and benefit the underlying cardiovascular disease.26 Herzberg com-
plied by slowly increasing the dose of vitamin and medication.
The conferences held every five years in celebration of Herzberg’s
birthdays were a continuing joy for him. These were special occasions for
him to meet with many friends from near and far and to discuss the latest
discoveries in science of close interest to him. On Herzberg’s eightieth
birthday, President Kerwin convened an open lecture series titled “Physical
Sciences in the Eighties” that had such a huge response that the venue had
to be changed at the last moment from the NRC Auditorium to the Westin

PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      383
At a banquet for “Physical Sciences in the Eighties”, a conference in honour of
Gerhard’s eightieth birthday, in Ottawa, 1984. Clockwise from Gerhard:
the Governor General Madame Jeanne Sauvé, President Larkin Kerwin,
Monika, the Minister of State for Science and Technology Mr. Tom Siddon, 
His Excellency Mr. Maurice Sauvé, and Mrs. Siddon. 
Christopher Longuet-Higgins and Monika look on as Gerhard
cuts the cake to celebrate his eighty-fifth birthday, 1989.

384
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Hotel in order to accommodate the six hundred attendees. The seven speak-
ers were Charles H. Townes, Werner Israel, Hendrik Casimir, Sir Denys
Wilkinson, Henry Taube, Melvin Calvin, and Carlo Rubbia (who had just
been awarded the 1984 Nobel Prize in Physics). At the banquet, Cec
Costain offered the toast to Herzberg and spoke of Herzberg’s time in
Saskatoon and the way he inspired his students. Takeshi Oka gave the after-
dinner speech and told of Herzberg’s scientific accomplishments and his
humanity and of how he made newcomers from far away places feel as
members of the Spectroscopy Laboratory. In 1989, the drastic cuts in the
NRC budget necessitated a more modest colloquium that featured molecu-
lar spectroscopy and was held at the NRC. Chandra presented the results of
his latest studies “Newton’s Principia—the late reaction of one scientist”,
and Christopher Longuet-Higgins gave a brief speech on his hero Gerhard
after the banquet at the National Arts Centre.
Herzberg became very discouraged with the changing atmosphere at
the NRC caused by the Government’s continuing reduction in the country’s
science budget. A new administration at the NRC (1989–1994) carried out
wholesale changes in its organizational structure and proposed minimal
basic research, resulting in resignations and unbelievably low morale.27 A
plan to transfer the HIA to the university sector was also in the wind. Many
wondered: “Did the administration have to propose such a move while
Herzberg was still active at the Institute?” The Standing Committee on
Industry, Science and Technology, Regional and Northern Development, of
the Canadian Government called Herzberg as a witness, and the members
(all elected members of Parliament) questioned him on the role of govern-
ment in performing and supporting basic science and of the effects on NRC
of the severe cuts in funding.28 Letters to NRC President Pierre Perron, to
the Prime Minister of Canada, and to the Minister of Science from over one
hundred international scientists and from presidents of the Chemical
Institute of Canada, the Professional Institute of the Public Service of
Canada, and the Academy of Sciences of The Royal Society of Canada no
doubt helped to save the HIA and let it remain in Ottawa for the time
being.29 Further resignations of senior scientists were finally stemmed by a
revised plan to preserve a cluster of basic science laboratories and form the
Steacie Institute for Molecular Sciences.
In honour of Herzberg’s ninetieth birthday, a wide-ranging internation-
al conference was held titled “The Future of Spectroscopy”, with invited
talks by twenty-six distinguished young scientists. This was a two and a half

day conference that included contributed papers in poster sessions. The
organizers were Bob McKellar of the NRC, Takeshi Oka, now at The Uni-
versity of Chicago, and Richard Saykally of the University of California,
Berkeley. They chose to hold the meeting in Sainte-Adèle, Quebec, from 25
to 28 September during the fall colour season, and two hundred friends and
admirers from eighteen countries participated in singing “Happy Birthday,
GH”. He gave the brief talk “Some Historical Remarks on the Statistics of
Atomic Nuclei” in which he discussed his early work with Walter Heitler on
the Bose statistics of nitrogen nuclei, three years before the neutron was dis-
covered. Dr. Arthur Carty, the newly appointed President of the NRC, wel-
comed the gathering at the banquet, and a number of colleagues gave brief
comments, followed by a speech on Herzberg’s life and accomplishments
by Charles Townes.
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      385
“Happy Birthday, dear Gerhard.”
At the banquet, Monika, Gerhard, Joan Stoicheff, and President Arthur Carty.

386
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Official Retirement at Ninety
Finally, as Herzberg approached his ninetieth birthday, he formally pro-
posed to retire from his position as Distinguished Research Scientist
because his health and failing eyesight prevented him from maintaining an
active eight-hour work day. He asked that the date of his retirement be as
close as administratively convenient to 25 December 1994. There was
unfinished work which he wanted to complete and he “wished to have the
continuing use of his office along with some secretarial assistance”.30 His
wish to retire was granted as of 31 December 1994. A ceremonial gather-
ing took place on 13 December in the auditorium at 100 Sussex Drive, fol-
lowed by a reception where he was greeted by many friends. On this occa-
sion, Herzberg received laudatory letters with best wishes from Governor
General Ramon Hnatyshyn and Prime Minister Jean Chrétien.31
As expected, Herzberg continued to work in his office daily, mainly
carrying on his voluminous correspondence and reading technical papers,
especially on the latest news of the diffuse interstellar bands. He persisted
in his search for the rare molecular species or chemical processes that could
give rise to such spectra: “It is one of my aims to solve that problem before
I quit”. But this was not to be. A fall down a short flight of stairs at home
Monika and Gerhard at his retirement reception at NRC.

prevented him from spending more than a few hours each day at the office.
In addition, a trip to Saas-Fee and Munich in the summer of 1996 was cut
short by a severe heart attack. He recovered after several days in a Munich
hospital and endured the flight home, but his health had noticeably failed.
He ceased to go to his office and was often in hospital for tests of a day or
more. With the progressing effects of Parkinson’s disease, increasing med-
ication, and loss of appetite, he weakened rapidly and was confined to his
home, where Monika cared for him faithfully for the last three years of his
life. He died at home on 3 March 1999. The Canadian flag flew at half-staff
on the Peace Tower of the Parliament Buidings in Ottawa in lament and
memory of The Honourable Gerhard Herzberg, P.C., C.C., F.R.S., F.R.S.C.,
one of Canada’s national treasures.
PART FOUR: LATER YEARS (1972–1999)      387
Gerhard Herzberg at his desk on 13 December 1994.

388
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Canadian flag at half-staff on the Peace Tower of the
Parliament Buildings in Ottawa in memory of Gerhard Herzberg.

EPILOGUE
“The sole aim of science is the glory of the human spirit.” This aphorism
attributed to the celebrated mathematician Carl Jacobi became Herzberg’s
cherished tenet. And he lived by it. It could not have been otherwise, for at
the time of his university years, the world’s greatest thinkers were involved
in the exciting discoveries of quantum theory and of the stunning new
world of atoms, molecules, the nucleus, and particle physics. These pio-
neers passed through the halls of academe in Germany and Britain, where
Herzberg had the opportunity to meet them and listen to their exploits in
the search for truth about the natural universe. They did not mention any
practical use of their findings but spoke of the importance of the concept of
beauty in their theories and scientific studies. Herzberg often recalled the
esthetic aspect of science expressed by the famous French mathematician
and philosopher Henri Poincaré:
The scholar does not study nature because it is useful; he studies it
because it gives him pleasure, and it gives him pleasure because it is
beautiful. If nature were not beautiful, it would not be worth knowing and
life would not be worth living. I am not speaking of the beauty that strikes
the senses, the beauty of qualities and appearances; not that I despise it by
any means, but it has nothing to do with science. I speak of the more inti-
mate beauty which comes from the harmonious order of the parts and
which a pure intelligence can comprehend. It is for this intellectual beau-
ty, perhaps more than for the future welfare of mankind that the scientist
condemns himself to long hours of difficult and exhausting work.
As Herzberg often said, he was so fortunate to have started scientific
work just at the time quantum theory was being applied to molecular spec-
troscopy. He could not have had a more understanding mentor than Hans
Rau in Darmstadt, who gave him the encouragement and freedom to
choose and work on his own research problems. Almost everything to
which Herzberg turned his attention was novel. When he joined the insti-
tutes of Max Born and James Franck in Göttingen he met the younger
group of Walter Heitler, Friedrich Hund, Eugene Wigner, Max Delbrück,
Hertha Sponer, Victor Weisskopf, and Edward Teller and collaborated with
some of them. In Bristol, London, and Cambridge he met similar keen
minds full of the excitement of pushing back the frontiers of knowledge.
All shared a childlike wonder and enthusiasm in this new world of
389

390
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
discovery, and they all became theoretical and experimental founders of
twentieth century science.
When forced to leave his homeland, Herzberg found the same creative
spark in some of his colleagues and students in the Canadian prairies, far
away from the centres of science in Europe and America. It was his good
fortune, while briefly at Yerkes Observatory, to become lifelong friends
with the eminent astrophysicist Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, whose aims
and achievements, in Herzberg’s estimation, best epitomized “the glory of
the human spirit”.
Herzberg began research with the aim of making a real contribution to
science. He wanted other scientists to be able to look on his work and build
on it. A big moment came when he found something no one had seen before
and was able to describe it and present it in such a way to his colleagues
that they couldn’t doubt it. He especially enjoyed it if what he found was
of value to others and they used it to do something interesting and useful.
The high points in his research were many. In physics, it was the work
on atomic hydrogen and helium, the knowledge of molecular hydrogen, of
forbidden transitions, and of predissociation. In chemistry, his determina-
tions of many molecular structures and the discovery of spectra of free rad-
icals, especially CH2 and CH3, and of the Rydberg molecule H3 were each
outstanding contributions. In astrophysics, the reproduction in the labora-
tory of the spectrum of CH+, proving its presence in the interstellar medi-
um, and spectra of C3, and H2O+ and their presence in comets, the quadru-
pole spectrum of H2, and discovery of hydrogen in the atmospheres of the
planets opened up new applications of spectroscopy for our knowledge of
the universe. His classic volumes on molecular spectra and molecular
structures provided the background for studies in all of the sciences and
remain as encyclopedias of molecular knowledge for all time. Finally, his
Spectroscopy Laboratory at the National Research Council helped to bring
Canada to an important position internationally. His laboratory became the
“Temple of Spectroscopy” for the world—a major institution, the likes of
which is difficult to imagine ever rising again in Canada.
In the midst of all these activities, he always seemed to find the time to
make the way a little easier for fellow scientists, young and old, by writing
letters of encouragement, making recommendations about jobs or advance-
ments, and nominating deserving candidates for awards. Such unselfish
interest in other people’s careers was surely unique.

One may wonder how he could have achieved all that he accom-
plished? There is no doubt that it took unusual determination, ambition, and
hard work, along with an innate ability and a desire to make life meaning-
ful. He developed a sense of purpose as a young student at the Technische
Hochschule Darmstadt, and this kept increasing as he listened to and met
the scientific giants of the quantum era. Later, as his own accomplishments
began to be recognized, it was not surprising that he became personally
acquainted with almost all of the active physicists and chemists working in
atomic and molecular spectra and structures, and with astrophysicists inter-
ested in the interstellar medium. This added to his sense of the importance
of his work in expanding scientific knowledge. Yet he insisted that “I don’t
have all that many problems which are brilliant, but if I have a problem that
I think is important, I persist in it—in a sense I am like a beaver”.
He carefully selected what he had time for, not only in his scientific
research but also in the limited time left for his family and for daily living.
He no doubt gave up much but found inner satisfaction in his music, read-
ing, travels, friends, and colleagues. Even after receiving the Nobel Prize,
he continued to work on perplexing scientific problems. As he explained,
“When you are awarded the prize you get a slight inferiority complex. You
have won, but you know that there are a half-dozen other people who
equally or better deserved the prize as much as you did. So you want to
demonstrate that you can do things and improve on your qualifications.”
Above all, Herzberg was a gentle and peaceful man, and while not out-
wardly sentimental, he could be strongly moved by biographies of civi-
lization’s eminent contributors and by poetry and music. A favourite poem
of his was the Wanderers Nachtlied II by Johann Wolfgang Goethe:
There is peace o’er all the peaks,
Über allen Gipfeln ist Ruh
In all the treetops
In allen Wipfeln spürest du
You feel scarce a breath,
kaum einen Hauch
The little birds are silent in the forest
Die Vöglein schweigen in Walde
Just wait, soon
Warte nur balde
You too will rest.
Ruhest du auch.
Combined with the music Franz Schubert wrote for it, this became Herz-
berg’s most treasured song. To him it was one of the supreme accomplish-
ments of the human spirit.
EPILOGUE      391

392
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
One often heard Herzberg speak of his good luck, not about difficulties
or concerns, but about his good luck! He was forever thankful for the wel-
come he and Luise had received in Saskatoon and for the ten happy years
spent there. He remembered, too, that during the first year of World War II,
Lord Tweedsmuir (John Buchan), the Governor General of Canada, visited
the University of Saskatchewan and made a short speech at a luncheon. He
did not talk about honour, bravery, and victory in war but reminded his lis-
teners of humanity, humility, and humour, which in his view were the real-
ly important things in life. Lord Tweedsmuir said it so simply, so sincerely
and earnestly, that Herzberg could not help but be deeply touched thinking
of the contrast with Nazi ideology. This brief speech convinced Herzberg
that he and Luise had made the right decision in choosing Canada to be
their homeland.
His last visit to the University of Saskatchewan was in October 1994.
He met with the faculty and students in the Departments of Physics and
Chemistry, gave a lecture, and was feted at a banquet. The main purpose of
his visit was to meet donors to the Herzberg Fund and to discuss his
bequest to the fund. In his will, he left to the University 40 percent of the
residue of his estate, “In recognition of what the University of Saskatche-
wan had done for me when my late wife and I arrived penniless at the uni-
versity at that time”.
At the south end of the Campus Oval, a Nobel Plaza was erected hon-
ouring both Gerhard Herzberg and Henry Taube, Nobel Laureates in Chem-
istry and former scholars of the University of Saskatchewan.
Herzberg’s enthusiasm for Canada began with his kind reception at the
University of Saskatchewan and later at the National Research Council,
both of which he came to know so intimately and affectionately. He was
forever grateful to Canada for giving him the opportunity to establish the
Spectroscopy Laboratory and the freedom to carry out basic research with
a group of young colleagues and to open its doors to gifted young scientists
from all over the world. After the many travails of the NRC, he was pleased
to learn of improved morale and the return of encouragement for basic
research under the new administration of President Arthur J. Carty, himself
an active research chemist. Even while bedridden, Herzberg kept up an
interest in science and music. He was delighted when Takeshi Oka visited
him in March 1997, bringing the news of his discovery of interstellar H3
+ ,
a prediction Herzberg had made thirty years before. Later, with the advanc-
ing Parkinson’s disease and its attendant loss of memory, recognition of

friends and conversation became possible only with Monika’s help. Yet in
late 1998, he seemed to follow Oka’s discussion of Mozart’s “Don Gio-
vanni”, which Oka had just heard on a brief visit to Prague. Monika later
told us that this was one of Gerhard’s happiest days.
Herzberg leaves a legacy of his vast knowledge in molecular science
and hundreds of scientists around the world who had been excited in basic
science by their hero “GH” during their sojourn in his Spectroscopy Lab-
oratory at the NRC. His search for the unknown species in the interstellar
medium, and in particular an explanation of the diffuse interstellar bands,
has kept these problems uppermost in the minds of many scientists and
remains a supreme challenge to this day. He worked on them to the very end.
At a Memorial Tribute held on 11 May 1999 in the Auditorium of the
National Research Council, President Carty announced the creation of a
new “Herzberg Memorial Prize and Fellowship” open to applicants in
Canada and around the world to work at the NRC for up to a year. In
November 2000, the Federal Government also launched the country’s pre-
mier research award, the annual “Gerhard Herzberg, Canada Gold Medal
for Science and Engineering” with a $1 million research award over five
years. This millennium project of the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada is intended not only to celebrate Canadian
heroes, but also to provide them with a new level of support that Canadian
researchers have never before enjoyed. Such awards to applaud and encour-
age outstanding research would have delighted Herzberg immensely.
Herzberg’s office, Room 2057, in the National Research Council Lab-
oratories at 100 Sussex Drive was renovated and named “The Gerhard
Herzberg Reading Room”, a most fitting memorial to this illustrious scien-
tist.
EPILOGUE      393

394
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
A memento in honour of Herzberg’s forty-six years at the NRC.
Nobel Plaza at the University of Saskatchewan
honouring Gerhard Herzberg and Henry Taube.

395
CHRONOLOGY
1904 Dec. 25
Birth of Gerhard Herzberg to Albin and Ella Herzberg in Hamburg.
1911–1915
Student at Vorschule on Hegenstrasse in Hamburg.
1915 Feb. 21
Death of Albin Herzberg after a brief illness.
1915–1924
Student at Realgymnasium of the Johanneum in Hamburg.
1922
Ella Herzberg leaves Germany at the height of the catastrophic inflation
and settles in Seattle, Washington, U.S.A.
1924
Graduates from the Johanneum, with the Abiturum and enters the Tech-
nische Hochscule in Darmstadt with a scholarship from the Stinnes
Company.
1926
Receives a federal scholarship “Studienstiftung des deutchen Volkes”.
1927
Graduates with Diplom Ingenieur Degree. Publishes his first three scientif-
ic papers on the spectra of hydrogen, as sole author.
1928
Receives Doktor Ingenieur Degree. Publishes nine papers on molecular spec-
tra. Postdoctorate Fellow at the University of Göttingen with Max Born and
James Franck. Publishes a paper with Walter Heitler that nitrogen nuclei fol-
low Bose statistics. Research Associate at the H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory,
University of Bristol. Completes the Habilitation in Darmstadt with a paper
on molecular orbital theory.
1929 Dec. 30
Marries Luise Oettinger in Nürnberg and returns to University of Bristol.
1930–1935
Privatdozent at the Technische Hochschule Darmstadt.
1932
Assistant to Professor Hans Rau at the THD.
1933 Jan. 30
Adolf Hitler appointed Chancellor of Germany.
1933 Oct.
Dr. John W.T. Spinks from the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon,
Canada, comes to work with Herzberg in Darmstadt.
1933
Begins a book on atomic and molecular spectra but limits it to a volume on
Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure. It is published by Th. Steinkopff in
1936.
1933–1934
Seeks a research position outside of Germany and is helped by the
Emergency Society of German Scholars Abroad in Zurich and the
Academic Assistance Council in London.

396
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
1935
Accepts a Guest Professorship offered by Walter C. Murray, President of
the University of Saskatchewan in Canada, with the aid of the Carnegie
Corporation of New York.
1935 Aug.
Arrives in New York, visits several research institutions in the U.S.A. and
Canada, and proceeds to Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.
1936–1945
Research Professor of Physics at the University of Saskatchewan.
1936 Sept. 23
Birth of Paul Albin Herzberg.
1936
J.W.T. Spinks translates Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure into English,
and the book is published by Prentice-Hall in 1937.
1938 Dec. 12
Birth of Agnes Margaret Herzberg.
1938
Completes German version of Spectra of Diatomic Molecules in 1938,
Spinks translates the volume, and it is published in both English and
German in 1939.
1939
Elected Fellow of The Royal Society of Canada.
1941
Observes the spectrum of CH+ with Alex E. Douglas, proving that CH+
exists in interstellar space.
1944
Infrared and Raman Spectra of Polyatomic Molecules is published in 1945.
1945–1948
Associate Professor, then Professor of Spectroscopy, at Yerkes Observatory
of The University of Chicago in Williams Bay, Wisconsin, U.S.A.
1947
Accepts position of Senior Research Officer in the Division of Physics at
the National Research Council of Canada (NRC), Ottawa, to begin Aug.
1948.
1948
Observes the quadrupole spectrum of molecular hydrogen in a long-path
cell.
1948 Aug. 8 
Returns to Canada and the NRC to establish a spectroscopy laboratory.
1949
Appointed Director of the Division of Physics, NRC, a position he holds
until 1955.
1950
First return to Europe, visits Darmstadt and Hamburg. Awarded the
Médaille de l’Université de Liège, the first of many medals and prizes.
1951
Elected a Fellow of The Royal Society of London.
1953
Awarded the Henry Marshall Tory Medal of The Royal Society of Canada.
1955–1969
Director of the Division of Pure Physics, NRC.

CHRONOLOGY
397
1956
President of The Canadian Association of Physicists.
1956
Observes the spectrum of the free methyl radical (CH3).
1959
Observes the spectrum of the free methylene radical (CH2).
1960
Bakerian Lecture, The Royal Society of London.
1964
Academician, Pontifical Academy of Sciences. Awarded Frederic Ives
Medal, Optical Society of America.
1966
Publishes Electronic Spectra of Polyatomic Molecules.
1966–1967
President of The Royal Society of Canada.
1968
Appointed Companion of the Order of Canada.
1969–1975
Appointed Distinguished Research Scientist, Division of Physics, NRC.
1970
Awarded the Faraday Medal, The Chemical Society of London.
1971
Awarded the Royal Medal, The Royal Society of London.
1971 June 3
Luise Herzberg dies of heart attack.
1971
Receives the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, The Swedish Royal Academy of
Sciences.
1972 Mar. 21
Marries Monika Elisabeth Tenthoff, niece of his friend Alfred Schulz.
1973–1980
Chancellor, Carleton University, Ottawa.
1974
Observes spectrum of ion H2O+ with Hin Lew and identifies this ion in
comet Kohoutek.
1975
Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics established at the NRC.
1975–1994
Distinguished Research Scientist, Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics, NRC.
1979
Observes the spectrum of triatomic hydrogen (H3).
1985
Awarded the Earle K. Plyler Prize, American Physical Society.
1992
Appointed Member of the Queen’s Privy Council of Canada.
1994 Dec. 31
Official retirement from the NRC.
1999 Mar. 3
Death in Ottawa after lengthy illness, cremation and burial in Ottawa.

398
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abella, I., and H. Troper. None is Too Many. Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1983.
Arms, Nancy. A Prophet in Two Countries: The Life of F.E. Simon. Oxford: Pergamon Press,
1966.
Bendersky, J.W. A History of Nazi Germany. Chicago: Nelson Hall, 1985.
Bentwich, Norman. The Refugees From Germany. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1936.
Bentwich, Norman. The Rescue and Achievement of Refugee Scholars. The Hague: Mart-
inus Nijhoff, 1953.
Beyerchen, Alan D. Scientists Under Hitler, Politics and the Physics Community in the
Third Reich. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1977.
Blumberg, Stanley A. and Gwinn Owens. Energy and Conflict: The Life and Times of
Edward Teller. New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1976.
Böhme, Helmut. Technische Hochschule Darmstadt. Darmstadt: Presse und Informations-
referat, 1990.
Born, Max. The Born-Einstein Letters. New York: Walker and Company, 1971.
Born, Max. My Life & My Views. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1968.
Born, Max. My Life: Recollections of a Nobel Laureate. London: Taylor & Francis Ltd.,
1978.
Casimir, H.B.G. Haphazard Reality: Half a Century of Science, New York: Harper Colo-
phon, 1984.
Cassidy, David C. Uncertainty: The Life and Science of Werner Heisenberg. New York:
W.H. Freeman and Co., 1991.
Davie, Maurice R. Refugees in America. New York: Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1947.
Doern, G. Bruce. Science and Politics in Canada. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University
Press, 1972.
Dresden, M. H.A. Kramers: Between Tradition and Revolution. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1987.
Edingshaus, Anne-Lydia. Heinz Maier-Leibnitz: Ein halbes Jahrhundert experimentelle
Physik. Munich: R. Piper - GmbH & Co. KG, 1986.
Elsasser, Walter M. Memoirs of a Physicist in the Atomic Age. Bristol: Adam Hilger Ltd.,
1978.
Fermi, Laura. Illustrious Immigrants: The Intellectual Migration from Europe. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press, 1968.
Franz, Eckhart G. Darmstadts Geschichte. Darmstadt: Eduard Roether Verlag, 1980.
Franz, Eckhart G. Juden als Darmstädter Bürger. Darmstadt: Eduard Roether Verlag, 1984.
Frisch, Otto R. What Little I Remember. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
Hastings, Max. Bomber Command. London: Michael Joseph, 1979.
Hayes, F. Ronald. The Chaining of Prometheus: evolution of a power structure for Can-
adian Science. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1973.

Heisenberg, Elisabeth. Inner Exile. Cambridge: Birkhaüser Boston Inc., 1984.
Herzberg, Gerhard, interview by Christine M. King on 5 May 1986 in Ottawa, for the
Beckman Center for the History of Chemistry.
Herzberg, Gerhard, interview by Brenda P. Winnewisser on 28 February and 2 March 1989
in Ottawa for American Institute of Physics, New York.
Herzberg, Gerhard, “Molecular Spectroscopy: A Personal History,” in Ann. Rev. Phys.
Chem. 36 (1985): 1–30.
Jarrell, Richard A., and Yves Gingras, eds. Building Canadian Science: The Role of the
National Research Council. Thornhill: The Scientia Press, 1992.
King, M. Christine. E.W.R. Steacie and Science in Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1989.
Lemmerich, J. Der Luxus des Gewissens. Berlin: Staatsbibliotek Preussischer Kulturbesitz,
1982.
McGrayne, S.B. Nobel Prize Women in Science. New York: Carol Publ. Group, 1992.
Middleton, W.E.K. Physics at the National Research Council of Canada 1929–1952.
Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1979.
Moore, Walter. Schrödinger: Life and Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1989.
Mulliken, Robert S. Life of a Scientist. ed. Ransil, Bernard J., Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1989. 
Murray, David R. and Robert A. Murray. The Prairie Builder: Walter Murray of Saskatch-
ewan. Edmonton: NeWest Press, 1984.
Nachmansohn, David. German-Jewish Pioneers in Science 1900–1933. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag, 1979.
Osterbrock, Donald E. Yerkes Observatory, 1892–1950. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press, 1997.
Peierls, Rudolf. Birds of Passage. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985.
Reid, Constance. Hilbert. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1970.
Reid, Constance. Courant in Göttingen and New York. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1976.
Sime, Ruth Lewin. Lise Meitner, A Life in Physics. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1996.
Spinks, John. Two Blades of Grass. Saskatoon: Western Producer Prairie Books, 1980.
Stokes, Lawrence D. “Canada and an Academic Refugee from Nazi Germany: The Case of
Gerhard Herzberg,” in The Canadian Historical Review 57 (1976): 150.
Wali, K. C., Ed., S. Chandrasekhar, The Man Behind the Legend. London: Imperial College
Press, 1997
Weisskopf, Victor F. Physics in the Twentieth Century: Selected Essays. Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1972.
Wolf, Christa. Darmstädter Archivschriften 3, Verzeichnis der Hochschullehrer der TH
Darmstadt. Marburg: Symon und Wagner KG, 1977.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
399

400
NOTES AND REFERENCES
Abbreviations for sources of information used in Notes and References
BSF
B. Stoicheff Files
CCA
Carnegie Corporation Archives
DMM
Deutsche Museum Munich
GH
Gerhard Herzberg
GHA
Gerhard Herzberg Archives (at home)
NAC
National Archives of Canada
THDA
Technische Hochschule Darmstadt Archives
UCA
The University of Chicago Archives
USA
University of Saskatchewan Archives
YOA
Yerkes Observatory Archives
Chapter 1. Family and Early Education
1. Based on interviews of G. Herzberg by B. Stoicheff for the article “GH” in Physics in
Canada, 28 (1972): 11, and more recent interviews; also “GH—Notes from Conver-
sations 1992–93” by Paul Herzberg, as well as letters in GHA, and discussions with the
pastor Matthias Uhlig and archivist Matthius Mergner on a visit by the author to Lang-
ensalza in August 1997.
2. Herzberg family tree from 1573, based on a document dated 24 August 1933, and pro-
duced by Langensalza state archivist Hermann Gutbier and confirmed in 1940.
According to the original document of Gutbier, the family dates further back to Hans
Quatmer who changed the family name to Herzberg. While the name Quatmer appears
in the records of St. Stephani Church, no further hints could be found of why Gutbier
gives a change of name to Herzberg or Hertzbergk; GHA.
3. The Heine sculpture was after a design by Louis Hasselry (Danish) for Empress Eliz-
abeth of Austria in Corfu. Emperor Wilhelm II bought the castle and removed the stat-
ue, subsequently purchased by the publisher Julius Campe, Jr., and put up at the Barkhof
in Hamburg. In 1939 the Heine statue was a target for political uprisings and was
removed and brought to Toulon. 
4. Müller, J.P., Mein System: 15 minuten täglicher arbeit für die gesundheit. Leipzig und
Zurich: Grethlein & Co., 1904.
5. Kuhn, T.S. et al., in Sources for History of Quantum Physics: An Inventory and Report.
Philadelphia: Amer. Phil. Soc. (1967): 2–3. 
6. Grimsehl, E., Lehrbuch der Physik, eds. W. Hillers and H. Starke; I 4th ed., II 4th
revised ed. Leipzig: Teubner, 1922.
7. Bohr, N., “On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules.” Phil. Mag. 26 (1913): 1.
8. GH, Ann. d. Phys. 84 (1927): 565.
9. This experience turned GH away from turnips for life!

10. GH to Hugo Stinnes, 22 Mar. 1924 (shorthand copy); GHA.
11. Max Warburg to GH, 11 Apr. 1924; GHA.
12. Heinersdorff to GH, 8 Apr. 1924; GHA.
13. GH to Heinersdorff, 11 Apr. 1924 (shorthand copy); GHA.
14. GH to Alfred Schulz, 28 Apr. 1924; GHA.
15. Heinersdorff to GH, 17 Apr. 1924; GHA.
Chapter 2. University Years
1. Based in part on descriptions by Werner Zimmer, in Darmstadt, Grenzen und Möglich-
keiten einer Stadt. Frankfurt: Verlag Waldemar Kramer, 1954; by Eckhart G. Franz in
Darmstadts Geschichte. Darmstadt: Eduard Roether Verlag, 1980; by Max Hastings in
Bomber Command. London: Michael Joseph, 1979; and a visit by the author in January
1995.
2. Böhme Helmut, Technische Hochschule Darmstadt. Darmstadt: Presse und Infor-
mationsreferat, 1990.
3. During the early 1870s, the prestige of the school had dropped to a low level and threats
were made to close the school or move it to Giessen. Otto Wolfskehl (1841–1907), a
banker, economic adviser to Ernst Ludwig, and patron of the school, played a major role
in saving the school and transforming it to the THD in 1877. His brother Paul (1856–
1906) was a mathematician who left in his will 100,000 Gold-Marks to the University
of Göttingen as the prize for the mathematician who first solved the 17th century prob-
lem known as “Fermat’s Last Theorem.” In the meantime, the interest was used to
finance the annual “Darmstadt Lectures,” which brought to Göttingen the most distin-
guished scientists of the age, such as Bohr, Planck, Nernst, Sommerfeld, Lorentz, and
Poincaré, among others. The lectures were discontinued in the early 1920s due to the
disastrous inflation. See Paul “Wolfskehl und der Wolfskehlpreis” by Klaus Barner in
Mathematische Schriften, Kassel, March 1997; also A Prophet in Two Countries: the
Life of F.E. Simon by Nancy Arms, Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1966, 17.
4. Marianne Viefhaus to B. Stoicheff, 20 May 1996; BSF.
5. GH to Alfred Schulz, 28 Apr. 1924; GHA.
6. GH to Alfred Schulz, 17 May 1924; GHA.
7. GH to Alfred Schulz, 31 May 1924; GHA. In 1919, the national organization of frater-
nities had adopted the Nürnberg articles, which stated persons of Jewish descent were
inadmissible as members.
8. GH to Alfred Schulz, 16 and 28 June 1924; GHA.
9. GH to Alfred Schulz, 28 June 1924; GHA.
10. GH to Alfred Schulz, 13 July and 9 Aug. 1924; GHA.
11. GH to Alfred Schulz, 31 May 1924; GHA.
12. GH to Alfred Schulz, 13 and 26 July 1924; GHA.
13. Wolf, C. and M. Viefhaus, in Verzeichnis der Hochschullehrer der TH Darmstadt, Teil
1: Kurzbiographien 1836–1945. Marburg: Symon und Wagner, 1977.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      401

402
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
14. Heinersdorff to GH, 4 Nov. 1924; GHA. 
15. Heinersdorff to GH, 25 June 1925; GHA.
16. Heinersdorff to GH, 29 July 1925; GHA.
17. GH to Heinersdorff, 31 July 1925; GHA.
18. Heinersdorff to GH, 5 Aug. 1925; GHA.
19. Schrödinger, E., Ann. Phys. 79 (1926): 361.
20. Thomson, J.J., Phil. Mag. 21 (1911): 225.
21. Winnewisser, Brenda P., interview of GH, 28 Feb. 1989.
22. GH, J. Chem. Phys. 70 (1979): 4806.
23. Herzberg’s professors and courses included the following; THDA:
First Year, 1924–1925, Engineering Physics
F. Dingelday
Higher mathematics
H.R. Müller
Descriptive geometry I and II
G. Schlink 
Mechanics I and II
H. Rau
Experimental physics and physics laboratory
L. Wöhler
Inorganic chemistry and chemistry laboratory
L. von Roessler
Mechanical drawing
E. Bramesfeld
Machine drawing
J.J. Goldstein
Philosophy
Second Year, 1925–1926, Engineering Physics
J. Horn
Differential equations
H.R. Müller 
Descriptive geometry III, kinematics
H. Hohenner 
Probability and least-dquares analysis
V. Blaess 
Mechanics III
W. Wagenbach
Hydraulics
H. Rau 
Physics laboratory
L. Wöhler 
Physical chemistry laboratory
K. Wirtz 
Electrical engineering
M.L.A. Muss 
Economics
P. Luchtenberg 
Philosophy
Third Year, 1926–1927, Physics
G. Schlink 
Higher mechanics and hydrodynamics
H. Rau 
Experimental physics and introduction to independent research
F. Dingelday 
Fourier series and integrals; higher algebra
J. Horn 
Partial differential equations
H. Baerwald 
Statistical mechanics and electrical theory

Fourth Year, 1927, Physics
H. Rau  
Independent research; instrumental optics; physical measurements
W. Georgii  
Cosmic physics
H. Baerwald  
Thermodynamics; electromagnetic theory and optics
24. GH, Ann. d. Phys. 84 (1927): 553, 565.
25. GH, Physik. Z. 28 (1927): 727.
26. Weisskopf, V.F., “Physics and Physicists the Way I Knew Them,” in History of
Twentieth Century Physics, (Proc. International School of Physics “Enrico Fermi”), ed.
C. Weiner. New York: Academic Press, 1977, 435.
27. Sommerfeld, A., Atombau und Spektralinien. Braunschweig: F. Vieweg & Sohn, 1920.
28. For a more detailed account see GH in The Spectra and Structures of Simple Free
Radicals: An Introduction to Molecular Spectroscopy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
1971.
29. GH, Z. Physik, 49 (1928): 512.
30. GH, Vistas in Astronomy, 29 (1986): 201–221.
31. Bonhoeffer, K.F. und G. Kaminsky, Z. Elektrochem. 32 (1926): 536; Z. Phys. Chem. 127
(1927): 385.
32. GH, “Über das Nachtleuchten von Stickstoff und Sauerstoff und über die Struktur der
negativen Stickstoffbanden.” Negative bands of nitrogen refers to the bands of N2
+.
33. GH, report of winter 1928/29 to Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes; NAC.
34. R. Ladenburg to GH, 24 Apr. 1928; GHA.
35. O. Oldenberg to GH, 10 May 1928; NAC.
36. Wigner, E. and E.E. Witmer, Z. Physik, 51(1928): 859.
37. Franck, J., Trans. Faraday Soc. 21 (1925): 536.
38. Condon, E.U., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 13 (1927): 462; Phys. Rev. 32 (1928): 858.
39. Born, M. und R. Oppenheimer, Ann. Physik, 84 (1927): 457.
40. Heitler, W. und F. London, Z. Physik, 44 (1927): 455.
41. Hund, H., Z. Physik, 36 (1926): 657; 37 (1927): 742; 42 (1927): 93; 43 (1927): 805; 51
(1927): 759.
42. Mulliken, R.S., Phys. Rev. 32 (1928): 186, 761, 880; 33 (1929): 730.
43. Raman, C.V. and K.S. Krishnan, Nature, 121 (1928): 502, 711.
44. Landsberg, G. und L. Mandelstam, Naturwiss. 16 (1928): 557, 772.
45. Vonderheid-Ebner, Christine, in THD Intern, 6 May 1993.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      403

404
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Chapter 3. A Year in Göttingen
1. Nachmansohn, David, German–Jewish Pioneers in Science 1900–1933. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1979, 41.
2. GH, “Molecular Spectroscopy: A Personal History.” Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 36 (1985): 1.
3. Born, Max, My Life and My Views. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1968; and My
Life: Recollections of a Nobel Laureate. London: Taylor and Francis Ltd., 1978; N.
Kemmer and R. Schlapp, “Max Born,” in Biographical Memoirs. London: The Royal
Society, 17 (1971): 17; David Nahmansohn, ibid. 67.
4. Kuhn, H.G., “James Franck,” in Biographical Memoirs. London: The Royal Society, 11
(1965): 53; David Nahmansohn, ibid. 63.
5. Born, Max, My Life and My Views. 32.
6. Franck, J. and G. Hertz, Verh. d. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 16 (1914): 12; Phys. Zeits. 17 (1916):
409.
7. Sime, Ruth Lewin, Lise Meitner, A Life in Physics. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1996, 59; J. Lemmerich, Der Luxus des Gewissens. Berlin: Staatsbibliotek Preus-
sischer Kulturbesitz, 1982, 37.
8. Moore, W., Schrödinger; Life and Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1989, 263.
9. Frisch, Otto R., What Little I Remember. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1979, 95.
10. GH to Kurt Lion, 4 Nov. 1928; GHA.
11. Born, Max, My Life and My Views, 37.
12. Born, Max, The Born Einstein Letters. New York: Walker and Company, 1971, 112.
13. GH, reports of the winter semester 1928/29 and summer semester 1929; GHA.
14. Hayes, William, “Max Ludwig Henning Delbrück,” in Biographical Memoirs. London:
The Royal Society, 28 (1982): 59.
15. GH to Hans-Werner Döring, 9 Nov. 1928; GHA. R.T. Birge, Nature, 122 (1928): 842;
R.S. Mulliken, Nature, 122 (1928): 842.
16. GH, ZS. f. Physik, 57 (1929): 601.
17. Rasetti, F., Proc. Nat. Acad. 15 (1929): 515.
18. Heitler, W. und GH, Naturwiss. 17 (1929): 673.
19. Chadwick, J., Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 142 (1932): 1. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in
Physics in 1935 for his discovery of the neutron.
20. GH and G. Scheibe, Trans. Farad. Soc. 25 (1929): 716.
21. GH und G. Scheibe, Z. Phys. Chem. B 7 (1930): 390.
22. Weisskopf, Victor F., Physics in the Twentieth Century: Selected Essays. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1972, 3.
23. Franck’s home is presently part of the Goethe Institute in Göttingen.
24. Winans, J.G. and E.C.G. Stueckelberg, Proc. Nat. Acad, Sci. 4 (1928): 867.
25. Druyvesteyn, M.J., Nature, 128 (1931): 1076.

26. Dabrowski, I. and GH, J. Mol. Spectrosc. 73 (1978): 185.
27. A.M. Tyndall to GH, 28 May 1929; NAC.
Chapter 4. A Year in Bristol
1. “Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure,” in Trans. Farad. Soc. 25 (1929): 611.
2. O.W. Richardson was awarded the 1928 Nobel Prize in 1929.
3. Long, D.A., in Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 7 (1988): 317; “Dr. A.C. Menzies has recalled that
Raman, during his stay in Bristol attending the Faraday Meeting, regularly enquired of
the hotel porter if there was a cable for him from Stockholm!” In fact Raman was so
sure that he would receive this coveted prize that he booked passage for himself and his
wife in July so that he would reach Stockholm in time for the Nobel ceremonies on 10
December.
4. Mott, N.F. and C.F. Powell, “Arthur Mannering Tyndall,” in Biographical Memoirs.
London: The Royal Society, 7 (1961): 159.
5. GH, Leipziger Vortrage, (1931): 167.
6. P.M.S. Blackett received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1948 for his development of the
Wilson cloud chamber method and his discoveries in the field of nuclear physics and
cosmic radiation. J.D. Cockcroft and E.T.S. Walton shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in
1951 for their pioneer work on the transmutation of atomic nuclei by artificially accel-
erated atomic particles. In 1978 P.L. Kapitsa was awarded the Nobel Prize for his basic
inventions and discoveries in the area of low-temperature physics.
7. Naudé, S.M., Phys. Rev. 34 (1929): 1498.
8. GH, Z. Phys. Chem. B 9 (1930): 43.
9. GH to James Franck, 29 Aug. 1930; NAC. 
10. James Franck to GH, 8 Sept. 1930; NAC.
11. Gretel Goldstein to G. and L. Herzberg, 14 Aug. 1930; GHA.
Chapter 5. Privatdozent in Darmstadt
1. Franz, Eckhart G., Darmstadt Geschichte. Darmstadt: Eduard Roether Verlag, 1980, 445.
2. Franz, Eckhart G., ibid. p. 446.
3. Vonderheid-Ebner, Christine, in THD Intern, 6 May 1993, 2.
4. Weisskopf, Victor F., Physics in the Twentieth Century: Selected Essays, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1972, 6.
5. GH, Annual Report from September 1930 to September 1931, 26 Oct. 1931; NAC.
6. GH, “Molecular Spectroscopy: A Personal History,” Ann. Rev. Chem. 36 (1985): 1; GH
to A.M. Tyndall, 1 June 1932; NAC.
7. F.W. Loomis to GH, 2 May 1932; NAC.
8. Winnewisser, Brenda P., interview of GH, 28 Feb. and 2 Mar. 1989, 12.
9. GH, Naturwiss. 10 (1931): 207.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      405

406
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
10. GH, Trans. Farad. Soc. 27 (1931): 378.
11. P. Debye to GH, 5 June and 22 June 1931; NAC.
12. GH and E. Teller, Z. phys. Chem. B 21 (1933): 410.
13. E. Teller to B. Stoicheff, 18 July 1972; BSF.
14. M. Polanyi to GH, 19 May and 5 June 1931; NAC.
15. GH, Leipziger Vortrage, (1931): 167.
16. Franz, Eckhart G., Darmstadt Geschichte. Darmstadt: Eduard Roether Verlag, 1980,
448.
17. J. Curry to GH, 1931; NAC.
18. S.C. Wu and R.M. Badger to GH, 26 Feb. 1932; NAC.
19. GH to S.C. Wu, 15 Mar. 1932; NAC.
20. GH, Naturwiss. 20 (1932): 577.
21. Herzberg, L., Nature, 129 (1932): 653.
22. Franz, Eckhart G., Darmstadt Geschichte. Darmstadt: Eduard Roether Verlag, 1980, 454.
23. Bendersky, J.W., A History of Nazi Germany. Chicago: Nelson Hall, 1985.
24. Nachmansohn, David, German–Jewish Pioneers in Science 1900–1933. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag 1979; Wolff, Stefan L. “Vertreibung und Emigration in der Physik,
Physikgeschichte 1933,” 1995, 267. 
25. Born, M., My Life and My Views. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1968; and My
Life: Recollections of a Nobel Laureate. London: Taylor and Francis Ltd, 1978.
26. Franck, J., in Der Luxus des Gewissens; Max Born, James Franck, Physiker in ihrer
Zeit. Berlin, Staatsbibliothek, 1983, 115.
27. Franck, J., in Göttinger Zeitung, 18 April, 1933; reprinted in Der Luxus des Gewissens;
Max Born, James Franck, Physiker in ihrer Zeit, Berlin, Staatsbibliothek, 1983, 114. 
28. GH to James Franck, 19 April, 1933; UCA.
29. McGrayne, S.B., Nobel Prize Women in Science. New York: Carol Publ. Group, 1992,
82.
30. Rupp, Susanne, in THD Intern, 6 May 1993.
31. Edmund Stiasny, with a Roman Catholic mother and Jewish father emigrated to Sweden
with his Swedish wife, and was a director of a research institute for tanning chemistry
in Halsingborg from 1933 until his retirement in 1943. Ernst Berl emigrated to the
United States of America in September 1933, as Professor at the Carnegie Institute of
Technology in Pittsburgh. Erich Aron, Emeritus Professor in 1933 died in Theresien-
stadt Camp in 1943. Paul Leser of Jewish descent, whose parents had converted to
Protestanism before his birth, returned the venia ligendi and emigrated to Sweden in
1936 and to the United States of America in 1942. Michael Evenari obtained his Habili-
tation in Feb. 1933, was dismissed on 1 April, and emigrated to Palestine where he
developed a program for turning the desert green. William Prager emigrated to Turkey,
then to the U.S.A. where he joined the Department of Mathematics at Brown University
in Rhode Island.
32. GH to Alfred Schulz, 10 May 1933; GHA.

33. Franz, Eckhart G., Darmstadts Geschichte. Darmstadt: Eduard Roether Verlag, 1980,
461.
34. GH document, 6 May, 1933; NAC.
35. Oskar Prochnow to GH, 23 April 1933; NAC. Gradstein was employed by the Phillips
Co. in Eindhoven, eventually becoming the Editor of the Phillips journal Review.
During the war he was sheltered by his Dutch wife’s parents and survived to resume his
position at the Phillips Co. after the war.
36. Gradstein, S., “Fluoreszenz des H2CO,” Zeits. Phys. Chem. 22 (1933): 384.
37. Kurt Lion found temporary employment in Turkey, and eventually went to the United
States where he joined the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
38. “Nationalism and Academic Freedom,” Nature, 131 (1933): 853.
39. GH to J.E. Lennard-Jones, 7 July, 1933; NAC.
40. GH to J.E. Lennard-Jones, 26 July 1933; NAC.
41. Luise Herzberg, Ph.D. diploma, dated 30 Aug. 1933; GHA.
42. J.W.T. Spinks to GH, 29 Mar. 1933; NAC.
43. Stoicheff, B., “GH,” in Physics in Canada, 28 (1972): 11.
44. Spinks, J.W.T., Two Blades of Grass. Saskatoon: Western Producer Prairie Books, 1980, 35.
45. A.J. Allmand to GH, 24 May 1933; NAC.
46. GH to J.W.T. Spinks, 27 May 1933; NAC.
47. Spinks, J.W.T., Two Blades of Grass. Saskatoon: Western Producer Prairie Books, 1980,
36.
48. J.W.T. Spinks to B. Stoicheff, 1972; also in “GH,” in Physics in Canada, 28 (1972): 11;
BSF.
49. Hans Baerwald was placed in the Buchenwald concentration camp in 1936, but being a
non-political prisoner, he was released due to Rau’s efforts, and permitted to go to
England where his daughter lived. He spent the next decade teaching at various schools,
but after the war was not given his position at the THD, and died of a heart attack in
1946 in England.
50. Hessian State Ministry document to Rector Hans Busch, 27 Apr. 1934; NAC. 
51. Hessian State Ministry to Rector Friedrich Hübener, 27 Nov. 1934; NAC.
52. Bendersky, J.W., A History of Nazi Germany. Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1985, 201.
53. GH’s students in the period 1932–1935 were W. Behagel, G. Büttenbender, K. Franz, S.
Gradstein, R. Kölsch, and K. Sainisch.
54. GH, Begrundung des Gesuches vom 16 Oct. 1933; NAC.
Chapter 6. Searching the World for an Academic Position
1. GH to Notgemeinschaft Deutscher Wissenschaftler im Ausland, 26 Nov. 1933; NAC.
2. Notice from the Reichsminister fur Wissenschaft, Erziehung, und Volksbildung, Berlin,
28 Nov. 1934; NAC.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      407

408
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
3. E. Miescher to GH, 27 Jan. 1934; NAC.
4. Sho-Chow Wu to GH, 20 Sept. 1933; NAC.
5. GH to C.V. Raman, 11 Jan. 1934; NAC.
6. A.M. Tyndall to GH, 29 July 1934; NAC.
7. GH applied to: Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore, India, 26 Jan. 1934; University
of Auckland, New Zealand, 17 May 1934; University of Ecuador in Quito, Ecuador, 29
Sept. 1934; University College in Rangoon, Burma, 22 Nov. 1934; NAC.
8. GH to M. Polanyi, 3 June 1934; NAC.
9. M. Polanyi to GH, 5 June 1934; DMM.
10. GH to M. Polanyi, 7 June 1934; NAC. 
11. M. Polanyi to W. Heisenberg, 19 June 1934; DMM.
12. W. Heisenberg to M. Polanyi, 9 July 1934; UCA.
13. J. Stark was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1919 for his discovery of the
Doppler effect in canal rays and of the splitting of spectral lines in electric fields. He
became a zealous Nazi, who had not kept up with the theoretical physics of his time,
and branded relativity and quantum theories as Jewish physics.
14. GH to the Academic Assistance Council, 25 June 1934, and to Emergency Committee
of New York, 22 June 1934; NAC.
15. In retrospect, this reply is at odds with the assistance given by the Emergency
Committee in Aid of Foreign Displaced Scholars in placing several hundred scholars in
positions in the United States of America, including Hertha Sponer at the end of 1934.
16. Nature, 131(1933): 793 and 853; Norman Bentwich in The Refugees from Germany,
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1937, 174; and in The Rescue and Achievement of
Refugee Scholars, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1953. During the first two years the
Council placed 57 in permanent positions and found temporary appointments for 155
persons. By 1945 the total number of academic refugees registered with the Society was
2541, with over 600 residing permanently in Britain, some returning to their own coun-
tries, and others remaining in the countries that offered them refuge.
17. GH to Academic Assistance Council, 29 June 1934; NAC.
18. J. Frenkel to GH, 1 Aug. 1934; NAC.
19. GH applied to: University of Louisville in Kentucky, 23 July 1934; Royal School of
Engineering in Giza, Egypt, 2 Aug. 1934; University of Cape Town, South Africa, 4
Sept. 1934; University of Ghent, Belgium, 11 Nov. 1934; NAC.
20. GH was offered a Research Fellowship for two years by J. Verschaffelt, University of
Ghent, Belgium, 19 Feb. 1935; NAC.
21. S. Gradstein to GH; NAC.
22. D. Coster to GH, Oct. 1934; NAC.
23. R.A. Mulliken to GH; NAC.
24. H. Sponer to GH, 13 Feb. 1934; NAC.
25. GH to Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, 19 Feb. 1935; NAC.

Chapter 7. Guest Professorship at the University of
Saskatchewan
1. N.D.W. to GH, 14 Jan. 1935; NAC.
2. GH to J.W.T. Spinks, 15 Jan. 1935; NAC.
3. W.C. Murray to H.J. Cody and E.F. Burton, 31 Jan. 1935; USA.
4. Spinks, J.W.T., Two Blades of Grass. Saskatoon: Western Producer Prairie Books 1980,
43–44; J.S. Thomson, “Walter Charles Murray,” in Proc. Trans. R. Soc. Can. 39 (1945):
103; Murray, D.R. and R.A. Murray, The Prairie Builder. Edmonton: NeWest Press,
1984. 
5. J.W.T. Spinks to GH, 30 Jan. 1935; NAC.
6. H.J. Cody to F.P. Keppel, Carnegie Corporation, 14 Jan. 1935; CCA.
7. H.J. Cody to W.C. Murray, noting McLennan’s replacement to be Malcolm F. Crawford,
5 Feb. 1935; USA.
8. F.P. Keppel to H.J. Cody, 8 Mar. 1935; CCA.
9. F.P. Keppel to H.J. Cody, 21 Nov. 1935; CCA.
10. W.C. Murray to H.M. Tory, 8 Feb. 1935, and reply 11 Feb. 1935; USA.
11. J. Franck to GH, 18 Mar. 1935; UCA.
12. J.S. Foster to GH, 1935; NAC.
13. Spinks, J.W.T., Two Blades of Grass, 44.
14. J.W.T. Spinks to GH, 21 Nov. 1934; NAC.
15. J.W.T. Spinks to GH, 7 Mar. 1935; NAC.
16. W.C. Murray to R.M. Lester, Carnegie Corporation, 8 Feb. 1935; USA.
17. J. Russell, Carnegie Corporation, to W.C. Murray, 14 Feb. 1935; USA.
18. W.C. Murray to J. Russell, 26 Feb. 1935; USA.
19. R.M. Lester to W.C. Murray, 8 Mar. 1935; USA.
20. S.H. Stackpole, “Carnegie Corporation, Commonwealth Program 1911–1961,” 1963;
CCA.
21. W.C. Murray to GH, 3 Apr. 1935; USA.
22. GH telegram to J.W.T. Spinks, 15 May 1935; USA.
23. GH to H. Sponer, 14 Mar. 1935; NAC.
24. K. Herzfeld to G. Herzberg, 5 Mar. 1935; NAC.
25. GH to H. Sponer, 15 Mar. 1935; NAC.
26. GH to J. Franck, 17 Mar. 1935; UCA.
27. J. Franck to GH, 18 Mar. 1935; UCA.
28. GH to Alfred Schulz, 5 Apr. 1935; GHA.
29. GH to W.C. Murray, 2 Apr. 1935; USA.
30. GH to W.C. Murray, 19 Apr. 1935; USA.
31. GH to Alfred Schulz, 17 Apr. 1935; GHA.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      409

410
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
32. GH to J.E. Verschaffelt, 4 Apr. 1935; NAC.
33. H. Sponer to GH, 8 June 1935; NAC.
34. GH to Academic Assistance Council, 4 Apr. 1935 and to N.D.W., 7 Apr. 1935; NAC.
35. GH to Rector F. Hübener, 4 Apr. 1935; NAC.
36. GH to E.L. Harrington, 19 Apr. 1935; NAC.
37. E.L. Harrington to GH, 20 Apr. 1935; NAC.
38. GH to E.L. Harrington, 6 May 1935; NAC.
39. E.L. Harrington to GH, 28 June 1935; NAC.
40. Abella, I. and H. Troper, None is Too Many. Toronto: Lester Publishing, 1983.
41. A.L. Jolliffe to W.C. Murray, 4 July 1935; USA.
42. W.C. Murray to A.L. Jolliffe, 13 July 1935; USA.
43. W.C. Murray to GH, 29 July 1935; GHA.
44. GH to Alfred Schulz, 1 July 1935; GHA.
45. GH to many friends in Germany, early Oct. 1935; GHA.
46. GH, notes of visits to universities and research institutes, Sept. 1935; GHA.
47. GH, “Molecular Spectroscopy: A Personal History,” Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 36 (1985): 14.
Chapter 8. Beginnings in Canada
1. Letters to many friends in Germany, Oct. 1935; GHA.
2. Clubb, Sally P., Saskatoon: The Serenety and the Surge. Saskatoon: Midwest Litho Ltd.,
1966.
3. Murray, David R. and  A. Robert, The Prairie Builder: Walter Murray of Saskatchewan.
Edmonton: NeWest Press, 1984.
4. Thomson, James S., in Trans. R. Soc. Can. 39 (1945): 105.
5. King, Carlyle, The First Fifty. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1959, 6.
6. B. Currie to B. Stoicheff, 29 Jan. 1972; BSF.
7. Cameron, Bill, quoted by Michael Taft in Inside These Greystone Walls. Saskatoon:
University of Saskatchewan, 1984, 169.
8. Spinks, J.W.T., Two Blades of Grass. Saskatoon: Western Producer Prairie Books, 1980.
9. A.L. Jolliffe to W.C. Murray, 26 Jan. 1937; USA.
10. W.C. Murray to A.L. Jolliffe, 30 Jan. 1937; USA.
11. A.L. Jolliffe to W.C. Murray 13 Feb. 1937; USA.
12. Rector Karl Lieser notice to GH, 6 Nov. 1937; GHA.
13. GH to E.I. Rabinowitch, 22 Nov. 1936; GHA.
14. H. Sponer to GH, 1936; NAC.
15. GH to H.N. Russell, 8 Feb. 1937; NAC.
16. Osterbrock, Donald E., Yerkes Observatory 1892–1950. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press, 1997.

17. GH, “Molecular Spectroscopy: A Personal History,” in Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 36
(1985): 14.
18. GH, F. Patat, and H. Verleger, “On the photographic infrared spectrum of methyl-acety-
lene (allylene) and the C-C single bond distance,” J. Chem. Phys. 41 (1937): 123.
19. R.M. Badger as told to GH, in GH, “Molecular Spectroscopy: A Personal History,” Ann.
Rev. Chem. 36 (1985): 1, and M. Christine King, interview of GH, 5 May 1986, 23. 
20. E.L. Harrington letter and nomination form to A. Beauchesne, 24 Nov. 1938; USA.
21. E.F. Burton to Members of Section III, Royal Society of Canada, 3 Mar. 1939; USA.
22. W.C. Murray to GH, 1936; NAC.
23. GH to A.L. Jolliffe, 2 and 3 Sept. 1938; GHA.
24. Thomson, James S., in Trans. R. Soc. Can. 39 (1945): 108.
25. Heath, Terrence, Uprooted: The Life of Ernest Lindner. Saskatoon: Fifth House, 1983.
Chapter 9. The War Years in Canada 
1. James S. Thomson to Judge J.F. Bryant, 27 Sept. 1940; USA.
2. E.H. Coleman (Under Secretary of State) to James S. Thomson, 9 Oct. 1940; USA.
3. GH to the Secretary of State, 14 Jan. 1943, and 15 May 1945; GHA.
4. Winnewisser, B.P., interview of GH 1989, 66. 
5. E.H. Coleman (Under Secretary of State) to James S. Thomson, 14 July 1941; USA.
6. Dunham, T. Jr. and W.S. Adams, Pub. Astron. Soc. Pacific, 49 (1937): 26. 
7. Swings, P. and L. Rosenfeld, Astrophys. J. 86 (1937): 483; A. McKellar, Pub. Astron.
Soc. Pacific, 52 (1940): 187.
8. McKellar, A., Pub. Dom. Astrophys. Obs. 7 (1941): 251; W.S. Adams, Astrophys. J. 93
(1941): 11.
9. The fourth line was later identified by A.E. Douglas and J.R. Morton, Astrophys. J. 131
(1960): 1 
10. Douglas, A.E. and GH, Astrophys. J. 94 (1941): 381; Can. J. Res. A 20 (1942): 71.
11. P. Swings to GH, 1941, as described in Spectrochim. Acta, 50th Ann. Edition, (1990):
63.
12. GH, Astrophys. J. 96 (1942): 314.
13. The Certificate of Identity for G. and L. Herzberg and the two children was received on
4 April 1944, valid for travel to the United States until the end of 1944; GHA.
14. Bill Cameron quoted by Michael Taft, in Inside These Greystone Walls. Saskatoon:
University of Saskatchewan, 1984, 169.
15. GH and G.R. Walker, Nature, 161 (1948): 647; GHA.
16. O. Struve to GH, 30 Aug. 1943; GHA.
17. GH to O. Struve, 4 Sept. 1943; GHA.
18. GH to O. Struve, 10 Dec. 1943; GHA.
19. O. Struve to GH, 20 Dec. 1943; GHA.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      411

412
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
20. GH to O. Struve, 29 Dec. 1943; GHA.
21. Weldon Brown to GH, 31 Dec. 1943; GHA.
22. James Franck to GH, 1 Jan. 1944; GHA.
23. R.S. Mulliken to GH, 14 Jan. 1944; GHA.
24. O. Struve to GH, 29 Jan. 1944; GHA.
25. GH to O. Struve, 27 Jan. 1944; GHA.
26. R.E. Gray (National Selective Service) to GH, 21 Mar. 1944; GHA.
27. GH to Mrs. W.C. Murray, 24 Mar. 1945; GHA.
Chapter 10. Interlude at the Yerkes Observatory, The
University of Chicago
1. National Selective Service Labour Exit Permit No. 71119, 11 July 1945; GHA. 
2. GH to O. Struve, 28 July 1945; YOA.
3. Certificate of Naturalization No. 203958 Series A, dated 22-6-45; GHA.
4. H.C. Daines, Comptroller, to GH, 8 Aug. 1945; GHA.
5. GH to President J.S. Thomson, 29 Aug. 1945; GHA.
6. E. Harrington to J.S. Thomson, 17 July. 1945; USA.
7. Osterbrock, D.E., Yerkes Observatory 1892–1950. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press, 1997.
8. Herzberg, Agnes, in S. Chandrasekhar: The Man Behind the Legend, ed. K.C. Wali.
London: Imperial College Press, 1997, 160.
9. J.G. Philips to B. Stoicheff, 12 July 1998; BSF.
10. B.P. Winnewisser, interview of GH, 28 Feb. 1989, 71; M.C. King interview of G. Herz-
berg, 5 May 1986, 26.
11. GH, Science, 106 (1947): 215.
12. H.J. Bernstein and GH, J. Chem Phys. 16 (1948): 30.
13. K.N. Rao to B. Stoicheff, 2 May 1998; BSF.
14. J.G. Philips to B. Stoicheff, 12 July 1998; BSF.
15. O. Struve to W. Bartky, 29 Jan. 1946; YOA.
16. E.L. Harrington to GH, 6 Mar. 1946; GHA.
17. GH to E.L. Harrington, 9 Mar. 1946; GHA.
18. GH to J.E. Duggan, Chief, Naturalization Branch, 1 Sept. 1946; GHA.
19. J.W.T. Spinks to GH, 12 Sept. 1946; GHA.
20. D.E. Osterbrock to B. Stoicheff, 3 Apr. 1996; BSF.
21. GH, speech, 28 May 1975, in honour of S. Chandrasekhar’s 65th birthday; GHA.
22. Chandrasekhar, S. in Nobel Lectures in Physics 1981–1990, ed. G. Ekspong. Singapore:
World Scientific, 1993, 134.

23. I am grateful to Takeshi Oka for telling me that he once asked Chandra about the valid-
ity of this statement, and his reply was a definite “yes.”
24. Herzberg, Paul, in GH—Notes from Conversations, 1992.
25. Blumberg, S.A. and G. Owens, Energy and Conflict of Edward Teller. New York:
Punam’s Sons, 1976, 258. 
26. Ibid., 1.
27. Teller, Edward, Better a Shield Than a Sword. New York: The Free Press, 1987.
28. “Franck Report,” in Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, 1946.
29. Science, 106 (1947): 5 September.
30. Osterbrock, D.E., Yerkes Observatory 1892–1950. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press, 1997, 288.
31. Hynek, J.A. ed., Astrophysics: A Topical Symposium Commemorating the Fiftieth
Anniversary of the Yerkes Observatory and a Half Century of Progress in Astrophysics.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1951.
32. Kuiper, G., The Atmospheres of the Earth and the Planets: Papers Presented at the
Fiftieth Anniversary Symposium of the Yerkes Observatory, September 1947. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press, 1949.
33. Wang, Jessica, American Science in an Age of Anxiety. Chapel Hill: The University of
North Carolina Press, 1999.
34. O. Struve to GH, 30 Jan. 1947; also in Popular Astronomy, 55 (1947): 1; GHA.
35. E.W.R.Steacie to GH, 21 January 1947; GHA.
36. GH, Astrophys. J. 87 (1938): 428.
37. GH, Nature, 163 (1949): 170; Can. J. Res. A 28 (1950): 144.
38. Kiess, C.C., C.H. Corliss, and H.K. Kiess, Astrophys. J. 132 (1960): 221; L.P. Giver and
H. Spinrad, Icarus, 5 (1966): 586.
39. Gauthier, T.N., III, U. Fink, R.R. Treffers, and H.P. Larson, Astrophys. J. 207 (1976):
L129.
40. Babcock, H.D. and L. Herzberg, Astrophys. J. 108 (1948): 229.
41. S. Chandrasekhar to B. Stoicheff, 20 Jan 1972; BSF.
Chapter 11. News of Family and Friends in War-Torn
Europe
1. S. Gradstein postcard to GH, 13 Aug. 1945; GHA.
2. S. Gradstein to GH, 26 Nov. 1945; GHA.
3. H. Rau to GH, 3 Aug. 1946; GHA.
4. H. Verleger to GH, 27 Mar. and 19 Sept. 1946; GHA.
5. G. Walther to L. Herzberg, 9 Nov. 1946; GHA.
6. Hastings, Max, “A Quiet Trip All Round: Darmstadt, 11/12 September 1944,” in
Bomber Command. London: Michael Joseph, 1979, Chapt XIII, 302.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      413

414
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
7. H. Juda to GH, 26 Nov. 1939 and 16 Mar. 1940; GHA. 
8. Franz, Eckhart G., Darmstadts Geschichte. Darmstadt: Eduard Roether Verlag, 1980,
472.
9. Finkelnburg, Wolfgang to GH, 27 Mar. 1947 and 25 June 1951; GHA.
10. Beyerchen, A.D., Scientists Under Hitler: Politics and the Physics Community in the
Third Reich. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1977, 176.
11. H.-W. Döring to GH, 3 Aug. 1946, 13 Oct. 1946, and 23 Feb. 1947; GHA.
12. J. Franck to GH, 26 Mar. 1946; GHA.
13. Emmy Langemak to GH, 1 Mar. 1946 and 23 Feb. 1947; GHA.
14. GH to K.-F. Bonhoeffer 20 Oct. 1947; GHA.
15. The Globe and Mail, 6 Feb. 1996; The New York Times, 11 Feb. 1996.
16. Leibholz-Bonhoeffer, Sabine, The Bonhoeffers: Portrait of a Family. London: Sidgwick
& Jackson, 1971.
17. Arms, Nancy, in A Prophet in Two Countries. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1966, 127.
Chapter 12. Return to Canada
1. C.J. Mackenzie to B. Stoicheff, 18 February 1972; BSF.
2. D. LeRoy to GH, 8, January 1985; GHA.
3. E.W.R.Steacie to GH, 21 January 1947; GHA.
4. GH to E.W.R. Steacie, January 1947; GHA.
5. C.J. Mackenzie to GH, 13 February 1947; GHA.
6. C.S. Beals to GH, 27 March 1947; GHA.
7. A.H.S. Gillson to GH, 20 April 1947; GHA.
8. W. Bentley to GH, 9 March 1948; GHA.
9. N.S. Gingrich to GH, 24 April 1947; GHA.
10. Der Kultusminister, des Landes Nordhein-Westfalen, to GH 29 August 1948; GHA.
11. C.J. Mackenzie, Diary no. 24, 14 April 1947; NAC.
12. GH to C.J. Mackenzie, 17 June 1947; GHA.
13. C.J. Mackenzie to GH, 23 June 1947; GHA.
14. C.J. Mackenzie Diary no. 24, 24 June 1947; NAC.
15. GH to C.J. Mackenzie, 4 July 1947; GHA.
16. GH to O. Struve, 24 June 1947 and 12 July 1948; GHA.
17. R.S. Mulliken to Chairman Physics Department, Chicago, 1 Dec. 1947; UCA.
18. GH to Mulliken, 14 Dec. 1947; UCA.
19. C.E.S. Smith, Commisioner of Immigration, to GH, 7 November, 1947; GHA.
20. GH to Alex Douglas, 12 Jan., 2 Feb., and 19 Feb. 1948; GHA. 
21. L. Herzberg to L. Chandrasekhar, 14 Aug. 1948; UCA.
22. GH to S. Chandrasekhar, 14 Aug. 1948; UCA.

23. S. Chandrasekhar to GH, 13 Sept. 1948; GHA.
24. GH to S. Chandrasekhar, 27 Sept. 1948; UCA.
25. Eggleston, Wilfrid, The Queen’s Choice. Ottawa: Queen’s Printer, 1961; Bond, C.J.
Courtney, City on the Ottawa. Ottawa: Queen’s Printer, 1961.
26. Heinrich Kroeger was a German prisoner of war who spent the war years in Canada, and
being a master craftsman was permitted to help in building homes. After the war he was
able to return to Canada, by an order-in-council, and became one of Ottawa’s best-
known home builders. The Ottawa Citizen, 6 June 1997.
Chapter 13. National Research Council of Canada: The
Temple of Science
1. See the following histories of the NRC: Thistle, Mel, The Inner Ring. Toronto: Uni-
versity of Toronto Press 1966; Eggleston, Wilfrid, National Research in Canada: the
NRC 1916–1966, Toronto: Clarke Irwin 1978; Jarrell, R.A. and Y. Gingras, Building
Canadian Science: the Role of the National Research Council, Scientia Canadensis, 15
(1991).
2. Eggleston, Wilfrid, National Research in Canada: the NRC 1916–1966, Toronto: Clarke
Irwin 1978. 26; Phillipson, D.J.C., Associate Committees of the NRCC, 1917–1975,
Ottawa: National Research Council of Canada, 1983.
3. Eggleston, Wilfrid, ibid. 79.
4. Mortimer, D.C., The Temple of Science. Ottawa: National Research Council Canada
Archives 1989. Apocryphal statements from the book of Esdras, forwarded to Tory, 2
March 1931.
5. Mackenzie, C.J., in The Mackenzie-McNaughton Wartime Letters, ed. Mel Thistle.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1975, 78.
6. Mackenzie, C.J., ibid. 130.
7. Mackenzie, C.J., ibid. 140.
8. Mackenzie, C.J., ibid. 144.
9. Hurst, D.G., Canada Enters the Nuclear Age, Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University
Press 1997; Eggleston, Wilfrid, Canada’s Nuclear Story, London: Harrap Research
Publications, 1966; Physics in Canada: A Century of Canadian Physics, 56 (2000):
57. 
10. Tickner, A.W., “The NRC Postdoctorate Fellowships,” in Building Canadian Science:
the Role of the National Research Council, eds. R.A. Jarrell and Y. Gingras, Scientia
Canadensis 15 (1991): 145.
11. Thompson, W.P., Graduate Education in the Sciences in Canadian Universities.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press 1963.
12. Babbitt, J.D., Science in Canada; Speeches of E.W.R. Steacie. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press 1965, 122.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      415

416
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Chapter 14. The Spectroscopy Laboratory
1. GH, “Alexander Edgar Douglas, 12 April 1916 – 26 July 1981,” July 1981, in
Biographical Memoirs. London: The Royal Society, 28 (1982): 92; B. Stoicheff,
“Alexander Edgar Douglas, 1916–1981,” Trans. R. Soc. Can. Ser. V 1 (1986): 277.
2. Norrish, R.G.W. and G. Porter, Nature, 164 (1949): 658; GH and D.A. Ramsay, Disc.
Faraday Soc. 9 (1950): 80. Norrish and Porter shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in
1967 with Manfred Eigen for their studies of extremely fast chemical reactions.
3. Ramsay, D.A., Can J. Chem. 70 (1992): 2511.
4. Costain, Cecil C., Physics in Canada, 48 (1992): 186. 
5. Douglas, A.E. and GH, “The nuclear spin of 3He,” Phys. Rev. 76 (1949): 1529.
6. Tickner, A.W., “The NRC Postdoctorate Fellowships 1948–1978,” in Building Can-
adian Science, eds. Richard A. Jarrell and Yves Gingras. Thornhill: The Scientia Press,
1992, 145.
7. B. Stoicheff: PDF at the NRC 1951–1953, then Research Officer at the NRC until Aug.
1964, when appointed to professorship in the Department of Physics, University of
Toronto, University Professor 1977 and University Professor Emeritus 1989–; served on
Council of the NRC 1977–1983.
8. Brief biographies and scientific contributions of members of the Spectroscopy Lab-
oratory can be found in Appendix A.
9. GH, Astrophys. J. 115 (1952): 337.
10. Stoicheff, B., J. Chem. Phys. 21 (1953): 1410; Can. J. Phys. 32 (1954): 339.
11. In addition to those already mentioned: from Australia, A.R.H. Cole, A.D. Walsh; India,
K.S. and R.S. Krishnan; Japan, S. Mizushima, Y. Morino, and S. Shimanouchi; USSR,
P. Kapitsa, S. Mandelstam, N. Sobolev, and I. Sobel’man; France, G. Amat, L. Brossel,
P. Jacquinot, J.P. Mathieu, and B. Vodar; Germany, O. Oldenburg, and R. Mecke;
Sweden, B. Edlén; Hungary, I. Kovács; Denmark, B. Bak and A. Langseth; the U.K.,
R.F. Barrow, A.G. Gaydon, C.K. Ingold, W.C. Price; the U.S.A, S.H. Bauer, N.
Bloembergen, B.L. Crawford, G.H. Dieke, H.H. Nielsen, J.R. Nielsen, E.K. Plyler, I.I.
Rabi, N.F. Ramsey, D.H. Rank, A.L. Schawlow, C.H. Townes, and J. Van Vleck, among
many others.
12. Douglas, A.E., “The NRC Spectroscopy Laboratory,” in Physics in Canada, 28 (1972):
29; see also Oka, Takeshi, “Reminiscences of Gerhard Herzberg at NRC,” ibid. 41
(1985): 68.
Chapter 15. Inspiring the Growth of Basic Research
1. GH to S. Chandrasekhar, Sept. 1948; GHA. 
2. Middleton, W.E.K., Physics at the National Research Council of Canada 1929–1952.
Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier University Press, 1979: 68.
3. It was known that R.B. Bennett, who represented Calgary in Parliament, held Tory
responsible for the University of Alberta being built in Edmonton rather than in Calgary.

4. Mackenzie, C.J., in The Mackenzie-McNaughton Wartime Letters, ed. Mel Thistle.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press 1975, 48.
5. GH to C.J. Mackenzie, 3 Dec. 1948; GHA.
6. S. Chandrasekhar to GH, 29 Dec. 1948; GHA.
7. D. Coster to GH, 5 Feb. 1950; NAC. This letter was written in the hospital and not
signed by Coster, since he apparently wished to add more to his letter. A handwritten
note by his wife told of Coster’s death from a stroke on 12 Feb. 1950. Coster was
famous for having discovered the element hafnium, and for helping Lise Meitner, who
was instrumental in the discovery of fission, to escape from Germany.
8. W. Heitler to GH, 14 Sept. 1948; GHA.
9. Mott, Neville, “Walter Heinrich Heitler,” in Biographical Memoirs. London: The Royal
Society, 28 (1982): 141.
10. I.I. Rabi to GH, 1948; GHA.
11. Ta-You-Wu to GH, 1960; NAC.
12. Mendelssohn, K. “David Keith Chalmers MacDonald,” in Biographical Memoirs.
London: The Royal Society, 10 (1964): 207. 
13. Middleton, W.E.K., Physics at the National Research Council of Canada 1929–1952.
Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier University Press, 1979, 68 and 143; King, M. Christine,
interview of GH, 5 May 1986, 27; Winnewisser, Brenda P., interview of GH, 28 Feb.
and 2 Mar. 1989, 74. 
Chapter 16. Research and Worldwide Acclaim
1. Lamb, W.E. Jr. and R.C. Retherford, Phys. Rev. 72 (1947): 241; 79 (1950): 549.
2. S. Chandrasekhar to B. Stoicheff, 20 Jan. 1972; and in Physics in Canada, 28 (1972):
11; BSF.
3. Chandrasekhar, S. and GH, Phys. Rev. 98 (1955): 1050; Hart J.F. and GH. ibid. 106
(1957): 79; Z. Physik, 171 (1963): 83. 
4. GH to W.E. Lamb Jr., 7 Oct. 1955; NAC.
5. W.E. Lamb Jr., to GH, 12 Nov. 1955; NAC. The footnote to which Lamb referred
appears on page 51 of Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure: For H, a transition with n
= 0 would correspond to a transition between fine structure terms with equal n; for n =
2 the transition has a wavenumber of only 0.3 cm–1, or a wavelength of about 3 cm.
Observations of absorption of this wavelength in activated hydrogen are still doubtful
[Betz (53); Haas (140)].
6. GH, Proc. R. Soc. Can. 248 A (1958): 309.
7. GH, Astrophys. J. 87 (1938): 428. 
8. GH, Nature, 166 (1950): 563; Durie, R.A., and GH, Can. J. Phys. 38 (1960): 806.
9. Trauger, J.T., Roesler, F.L., Carleton, N.P., and Traub, W.A., Astrophys. J. 184 (1973):
L137.
10. Kuiper, G.P., ibid. 109 (1949): 540.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      417

418
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
11. Welsh, H.L., M.F. Crawford, and J.L. Locke, Phys. Rev. 76 (1949): 580.
12. GH, Astrophys. J. 115 (1952): 337.
13. Kiess, C.C., C.H. Corliss, and H.K. Kiess, ibid. 132 (1960): 221; Giver, L.P. and H.
Spinrad, Icarus, 5 (1966): 586.
14. Carruthers, G.R., Astrophys. J. 161 (1970): L81.
15. Spitzer, L., J.F. Drake, E.B. Jenkins, D.C. Morton, J.B. Rogerson, and D.G. York, ibid.
181 (1973): L116. 
16. Morton, D.C., ibid. 197 (1975): 85.
17. Stoicheff, B., Can. J. Phys. 35 (1957): 730.
18. GH and L.L. Howe, ibid. 37 (1959): 1293.
19. GH, Phys. Rev. Lett. 23 (1969): 1081; J. Mol. Spectrosc. 33 (1970): 147.
20. GH and Ch. Jungen, ibid. 41 (1972): 425.
21. GH, Trans. R. Soc. Can. 5 (1967): 3.
22. GH in letter of 4 Apr. 1967 inquired of Weisskopf whether this attribution was correct,
and received a reply 12 Apr.: “I am proud that I am supposed to have made this state-
ment. I do not remember making it, but I do not mind to be quoted since I believe it is
a correct statement.” NAC.
23. GH, Astrophys J. 96 (1942): 314; Rev. Mod. Phys. 14 (1942): 195.
24. Douglas, A.E., Astrophys. J. 114 (1951): 466.
25. GH and J. Shoosmith, Can. J. Phys. 34 (1956): 523.
26. R.G.W. Norrish to GH, 31 May, 1956; NAC.
27. GH and J. Shoosmith, Nature, 183 (1959): 1801.
28. GH first reported a linear ground state for CH2 and this caused considerable controver-
sy since electron spin resonance and ab initio theory showed a bent structure. He retract-
ed the linear structure in J. Chem. Phys. 54 (1971): 2276.
29. Hollis, J.M., P.R. Jewell, and F.J. Lovas, Astrophys. J. 438 (1995): 259.
30. Bézard, B., H. Feuchtgruber, J.I. Moses, and T. Encrenaz, Astron. Astrophys. 334
(1998): L41; Bézard, B., P.N. Roman, H. Feuchtgruber, and T. Encrenaz, Astrophys. J.
515 (1999): 868.
31. Feuchtgruber, H., F.P. Helmich, van Dishoeck, and C.M. Wright, ibid. 535 (2000):
L111.
32. GH, Proc. R. Soc. Can. A 262 (1961): 291.
33. The free radicals studied included NH2, HCO, SiH2, NH2, BH2, PH2, NCO, NCS, C3,
N3, CCN, CNC, NCN, HNCN, BO2, HCF, HCCl, CF2, HSiCl, HSiBr, and HSiI. See
GH, The Spectra and Structures of Simple Free Radicals, Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 1971.
34. GH, Quart. Revs. 25 (1971): 201.
35. GH and A. Laterqvist, Can. J. Phys. 46: 2363.

Chapter 17. Ambassador of Canadian Science
1. P.A.M. Dirac to GH, 24 Apr. 1954; NAC. 
2. Shanmugadhasan, S., in Physics in Canada, 24 (1955); Eden, R.J. in Science, 122
(1955): 1278.
3. GH to Nathan Sugarman, 16 Sept. 1965; NAC.
4. Program of “Symposium On Energy Exchange In Molecular Systems,” 12 and 13 May,
1966; UCA.
5. Told to the author by Emil Wolf, 2001.
6. Government of India invitation to GH, 21 Sept. 1956; NAC.
7. Winnewisser, B.P., interview of GH, 1989, 27.
8. Weizmann Institute of Science to GH, 15 Oct. 1957.
9. Paul Herzberg in conversations with GH, summer 1993.
10. GH’s USSR bankbook, GHA; GH to Harold E. Johns, July 1973, NAC; also told to
author by Dudley Herschbach and John Callomon, 1999.
11. Oka, T., “Reminiscences of Gerhard Herzberg at NRC,” in Physics in Canada, 41
(1985): 68.
12. See: Fundamental and Applied Physics: Proceedings of the Esfahan Symposium, eds.
M.S. Feld, A. Javan, and N.A. Kurnit. New York: Wiley-Interscience 1973, 491 and 523.
Chapter 18. The Classic Volumes
1. See Chapter 3, p. 52.
2. See Books and Publications.
3. Mulliken, R.S., Proc. R. Soc. Can. 49 (1979):
4. Condon, E.U. and G.H. Shortley, The Theory of Atomic Spectra. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1935.
5. H. Cirker to GH, 16 May 1944; GHA.
6. H. Cirker to GH, 20 May 1987; GHA.
7. R.S. Mulliken to G. Herzberg, 24 Nov. 1939; NAC.
8. W. Jevons to Steinkopff, 1939; NAC.
9. Stoner, E.C., in Philosphical Magazine, 30 (1940): 520.
10. Ingold, C.K., in Nature, 147 (1941): 36.
11. Glaser, L., quoted in Nachmansohn, David, German–Jewish Pioneers in Science
1900–1933. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1979, 137.
12. C. Dollard, record of interview with GH, 23 April 1942; CCA.
13. E.M. Crane to GH, 1 May 1942; NAC.
14. GH to E.M. Crane, 26 Nov. 1942; NAC.
15. S. Chandrasekhar to B. Stoicheff, 20 Jan.1972; BSF.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      419

420
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
16. GH to W.P. Thompson, 2 June 1950; USA.
17. H.C. Longuet-Higgins to GH, 21 Dec. 1966; NAC.
18. GH to G. Scheibe, 13 Apr. 1967; NAC.
19. GH to C.S. Hutchison, Jr., 10 Dec. 1985; GHA.
20. S. Chandrasekhar to GH, 9 Apr. 1979; NAC.
21. Spectra of Diatomic Molecules was selected by Current Contents of 28 March 1983 as
“This Week’s Citation Classic” having been cited in over 7,905 publications since
1961. 
Chapter 19. Challenging the New Politics of Science
1. Doern, G. Bruce, Science and Politics in Canada. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University
Press, 1972; Hayes, F. Ronald, The Chaining of Prometheus: evolution of a power struc-
ture for Canadian Science. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1973.
2. Babbitt, J.D., Science in Canada: Speeches of E.W.R. Steacie. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1965, 115.
3. Ibid. 37.
4. Ibid. 139.
5. Marion, Léo, “Edgar William Richard Steacie,” in Biographical Memoirs. London: The
Royal Society, 10 (1964): 257; Smith, I. Norman, “All Canada Became His ‘Lab’,” in
the Ottawa Journal, 29 Aug. 1962.
6. Eggleston, Wilfrid, National Research in Canada: the NRC 1916–1966. Toronto: Clarke
Irwin, 1978. 352.
7. Dainton, Fred, New Scientist, 3 Mar. 1990, in review of E.W.R. Steacie and Science in
Canada.
8. Herzberg, G., “E.W.R. Steacie, 1900–1962,” in Physics in Canada, 18 (1962): 42.
9. Eggleston, Wilfrid, ibid. 394.
10. King, M. Christine, E.W.R. Steacie and Science in Canada. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1989, 190.
11. Report, Royal Commission on Government Organization. Ottawa: Queen’s Printer,
1963.
12. Ibid. 212, 213: The figures quoted for operating costs are pure (basic) research divisions
$2.7 million, the other divisions including regional laboratories $18.8 million.
13. Gwyn, Richard, The Northern Magus. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart Limited, 1980,
95–97.
14. Senate Debates, 29 June 1967, 249; ibid. 2 Nov. 1967, 364.
15. Carruthers, Jeff, in The Ottawa Citizen, 18 Dec. 1970.
16. Senate Debates, 4 Feb. 1970, 491.
17. GH to B.G. Ballard, 15 Feb. 1965; GHA.
18. GH, “Pure Science and Government,” 14 May 1965.
19. GH, “The Dangers of Science Policy,” 7 Nov. 1969.

20. GH, “In Defence of Basic Research,” in the NRC Newsletter, summer 1970.
21. GH, “Remarks on the Report of the Senate Special Committee on Science Policy,” 13
Mar. 1971; “Bureaucracy and the republic of science,” in Impact of Science on Society,
No. 1/2, 22 (Jan.–June 1972): 105; and “Notes on Report of the Senate Special
Committee on Science Policy”; GHA.
22. The reader may be interested in comparing volume I with Senator Lamontagne’s
speech, (Ref. 14): an officer of the NRC suggested that the Senator “should be given full
marks for not allowing himself to be confused by the facts in arriving at his pre-
determined thesis.” 
23. A Science Policy for Canada, Report of Senate Special Committee on Science Policy,
Vol. 1, 4.
24. GH to Senator Lamontagne, 15 Mar. 1971; NAC.
25. McKinley D.W.R. to Dr. Hunt (Chairman of Selection Board), 4 Nov. 1968; W.G.
Schneider to GH, 24 Feb. 1969; GHA.
26. Symposia in honour of Dr. Herzberg have been held at Mont Tremblant Lodge, Que. in
1974; at Université Laval, Que. in 1979; in Ottawa, in 1984 and 1989; at Sainte Adèle,
Que., in 1994; and in Cornwall, Ont., in 1999.
27. GH to W.G. Schneider, 17 Sept. 1969; GHA.
Chapter 20. Nobel Laureate
1. Kingstone, Joan G. of Rockcliffe Park, interview of GH, 8 Apr. 1989; GHA.
2. James Orbinski, brief biography, 2002; BSF.
3. Peter Erman to B. Stoicheff, 12 Aug. 1996; BSF.
4. Some selections from collection of telegrams and letters compiled by J.D. Babbitt,
NRC:
“First of all I want to tell you again how happy I was when I heard that your work had
been recognized by award of the Nobel Prize in chemistry. It might equally well have
been in physics, of course. Anyway, it is wonderful that the committee has recognized
your very great research contributions to our knowledge of molecules and their spectra.
Then too, there are the books. I personally felt that to organize and present the results
of research in such a way as you have done is itself so major a contribution as to deserve
a Nobel Prize. But you have done that in addition to the research for which the prize was
given.” [Robert S. Mulliken, The University of Chicago.]
“I cannot tell you how very excited Lalitha and I were when we heard on the TV that
you had been awarded the 1971 Nobel Prize for Chemistry. I believe that I had remarked
to you once that to give the Prize to Mulliken and to Norrish and not to have given it to
you would have been the most flagrant form of injustice. The Nobel Committee can now
be commended for their sense of fairness: they have done themselves proud. Soon you
must be preparing for the ceremonies in Stockholm; and you will sorely miss Luise -
more than ever.” [Chandra.]
“Delighted to hear of your Nobel Prize. We will resist all attempts to make a chemist of
you.” [Robert E. Bell, McGill University.]
NOTES AND REFERENCES      421

422
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
“Nothing since I was a child on Christmas morning has given me as much delight as the
Swedes’ recognition of the Prince of Spectroscopy as a chemist in disguise. Joyous con-
gratulations.” [Bryce S. Crawford, University of Minnesota.]
“We always suspected that deep down you were a chemist. Warmest congratulations.”
[Jim Morrison, McMaster University.]
“You have created a new field. It was clear for a long time how important this field is,
but it is only now that people seem to wake up to its importance. Very much better late
than never.” [Edward Teller, University of California, Livermore.]
5. Walter Herzberg interview in Hamburger Abendblatt, 3 Nov. 1971.
6. Senator Joseph A. Sullivan to GH, 4 Nov. 1971; NAC. 
“Please accept my very warm and hearteous congratulations. This speaks for itself, and
probably I did not make any mistake in my attitude that I assumed in regard to a certain
committee investigating science and research in this country. I feel I have been vindi-
cated thanks to you.
7. Telegram from the Permanent Secretary Erik Rudberg, Royal Academy of Sciences,
Sweden, 2 Nov. 1971; GHA.
8. Telegram from NRC President W.G. Schneider, 2 Nov. 1971; GHA.
9. I.I. Sobel’man to B. Stoicheff, 18 Jan. 1994; BSF.
10. J. Shoosmith letter, see 4 above, compilation by J.D. Babbitt.
11. Herzberg letters of thanks to C.W. Drury, 14 and 19 Nov. 1971; NAC.
12. Governor General’s address, in Physics in Canada, 28 (1972): 7.
13. GH’s address, ibid. 8.
14. GH to Governor General, 1 Dec. 1971; NAC.
15. Linus Pauling Award speech in Seattle, 4 Dec. 1971; GHA.
16. Aide-Memoire regarding Nobel Ceremonies, 2 Nov. 1971; NAC and Personal Pro-
gramme, Nov. 1971; GHA.
17. Based on communications with Agnes Herzberg, Monika Herzberg, and Doris Brock-
house.
18. Les Prix Nobel, En 1971, Stockholm: Imprimerie Royale, P.A. Norstedt & Soner, 1972.
29.
19. See Nobel’s will and selection of Nobel Laureates in Appendix B.
20. Prof. Stig Claesson, Citation, Ref. 18 (translation), 43. 8The Nobel Foundation 1971.
21. GH, ibid. 61. 8The Nobel Foundation 1971.
22. GH, Nobel Lecture, “Spectroscopic Studies of Molecular Structure,” ibid. 201. 8The
Nobel Foundation 1971.
Chapter 21. Weathering the Aftermath
1. GH letter to J. Shoosmith, 26 Jan. 1972. I am indebted to Paul Feldman for a copy of
this letter, which he had received from Shoosmith’s son.

2. McRae, Earl, Canada’s Nobel-award scientist would sooner be an opera singer, in The
Toronto Star, 15 Jan. 1972.
3. GH to His Worship Mayor Herbert S. Sears, Feb. 1972, and similar letters to the
Lieutenant-Governor, the Minister of Education, and J.W.T. Spinks; NAC.
4. Proceedings of the 249th Meeting of the Council, NRC Ottawa, 14 Mar. 1972.
5. Proceedings of the 252nd Meeting of the Council, NRC Ottawa, 13 Mar. 1973.
6. GH to McMaster University, 26 Sept. 1973; NAC.
7. GH to W.C. Price, 2 May 1972; NAC.
8. McCabe, Nora, Province Honors Herzberg at Dinner, in The Toronto Star, 18 May, 1972.
9. A Science Policy for Canada: Targets and Strategies for the Seventies, Vol. 2, Ottawa,
Information Canada, 1972.
10. GH to Senator J.A. Sullivan, 11 Feb. 1972; NAC.
11. Senator J.A. Sullivan to GH, 18 Feb. 1972; NAC.
12. Lynch, Charles, “Reports Useless,” in The Gazette, Montreal, 21 Jan. 1972.
13. GH to Science Undergraduate Society, 29 Mar. 1972; NAC.
14. SCITEC, founded in 1970 with the aim of “marshalling the scientific and technical
community to provide leadership, and to communicate, co-operate and work within
itself, with government and the public in the national interest.” National societies which
offered founding support included those of chemistry, physics, engineering, agriculture,
and biology.
15. Babbitt, J.D., “The Senators and their science policy for Canada,” in Canadian
Research & Development, July–August 1974, 26.
16. A Science Policy for Canada: Progress and Unfinished Business, Vol. 4, Ottawa: Supply
and Services Canada, 1977.
17. Kerwin, L. to GH, 1 Dec. 1989; GHA. After his two terms as president of the NRC,
Kerwin was appointed president of the new Canadian Space Agency.
18. Phillipson, D.J.C., in Building Canadian Science: The Role of the National Research
Council, eds. Richard A. Jarrell  and Yves Gingras. Thornhill: The Scientia Press, 1992.
Chapter 22. The Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics
1. Proceedings of the 257th Meeting of the Council, NRC Ottawa, 23 Sept. 1974.
2. Lew, H and I. Heiber, J. Chem. Phys. 58 (1973): 1246: Lew, H. Can. J. Phys. 54 (1976):
2028.
3. GH and H. Lew, Astron. Astrophys. 31 (1974): 123; Wehinger, P., S. Wykoff, G.H. Her-
big, GH, and H. Lew, Astrophys. J. 190 (1974): L43.
4. Alexander, A.J., H.W. Kroto, and D.R.M. Walton, J. Mol. Spectrosc. 62 (1976): 175.
5. Avery, L.W., N.W. Broten, J.M. MacLeod, T. Oka, and H.W. Kroto, Astrophys. J. 205
(1976): L173.
6. Oka, T., J. Mol. Spectrosc. 72 (1978): 172.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      423

424
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
7. Kroto, H.W., Astrophys. J. 219 (1978): L133; Broten, N.W., T. Oka, L.W. Avery, J.M.
MacLeod, and H.W. Kroto, ibid. 223 (1978): L105.
8. Douglas, A.E., Nature, 269 (1977): 130.
9. Kroto. H., Sphere, Ottawa: National Research Council of Canada, April 1991, 7.
10. GH, Trans. R. Soc. Can. 5 (1967): 3.
11. Oka, T., “Reminiscences of Gerhard Herzberg at NRC,” in Physics in Canada, 41
(1985): 68.
12. GH, J. Chem. Phys. 70 (1979): 4806; Dabrowski, I. and GH, Can. J. Phys. 58 (1980):
1238; GH, and J.K.G. Watson, ibid. (1980): 1250; GH, J.T. Hougen, and J.K.G. Watson,
ibid. 60 (1982): 1261.
13. Figger, H., Y. Fukada, W. Ketterle, and H. Walther, ibid. 62 (1984): 1274; Chem. Phys.
Lett. 146 (1988): 180; Z. Phys. D. 13 (1989): 129, 139.
14. GH and J.T. Hougen, J. Mol. Spectrosc. 97 (1983): 430.
15. GH, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 38 (1987): 27.
16. Oka, T., Phys. Rev. Lett. 45 (1980): 531.
17. Geballe, T.R. and T. Oka, Nature, 384 (1996): 334.
18. For more details see Oka, T., Rev. Mod. Phys. 64 (1992): 1141; and in Spectroscopy:
Perspectives and Frontiers, ed. A.P. Roy. New Delhi: Narosa Publ. House, 1997, 1.
19. Jenniskens, P. and F.-X. Désert, Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. 106 (1994): 39.
Chapter 23. Continuing Activities
1. GH, “Commemorative Talk” in Okazaki, Japan, 9 May 1985; GHA.
2. R. Lst to G. Herzberg, 20 Aug. 1976; GHA.
3. GH to S. Chandrasekhar, July 1980; GHA
4. GH, Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. 51 (1985): 495.
5. B. Mulroney to GH, 25 June 1992; GHA.
6. Files “Connections with Humanitarian Organizations” and “Appeals”; GHA.
7. A. Petelin to GH, 6 Apr. 1978; GHA.
8. GH to N. Podgorny, Oct. 1973; GHA.
9. GH, telegram to Flora MacDonald, 23 Jan. 1980; GHA.
10. GH, telegram to K. Chernenko, 13 May 1984; GHA.
11. G. Campbell MacLean, Chm. of Board of St. Boniface General Hospital Research, to A.
Sakharov, 16 Feb. 1987; GHA.
12. GH to M. Gorbachev, 3 Dec. 1987; GHA.
13. “Sakharov Thanks Canadians,” in The Candle, Amnesty International, fall 1989.
14. GH introduction of Sakharov to the NRC, 13 Feb. 1989; GHA.
15. GH to Cardinal König, 26 Nov. 1980; GHA.
16. GH to War Resisters International, 28 May 1982; GHA.

17. “Die Feinstruktur der He+ Linien 1640 Å und 4686 Å” (Z. Physik, 146 (1956): 269).
Festschrift on Born’s 80th birthday: “Twenty-parameter eigenfunctions and energy val-
ues of the 23S states of He and He-like ions” (Z. Physik, 171 (1963): 83).
18. GH, “Testimonial Dinner,” University of Saskatchewan, 21 Sept. 1974; GHA.
19. GH to Mrs. S. Chandrasekhar, 24 Oct. 1995; GHA.
20. Ransil, Bernard, J., Robert S. Mulliken: Life of a Scientist. Berlin: Springer-Verlag 1989.
21. H. Taube to GH, 4 Nov. 1983; GHA.
22. A tribute to Edward U. Condon: “Beutler-Fano shape in the predissociation of H2,” in
Topics in Modern Physics. Colorado Associated University Press, 1971, 191. Festschrift
for I.I. Rabi: “The predicted infrared spectrum of HeH+ and its possible astrophysical
importance,” Trans. New York Acad. Sci. 38 (1977): 14.
23. GH, “To Ernst Miescher on His Eightieth Birthday,” in Helvetica Physica Acta, 58
(1985): 951.
24. M. Delbrück to GH, 24 Apr.1967; GHA. 
25. GH to Jack Locke, 4 Sept. 1980; GHA. 
26. L. Pauling to GH, 26 Nov. 1993; GHA.
27. Prime Minister Brian Mulroney appointed Dr. Pierre O. Perron, then Associate Deputy
Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources as President of the NRC for a five-year term
on 25 July 1989.
28. House of Commons, Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence of the Standing Committee
on Industry, Science and Technology, Regional and Northern Development, Issue No.
41, 25 April 1990. Ottawa: Queen’s Printer.
29. McCulloch, E.A., open letter to President Perron and Members of the NRC, 29 Mar.
1990; Craig, Iris, letter to members of the NRC, 13 Mar. 1990; Dutton, Guy G.S., letter
to NRC President, in L’Actualité chimique canadienne, June 1990, 4.; GHA, copies of
letters to Prime Minister and Minister of Science; BSF.
30. GH to Vice-President C. Willis, 24 Oct. 1994; GHA.
31. Letters from Governor General Ramon Hnatyshyn and Prime Minister Jean Chrétien to
GH, 13 Dec. 1994; GHA.
NOTES AND REFERENCES      425

426
APPENDICES
A. Staff Members of the Spectroscopy Laboratory
In addition to the founding members, Gerhard Herzberg, Alex Douglas, Don Ramsay, Hin
Lew, and Cec Costain, the following were appointed to the research staff of the Laboratory:
Amano, Takayoshi, is presently Chairman of the Department of Materials and Biological
Sciences in the Institute of Astrophysics and Planetary Sciences, Ibaraki University in Mito,
Japan. His work is in the field of free radicals and ions of astrochemical and atmospheric
interest. Amano received his Ph.D. in 1969 from the University of Tokyo working with Pro-
fessor Y. Morino on studies of microwave spectra of free radicals. He joined the Spec-
troscopy Laboratory as a visiting Associate Research Officer in 1980 and was appointed as
a staff member in 1982. His research included infrared and microwave double resonance
spectroscopy and later, laser spectroscopy of free radicals and ions. He returned to Japan in
1993.
Bunker, Philip R., obtained his Ph.D. in 1965 in theoretical chemistry at Cambridge Uni-
versity working with Professor H.C. Longuet-Higgins, and joined the NRC as a postdoctoral
fellow with Jon Hougen the same year. He became a staff member of the Spectroscopy
Laboratory the following year and after three decades switched to the Steacie Institute for
Molecular Sciences where he is a Principal Research Officer. His theoretical interests have
spanned the areas of prediction, analysis, and understanding of molecular spectra, the
dynamical interactions between the motions of electrons and nuclei, and effects occurring
in flexible molecules. He and Per Jensen have produced a highly acclaimed volume on
Molecular Symmetry and Spectroscopy and edited Computational Molecular Spectroscopy.
Chapman, George D. Following his Ph.D. with Prof. Lucjan Krause at the University of
Windsor in 1966, Chapman obtained an NRC Postdoctoral Fellowship to work in quantum
optics with Prof. George Series at Oxford University. He joined the Spectroscopy Labor-
atory in 1968 and carried out research on coherence transfer in atomic collisions, the trans-
verse Hanle effect, magnetic predissociation of the iodine molecule, and lifetimes of its rota-
tional levels. In 1972 he transferred to the NRC Mechanics Section and worked in optical
physics applied to metrology. Over the years he has served the NRC in various capacities in
the Industrial Research Assistance Program, the Mechanical Metrology Group, and Mass
Standards Program, among others.
Dabrowski, Izabel, after graduating with a B.Sc. from McGill University, she became
Herzberg’s technical assistant in 1969, helping to measure plates and doing routine calcula-
tions. Her interest in spectroscopy prompted her to obtain a M.Sc. in Chemistry in 1976,
when she was promoted to Research Officer. Izabel continued to collaborate with Herzberg
until his retirement, and they co-authored many papers on the electronic spectra of hydro-
gen and the rare gas hydrides.

Hougen, Jon T., attended Oberlin College and the University of Wisconsin, obtaining a
B.Sc. in chemistry in 1956. He entered Harvard as a National Science Foundation Pre-
doctoral Fellow and obtained a Ph.D. in 1960 in physical chemistry under the research
direction of W. Moffitt and W. Klemperer. Jon joined the NRC that year as a postdoctoral
fellow and became a staff member of the Spectroscopy Group in 1962; his early interest
being the study of rotational and vibronic energy levels of diatomic, triatomic, and sym-
metric top molecules. He and Shoba Singh (PDF) were the first to observe electronic Raman
spectra of crystals, having studied the ion Pr3+ in single crystals of PrCl3. He continued to
work with his interests in quantum mechanical and group theoretical calculations of various
molecular motions and interactions, and collaborated with Herzberg and other NRC theo-
rists and visitors long after his departure from the NRC. He accepted an appointment to the
National Bureau of Standards in Washington in 1964, rose through the ranks to Acting Chief
of the Molecular Physics Division, and remains as a Senior Research Fellow following his
retirement in 2001. For his outstanding contributions to spectroscopy, Jon has received
numerous honours including the Coblentz Award, Plyler Prize, and Lippincot Award.
Howe, Lila L., educated in Prince Edward Island, joined the NRC as Herzberg’s technical
assistant in 1954. She was soon promoted to Research Officer and collaborated with Herz-
berg in one of the most extensive analyses of the ground state of molecular hydrogen via the
Lyman bands. Lila left the NRC in 1961 and the following year was employed in the edi-
tor’s office of the Toronto publisher Ginn and Company.
Huber, Klaus-Peter, co-author with Herzberg of Constants of Diatomic Molecules, pub-
lished in 1979, first served as a postdoctoral fellow with the Spectroscopy Group from 1963
to 1965 and was then appointed as a staff member. He obtained his Ph.D. with Prof. Ernst
Miescher at the University of Basel with research on the NO molecule, and worked on spec-
tra of NO2 at the NRC. He helped to develop jet absorption techniques for high-resolution
studies of rotationally cold molecules, and has concentrated on spectra of molecules of rel-
evance in astrophysics and in the chemistry of planetary atmospheres. In recent years, he
continues with these interests at the NRC and in collaboration with scientists at Université
de Paris-Sud, the Observatoire de Paris-Meudon, the Photon Factory in Tsukuba, Japan, and
the Institute for Astrophysics and Planetary Sciences at Ibaraki University in Mito, Japan.
Johns, John W.C., studied chemistry at Oxford University, and was supervised by Prof.
Richard Barrow in spectroscopy, obtaining his Ph.D. in 1958. He joined the NRC as a post-
doctoral fellow that year working with Don Ramsay in developing a large flash photolysis
apparatus with which spectra of NH2 were obtained. On returning to the UK, he attended
the Bakerian Lecture by Herzberg, who offered him the job of helping in the analysis of the
CH2 spectrum. He was appointed a Research Officer in 1961, and along with analyses of
electronic spectra of free radicals he studied spectra of CH, BH, BH2, and BO2. He auto-
mated the infrared spectrometer and investigated the complex spectra of N2H2, then dou-
bled the resolution of a Bomem FTIR spectrometer and examined line shapes and absolute
intensities. In 1988, John served as Section Head of the Spectroscopy Laboratory. He
received the Pittsburgh Spectroscopy Award in 1995. John retired in 1996 having been a
member of the NRC for thirty-five years.
APPENDIX      427

428
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Marmet, Paul, OC, FRSC, was educated at Université Laval and obtained his Ph.D. in
1960 for studies in the new field of electron spectroscopy. After a postdoctoral year in
Australia at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Organization in Melbourne, he
returned to Université Laval and rose through the ranks to Professor of Physics in 1970.
Paul joined the HIA in 1983 where he continued his research in electron spectroscopy of
atoms and molecules until 1991, when he joined the University of Ottawa as a Visiting Pro-
fessor. His numerous awards for research include the Rutherford Memorial Fellowship, the
Herzberg Medal, and the Service Award of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada.
McKellar, A. Robert W., FRSC, son of Herzberg’s friend, the noted astronomer Andrew
McKellar, received his Ph.D. at the University of Toronto in 1970 working on infrared spec-
tra of weakly bound van der Waals molecules with Prof. Harry Welsh. McKellar joined the
Spectroscopy Group as a Postdoctoral Fellow in 1971, collaborating with Oka and Johns on
double-resonance infrared spectroscopy using lasers. He was appointed as a staff member
in 1973 and investigated the spectrum of the free radical FO, and the infrared triplet spec-
trum and singlet-triplet splitting of methylene, CH2. His research interest has concentrated
on studies of infrared spectra of “unusual” molecules (unstable free radicals, ions, and
weakly bound complexes) of possible astrophysical importance. He was awarded the Herz-
berg Medal of the Canadian Association of Physicists in 1982, and served as Spectroscopy
Group Leader from 1991 to 1998.
Oka, Takeshi, FRS, FRSC, studied at the University of Tokyo obtaining his Ph.D. in 1960
under the supervision of Professors Koichi Shimoda and Yonezo Morino, and continued
research there in infrared spectroscopy as a Fellow of the Japanese Society for Promotion
of Science until 1963. He then joined the Spectroscopy Laboratory as a postdoctoral fellow,
was appointed a Research Officer in 1965, and rose to the rank of Senior Research Officer.
At the NRC his research progressed from studies in the infrared to the microwave region,
with major interest in molecular spectra of astrophysical importance. He developed tech-
niques for double-resonance optical and microwave spectroscopy for these studies, and then
pursued his search for the elusive spectrum of H3
+ . He succeeded in this important quest,
and discovered it in 1980. In 1981 he accepted the position of Professor of Chemistry,
Astronomy and Astrophysics at The University of Chicago, where in 1989 he was appoint-
ed Robert A. Millikan Distinguished Service Professor. Oka’s major interests are concerned
with molecular ions in laboratory and astronomical plasmas since such ions play crucial
roles in the production of the many molecular species found in interstellar space and star
formation. His group and colleagues have discovered H3
+ , H3O+, HCNH+, CH5
+ and other
ions in interstellar clouds. For his achievements, Oka has been invited to give many named
lectures, and has received the Steacie Prize, Earle K. Plyler Prize, William F. Meggers
Award, and E. Bright Wilson Award among others.
Ritter, George, from Stellenbosch, South Africa, with a Ph.D in optical double resonance,
joined the NRC and Hin Lew’s group as a postdoctoral fellow in 1958 and was appointed
as a staff member in 1961. He extended studies of the rare earths initiated by Hin Lew, by
investigating the hyperfine structures and nuclear moments of Lutetium and Thulium. He
later built an optical double resonance system and examined the hyperfine structures of the
lowest excited states of the isotopes of Lithium. In 1964 he returned to South Africa as a
research scientist of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in Pretoria.

Simard, Benoit, studied chemistry at Université du Québec à Chicoutimi and Université
Laval, and obtained his Ph.D. at the University of Saskatchewan in 1986 for research in
spectroscopy, photophysics, and ab initio calculations of thiocarbonyl compounds, under
the supervision of Prof. Ronald Steer. That year Benoit joined the NRC Laser Chemistry and
Inorganic Chemical Dynamics Group to work with Dr. Peter Hackett on the spectra of
metal-containing molecules and metal clusters. He transferred to the Spectroscopy Group in
1996 and became the Program Leader two years later. His interests include metal–ligand
interactions, from nanoparticles to small molecules, to clusters, carbon nanotubes, metal
interactions with biological molecules in the gas phase, and spectroscopy of highly reactive
ions.
Stoicheff, Boris, OC, FRS, FRSC, after thirteen years at the NRC, he joined the Department
of Physics at the University of Toronto where he continued spectroscopic research with
lasers. His group carried out studies in Brillouin scattering of liquids and rare-gas solids as
well as stimulated Raman and Brillouin scattering. They developed nonlinear techniques for
producing tunable extreme ultraviolet radiation to 750 Å, and investigated spectra of rare-
gas excimers at high resolution, and determined the dissociation energy of molecular hydro-
gen to high precision. Electromagnetically induced transparency in atomic hydrogen was
studied in great detail. He received numerous awards, among them the William F. Meggers
Award, Frederic Ives Award, and the Henry Marshall Tory Medal, and served as president
of the Optical Society of America and of the Canadian Association of Physicists.
Vervloet, Michel, curently Directeur de Recherche at the CNRS Laboratoire de Photo-
physique Moleculaire in Orsay. He received his Ph.D. in Reims investigating the emission
spectrum of NH2 and joined Don Ramsay’s Section on Larger Molecules as a Research
Officer in 1980. His research concerned studies of the emission spectra of diatomic and tri-
atomic molecules and free radicals using Fourier transform techniques. He returned to
France after ten years at the NRC and is involved in spectroscopy with synchrotron radia-
tion in the terahertz region.
Watson, James K.G., FRS, FRSC, studied chemistry at the University of Glasgow and
obtained his Ph.D in 1962 under the supervision of Professor John Brand. Jim was a post-
doctoral fellow at the NRC from 1963 to 1965, a Lecturer at the University of Reading
1966–1971, a Visiting Associate Professor at The Ohio State University until 1975, and then
a Senior Research Fellow at the University of Southampton 1975–1979 and 1980–1982. He
served as a Visiting Scientist at the HIA in 1979 and was appointed a Senior and later a
Principal Research Officer in 1982. His interests include molecular symmetry properties,
analysis of molecular rotation–vibration and electronic spectra, clarifying spectra of
Rydberg molecules, and the diffuse interstellar problem. Jim is considered to be one of the
most outstanding theoretical spectroscopists of our time, especially for his contributions to
the understanding of molecular rotation and vibration. His honours and awards are many,
including the Earle K. Plyler Prize, the Marcus Marci Medal, and the Henry Marshall Tory
Medal.
APPENDIX      429

430
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
B. The Nobel Prizes
On 27 November 1895, Alfred Bernhard Nobel (1833–1996) established the Nobel Found-
ation and gave the bulk of his vast fortune to endow annual prizes in physics, chemistry,
physiology or medicine, literature, and peace to be awarded to those who shall have con-
ferred the greatest benefit on mankind. In 1968 an Alfred Nobel Memorial Prize in Eco-
nomic Science was instituted by the Sveriges Riksbank (Central Bank of Sweden). All of
the awards are made for the most recent achievements in these fields of culture, and for
older works only if their significance had not become apparent until recently. Presentations
of a diploma and a gold medal are made in Stockholm for five of the Prizes on 10 December,
the Festival Day of the Foundation, this being the anniversary of the death of Alfred Nobel
in 1896. The Peace Prize is presented on the same day in Oslo, Norway. Sweden and Nor-
way were united when the Nobel Foundation and Prizes were inaugurated, hence this shar-
ing of Nobel Prize presentations.
The regulations for submission of proposals for the awards and for selection of laure-
ates are similar for the different prizes. For each field, about a thousand individuals from all
over the world (most of them different from year to year) are invited to nominate candidates.
In this way the Nobel Committees get indications of the development in all branches of
these fields and obtain a foundation for evaluating which scientists are making the most sig-
nificant contributions. Proposals received for an award, and the ensuing investigations and
opinions concerning the award of a prize, may not be disclosed and access to such material
may be granted for purposes of historical research only after at least fifty years have elapsed
after a decision for an award has been made.

431
BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS
BOOKS
Atomspektren und Atomstruktur
Th. Steinkopff, Dresden & Leipzig, 1936
Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure
1st edition, Prentice Hall Inc., New York, 1937
2nd edition, Dover Publications, New York, 1944
Russian translation, Moscow, 1948
Italian translation, Torino, 1961
Japanese translation, Tokyo, 1964
Moleklspektren und Moleklstruktur: I. Zweiatomige Molekle
Th. Steinkopff, Dresden & Leipzig, 1939
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure: I. Diatomic Molecules
1st edition, Prentice Hall Inc., New York, 1939
2nd edition, D. Van Nostrand Co. Inc., New York, 1950
3rd edition, Krieger Publishing Co., Florida, 1989
Russian translation, Moscow, 1949
Hungarian translation, Budapest, 1956
Chinese translation, Beijing, 1983
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure: II. Infrared and Raman Spectra of Polyatomic
Molecules
1st edition, D. Van Nostrand Co. Inc., New York, 1945
2nd edition, Krieger Publishing Co., Florida, 1991
Russian translation, Moscow, 1949
Hungarian translation, Budapest, 1960
Chinese translation, Beijing, 1983
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure: III. Electronic Spectra & Electronic Structure
of Polyatomic Molecules
1st edition, D. Van Nostrand Co. Inc., New York, 1966
2nd edition, Krieger Publishing Co., Florida, 1991
Russian translation, Moscow, 1969
The Spectra and Structures of Simple Free Radicals: An Introduction to Molecular
Spectroscopy.
1st edition, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1971
2nd edition, Dover Publications, New York, 1988
German translation, Darmstadt, 1973
Russian translation, Moscow, 1974

432
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Japanese translation, Tokyo, 1975
Yugoslavian translation, Belgrade, 1982
Chinese translation, Beijing, 1983
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure: IV. Constants of Diatomic Molecules. (with
K.P. Huber)
Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1979
Russian translation, Moscow, 1983
PUBLICATIONS
1927
Untersuchungen ber die Erscheinungen bei der elektrodenlosen Ringentladung in Wasser-
stoff. Ann. Phys. 84: 553.
ber die Spektren des Wasserstoffs. Ann. Phys. 84: 565.
ber die kontinuierlichen Spektren des Wasserstoffs. Physik Z. 28: 727.
1928
ber das Nachleuchten von Stickstoff und Sauerstoff und den Einfluss der Wnde hierauf.
Z. Physik, 46: 878.
Cathode rays in the electrodeless ring-discharge. Phil. Mag. 5: 7 and 446.
Die neuere Entwicklung der Quantenmechanik I und II. Z. math. naturw. Unterr. 59: 97.
Resonanzfluoreszenz des Cyans. Naturwiss. 16: 464.
ber die Struktur der negativen Stickstoffbanden. Ann. Phys. 86: 189.
Spektroskopisches ber das Nachleuchten von Stickstoff. Z. Physik, 49: 512.
ber die intensitatsverteilung in Bandenspektren. Z. Physik, 49: 761.
The dissociation energy of nitrogen. Nature, 122: 505.
Ein neues Bandensystem des CO. Naturwiss. 16: 1027.
1929
ber die Bandenspektren von CO, nach Versuchen mit der elektrodenlosen Ringentladung.
Z. Physik, 52: 815.
(With W. Heitler) Eine spektroskopische Besttigung der quantenmechanischen Theorie der
homopolaren Bindung. Z. Physik, 53: 52.
Die Dissoziationsarbeit von Sauerstoff. Z. Phys. Chem. B, 4: 223.
(With W. Heitler) Gehorchen die Stickstoffkerne der Boseschen Statistik? Naturwiss. 17:
673.
Zum Aufbau der zweiatomigen Molekle. Z. Physik, 57: 601.
(With G. Scheibe) On the absorption spectra of methyl halides and some other methyl com-
pounds in the ultraviolet and in the Schumann region. Trans. Farad. Soc. 25: 12.

1930
Der Elektronendrall. Z. math. naturw. Unterr. 61: 49.
(With G. Scheibe) ber die Absorptionsspektra der dampfformigen Methylhalogenide und
einiger anderer Methylverbindungen im Ultraviolett und im Schumann-Geibiet. Z.
Phys. Chem. B, 7: 390.
Zur Deutung der diffusen Moleklspektren (Prdissoziation). Z. Physik, 61: 604.
Das Stickstoffisotop der Masse 15. Z. Phys. Chem. B, 9: 43.
A new band system probably due to a molecule CP. Nature, 126: 131.
Predissociation of the phosphorous (P2) molecule. Nature, 126: 239.
Zur Bestimmung von Dissoziationswrmen aus Pradissoziationsspektren und die Dissoz-
iationswarme von O2. Z. Phys. Chem. B, 10: 189.
1931
Ultraviolet absorption spectra of acetylene and formaldehyde. Trans. Farad. Soc. 27: 378.
Die Prdissoziation und verwandte Erscheinungen. Naturwiss. 10: 207.
Elektrononstruktur der Molekle und Valenz. Leipziger Vortrage, 167.
1932
ber die Struktur und den monomolekularen Zerfall der Molekle N2O und CO2. Z. Phys.
Chem. B, 17: 68.
Rotational structure and predissociation of the P2 molecule. Phys. Rev. 40: 313.
(With K. Franz) Fluoreszenz des H2CO (Anregungsbedingungen und Schwingung-
sanalyse). Z. Physik, 76: 720.
Ein neuartiges, “verbotenes” Absorptionsbandensystem des O2 Molekls. Naturwiss. 20:
577.
Bandenspektrum, Prdissoziation und Struktur des P2-molekls. Ann. Phys. 15: 677.
1933
(With E. Teller) Schwingungsstruktur der Elektronenbergange bei mehratomigen Mole-
klen. Z. Phys. Chem. B 21: 410.
(With J. Curry) Extension of the visible absorption system of NO2 to longer wavelengths.
Nature, 131: 842.
(With R. Klsch) Die Ultraviolettabsorption der Aminogruppe (–NH2) und anderer Gruppen
in einfachen Moleklen im Gaszustand. Z. Elektrochem. Nr. 76.
(With J. Curry and L. Herzberg) Spectroscopic evidence for the molecule PN. J. Chem.
Phys. 1: 749.
(With J. Curry and L. Herzberg) Spektroskopischer Nachweis und Struktur des PN-
Molekls. Z. Physik, 86: 348.
1934
(With J. Curry) ber die ultravioletten Absorptionsbanden des Sauerstoffs (Schumann-
Runge-Banden) Ann.  Phys., 19: 800.
Photography of the infrared solar spectrum to wavelength 12 900 . Nature, 133: 759.
BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS      433

434
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
(With F. Patat and J.W.T. Spinks) Bands of ‘heavy’ acetylene in the near infrared. Nature,
133: 951.
(With J.W.T. Spinks) Photgraphie der zweiten Obserschwingung des HCl bei 1.19 µ, mit
grosser Dispersion. Z. Physik, 89: 474.
(With H. Sponer) ber die Dissoziationswrme des Stickstoffmolekls. Z. Phys. Chem. B,
26: 1.
(With H. Verleger) Das Spektrum des schweren Wassers im photographischen Ultrarot. Z.
Physik, 35: 622.
(With H. Baerwald and L. Herzberg) Bandenspektrum und Struktur des CP-Molekls. Ann.
Phys. 20: 569.
(With J.W.T. Spinks) ber das Rotationsschwingungsspektrum des Acetylens (C2H2). Z.
Physik, 91: 386.
(With F. Patat and J.W.T. Spinks) Rotationsschwingungsspektren im photographischen
Ultrarot von Moleklen, die das Wasserstoffistotp der Masse 2 enthalten. I. Das C2HD-
Spektrum und der C–C und C–H Abstand im Acetylen. Z. Physik, 92: 87.
(With J.W.T. Spinks) Absorption bands of HCN in the photographic infrared. Proc. R. Soc.
A 147: 434.
1935
(With G. Buttenbender) ber die Struktur der zweiten positiven Stickstoffgruppe und die
Prdissoziation des N2-Molekls. Ann. Phys. 21: 577.
(With F. Patat and H. Verleger) ber die geometrische Struktur des N3H-Molekls. Z.
Elektrochem. 41: 522.
(With F. Patat and H. Verleger) ber das photographische Ultrarotspektrum des Methyl-
azetylens und den Kernabstand der C–C -Einfachbindung. Z. Physik, 36: 625.
(With H. Verleger) Two new bands of CO2 in the photographic infrared. Phys. Rev. 48: 706.
1936
(With G.W. Funke) On the rotation–vibration spectrum of acetylene in the photographic
infrared. Phys. Rev. 49: 100.
Dissociation energies of CO and CN, and heat of sublimation of carbon. Nature, 137: 620.
Atomspektren und Atomstruktur. Wissensch. Forschungsberichte. Naturwiss. Reihe Bd. 37,
Th. Steinkopff, Dresden & Leipzig.
(With H. Verleger) ber die photographischen Ultrarotspektren einiger einfacher Kohlen-
stoffverbindungen im Gaszustand. Physik Z. 37: 444.
(With F. Patat and H. Verleger) Rotationsschwingungenspektren im photographischen
Ultrarot von Moleklen, die das Wasserstoffisotop der Masse 2 Enthalten. II. Das C2HD
Spektrum und der C–C und C–H Abstand im Acetylen (weitere Ergebnisse). Z. Physik,
102: 1.
(With J.W.T. Spinks and W.W. Watson) Pressure broadening of the HCN band lines and
intermolecular forces. Phys. Rev. 50: 1186.
1937
(With E. Blum) On the ultraviolet absorption spectrum of diborane. J. Phys. Chem. 41: 91.

(With F. Patat and H. Verleger) On the photographic infrared spectrum of methyl–acetylene
(allylene) and the C–C single bond distance. J. Phys. Chem. 41: 123.
The heat of dissociation of the carbon monoxide molecule and the heat of sublimation of
carbon. Chem. Rev. 20: 145.
(With K.F. Herzfeld and E. Teller) The heat of sublimation of graphite. J. Phys. Chem. 41:
325.
(With W.S. Herbert and G.A. Mills) An attempt to detect the presence of metastable atoms
in active nitrogen by light absorption. Can. J. Res. A, 15: 35.
(With J.W.T. Spinks) Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure. (Translation). Prentice-Hall,
Inc. New York.
(With L. Gero and R. Schmid) On the Cameron bands (3Π–1Σ+) of carbon monoxide. Phys.
Rev. 52: 467.
(With J.G. Fox) Analysis of a new band system of the C2 molecule. Phys. Rev. 52: 638.
1938
On the possibility of detecting molecular hydrogen and nitrogen in planetary and stellar
atmospheres by their rotation–vibration spectra. Astrophys. J. 87: 428.
1939
Moleklspektren und Moleklstruktur. I. Zweiatomige Molekle. Wissensch. Forschungs-
berichte Naturwiss. Reihe Bd. 50, Th. Steinkopff, Dresden & Leipzig.
Forbidden transitions in diatomic molecules. Astrophys. J. 89: 288.
Dissociation, predissociation, and recombination of diatomic molecules. Astrophys. J. 89:
290.
(With J.W.T. Spinks) Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure. I. Diatomic Molecules.
Translation of (68), Prentice-Hall, Inc., New York.
1940
(With L.G. Mundie) On the predissociation of several diatomic molecules. J. Chem. Phys.
8: 263.
(With A.E. Douglas) Spectroscopic evidence for the B2 molecule. Phys. Rev. 57: 752.
(With R.B. Sutton) Tail bands of the Deslandres-d’Azambuja system of the C2 molecule.
Can. J. Res. A, 18: 74.
(With L. Herzberg and G.G. Milne) On the spectrum of the P2 molecule. Can. J. Res. A, 18:
139.
On the presence of HNC in hydrogen cyanide. J. Chem. Phys. 8: 847.
(With A.E. Douglas) Spectroscopic evidence of the B2 molecule and determination of its
structure. Can. J. Res. A, 18: 165.
(With A.E. Douglas) Band spectrum of the BN molecule. Can. J. Res. A, 18: 179.
1941
(With A.E. Douglas) CH+ in interstellar space and in the laboratory. Astrophys. J. 94: 381.
(With W. Hushley) Band spectrum and structure of the BCl molecule. Can. J. Res. A, 19:
127.
BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS      435

436
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
1942
On the heat of sublimation of carbon. J. Chem. Phys. 10: 306.
(With A.E. Douglas) Band spectrum and structure of the CH+ molecule; identification of
three interstellar lines. Can. J. Res. A, 20: 71.
Evidence for the presence of CH2 molecules in comets. Rev. Mod. Phys. 14: 195.
l-type doubling in linear polyatomic molecules. Rev. Mod. Phys. 14: 219.
Laboratory production of the λ4050 group occurring in cometary spectra; further evidence
for the presence of CH2 molecules in comets. Astrophys. J. 96: 314.
1945
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure II. Infrared and Raman Spectra of Polyatomic
Molecules. D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., New York.
1946
On the electronic structure of the nitrogen molecule. Phys. Rev. 69: 362.
On a critical test for the presence of a lunar atmosphere. Popular Astronomy, 54: 414.
On the high pressure bands of carbon and the formation of C2 molecules. Phys. Rev. 70:
762. 
1947
(With H.J. Bernstein) Ultraviolet absorption spectrum of nitric oxide. J. Chem. Phys. 15: 77.
(With L. Herzberg) Fine structure of the infrared atmospheric oxygen bands. Astrophys. J.
105: 353.
The spectroscopic laboratory. Science, 106: 215.
1948
(With H.J. Bernstein) Rotation–vibration spectra of diatomic and simple polyatomic mole-
cules with long absorbing paths. I. The spectrum of fluoroform (CHF3) from 2.4 µ to
0.7 µ. J. Chem. Phys. 16: 30.
(With L. Herzberg) Production of nitrogen atoms in the upper atmosphere. Nature, 161: 283.
Fe II emission lines in α-Herculis and α-Scorpii. Astrophys. J. 107: 94.
(With G.R. Walker) Initiation of high explosives. Nature, 161: 647.
Molecular constants from spectroscopic data. Trans. Am. Soc. Mech. Eng. 70: 623.
(With J.G. Phillips) Infrared CN bands. Astrophys. J. 108: 163.
1949
Quadrupole rotation–vibration spectrum of the hydrogen molecule. Nature, 163: 170.
Laboratory absorption spectra obtained with long paths, in The Atmospheres of the Earth
and Planets, ed. G.P. Kuiper. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 346.
(With L. Herzberg) Absorption spectrum of methyl iodide in the near infrared. Can. J. Res.
B, 27: 332.
(With K.Narahari Rao) Rotation–vibration spectra of diatomic and simple polyatomic mol-
ecules with long absorbing paths. II. The spectrum of carbon monoxide below 1.2 µ. J.
Chem. Phys. 17: 1099.
(With A.E. Douglas) The nuclear spin of 3He. Phys. Rev. 76: 1529.

1950
Forbidden transitions in diatomic molecules. I. The quadrupole rotation–vibration spectrum
of H2. Can. J. Res. A, 28: 144.
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure. I. Spectra of Diatomic Molecules. D. Van Nos-
trand Company, New York, 2nd ed.
Rotation–vibration spectrum of the HD molecule. Nature, 166: 563.
(With R.D. Cowan and S.P. Sinha) Rotation–vibration spectra of diatomic and simple poly-
atomic molecules with long absorbing paths. IV. The spectrum of methyl fluoroform
(CH3CF3) from, 19 µ to 0.7 µ. J. Chem. Phys. 18: 1538.
(With L. Herzberg) Rotation–vibration spectra of diatomic and simple polyatomic mole-
cules with long absorbing paths. VI. The spectrum of nitrous oxide (N2O) below 1.2 µ.
J. Chem. Phys. 18: 1551.
(With C. Reid) Infrared spectrum and structure of the HNCO molecule. Disc. Far. Soc. 9:
92.
1951
(With A.Vallance Jones and L.C. Leitch) Photographic infrared spectrum of CD3CCH and
the structure of methyl acetylene. J. Chem. Phys. 19: 136.
The atmospheres of the planets. J. R. Astron. Soc. Can. 45: 100.
(With A.E. Douglas) Predissociation and the dissociation of the N2 molecule. Can. J. Phys.
29: 294.
1952
(With D.A. Ramsay) Absorption spectrum of free NH2 radicals. J. Chem. Phys. 20: 347. 
Forbidden transitions in diatomic molecules. II. The 3Σu
+ – 3Σg
– absorption bands of the oxy-
gen molecule. Can. J. Phys. 30: 185.
Spectroscopic evidence of molecular hydrogen in the atmospheres of Uranus and Neptune.
Astrophys. J. 115: 337.
Rotation–vibration spectra and structure of simple polyatomic molecules. Nature, 169: 997. 
(With H.S. Heaps) Intensity distribution in the rotation–vibration spectrum of the OH mol-
ecule. Z. Physik (Born-Franck issue), 133: 48.
Forbidden transitions in the spectra of diatomic molecules. Trans. R. Soc. Can. 46: 1.
1953
(With D.A. Ramsay) The absorption spectrum of free NH2 radicals. Far. Soc. Disc. 14: 11.
Forbidden transitions in diatomic molecules. III. New 1Σu
– – 3Σg
– and 3∆u – 3Σg
– absorption
bands of the oxygen molecule. Can. J. Phys. 31: 657.
(With J. Bardwell) Laboratory experiments on the detectability of silane (SiH4) and methyl
deuteride (CH3D) in the atmospheres of the outer planets. Astrophys. J. 117: 462.
(With S. Chandrasekhar and D. Elbert) Shift of the 11S state of helium. Phys. Rev. 91: 1172. 
(With L. Herzberg) Rotation–vibration spectra of diatomic and simple polyatomic mole-
cules with long absorbing paths. XI. The spectrum of carbon dioxide (CO2) below
1.25 µ. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 43: 1037.
(With P.A. Brix) The dissociation energy of oxygen. J. Chem. Phys. 21: 2240.
BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS      437

438
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
1954
(With P.A. Brix) Fine structure of the Schumann-Runge bands near the convergence limit
and the dissociatin energy of the oxygen molecule. Can. J. Phys. 32: 110.
Table 625 and 625A of molecular constants of diatomic molecules, in Smithsonian Physical
Tables, 9th rev. ed., 586.
1955
(With B.P. Stoicheff) The carbon–carbon and carbon–hydrogen distances in simple poly-
atomic molecules. Nature, 175: 79.
(With L. Herzberg) Molecular spectra. Chapter 20 in Fundamental Formulas of Physics, ed.
Donald H. Menzel. Prentice-Hall, New York, 465.
(With C.P. Courtoy) Effect of Fermi resonance on the centrifugal stretching constants in
CO2. J. Chem. Phys. 23: 975.
(With S. Chandrasekhar) The energies of the ground states of He, Li+ and O6+. Phys. Rev.
98: 1050.
Laboratory investigations of spectra of interstellar and cometary molecules. Mm. Soc. R. Sc.
Liège, 15: 291.
Heinrich Kayser, 1853–1940 (Obituary Notice in Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the
Royal Society, 1: 135.
(With T.J. Hugo) Forbidden transitions in diatomic molecules. IV. The a’3Σ – X1Σ+ and
e3Σ– – X1Σ+ absorption bands of carbon monoxide. Can. J. Phys. 33: 757.
(With D.A. Ramsay) The 7500–4500 absorption system of the free HCO radical. Proc.
R. Soc. A 233: 34.
1956
Lamb shift of the 12S ground state of deuterium. Proc. R. Soc. A 234: 516.
(With J. Shoosmith) Absorption spectrum of free CH3 and CD3 radicals. Can. J. Phys. 34:
523. 
(With A. Lagerqvist and E. Miescher) Fine structure analysis and mutual perturbation of the
δ and β bands of the NO molecule. Can. J. Phys. 34: 622.
Die feinstruktur der He+ linien 1640  und 4686 . Z. Physik, 146: 269.
(With A.E. Douglas and D.C. Rose) Atmospheric ozone near the North Pole, in Vistas in
Astronomy, ed. A. Beer. Pergamon Press, London, 2: 874.
1957
(With L. Herzberg) Constants of polyatomic molecules, in American Institute of Physics
Handbook, McGraw-Hill Inc., New York, 7–145.
Recent laboratory investigations on molecules of astronomical interest. Mm. Soc. R. Sc.
Liège, 18: 397.
(With J.F. Hart) Twenty-parameter eigenfunctions and energy values of the ground states of
He and He-like ions. Phys. Rev. 106: 79.
(With A.E. Douglas) Separation of overlapping orders of a concave grating spectrograph in
the vacuum ultraviolet region. J. Opt. Soc. 47: 625.

(With K.K. Innes) Ultraviolet absorption spectra of HCN and DCN. I. The α–X and β–X
systems. Can. J. Phys. 35: 842.
Lamb shifts in hydrogen and helium. Physics in Canada, 13: 8.
1958
Molecular electronic spectra. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 9: 315.
Ionization potentials and Lamb shifts of the ground states of 4He and 3He. Proc. R. Soc. A
248: 309.
1959
Spectra of free radicals. Proc. Chem. Soc. (Centenary Lecture, April, 1959), 116. 
(With L.L. Howe) The Lyman bands of molecular hydrogen. Can. J. Phys. 37: 636.
(With J. Shoosmith) Spectrum and structure of the free methylene radical. Nature, 183:
1801.
(With H.R. Moore) The spectrum of Li+. Can. J. Phys. 37: 1293.
1960
(With R.A. Durie) Forbidden transitions in diatomic molecules. V. The rotation–vibration
spectrum of the hydrogen–deuterium (HD) molecule. Can. J. Phys. 38: 806.
(With A. Monfils) The dissociation energies of the H2, HD and D2 molecules. J. Mol.
Spectrosc. 5: 482.
1961
L’importance de la spectroscopie dans la science moderne. Revue Universelle des Mines,
17: 1.
(With A. Monfils and B. Rosen) Spectras moleculaires dans l’ultraviolet lointain. Mm. Soc.
R. Sc. Liège, 4: 146.
The spectra and structures of free methyl and free methylene. Proc. R. Soc. A 262: 291.
The ionization potential of CH2. Can. J. Phys. 39: 1511.
1962
Molecular spectra in the vacuum ultraviolet. (Bologna paper), in Advances in Molecular
Spectroscopy. Pergamon Press, London, 29.
Report of Commission 14 of IAU. Trans. of the IAU A, 11: 97.
Recent work on spectra of free radicals. ICSU Rev. 4: 179.
1963
(With J.F. Hart) Twenty-parameter eigenfunctions and energy values of the 23S states of He
and He-like ions. Z. Physik, 171: 83.
(With P.A. Warsop) Spectrum and structure of the free HNCN radical. Can. J. Phys. 41: 286.
Spectroscopic investigations in the vacuum ultraviolet at the National Research Council. J.
Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2: 319.
(With J.W.C. Johns) The red bands of CH2 and their possible importance in the spectra of
the major planets. Mm. Soc. R. Sc. Liège, 7: 117.
Electronic spectra of simple polyatomic molecules, in III Molecular Structure (Proc. Robert
A. Welsh Found. Conf., Nov. 1959), 123.
BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS      439

440
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Determination of the structures of simple polyatomic molecules and radicals in electroni-
cally excited states. Disc. Far. Soc. (12th Spiers Memorial Lecture, Dundee, Apr. 1963),
35: 7.
(With H.C. Longuet-Higgins) Intersection of potential energy surfaces in polyatomic mole-
cules. Disc. Far. Soc. 35: 77.
(With L. Gausset, A. Lagerqvist, and B. Rosen) Spectrum of the C3 molecule. Disc. Far.
Soc. 35: 113.
1964
(With R.D. Verma) Spectra and structures of the free HSiCl and HSiBr radicals. Can. J.
Phys. 42: 395.
(With S.H. Bauer and J.W.C. Johns) The absorption spectrum of BH and BD in the vacuum
ultraviolet. J. Mol. Spectrosc. 13: 256.
(With D.N. Travis) The spectrum and structure of the free NCN radical. Can. J. Phys. 42:
1658.
(With D.N. Travis) Identification of free radicals in flash photolysis. Nature, 204: 988.
1965
Molecular spectroscopy and astrophysical problems. J. Opt. Soc. Am. (Ives Medal Award
Lecture, New York, 1964), 55: 229.
(With L. Gausset, A. Lagerqvist, and B. Rosen) Analysis of the 4050  group of the C3
molecule. Astrophys. J. 142: 45.
1966
Spectra and structure of triatomic free radicals. J. All-Union Chem. Soc. in the name of D.I.
Mendeleev, 11: 146.
Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure. III. Electronic Spectra and Electronic
Structure of Polyatomic Molecules. D. Van Nostrand Co. Inc., Princeton, N.J.
Determination of the structures of simple polyatomic molecules and radicals in electroni-
cally excited states. Uspekhi Phis. Nauk (Translation into Russian, 12th Spiers Mem-
orial Lecture, Dundee, Apr. 1963), 88: 675.
(With A.M. Bass, J.D. Simmons, and S.G. Tilford) The forbidden I1Σ– – X1Σ+ absorption
bands of carbon monoxide. Can. J. Phys. 44: 3039.
(With J.W.C. Johns) The spectrum and structure of singlet CH2. Proc. R. Soc. A 295: 107.
1967
(With J.W.C. Johns) The spectrum and structure of the free BH2 radical. Proc. R. Soc. A 298:
142.
A new predissociation of the H2 molecule. Sci. Light, 16: 14.
(With A.E. Douglas) Apparatus for the observation of optical molecular spectra. Appl. Opt.
6: 1593.
Remarks on the diffuse interstellar lines. IAU Symp. No. 31, Academic Press, New York,
91.
(With I. Dubois and R.D. Verma) Spectrum of SiH2. J. Chem. Phys. 47: 4262.

The spectra of hydrogen and their role in the development of our understanding of the struc-
ture of matter and of the universe. Trans. R. Soc. Can. 5: 3. (Presidential Address)
1968
Spectra and structures of triatomic free radicals, in Advances in Photochemistry, eds. W.A.
Noyes, Jr., G.S. Hammond, and J.N. Pitts, Jr. Interscience Publ., New York, 5: 1.
Some spectral-analytical problems in astronomy. XIII Colloquium Spectroscopicum
Internationale, (Keynote Address), Hilger, London, 3.
Spectra and structures of simple free radicals. Chem. Ind. 21: 474. (In Japanese, translated
by T. Nakagawa.)
Absorption spectra of molecular ions. Pont. Acad. Sci. Commentarii, 2: 1.
Molecular absorption spectra in flash discharges. Int. Conf. on Spectroscopy, Bombay,
India, Jan. 1967, Dept. of Atomic Energy, Govt. of India, 41.
(With A. Lagerqvist) A new spectrum associated with diatomic carbon. Can. J. Phys. 46:
2363.
1969
Forbidden transitions in diatomic molecules. Mm. Soc. R. Sc. Liège, 16: 121.
(With A. Lagerqvist and B.J. McKenzie) Absorption spectrum of SiH in the vacuum ultra-
violet. Can. J. Phys. 47: 1889.
(With J.W.C. Johns) New spectra of the CH molecule. Astrophys. J. 158: 399.
(With A. Lagerqvist and C. Malmberg) New electronic transitions of the C2 molecule in
absorption in the vacuum ultraviolet region. Can. J. Phys. 47: 2735.
Dissociation energy and ionization potential of molecular hydrogen. Phys. Rev. Letters, 23:
1081.
1970
The dissociation energy of the hydrogen molecule. J. Mol. Spectrosc. 33: 147.
Predissociation and pre-ionization in diatomic and simple polyatomic molecules. J. Chem.
Phys. 56.
(With B. Edlén, A. Olme, and J.W.C. Johns) Ionization potential of boron and the isotopic
and fine structure of 2s2p2 2∆. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 60: 889.
(With A. Dalgarno and T.L. Stephens) A new continuous emission spectrum of the hydro-
gen molecule. Astrophys. J. 162: L49.
(With T.J. Hugo, J.D. Simmons, and S.G. Tilford) Rotational analysis of the forbidden d3∆i
– X1Σ+ absorption bands of carbon monoxide. Can. J. Phys. 48: 3004.
1971
The Spectra and Structures of Simple Free Radicals: An Introduction to Molecular Spectros-
copy. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, N.Y.
(With J.W.C. Johns) On the structure of CH2 in its triplet ground state. J. Chem. Phys. 54:
2276.
Spectra and structures of molecular ions. Quart. Rev. 25: 201. (Faraday Lecture)
BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS      441

442
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Beutler-Fano shape in the predissociation of H2, in Topics in Modern Physics—A Tribute to
Edward U. Condon, Colorado Associated University Press, Boulder, 191.
Laboratory studies of the spectra of interstellar molecules, in Highlights of Astronomy, ed.
De Jager. D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, 415.
1972
(With Ch. Jungen) Rydberg series and ionization potential of the H2 molecule. J Mol.
Spectrosc. 41: 425. 
Spectroscopic studies of molecular structure. Les Prix Nobelen, 1971, P.A. Norstedt &
Soner, Stockholm, 202. (Nobel Lecture).
Spectroscopic studies of molecular structure. Science, 177: 123.
Spektroskopische Untersuchung von Molekulstrukturen. Angew. Chem. 84: 1126. (Nobel-
Vortrag)
(With L. Herzberg) Constants of polyatomic molecules, in American Institute of Physics
Handbook, 3rd. ed. 7/185–199, McGraw-Hill Inc., New York.
1973
Einfhrung in die Moleklspektroskopie Die Spektren und Strukturen von einfachen freien
Radikalen. Wissensch. Forschungsberichte, Reihe 1A, Bd. 74, Dr. Dietrich Steinkopff
Verlag, Darmstadt.
(With H. Bredohl) The Lyman and Werner bands of deuterium. Can. J. Phys. 51: 867.
Experimental tests of the quantum theory of molecular hydrogen. Pont. Acad. Sci.
Commentarii, 2: 1.
Experimental tests of the quantum theory of molecular hydrogen, in Fundamental and
Applied Laser Physics, eds. M.S. Feld, A. Javan, and N.A. Kurnit. (Proc. Esfahan
Symp., 29 Aug. – 5 Sept. 1971) John Wiley & Sons Inc., N.Y., 491.
Spectroscopy and molecular structure, in Physics 50 Years Later, Proc. 14 Gen. Assembly,
Int. Union of Pure and Applied Phys., Natl. Acad. Sci. Washington, 101.
1974
Introductory Remarks (Vail Conference), in Laser Spectroscopy, eds. R.G. Brewer and A.
Mooradian. Plenum Press, New York, 7.
(With H. Lew) Tentative identification of the H2O+ ion in comet Kohoutek. Astron.
Astrophys. 31: 123.
(With P.A. Wehinger, S. Wyckoff, G.H. Herbig, and H. Lew) Identification of H2O+ in the
tail of comet Kohoutek (1973f). Astrophys. J. Letters, 190: L43.
(With I. Dabrowski) The absorption spectrum of D2 from 1100 to 840 . Can. J. Phys. 52:
1110.
Remarks on the boundaries of knowledge. Trans. R. Soc. Can. 12: 21.
1976
Experimental Tests of the Quantum Theory of Molecular Hydrogen. “Precise and Accurate
Measurements in Chemistry,” Kagaku Sosetsu, 10: 254. (Translated into Japanese by K.
Ohno). 

(With I. Dabrowski) The absorption and emission spectra of HD in the vacuum ultraviolet.
Can. J. Phys. 54: 525.
Cometary spectra and related topics. Mm. Soc. R. Sc. Liège, Ser. 6, 11: 115.
1977
(With I. Dabrowski) The predicted infrared spectrum of HeH+ and its possible astrophysi-
cal importance. Trans. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 38: 14. (A Festschrift for I.I. Rabi.)
1978
(With I. Dabrowski) The spectrum of HeNe+. J. Mol. Spectrosc. 73: 183.
The importance and needs of Canadian research in science. Trans. R. Soc. Can. 16: 311.
1979
A spectrum of triatomic hydrogen. J. Chem. Phys. 70: 4806.
Cosmochemistry. Chem. Ind. 32: 93. (Translated into Japanese by E. Hirota and S. Hirota.)
(With K.P. Huber) Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure. IV. Constants of Diatomic
Molecules., Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
1980
Astronomy and basic science. J. R. Astron. Soc. Can. 74: 70.
Spectroscopic studies based on the pioneering work of R.S. Mulliken. J. Phys. Chem. 84:
2095.
(With I. Dabrowski) The electronic emission spectrum of triatomic hydrogen. I. Parallel
bands of H3 and D3 near 5600 and 6025  Can. J. Phys. 58: 1238.
(With J.K.G. Watson) The electronic emission spectrum of triatomic hydrogen. II. The per-
pendicular bands near 7100 . Can. J. Phys. 58: 1250.
The interplay of molecular spectroscopy and astronomy, in Highlights in Astronomy, ed.
P.A. Wayman. D. Riedel Publ. Co. 5: 3. (Proc. IAU 17th Gen. Assembly).
Recent laboratory work on molecules of possible importance for interstellar studies, in
Interstellar Molecules, ed. B.H. Andrew. IAU #87, 231.
Introduction. 21st Liège Int. Astrophys. Symp. Laboratory and Astrophysical Spectroscopy
of Small Molecular Species, 8.
(With I. Dabrowski) The spectra of HeH+ and HeNe+. 21st Liège Int. Astrophys. Symp.
Laboratory and Astrophysical Spectroscopy of Small Molecular Species, 341.
H2O+ ions in the upper atmosphere. Ann. Geophys. 36: 605.
1981
(With H. Lew, J.J. Sloan, and J.K.G. Watson) The electronic emission spectrum of triatom-
ic hydrogen. III. Infrared perpendicular bands near 3600 cm–1. Can. J. Phys. 59: 428.
Rydberg spectra of triatomic hydrogen and of the ammonium radical. Far. Soc. 71: 165.
Carlyle Smith Beals, 29 June 1899 – 2 July 1979, in Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of
the Royal Society, 27: 28.
(With I. Dabrowski and K. Yoshino) The spectrum of HeAr+. J. Mol. Spectrosc. 89: 491. 
The interplay of molecular spectroscopy and astronomy. J. Spect. Soc. Jpn. 30: 407.
BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS     443

444
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Introductory remarks. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A, 303: 465.
1982
Alexander Edgar Douglas, 12 April 1916 – 26 July 1981, in Biographical Memoirs of
Fellows of the Royal Society, 28: 90.
The electronic emission spectrum of triatomic hydrogen. IV. Visible bands near 5800  and
infrared bands near 3950 cm–1. Can. J. Phys. 60: 1261.
(With Ch. Jungen) High orbital angular momentum states in H2 and D2. J. Chem. Phys. 77:
5876.
Molecular hydrogen in the laboratory and in space. Trans. R. Soc. Can. 20: 151.
1983
Introduction to Molecular Ion Spectroscopy, in Molecular Ions: Spectroscopy, Structure and
Chemistry, eds. T.A. Miller and V.E. Bondybey, 1.
(With J.T. Hougen) Spectra of the ammonium radical. I. The Schuster band of ND4. J. Mol.
Spectrosc. 97: 430.
1984
Spectra of triatomic hydrogen and of the ammonium radical. J. Mol. Struct. 113: 1.
Spectra of the ammonium radical: The Schuler bands. J. Astrophys. Astron. 5: 131.
(With I. Dabrowski) The a 3Σg
+– c3Πu and c3Πu – a 3Σg
+systems in the infrared spectrum of
H2 and D2. Acta Phys. Hungar. 55: 219.
1985
(With P. Senn, P. Quadrelli and K. Dressler) Spectroscopic identification of the lowest
vbibrational levels of the (2pσ)2F1Σg
+ state of the H2 molecule. J. Chem. Phys. 83: 962.
R.K. Asundi Memorial Lecture—Spectra of Molecular Ions. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad. A
51: 495.
To Ernst Miescher, on his eightieth birthday. Helv. Phys. Acta, 58: 951.
Chalmers Jack Mackenzie, 1888–1984. Proc. R. Soc. Can. 23: 137.
Molecular spectroscopy: A personal history. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 36: 1.
1986
(With Ch. Jungen) The 4f states of He2: A new spectrum of He2 in the near infrared. J.
Chem. Phys. 84: 1181.
Rowland gratings, molecular hydrogen and space astronomy. Vistas Astron. 29: 201.
(With P. Senn, P. Quadrelli and K. Dressler) Spectroscopic identification of the lowest rota-
tion–vibration levels of the (2pσ)2 F1Σg
+ state of the D2 molecule. J. Chem. Phys. 85:
2384.
1987
Rydberg molecules. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 38: 27.
1988
(With I. Dabrowski, B.P. Hurley, R.H. Lipson, M. Vervloet, and D.-C. Wang) Spectra of rare
gas hydrides. I. 2Π – 2Σ and 2Σ – 2Σ transitions of KrH and KrD. Mol. Phys. 63: 269.

(With I. Dabrowski and R.H. Lipson) Spectra of rare gas hydrides. II. 2Π – 2Σ and 2Σ – 2Σ
transitions of XeH and XeD. Mol. Phys. 63: 289.
Historical remarks on the discovery of interstellar molecules. J. R. Astron. Soc. Can. 82:
115.
1989
(With Ch. Jungen, I. Dabrowski, and D.J.W. Kendall) High orbital angular momentum
states in H2 and D2. II. The 6h–5g and 6g–5f transitions. J. Chem. Phys. 91: 3926.
Reminiscences of C.V. Raman. Prajna J. 33: 17.
Science and the Humanities. Chem. Ind. (Jpn.), 42: 2.
1990
Molecular Astrophysics. Spectrochim. Acta, (50th Anniversary Edition), 63.
The history of the discovery of the spectra of CH2 and H3. J. Mol. Structure, 217: 11.
(With Ch. Jungen, I. Dabrowski, and M. Vervloet) High orbital angular momentum states in
H2 and D2. III. Singlet–triplet splittings, energy levels and ionization potentials. J.
Chem. Phys. 93: 2289.
1991
Essay Review: A leader of Indian science. Notes Rec. R. Soc. Lond. 45: 109.
1992
(With Ch, Jungen, I. Dabrowski, and M. Vervloet) The Ionization Potential of D2. J. Mol.
Spectrosc. 153: 11.
(With I. Dabrowski, G. DiLonardo, J.W.C. Johns, D.A. Sadovvskii, and M. Vervloet)
Spectra of rare gas hydrides. IV. Three new bands of argon deuteride involving a low-
lying “p” Rydberg state. J. Chem. Phys. 97: 7093.
1996
(With I. Dabrowski) The electronic emission spectra of triatomic hydrogen: The 6025 bands
of H2D and HD2, in Amazing Light: A Festschrift for Charles H. Townes’80th Birthday,
ed. Raymond Chiao. Springer Verlag, New York, 173.
BOOKS AND PUBLICATIONS      445

446
HONOURS AND AWARDS
Fellowships, Medals, Special Lectures
Mueller-Alewyn-Plakette Medal, Darmstadt
1927
Fellow, The Royal Society of Canada
1939
Médaille de l’Université de Liège
1950
Fellow, The Royal Society of London
1951
Henry Marshall Tory Medal, The Royal Society of Canada
1953
Honorary Fellow, Indian Academy of Sciences
1954
Joy Kissen Mookerjee Gold Medal, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science 1954
Gold Medal for Achievement in Physics, Canadian Association of Physicists
1957
Honorary Fellow, National Academy of Sciences, India
1957
Medal of the Society for Applied Spectroscopy
1959
Chair Francqui, Université de Liège
1959–1960
Médaille de l’Université de Liège
1960
Médaille de l’Université de Bruxelles
1960
Corresponding Member, Société Royale des Sciences de Liège
1960
Bakerian Lecture, The Royal Society of London
1960
Spectroscopy Award, Spectroscopy Society of Pittsburgh
1962
Twelfth Spiers Memorial Lecture, Faraday Society
1963
Frederic Ives Medal, Optical Society of America
1964
Honorary Member, Hungarian Academy of Sciences
1964
Academician, Pontifical Academy of Sciences
1964
Foreign Honorary Member, American Academy of Arts and Sciences
1965
President, The Royal Society of Canada
1966–1967
Honorary Fellow, Optical Society of America
1968
Honorary Fellow, Chemical Society of London (now Royal Society of Chemistry)
1968
Foreign Associate, National Academy of Sciences, Washington
1968
Companion of the Order of Canada
1968
George Fisher Baker Non-Resident Lecturer in Chemistry, Cornell University
1968
Willard Gibbs Medal, American Chemical Society
1969
Gold Medal, Professional Institute of the Public Service of Canada
1969
Honorary Member, Society for Applied Spectroscopy
1969
Faraday Medal, Chemical Society of London
1970
Honorary Member, Royal Irish Academy
1970
Honorary Fellow, Chemical Institute of Canada
1970
Honorary Member, Spectroscopy Society of Canada
1970

Royal Medal, The Royal Society of London
1971
Linus Pauling Medal, American Chemical Society
1971
Nobel Prize in Chemistry, Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences
1971
Foreign Member, American Philosophical Society
1972
Chemical Institute of Canada Medal
1972
Chancellor, Carleton University
1973–1980
Member, International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science
1973
Honorary Fellow, Indian Chemical Society
1973
Madison Marshall Award, American Chemical Society (North Alabama Section)
1974
Foreign Fellow, Indian National Science Academy
1974
Honorary Member, La Asociacion de Quimicos Farmaceuticos de Colombia
1974
Foreign Associate, Royal Academy of Belgium
1974
Centennial Foreign Fellow, American Chemical Society
1976
Honorary Member, Japan Academy
1976
Honorary Member, Chemical Society of Japan
1978
Honorary Member, Real Sociedad Espanola de Fisica y Quimica
1978
Member, European Academy of Arts, Sciences and Humanities
1980
Foreign Member (Physics), Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences
1981
Earle K. Plyler Prize, American Physical Society
1985
Korrespondierenden Milglied Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften
1986
Jan Marcus Marci Memorial Medal, Czechoslovak Spectroscopy Society
1987
Minor Planet 3316=1984 CN1 officially named “Herzberg”
1987
Ohio Engineering Hall of Fame, Dayton
1990
Member of the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada
1992
Honorary Degrees
LL.D
University of Saskatchewan
1953
D.Sc.
McMaster University, Hamilton
1954
D.Sc.
National University of Ireland, Dublin
1956
LL.D.
University of Toronto
1958
LL.D.
Dalhousie University
1960
D.Sc.
Oxford University
1960
LL.D.
University of Alberta
1961
D.Sc.
University of British Columbia
1964
D.Sc.
Queen’s University, Kingston
1965
D.Sc.
University of New Brunswick
1966
Fil. Hed.-Dr. University of Stockholm
1966
HONOURS AND AWARDS      447

448
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
D.Sc. 
University of Chicago
1967
D.Sc.
Carleton University, Ottawa
1967
Dr.rer.nat.
University of Göttingen
1968
D.Sc.
Memorial University, St. John’s
1968
D.Sc.
York University, Toronto
1969
D.Sc.
University of Windsor
1970
D.Sc.
Royal Military College of Canada
1971
D.Sc.
Drexel University, Philadelphia
1972
LL.D.
St. Francis Xavier University, Antigonish
1972
D.Sc.
University of Montreal
1972
LL.D.
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby
1972
D.Sc.
Université de Sherbrooke
1972
D.Sc.
Cambridge University
1972
D.Sc.
McGill University, Montreal
1972
D.Sc.
University of Manitoba
1973
Dr.rer.nat.
University of Hamburg
1974
D.Sc.
University of Bristol
1975
D.Sc.
Andhra University
1975
D.Sc.
Osmania University
1976
D.Sc.
University of Delhi
1976
D.Phil.
Weizmann Institute of Science
1976
D.Sc.
University of Western Ontario, London
1976
D.Sc.
Université Laval, Québec
1979
Dr.phil.nat.
University of Frankfurt
1983
Ph.D.
University of Toledo
1984
D.Sc.
St. Mary’s University, Halifax
1991

NAME INDEX
A
Adams, Walter S.    141
Alberti, Franz    231
Alcock, A. John     256
Allmand, Arthur J.    85, 86, 219, 231
Altschul, Anni and Rudolph    138, 379
Alty, Thomas    121, 123, 124
Amano, Tokayoshi    234, 426
Amat, Gilbert    285
Aron, Erich    82
Asundi, R. Krishna    65, 242, 280, 370, 371
B
Babbitt, John D.    355
Babcock, Harold D.    177
Badger, R.M.    75, 133
Baerwald, Hans    38, 82, 87, 183
Ballard, Bristow Guy    308, 309, 312, 356
Balmer, J.J.    32
Banting, Sir Frederick    320
Barker, Edward F.    140
Barrow, Richard    349
Beals, Carlyle S.    129, 193, 194
Bennett, R.B.    213, 247
Berl, Ernest    82, 114
Bernstein, Harold J.    166, 192, 224
Beutler, Hans    127, 130
Bhabha, Homi    281
Biber, Ella    3, 8, 13
Biber, Rudolf Alber    4
Birge, R.    49, 96
Blackett, Patrick M.S.    65, 251, 255
Bleuler, Konrad    279, 285, 340
Blumenthal, Margarethe    31, 32
Bohr, Niels    12, 103, 281, 344
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich    186
Bonhoeffer, Karl-Friedrich    37, 39, 49,
84, 186, 187, 202
Bonhoeffer, Klaus    186
Born, Max    39, 40, 42, 43–46, 59, 80, 91,
278, 377
Boyle, R.W.     102, 194, 246, 312
Brandt, Willy    334
Brezhnev, Leonid    374
Brieger, Peter    103
Brockhouse, Bertram N.    218, 320, 379
Brown, Weldon G.    151, 153
Buchan, John    392
Bunker, Philip R.    234, 426
Bunsen, R.    12, 279
Burgess, Cecil    231
Burton, Eli F.    102, 106, 134
C
Callomon, John    302, 350
Calvin, Melvin    384
Carnegie, Andrew    105
Carrington, Alan    285
Carty, Arthur J.    385, 392
Casimir, Hendrik    56, 384
Chadwick, James    50
Chandrasekhar, Lalitha    163, 169, 198,
200, 378
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan    157, 160,
163, 169, 171, 177, 178, 198, 201, 202,
248, 252, 261, 281, 300, 304, 347, 369,
378, 384, 390
Chapman, George D.    234, 426
Chernenko, Konstantin    374
Chrétien, Jean    386
Churchill, Winston L.S.    63, 218
Chuvikov, P.    282
Cirker, Hayward    293
Claesson, Stig    333, 334, 340
Cockroft, J.D.    65, 218
Cody, H.J.    102, 103
Compton, Arthur H.    152–154
Condon, Edward U.    40, 47, 114, 174,
291, 379
449

450
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Costain, Cecil Clifford    229, 360, 361
Coster, Dirk    96, 248
Courant, Richard    42, 80, 82
Cox, Bert    132
Craig, Ruth    231
Crane, Edward M.    297–299, 301
Crawford, Bryce L., Jr.    147, 379
Curl, Robert F., Jr.     242, 361
Currie, Balfour W.    121–123, 147
Curry, James    75, 113
Curtis, Fritz    82
D
Dabrowski, Izabel    231, 232, 304, 321,
322, 426
Dainton, Fred S.    227
Dalgarno, Alexander    242
Davis, William G.    350
Debye, Peter    70
Delbrück, Max    48, 52, 55, 59, 63, 381
Dennison, David M.    114
Dingler, Hugo    87
Dirac, Paul    46, 262, 275, 276, 286
Dollard, Charles    297
Doren, Frank    230
Döring, Hans-Werner    10, 15, 49, 57,
111, 112, 185, 278, 
Douglas, Alexander Edgar    142–144,
197, 198, 200, 223–226, 232, 237,
244, 245, 257, 272, 273, 302, 318,
328, 338, 361, 363, 382
Drury, Charles M.     311, 325, 326
Druyvesteyn, M.J.    54
Dunham, Theodore    141
E
Edlén, Bengt    340
Ehrenfest, Paul    56
Eichelmann, Emma    8, 17
Einstein, Albert    12, 44, 80
Elizabeth II, Queen     372
Engdahl, Tom    331
Ensell, George    238
Evenari, Michael    82
Eyring, Henry    147
F
Falconer, James    119
Fang-Yi    380, 381
Feldreich, Bengt    339. 340
Fermi, Enrico    140, 276
Finkelnburg, Wolfgang    76, 96, 184
Flainek, Peter    231
Foster, J. Stuart    101, 103, 114
Fox, J.G.    131, 140, 147
Franck, James    39, 40, 42–46, 66, 67, 80,
81, 94, 106, 151, 153, 172, 186, 276,
377
Franz, K.     76
Fraunhofer, Joseph    12
Frechete, Paul    230
Fröhlich, H.    278
Frost, Edwin B.     162
Funke, Gösta, W.    88
G
Gabor, Dennis    333, 339
Galbraith, Dave    207, 345
Gamow, George    147, 252
Gauss, Carl F.    42
Gaydon, A.G.    350
Geballe, Thomas R.    366
Gillespie, Allistair    325
Glaser, Ludwig    295
Glassco, J. Grant    309, 314
Goeppert, Maria    48, 52
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang    5, 10, 27, 391
Goetz, Werner    228, 231
Goldstein, Gretel and Julius    25, 67
Gorbachev, Mikhail    374, 375
Gordy, Walter    379
Gradstein, Stephan    84, 95, 179, 180
Gray, Lorne    134, 294

NAME INDEX      451
Grosart Allister    322
Gustav VI, King of Sweden    332, 334,
335, 332–335, 338, 339
Gzowski, Peter    323
H
Haber, Fritz    45
Hale, George Ellery    159
Ham, W.R.    144
Harper, William R.    159
Harrington, Ertle L.    104, 108, 109,
121–123, 158, 167, 298
Hart, J.F.    262
Haslam, R. Newman H.    121–123, 134,
292, 294, 297, 298
Haurwitz, Bernard    103
Heine, Heinrich    8, 145
Heinersdorff, Herr    16, 17
Heisenberg, Werner    46, 50, 70, 71, 93,
369
Heitler, Walter    40, 47, 50, 52, 59, 80,
112, 252, 262, 279
Henderson, J.T.    312
Herschbach, Dudley R.    241
Hertz, Gustav    44, 45, 322
Herzberg, Agnes Margaret (daughter)
birth, 126, 128; 148, 149, 286, Ph.D.,
287; 296, 327, 332, 336, 340
Herzberg, Albin (father)    3, 6–8
Herzberg, Ella (mother)    3, 8, 13
Herzberg, Gerhard    
and music, 7, 26, 29, 145, 242, 285,
345, 391; arrival in Canada, 115; birth
and genealogy 3; CH+, 142; CH2, 144,
270; CH3, 269; classic texts, 290;
death of, 387; departure from
Germany, 111; Director NRC, 246;
Doktor Ingenieur, 38; education, 7, 9,
18; establishing spectroscopy laborato-
ries, 62, 75, 131, 164, 222; explosives
research, 147,148; Balmer spectrum,
31; Fellow, The Royal Society, 278;
Fellow, The Royal Society of Canada,
133; first molecular research, 35;
habilitation, 64; H2 and quantum theo-
ry, 264; H2 in Uranus and Neptune,
264; H2 quadrupole spectrum, 176;
H2O+, 359; H3, 363; honours, awards,
and prizes, 446; human rights, 373; in
Bristol, 59; in Darmstadt, 18, 68; in
Ottawa, 222; in Saskatoon, 116; in
Williams Bay, 157; initial lectures, 52;
marriage, to Luise 64, to Monika 346;
N and Bose statistics 50; Nobel Prize,
xi, 320; privatdozent, 68; publications,
431; return to Canada, 191; 
Herzberg, Louise (daughter-in-law)    286,
287
Herzberg, Luise (wife)    
at Dominion Observatory, 319; at
Radio Physics laboratory, 319; birth of
Agnes, 126; birth of Paul, 125; death,
318; first illness, 198; first return to
Europe, 279; guest worker at NRC,
231; marriage, 64; member of Physics
Club in Saskatoon, 124; Ph.D., 85;
second operation, 277; visits Lotte,
113; volunteer research associate at
Yerkes, 166; 91, 113, 177, 268, 294,
298, 392
Herzberg, Monika (wife)    
marriage, 387; 393
Herzberg, Paul Albin (son)    
birth, 125, 126; 148, 149, 198, 286,
marriage, 287; Ph.D., 287; 296, 332,
351
Herzberg, Walter (brother)    3, 7, 14, 111,
112, 137, 146, 185, 278, 322
Herzfeld, Karl    96, 103, 106
Hilbert, David    42, 64
Hillers, Wilhelm    11, 12
Hiltner, W. Albert    158, 160, 162
Hines, Jerome    345

452
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Hirschfelder, Joe    379
Hitler, Adolf    17, 73, 78
Hnatyshyn, Ramon John    372, 386
Horowitz, K. Lark    140
Hougen, Jon T.    234, 242, 302, 364, 427
Hoveida, A. Abbas    283
Howe, Clarence Decator    216
Howe, Lila    231, 232, 427
Howlett, Leslie E.    249, 250, 256, 257
Huber, Klaus P.    234, 244, 302, 304, 427
Hund, Friedrich    40, 47, 49, 54, 70, 379
Hurley, Brian    363
Hushley, W.J.    144
Hutchins, Robert    151, 160
Hylleraas, E.A.    261
I
Innes, Keith    231
Israel, Werner    384
J
Jacobi, Carl    389
Javan, Ali    283
Jenkins, Francis A.    37, 78
Jevons, W.    294
John Paul II, Pope    376
Johns, John W.C.   234, 302, 363, 382, 427
Johnson, R.C.    65
Jolliffe, A.L.    110, 124, 125, 136
Jones, R. Norman    224, 227
Jordan, Pascual    46
Juda Family    67, 72, 73, 180, 181
Jungen, Christian    244
K
Kapitsa, Pyotr    65, 379
Kaplan, Joseph    96
Kastler, Alfred    252, 340, 343
Kenrick, Frank B.    133
Kerwin, J. Larkin     310, 356, 357, 379,
382
King, W.L. Mackenzie     211, 213, 217
Kirchhoff, G.R.    12, 279
Kistiakowski, George B.    147, 379
Klein, Felix    42
Klemperer, William    242
Kolos, W.    241
Krishnan, R.S.    40
Kroeger, Heinrich    206
Kronig, R. de L.    71
Kroto, Sir Harold W.    242, 360, 361
Kuhn, Heinrich G.    51, 80
Kuiper, Gerard    132, 160, 164, 170, 171,
174, 264, 359
Kuznets, Simon    334
L
Ladenburg, Rudolf    39, 96
Lagerqvist, Albin    244, 273, 340, 380
Lamb, Willis E., Jr.    261, 262, 283
Lamontagne, Maurice    310, 317, 321,
322, 353–355
Lamoureux, Lucien    325
Landau, Edmund    82
Landsberg, G.    40
Langemak, Emmy    186
Laurence, George C.    218
Lee, Yuan T.    242
Legget, Robert F.    312
Lenard, Philipp    87
Lennard-Jones, John E.    47, 54, 59, 60,
63
LeRoy, Donald    192
Leser, Peter    82
Lew, Hin    228, 229, 359, 360
Lewis, W. Bennett    218, 232
Lindner, Ernest    137
Lion, Kurt     31, 49, 82, 84
Locke, Jack L.    382
London, Fritz    40, 47, 63, 108, 129
Longuet-Higgins, Christopher    242, 285,
302, 384
Loomis, Francis W.    68, 114

NAME INDEX      453
M
MacCallum, K.J.    298
MacDonald, D. Keith C.    254, 255, 278,
307
MacDonald, Flora    374
MacKay, Charles    121, 122
Mackenzie, Chalmers Jack    134,
191–196, 214–220, 247, 258, 312,
348, 349, 377
MacLeod, John J.R.     320
Mandelstam L.    40
Mandelstam S.L.    xiii, 282, 323
Mantsch, Henry H.    380, 382
Marmet, Paul    234, 428
McKay, A.S.    144
McKellar, Andrew    129, 141
McKellar, A. Robert W.    234, 242, 385,
428
McLennan, John C.    101, 103
McNaughton, Andrew G.L.    214, 215,
247, 312
Meagher, Margaret    331, 340
Mecke, Rudolf    70
Meissner, Karl W.    77, 85
Mendel, Frederick    138
Michener, Roland    326, 330
Miecznikowski, John    348, 349
Miescher, Ernst    92, 242, 279, 340, 380
Mills, G.A.    131
Milne, G.G.    144
Minkowski, Hermann    42
Mizushima, S.    282
Morgan, William W.    160, 163, 174
Morino, Yonezo    380
Morrison, Adair    200
Morrison, F. B.    145
Mott, Neville F.    63
Mulliken, Robert S.     40, 47, 49, 67, 78,
96, 130, 141, 154, 197, 241, 290, 294,
378, 379
Mulroney, Brian    372
Mundie, L.G.    131
Murray, Walter C.     101, 104–110, 118,
124, 135, 136, 155, 156, 294
N
Naudé, S.M.    66
Neruda, Pablo    334
Newton, Sir Isaac    3, 12, 381
Nielsen, Harald H.    274
Nobel, Alfred Bernhard    332, 333, 430
Noether, Emmy    51, 80, 82
Nordheim, Lothar W.    47, 52, 108
Norrish, Reginald G.W.     228, 269, 278
O
Oettinger, Elsbeth    56, 125–127, 202,
203
Oettinger, Lotte    56
Oettinger, Luise Hedwig    53, 56, 57
Oettinger, Paul    56, 135–137, 202, 203,
279
Oka, Takeshi    234, 283, 360, 361, 363,
365, 366, 384, 385, 392, 393, 428
Oliphant, M.    65
Olson, N.    144
Oppenheimer, J. Robert    40, 47
Orbinski, James    320
P
Pahlavi, S. Arya-Mehr    283
Parkin, J.H.    312
Patat, Franz    89
Pauli, Wolfgang    47, 262
Pauling, Linus    40, 133, 331, 373, 374,
381, 382
Pearson, Fred    164
Pearson, Lester B.    309, 320, 326, 353
Penner, C.M.    131
Perron, Pierre    384
Petelin, Andrei    373
Peters, Heinrich    26, 31, 362
Petrén, Sture    336

454
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Pfitzer, Eugene    238
Phillips, John G.    166, 176
Placzek, George    71
Planck, Max    12, 13, 44, 344
Pohl, Robert    42–44, 52, 277
Poincaré, Henri    389
Polanyi, John C.    242, 320, 379
Polanyi, Michael    71, 80, 92
Porter, George    228, 278
Potter, James    230
Powell, Cecil F.     59
Prager, William    82, 95
Price, William C.    348, 349
R
Rabi, Isidor I.    113, 253, 343, 379
Rabinowitch, Eugene I.    80, 174, 277
Raman, Sir C.V.    40, 61, 280, 281
Ramsay, Donald Allan    227, 228, 268, 272
Ramsden, Stuart A.    256
Randall, Harvey M.    114, 140
Rank, David H.    197, 227
Rao, K. Narahari    165, 176
Rasetti, Franco    50, 61, 71
Rau, Hans    26, 28–38, 64, 74, 180, 182,
277, 279, 338, 377
Richardson, O.W.    60
Ritter, George    234, 428
Rodenstock, Hermann    31
Roosevelt, Franklin D.    218
Rose, Donald C.    60, 224
Rosen, Boris    244, 380
Rosseland, Svien    103
Rubbia, Carlo    384
Rudberg, Erik    331, 332
Runge, Carl    42
Russell, Henry N.    130
Russell, J.M.    104
Rutherford, Sir Ernest    12, 59, 94, 344
S
Sakharov, Andrei Dmitrievich   373–376, 379
Saykally, Richard    385
Scheibe, Günter    51, 53, 64, 70, 87, 302
Schiller, Johann C.F.    5, 10, 27
Schleicher, Rüdiger    187
Schmit, G.V.    183
Schneider, William G.    xiii, 121, 309,
310, 317, 323, 330, 356, 357, 358
Schrödinger, Erwin    30, 46, 80
Schubert Franz    145, 207, 285, 391
Schulz, Alfred    10, 15, 57, 107, 111, 112,
185, 278, 347
Shapley, Harlow    174
Sheppard, Norman    242
Shoosmith, Jack    231, 260, 268–270,
344, 382
Shrum, Gordon M.    133
Simard, Benoit    234, 429
Sinclair, Adelaide    320
Sinha, S.P.    166
Skinner, Herbert W.B.    55, 59
Slater, John C.    40
Smalley, Richard E.    242, 361
Smith, Michael    320, 379
Smyth, H.D.    130
Snow, C.P.    331
Sobel’man, Igor I.    xiii, 323
Solandt, Omond    315, 325
Solzhenitsyn, Alexander I.    373
Sommerfeld, Arnold    33, 52
Spinks, John W.T.    85–89, 96, 101, 103,
115, 131, 134, 168, 192, 292–294,
301, 377, 378
Sponer, Hertha    51, 71, 80, 96, 105–109,
172, 276
Stark, Johannes    87
Steacie, Edgar W.R. “Ned”    114, 175,
192, 215, 216, 219–221, 246, 258,
306, 307, 356
Steinkopff, Theodor   53, 65, 290, 293, 296
Stiasny, Edmund    82
Sting Herr    37, 69
Stinnes, Hugo    15, 16

Stoicheff, Boris    234, 235, 238, 239,
429
Struve, Otto    130, 141, 149–154, 157,
160–175, 196, 381
Stueckelberg, E.C.G.    54
Sullivan, Joseph A.    322, 352
Sutherland, Earl W.    334, 335
Sutherland, Gordon B.B.M.   227, 230, 242
Sutton, R.B.    131, 140
Svendsoy, Charlotte (half-sister)    129
Svendsoy, Ella (mother)    129, 146, 204, 
Swalen, Jerome D.    241
Swings, Polydor    141, 144, 380
Szilard, Leo    140
T
Taube, Henry    121, 379, 384, 392
Teller, Edward    52, 71, 80, 130, 140,
141, 171, 172, 251, 255, 277
Tenthoff, Monika   185, 332, 344–347,
350
Thiessen, George    379
Thode, Harry G.    379
Thompson, Marjorie    304, 321–324, 382
Thompson, Sir Harold W.    227, 242, 282,
349
Thompson, W.P.    301
Thomson, J.J.    31, 344, 362
Thomson, James S.    136, 139, 158
Thorvaldson, Thorbergur    101
Thurnauer, Hans    202, 203
Thurnauer, Lotte    113, 126, 202, 203
Thurnauer, Peter    347
Tiselius, Arne W.K.    320
Tory, Henry Marshall    102, 103, 211,
213, 246
Townes, Charles H.    384, 385
Trottier, P.L.    323
Trudeau, Pierre Elliot    310, 326, 330
Truman, Harry    174
Tucker, Richard    345
Tyndall, Arthur M.    55, 59, 62, 64, 69, 92
U
Uhlenbeck, George    56
Uncle Victor    73, 181, 187
Urey, Harold C.    88, 113
V
Verleger, Heinz    88, 180, 183
Verschaffelt, J.    95, 108
Vervloet, Michel    234, 429
Vieweg, Richard    182
von Dohnanyi, Hans    186
Von Euler, U.S.    332
von Laue, Max    43, 251
W
Wadsworth, Beulah    231
Wagner, Carl    182
Wagner, Richard    5, 303
Walther, Oswald    180
Watson, James K.G.    234, 364, 366, 429
Weisskopf, Victor F.    48, 52, 266
Weizel, W
277
Welsh, Harry L.    234, 242, 264, 285, 347
Weyl, Hermann    42, 46, 82
Wheeler, John    140
Wien, Wilhelm    28, 32
Wigner, Eugene    39, 47, 52
Wilkinson, Philip    241
Wilkinson, Sir Denys    384
Wilson, E. Bright, Jr.    241, 282
Winans, John G.    54, 130
Wolf, Emil    278
Wood, R.W.    69, 132, 164
Wright, George    146
Wu, Sho-Chow    75, 92, 380
Wu, Ta-You    253, 254
Y
Yerkes, Charles T.    159
Z
Zacharias, Jerrold R.    228
NAME INDEX      455

456
SUBJECT INDEX
A
Academic Assistance Council (later,
Society for the Protection of Science
and Learning)    85, 94–96, 108
Acoustics Section, NRC    197, 227
afternoon tea    63, 239, 240
Algonquin radio telescope    360
Alsos    170
Ambassador of science    274–288
American Astronomical Society    173,
261
American Chemical Society   130, 131, 330
American Philosophical Society    130, 132
American Physical Society    364
anti-Communism    73, 79, 174
anti-Semitism    24, 79, 97
arrival in New York, 1935    113
arrival in Ottawa, 1948    199
arrival in Saskatoon, 1935    115, 116
arrival in Stockholm, 1971    331
Aryan physics    184, 295
Associate Committees, NRC    210, 313
Astronomical Society of the Pacific    129
Astrophysical Journal
174
Asundi Memorial Lecture    370
atomic bomb    140
Atomic Energy Canada Ltd.    217, 218,
294
Atomic Energy Control Board    218
Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure
111, 131, 290–293, 295, 303
Auschwitz    181
B
Balmer series    31, 32
Bomber Command    181
book-burning    83
Born-Oppenheimer approximation    40
Bose statistics    50, 385
Bristol    59–67
C
California Institute of Technology    133
Canada-France–Hawaii Telescope (CFHT)
359, 371, 381
Canadian Association of Physicists (CAP)
207, 276, 285
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC)
323
Canadian citizenship    139, 158
Canadian Journal of Research
211
Canadian Journal of Physics
238, 371
Cancer Causation and Prevention
Conference    371
CANDU reactor    218
carbon–chain molecules    360, 361
Carleton University    208, 347, 371
Carnegie Corporation    101, 103, 105,
297
Cavendish Laboratory    65, 334
C–C bonds and distances    132, 259
Centre Nationale de la Recherche
Scientifique    258, 359
CH+
141–143, 149
CH2
144, 149, 259, 267, 270–272
CH3
259, 267, 269, 272
C2
– 273
Chalk River Laboratories    215, 218
Civil Service Commission    307
claims for restitution    279
cold war    174, 250
colloquia at NRC    251

SUBJECT INDEX      457
Columbia University    113, 223
Columbus, Ohio    165
cometary spectra    143–145
Comet Kohoutek    359, 360
Communism    73, 79, 83, 174
Constants of Diatomic Molecules
304
Cornell University and Cornell University
Press    303
cottage on Lynch lake    351
D
Darmstadt    18–20, 82, 180, 277, 369, 370
Defence Research Board (DRB)    217,
250
de-Nazification    183
Department of External Affairs, Canada
277, 282
Department of Immigration, Canada
110, 124, 136
Der Ring des Nibelungen    303
deuterium    88, 89
Dirac Colloquium, NRC    276
diffuse interstellar bands    272, 367, 381,
393
dissociation energy of H2, D2, HD    264,
265
Distinguished Research Scientist    317
Division of Applied Chemistry    256
Division of Applied Physics    256, 257
Division of Pure Physics    256, 257
Dominion Observatory    129, 319
Dover Publishers    292, 299, 303
Duke University    108, 129, 172, 223
E
electronic spectra    36
Electronic Spectra and Electronic
Structure of Polyatomic Molecules
260, 301–303
Emergency Committee in Aid of
Displaced Foreign Scholars, New York
94
Emergency Society of German Science
(Notgemeinschaft der deutschen
Wissenschaft)    69, 94
Emergency Society of German Scholars
Abroad (Notgemeinschaft Deutscher
Wissenschaftler im Ausland)    91–94,
101, 108, 125
Enabling Act    79
enemy alien    139, 147, 296
Engineering Diploma    26, 32
Engineering Doctorate Degree    33, 38
Exchange Program, USSR and NRC
308, 374
explosives research    146–148
Expo’67    208, 310
F
Faraday Society Meetings    52, 60, 70,
277, 280
Fermi statistics    50
flash photolysis    268, 269, 278
food parcels    185–187
forbidden transitions    75, 130
Franck–Condon principle    40, 276
Franck Memorial Symposium    276
Franck Report    172, 277
Frankfurt    18, 77, 186
fraternities    24, 53
Fraunhofer spectrum    12
free radicals    267–272
fullerenes    361
G
Gerhard Herzberg, Canada Gold Medal for
Science and Engineering    393
Gerhard Herzberg Reading Room, NRC
393

458
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
German Students’ Law    82
Gestapo    91
Glassco Commission and Report    309,
311, 312, 314
Gordon Research Conferences    275
Göttingen    42, 276
– Institute of Mathematics    42, 64, 82
– Institute of Theoretical Physics,    43,
46–51, 82
– First Institute of Physics    42, 43, 46, 82
– Second Institute of Physics    42, 43,
46, 51–58, 82
Governor General’s Dinner in Honour of
Herzberg, 1971    326–330
Göttinger Zeitung 
80, 81
Grants and Scholarships Program, NRC
210, 219, 220, 252
grating spectrographs    76, 77, 132, 164,
224
Great Depression    68, 86, 96, 123
Great War    8, 13, 19
group meetings, NRC    237, 363
Guest professor    104, 107, 109
H
habilitation    63, 369
Hamburg    3, 6–8, 110, 185, 278, 322
Harvard University    147, 241, 242, 
heart attacks    381, 382, 387
Heeney Commission and Report    307, 312
Heisenberg Lecture    369
helium, He, He+, He2
232, 261–263
Herzberg Birthday Conferences    318,
358, 382–385
Herzberg bust    348
Herzberger Landstrasse, Göttingen    46
Herzberg Institute of Astrophysics (HIA)
358–367
Herzberg Laboratories, Carleton
University, Ottawa    347
Herzberg Memorial Prize and Fellowship
393
Herzberg Park, Saskatoon    346
Herzberg’s day at NRC    260
Herzberg’s office    235, 325
Honorary Advisory Council, NRC    210,
220, 309, 357
House Committee of Un–American
Activities 174
House of Commons, Canada    325
human rights    373–376
hydrogen, H    13, 31, 32
H2, D2, HD    50, 130, 176, 177, 263–267
H3, D3
361, 363, 364, 369
H3
+
361–366, 392
H2O+
359, 360
I
Imperial College, London    65, 286, 350
Indian Institute of Science    92, 280
Indian Science Congress    280, 281
Industrial Research Assistance Program
(IRAP)    308
inflation, Germany 1922    13
Infrared and Raman Spectra of
Polyatomic Molecules
296–298
Institute of Physics Exhibition, London
348
International Astronomical Union    282
International Congress on Molecular
Spectroscopy, Tokyo    282
International Symposium on Molecular
Spectroscopy, Columbus, Ohio   165,
274
International Union of Pure and Applied
Physics    281, 356
interstellar medium    141, 143, 264, 271,
359–362, 366, 367, 393
interviews    321, 323, 324, 344, 345
ionization potential of H2
264, 265

SUBJECT INDEX      459
J
Johanneum, Hamburg    9, 10, 111, 322
Johns Hopkins University    69, 81
Journal of Molecular Spectroscopy
165
Juda home    67, 72, 180
K
Kaiser–Wilhelm Institute    39, 71, 93
King’s College, London    65, 85, 348,
349, 370
Krieger Publishing Company Inc.    305
Kristallnacht    135, 180
L
Lake O’Hara    288
Lamb shifts    261–263
Langensalza    3–8
lasers    223, 256, 259, 363
Laser & Plasma Physics Section (formerly,
Plasma Physics Section)    255, 256
Law for Restoration of the Career Civil
Service    79
Leipzig Conference    70, 71
Leningrad    xi, 282, 323
light scattering     50, 61, 101, 223, 238,
239, 280
lithium, Li, Li+, Li++
34, 35, 261, 263
Loeb Institute Advisory Committee    371
Low–Temperature & Solid–State Physics
Section    254, 255
Lutheran    3, 82
M
Macdonald Report    352
Manhattan Project    81, 154, 174
Marriage    64, 346, 347
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT)    114, 129, 223, 228, 283
Mauna Kea, Hawaii    132, 359
Max–Planck–Institute     258, 369
Max–Planck–Institute for Quantum Optics
364, 365, 369
McDonald Observatory    160, 164
McGill University    101, 103, 114, 194,
220
McMaster University    348, 379
Mendel Art Gallery, Saskatoon    138
Metallurgical Laboratory    141
microwave spectroscopy    223, 225, 230,
241
Ministry of Education, Science & Culture,
Japan    368
Ministry of State for Science and
Technology (MOSST)    356
molecular ions    273, 365, 371
molecular orbital theory    40, 49, 50, 54,
64, 71, 379
Molecular Spectra and Molecular
Structure
131, 293–305
molecular spectroscopy    35–37, 39–41
Montreal Road Campus    213, 217
Moscow    xiii, 282
Mulliken Memorial Lectures    378, 379
multiple traversal cell    164, 165
music in Darmstadt, Saskatoon and
Ottawa    26, 29, 137, 205
N
National Arts Centre, Ottawa    208
National Boycott, Germany 1933    79
National Physical Laboratories, Teddington
55, 258
National Research Council Act    307, 356
National Research Council of Canada
102, 134, 191, 209, 221, 309, 312,
392, 393
National Research Laboratories    203,
211–214
National Socialism    41

460
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC)    356,
393
Nazis, National Socialist German
Workers’ Party (NSDAP)    68, 74, 78,
91, 110, 111, 184, 185
neutron scattering    218
nitrogen afterglow    35, 37
nitrogen nuclei and statistics    50, 385
Nobel Plaza, Saskatoon    392
Nobel Prize and Festival    320–339;
announcement, 322, 323; 1971
Laureates,     333–335; 
lectures, 339; 
medal and diploma, 336, 337; 343,
430
Non–Aryan    79
nuclear disarmament    373
Nürnberg    56, 64, 135
Nürnberg Laws    90
O
OECD Report    315, 352, 354
Office of Naval Research (ONR)    167,
173
Ohio State University    165, 274
Okazaki, Japan    368
Ontario Science Centre    350
Optics Laboratory, NRC    249
Order of Canada    288
Ottawa    191, 194, 199–208
oxygen spectrum    76, 177
P
Parkinson’s disease    387, 392
Parliament Buildings, Ottawa    199, 202,
203, 387
Pennsylvania State University    223, 227
People’s Student Party, Darmstadt    68, 74
philosophy of the Spectroscopy Laboratory
244, 245
Pontifical Academy of Science    288
post–war policy, NRC    216, 217
Postdoctoral Fellowship Program    218,
219
Postdoctoral Fellows of Spectroscopy Lab
233, 234
pressure-induced spectra    264
Prentice-Hall Company    114, 291–293,
296, 299
Princeton University    80, 114, 129, 130,
147, 286
Principles of Optics
278
privatdozent    64, 68–97
Publishing House for Foreign Literature,
Moscow    282
Purdue University    140
Q
quadrupole spectrum of H2
130,
175–177, 264
quantum theory    12, 46, 264–267
Quebec Conference, 1943    218
Queen’s Privy Council for Canada    372,
373
Queen’s University, Kingston    286, 287,
312, 315
R
radar    214, 223
Radio Physics Laboratory    319
Raman effect    40, 50, 61, 101, 223, 238,
239, 280
rational planning    310
Regina    117, 346
Reich Education Ministry    91, 97
Rentenmark, (RM)    13
re-organization at Yerkes Observatory
174, 175

SUBJECT INDEX      461
Research Enterprises Limited, Toronto
215, 223, 249
retirement at ninety, 1995    386
Rideau Hall, Ottawa    204, 206, 326–330
rocket program, THD    181, 182
rotational energy    35
rotational spectra    35, 50, 239
rotation–vibration spectra    35
Royal Society, London    94, 272, 278
Royal Society of Canada    133, 134, 266,
321, 356
royalty payments    292, 293, 297, 301,
304
Royal visit, 1939    138
Rydberg molecules    364, 365
S
Saas–Fee    279, 285, 288, 387
Sakharov visit to Canada and NRC    375,
376
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan    85, 116–156
Schutzstaffel, SS    73
Science policy    306, 310, 314–316, 352
Seattle    4, 129, 330
Senate Special Committee on Science
Policy and Reports      310, 311,
315–317, 320–322, 343, 352–356
singing and lessons    131, 145, 207, 285,
345
Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council (SSHRC)     356
source of light    13
Soviet Embassy, Ottawa    374
Soviet Union    282, 308, 373, 374
Spectra and Structures of Simple Free
Radicals    303–305
Spectra of Diatomic Molecules
134,
293–296, 299–301, 305
Spectroscopy Laboratory, NRC
222–245, 259, 274, 283, 330, 359, 382
Spectroscopy Labs in Chemistry, NRC
224
spectrum    12
staff, scientific of Spectroscopy Lab
225–231
staff, technical of Spectroscopy Lab    230,
231
Steacie Institute for Molecular Sciences
(SIMS)    384
Stinnes Company    15, 16, 29
Strategic Defense Initiative    172
Sturmabteilung (Storm Troops), SA
41,
73, 87
Sussex Drive    203, 206, 212
Symposium on Fundamental & Applied
Laser Physics, Iran    283
T
Technische Hochschule Darmstadt (THD)
20–23, 180, 278, 369
Testimonial Dinner for Spinks    377
tests of quantum theory    264, 283
Temple of Science, NRC    213
Theoretical Physics Section, NRC    252,
253
Time and Frequency Section, NRC    230
Treasury Board, Ottawa    216, 308, 311,
325
turnip winter, 1916–1917    13
U
Université Laval    310, 356
University College, London    350
University of Bonn    194, 277
University of Bristol    55, 62
– H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory    59
University of California, Berkeley    96,
166, 175
University of Cambridge    65, 223, 227,
242, 278

462
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
University of Chicago    81, 114, 141, 143,
149–155, 157, 158–178, 294, 378, 385
University of Edinburgh    80, 278
University of Ghent    95, 108
University of Göttingen    39, 42, 125
University of Hawaii    359 
University of Illinois    286
University of Istanbul    91
University of Leningrad    xi, 323
University of Manchester    93
University of Michigan,    114, 140, 230,
362
University of Montreal    218
University of Ottawa    208
University of Oxford    242, 278, 349
University of Saskatchewan    85, 104,
105, 107, 117–123, 288, 392
Department of Physics    120–123
Physics Club    122, 124
University of Toronto    96, 101–103, 134,
146, 220, 284
University of Wisconsin    147
University Teachers League, Germany
184
V
valence theory    40
Van Nostrand Company (later, Van
Nostrand Reinhold Company)    297,
299, 304
Versailles Treaty    68
visiting scientists, NRC    240–244, 259
visits to Germany    277, 279, 369, 387
Vorschule    7
W
Wartime Bureau of Technical Personnel
155, 157
wave mechanics    30
Weimar Republic    68
Weizmann Institute, Tel Aviv    281
Wigner–Witmer rules    39, 49
Williams Bay, Wisconsin    157, 161–164
World War II    138, 139, 179–187, 292,
293, 296, 299
Y
Yerkes Observatory    130, 141, 149–155,
157–178, 299, 300
York University    314
Z
zodiacal light    281
Zurich    91, 92

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Not surprisingly, my main thanks are reserved for Gerhard Herzberg, my mentor,
colleague, and friend. During lunch at his home in December 1992 he mentioned
that he liked the biographical memoir that I had written of Harry Welsh for The
Royal Society, and asked me to write his. I couldn’t help but laugh, saying that we
couldn’t forsee the future and that he might be writing mine. On my return home
to Toronto, I kept thinking that such an outstanding scientist and wonderful man
deserved far more than a twenty to thirty page biography, and in fact a full book
would barely do him justice. This recurring idea finally convinced me to try to
write his story, not only to chronicle the history of his scientific achievements but
for the enjoyment of the general reader. Far too few books have been written about
scientists and their accomplishments, and the story of science in Canada during the
mid-1900s is not well known. After discussing this idea with my wife, I telephoned
Gerhard and described my thoughts; he was most receptive, but he cautioned me
“You don’t know what you are getting into”.
I soon learned what he meant as he gave me access to his voluminous corre-
spondence. He had saved copies of his own letters as well as of those he had
received from 1924 to 1997, and had filed them alphabetically and by year. A stack
of about eight metres of letters was housed in the National Archives in Ottawa cov-
ering the period 1928 to 1976 in 56 volumes. At his NRC office, I found another
six metres, along with extensive files of scientific data (which I occasionally exam-
ined), and about two more metres at his home, mainly letters to and from his close
friends from 1924 to 1936 and during the 1940s, as well as diplomas, invitations,
and news clippings. These extensive collections provided most of the source mate-
rial, as indicated in the Notes and References. It took many visits to Ottawa to read
all of this correspondence. On these occasions I also had the opportunity to discuss
my archival research with Gerhard. The rapid debilitation of his memory caused
by Parkinson’s disease put an end to his reminiscences by early 1997.
I am most grateful to Monika Herzberg for her kind hospitality, and particu-
larly for her assistance in providing the many files and photograph albums at her
home for my study. She was instrumental in translating early letters and documents
from German for me. Ursula Scheffler also kindly helped wih translations. Paul
and Agnes Herzberg were especially helpful in providing me with family photo-
graphs, which I have used throughout the book. Moreover, Paul gave me access to
copious notes he had taken of conversations with his father in 1992 and 1993 about
the early family history, while Agnes provided anecdotes of the family, relatives,
and friends. 
While writing this book, I visited all of the cities, schools, and research insti-
tutes where GH had lived, studied and worked, and was overwhelmed by the ready
and willing assistance of archivists and librarians. Marianne Viefhaus of the
463

464
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Technische Hochschule Darmstadt Archives and Cheryl Avery of the University of
Saskatchewan Archives gave generously of their time. I received much help over
the years from the National Archives in Ottawa. The archives of the National
Research Council Canada, Yerkes Observatory, the Universities of Bristol,
Chicago, Göttingen, and the Carnegie Corporation, as well as the municipal
archives of Langensalza and Göttingen, provided a lot of useful information.
I should add that in 1972, I had interviewed Gerhard extensively for a biogra-
phical sketch that I was invited to write for the Special Issue of Physics in Canada
celebrating his receipt of the Nobel Prize. Later, Gerhard gave me copies of many
interviews as well as the brief review of his research “Molecular Spectroscopy: A
Personal History” published in the Annual Reviews of Physical Chemistry in 1985.
This history was augmented by more personal touches brought out in the tran-
scripts of taped interviews which he gave me: one by Christine King carried out in
1986 for the Beckman Center for the History of Chemistry, and another by Brenda
P. Winnewisser in 1989 for the History Center of the American Institute of Physics.
I also had the opportunity to interview most members of the Spectroscopy
Laboratory, and many colleagues in the fields of atomic and molecular spec-
troscopy. 
My visits to Germany would not have been as productive without the gener-
ous assistance of Herbert Walther, Director of the Max-Planck-Institute for Quant-
um Optics in Garching, who organized and took me on visits to Göttingen and the
towns of Herzberg and Langensalza. Bruno Elschner of the THD and Peter Brix,
an early postdoctoral fellow in Herzberg’s laboratory and past Director of the
Physics Institute at the THD, arranged for my visit to Darmstadt and the THD
Archives. Takeshi Oka took me on a visit to Yerkes Observatory and Williams Bay,
and prepared the way for my research at the Regenstein Library of The University
of Chicago. I am most grateful to NRC President Arthur Carty for the use of
Herzberg’s office during my visits to Ottawa, arranged by Jim Watson, and for
Izabel Dabrowski’s help with office files, lists of publications and of postdoctoral
fellows, visitors, and staff members of the Spectroscopy Laboratory.
I am indebted to the University of Toronto for the use of office space and facil-
ities, and to Derek York, Pekka Sinervo, and Henry Van Driel, successive chairmen
of the Department of Physics, for financial support which helped to defray travel
costs to Ottawa. In the early stages, a grant from the Association for Canadian
Studies provided assistance for library searches carried out efficiently by Sabina C.
Watts, a Junior Fellow of Massey College at the time.
Many friends and colleagues read early drafts of one or more chapters, and
their suggestions were of immense help: Gerhard and Monika read many of the
early chapters, as did Paul and Agnes Herzberg; Peter Brix the chapter on the THD;
and Klaus-Peter Lieb read that on Göttingen. Takeshi Oka read drafts of most of
the manuscript and was instrumental in helping to review Herzberg’s research. I
am especially thankful for his writing of the Foreword. My wife Joan, son Peter,

and Vincent M. Tovell provided cogent comments as readers of the life and times
of Gerhard Herzberg. I am most grateful to all the readers for their insights and
helpful comments.
I was taken by surprise when in July 2001 I received a telephone call from
Keith Ingold informing me that the Editorial Board of the NRC Monograph
Publishing Program had plans to begin a program on biographies of Canadian sci-
entists. He asked whether I would be interested in submitting my manuscript to
launch the program. Within a short time, discussions with Gerald J. Neville,
Manager of the Program settled several matters, including co-publication with the
McGill-Queen’s University Press, and activities proceeded rapidly. I am thankful
for the encouragement and support given by B.P. Dancik, Editor-in-Chief of NRC
Press, and P.B. Cavers, Editor of the NRC Monograph Publishing Program, and
particularly for the editorial assistance of Carol McKinley, Nancy Daly, Jennifer
McColl, and Diane Candler.
Finally I wish to recognize and thank all those who have provided me with
photographs that help to illustrate the family life and friends and colleagues of
Herzberg over his lifetime and seven decades of research activity. The many fam-
ily photographs were generously given to me by Monika, Agnes, and Paul Herz-
berg. Most of those depicting activities in the Spectroscopy Laboratory were from
Hin Lew’s copious collection, and spectra were reprinted from Herzberg’s own
files. Apart from the family photographs, the photographers and sources, when
known, are noted below.
Illustration Credits
Frontispiece: by Ted Grant, NRC, courtesy NRC Archives.
Chapter 1
Hamburg, reprinted from Percy Ernst Schramm, Neuen Generation
1648–1948 (Zweite Band) 1964, courtesy Vandenhoeck-Ruprecht: Göttingen
(p. 7).
Johanneum, courtesy Prof. Dr. Werner Selberg, Hamburg (p. 9).
Chapter 2
Darmstadt, reprinted from Georg Zimmermann, Zerstörung und Wiederaufbau
der historische Mitte, Eduard Roether Verlag, Darmstadt 1985 (p. 19).
Darmstadt houses, courtesy Darmstädter Echo (p. 20). 
Mathildenhöhe, by the author (p. 21).
Technische Hochschule, courtesy Darmstadt University of Technology (p. 22). 
Chapter 3
Institute of Physics, courtesy Göttingen Photo Museum (p. 42).
Professors (detail), courtesy University of Göttingen Archives (p. 44).
Heitler, by Walter Stoneman 1948, © Godfrey Argent, London (p. 47).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS     465

466
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Chapter 4
H.H. Wills Laboratory, courtesy University of Bristol Archives (p. 60).
Faculty, courtesy University of Bristol Archives, with thanks to Sir M.V. Berry
and Prof. R.N. Dixon (p. 62).
Chapter 5
German Day, courtesy Hesse State Archives, Darmstadt (p. 74).
Two- and three-metre spectrographs, from Wilhelm Schlink, Die Technische
Hochschule Darmstadt 1836 bis 1936, courtesy Darmstadt University of
Technology (p. 76, 77).
Chapter 8
Campus, courtesy University of Saskatchewan Archives (p. 118).
Physics Club, courtesy University of Saskatchewan Archives, with thanks to
Prof. Henry Caplan (p. 122).
Chapter 9
Walter C. Murray, by R. Dill, courtesy University of Saskatchewan Archives
(p. 156).
Chapter 10
Yerkes Staff, courtesy Yerkes Observatory Photography (p. 161).
Gerard Kuiper, ibid. (p. 171).
Chapter 11
Remains of THD, reprinted from Georg Zimmermann, Zerstörung und
Wiederaufbau der historische Mitte, Eduard Roether Verlag, Darmstadt 1985
(p. 181).
Chapter 12
Aerial View of Ottawa (detail), by Alex Onoszko 1968, courtesy Ottawa
Municipal Archives (p. 199).
Chapter 13
National Research Laboratories, lobby, and corridor, courtesy NRC Archives
(p. 212, 213).
C.J. Mackenzie and E.W.R. Steacie, by Paul Horsdal, courtesy NRC Archives
(p. 216).
Chapter 14
Herzberg, by Hans Blohm, courtesy Hans Blohm, Ottawa (p. 222).
Alex Douglas, courtesy NRC Spectroscopy Lab (p. 226).
Don Ramsay, courtesy NRC Archives (p. 228).
Hin Lew, by Hin Lew (p.229).
Costain et al, by Prof. Koichi Shimoda 1963 (p. 230).
Lila Howe, by Hin Lew (p. 232).
Izabel Dabrowski, courtesy Izabel Dabrowski (p. 232).
Staff, by Hin Lew (p. 234).
Ottawa River and office, by the author (p. 236).
Afternoon tea (p. 239) , party 1951 (p. 240), tea party, and Christmas party

(p. 241) by Hin Lew.
Jon Hougen, by Hin Lew (p.242).
John Johns by Dr. Dieter Hausamann, courtesy John Johns (p. 242).
Group, courtesy NRC Spectroscopy Lab, with thanks to Izabel Dabrowski and
Bob McKellar (p. 243).
Chapter 15
Director (p. 248), L.E. Howlett (p. 249), Ta-You-Wu et al (p. 253), Keith
MacDonald (p. 254), courtesy NRC Archives.
Chapter 16
Herzberg et al, by Hin Lew (p. 271).
Chapter 17
Göttingen colleagues, courtesy Gordon Conference, with thanks to Takeshi
Oka (p. 275).
McLennan Physical Labs, courtesy University of Toronto Archives (p. 284).
Honorary Degree, by Len Hillyard, courtesy University of Saskatchewan
Archives (p. 289).
Order of Canada, courtesy Canadian Government Photo Centre (p. 289).
Chapter 18
Classic texts, by the author (p. 291).
Chapter 20
Walter Herzberg, courtesy Hamburger Abendblatt (p. 322).
Herzberg, by Lorne Bradley, NRC, courtesy Lorne Bradley (p. 324).
Telegram greetings and welcoming office, by Hin Lew (p. 324, 325).
1971 Nobel Laureates, © Pressens Bild, Stockholm (p. 335). 
Chapter 21
Student band, by L. Taylor, courtesy University of Saskatchewan Archives
(p. 345).
Herzberg Labs at Carleton University, by Hin Lew (p. 348).
Sculptor, courtesy NRC Archives (p. 349).
Nobel Prize commemoration, courtesy Institute of Physics (p. 350).
Chapter 22
Discussing H2O+, courtesy NRC Spectroscopy Lab (p. 360).
Celebrating award of Steacie Prize, and Harold Kroto, courtesy NRC Archives
(p. 361, 362).
Discussing H3, courtesy Prof. Wolfgang Ketterle (p. 365).
Oka and Herzberg, by Dr. Michio Takami, courtesy Takeshi Oka (p. 366).
DIBS Spectrum, courtesy Drs. P. Jenniskens and F.-X. Désert (p. 367).
Chapter 23
Herzberg at blackboard, courtesy NRC Archives (p. 368).
Running start of lecture and vital lecturer, courtesy Prof. Bruno Elschner
(p. 369, 370).
Queen’s Privy Council, courtesy Canadian Government Photo Centre (p. 372).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS      467

468
GERHARD HERZBERG: AN ILLUSTRIOUS LIFE IN SCIENCE
Demonstration at Embassy and meeting Sakharov, courtesy The Ottawa
Citizen (p. 375).
J.W.T. Spinks, by Les Saunders, courtesy University of Saskatchewan Archives
(p. 378).
Dr. Wu, by Henry Mantsch, NRC (p. 380).
Vice-Premier, courtesy Henry Mantsch (p. 381).
Monika and Gerhard, and Herzberg at desk, by the author (p. 386, 387).
Flag at half-staff, by Agnes Herzberg (p. 388).
Epilogue
Memento and Nobel Plaza, by the author (p. 394).

