
GIORDANO BRUNO

a volume in
Values in Italian Philosophy
VIP
Daniel B. Gallagher, Editor
VIBS
Volume 254
Robert Ginsberg
Founding Editor
Leonidas Donskis
Executive Editor
Associate Editors
G. John M. Abbarno
George Allan
Gerhold K. Becker
Raymond Angelo Belliotti
Kenneth A. Bryson
C. Stephen Byrum
Robert A. Delfino
Rem B. Edwards
Malcolm D. Evans
Roland Faber
Andrew Fitz-Gibbon
Francesc Forn i Argimon
Daniel B. Gallagher
William C. Gay
Dane R. Gordon
J. Everet Green
Heta Aleksandra Gylling
Matti Häyry
Brian G. Henning
Steven V. Hicks
Richard T. Hull
Michael Krausz
Olli Loukola
Mark Letteri
Vincent L. Luizzi
Hugh P. McDonald
Adrianne McEvoy
J.D. Mininger
Peter A. Redpath
Arleen L. F. Salles
John R. Shook
Eddy Souffrant
Tuija Takala
Emil Višňovský
Anne Waters
James R. Watson
John R. Welch
Thomas Woods

Amsterdam - New York, NY 2012
Paul Richard Blum
Translated from the German by
Peter Henneveld
GIORDANO BRUNO
An Introduction

Cover image:  Bronze statue of Giordano Bruno by Ettore Ferrari, Campo 
de’ Fiori, Rome. (photo: dreamstime)
Cover Design: Studio Pollmann
The paper on which this book is printed meets the requirements of “ISO 
9706:1994, Information and documentation - Paper for documents - 
Requirements for permanence”.
ISBN: 978-90-420-3555-3
E-Book ISBN: 978-94-012-0829-1
© Editions Rodopi B.V., Amsterdam - New York, NY 2012
Printed in the Netherlands

CONTENTS 
 
EDITORIAL FOREWORD 
vii 
 
FOREWORD 
ix 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
xi 
 
ONE 
Pleasant Campania: Education Before and In the Convent 
1 
 
TWO 
Fleeing into Exile—Northern Italy, Geneva, Toulouse: 
 
Astronomy as a Means of Earning a Living 
9 
 
THREE 
Paris: The Power of Memory 
13 
 
FOUR 
Off to London: Satire, Metaphysics, and Ethics in Italian 
25 
 
FIVE 
God Is Not Idle: Infinite Possibilities and Infinite Reality 
31 
 
SIX 
Religion and Ethics for the People and the Hero 
51 
 
SEVEN 
Return to Paris: Challenging Mathematics  
 
and Aristotelianism 
69 
 
EIGHT 
“Houses of Wisdom” in Germany:  
 
History, Magic, and Atomism 
79 
 
NINE 
Off to Venice: The Trial of the Heretic 
101 
 
TEN 
Afterlife: From Heretic to Hermeticist 
109 
 
CHRONOLOGY 
117 
 
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 
119 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
123 
 
INDEX 
 
125 
 

EDITORIAL FOREWORD 
 
If only the statue of Giordano Bruno in Rome’s Campo de’ Fiori could speak. 
It might remind college students of the price their forerunners had to pay to 
ensure that it would stand there, gazing down on them as they caroused in the 
pubs below. It might relate the details of the trial and execution of the man it 
commemorates. It might even give him voice, allowing him to explain his 
theory of an infinite universe and infinite worlds so that students might com-
pare it with the inflationary cosmology and the multiverse they learned about 
in physics class. 
But alas, Ettore Ferrari’s statue cannot speak, and university students 
may never know how hard their predecessors worked to raise the money for 
the monument and how they clamored in the streets to have it finally erected 
and unveiled in 1889. As for Bruno’s trial, students today know only a bit 
more than students did back then, thanks to Cardinal Angelo Mercati’s redis-
covery of the Miscelleanea Armadi in 1940.  
Perhaps the most important conversation, however, would be about Bru-
no’s infinite universe and infinite worlds and our inflationary cosmology and 
the multiverse. In other words, the story of Bruno’s trial and execution, alt-
hough fascinating, are in many ways secondary to the story of his ideas. For 
far too long those ideas have been overshadowed by Bruno’s enshrinement as 
an icon of academic freedom. His relentless drive to think for himself and ex-
press those ideas, regardless of the consequences, are integral to his story. But 
to understand his story we must first understand the ideas he felt so compelled 
to express.  
That is where this book comes in. As with every volume in the Values in 
Italian Philosophy Series, it revolves around ideas. Paul Richard Blum expert-
ly interweaves the history and the ideas into this brief introductory text, but 
the emphasis is on the latter. If Bruno did not receive a fair trial back then, he 
certainly deserves one today. Too often we approach him with a rigid view of 
how we think science and religion should or should not be related. That is 
why Blum’s readers will feel a twinge of embarrassment when they realize 
how prone we are to construe the “science and religion” question solely in 
twenty-first-century terms. Although there are similarities, the issues were 
different in Bruno’s day, and that is all the more reason to read him today. He 
was deeply imbued in classical and Renaissance literature, devouring the 
works of Aristotle and the Scholastics. Bruno, like many of his contemporar-
ies, strove to understand the new with the help of the old and to reexamine the 
old in light of the new—a good lesson for us today. 
Admittedly, Bruno can be extremely arcane and even esoteric, hence the 
need for an accomplished interpreter like Blum. But Bruno is not alone in this 
regard. Marsilio Ficino can be equally arcane and esoteric, yet the Tatti Re-
naissance Library deems his work worthy of editing and translating, a clear 

viii 
Editorial Foreword 
 
indication of the high interest in early-Renaissance scholarship. The late-
Renaissance was no less fecund and deserves no less scrutiny, especially in 
the English-speaking world. That is why the Values in Italian Philosophy se-
ries is pleased to feature Peter Henneveld’s translation of Blum’s book, origi-
nally published in German in 1999. May it say what Ferrari’s statue cannot 
and promote a greater interest in Giordano Bruno’s contribution to Italian phi-
losophy and beyond.  
 
 
Daniel B. Gallagher, Editor 
Values in Italian Philosophy Special Series 
Rome, Italy

 
FOREWORD 
“There is nothing new under the sun”—this was Giordano Bruno’s motto. 
Nonetheless it is appropriate to introduce him as a thinker who produced a 
peculiar philosophy. As one can see in the final chapter about his afterlife, he 
was mostly recited in order to take sides—be it against Catholics, in favor of 
tolerance, for or against current strands in philosophy, or as a representative 
of his era. However, one of his most constant impulses was resistance against 
monopolization. On the other hand, the thinker from Nola makes it difficult 
for the reader to follow him in the hopes of finding clear statements. The hec-
tic speaker, with “names and titles longer than his body,” pulling back his 
arms like a juggler and continually talking to his audience—this is not just a 
spiteful exterior description (at that time in Oxford) but also emblematic of 
Bruno’s way of philosophizing: He is not looking for outright solutions but 
rather for the depth of the problems; he knows the literature and the strategies 
combined with their weaknesses. Therefore, he does not obediently study in 
the monastery what scholasticism has to offer; rather he loses his composure 
in light of the unsolved questions of long dismissed heresies. In a particular 
way, however, he is looking for allies in matters of his own insights, and he 
makes himself a propagator on his own account. Thus his fascination lies 
more outside than inside of professional philosophy. An attempt shall be 
made, through the convolutions and turning points of his argumentations, to 
find the identical Bruno in his various and different works—the same Bruno 
who proudly said about himself: “Philosophy is my profession!” 
Unlike some other philosophers of his era, Bruno was neither holding an 
office nor was he a politician; he was neither a businessman nor an artist. 
Therefore, his way of thinking will be presented along the stations of his jour-
ney through Western Europe. On that way, key topics will offer themselves, 
as will be announced in the chapter titles. 
Although footnotes are absent, this book is very much indebted to the 
literature listed in the bibliography (and there the emphasis was put on more 
recent research). Some citations regarding certain factual information have 
been put in parentheses. Ancient sources are being cited according to their in-
ner structure so they can be consulted in any edition. Sigla of abbreviations 
are found in the bibliography. All translations have been provided by the au-
thor and the translator. 
This book partly has been written during a research visit at the Center 
for Philosophy of Religion at the University of Notre Dame, Indiana. I would 
like to express my heartfelt thanks for this opportunity and the manifold help 
and assistance. 
Baltimore, 6 December 2011 Paul Richard Blum

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
The publication of this book was made possible with the support of The Center 
for the Humanities and the Faculty Technology Center of Loyola University 
Maryland. 
 

One 
 
PLEASANT CAMPANIA: 
EDUCATION BEFORE AND IN THE CONVENT 
 
Erstwhile your sacred lights, o delightful Mount Cicala, caressed me, as 
I recall … and you said to me with your forefinger outstretched: Turn 
your eyes northwards, and thereupon behold kindred Vesuvius. Akin to 
myself, he too wants you well, do you believe me? … I said: This one is 
a world far removed, shadowed in shabby fog; no good he has to offer. 
… You, however, didst say: And yet he is my loving brother, and he 
wants you well. … Thusly having thereupon arrived, I behold Vesuvius 
from close … with grapes richly dangling from the branches, with fruit 
of all kinds, and looking at the benevolent sky of home; nothing known 
to me is missing from him, and he has a hundredfold more of it. Thus at 
first I accuse my mendacious eyes in astonishment. And he commanded: 
… Thus stay here, despise the gods of Cicala. Behold the richness of my 
goods … herefrom direct your eyes, and look upon Cicala, my brother, 
far away touching the sky with a sable dome and shrouding the valleys 
with a pitch-colored garment. … Thereupon I said: You also were just 
the same before I came to you. … Thusly the fogs disappear; the sky 
and the center of the world thereunto return with me so that I enter, al-
ways accompanied by him, and he always remains with me wherever I 
remain. … In whichever earthly region I should dwell, I see West and 
East maintaining equal distance. … It is not, therefore, vision which lies, 
for as much will be reflected as can be measured with equal radius, and 
wherever you shall go, there will be an equal measure. … Therefore the 
sky is not bounded by a fixed edge …. (OL I 1, 312–316) 
 
In this childhood memory, Giordano Bruno narrates his philosophy of the in-
finite world and the relativity of the center as a childhood experience. 
With a clear view to Mount Vesuvius, dominating the “fortunate Cam-
pania,” he had grown up in Nola, located about 30 kilometers (18.6 miles) 
from Naples where he had been born in 1548, presumably in February. Most 
of the pieces of information about his origin and early days stem from such 
biographical remarks slipped into his philosophical writings, as well as from 
the protocols of the inquisition process, at the end of which he was burned at 
the stake in Rome on February 17, 1600. Bruno’s father, Giovanni, was a pro-
fessional soldier; his mother’s name was Fraulissa Savolino. There is no evi-
dence of his family being wealthy, but one can assume that the son entered 
the Order of Preachers at the age of seventeen (in 1565), due to his inability to 

2 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
otherwise afford his studies. At the age of fourteen, Bruno began his studies 
of the humanistic subjects, such as grammar, rhetoric, poetry, as well as logic 
in Naples, the capital of the kingdom which was under Spanish rule at the 
time. His most prominent teacher seems to have been the Augustinian friar 
Theophilus Vairanus who was later to become director of studies at Florence, 
then professor at the university of Rome, before finally becoming a private 
teacher until his death in Palermo in 1578. The Augustinians were a promi-
nent order in the 16th century, and although they were giving public lectures in 
Naples, Bruno apparently took private lessons with Vairano. He attended the 
public lectures of Giovanni Vincenzo Colle, known as Sarnese († 1574); the 
latter is known to have published editions of the Averroistic philosopher Hi-
eronymus Balduinus. Neither one of both teachers has made a name for them-
selves due to notable achievements, and perhaps Bruno is referring to their 
lessons in his later polemics against Aristotelian logic when he presents the 
following logical conclusion as an example: 
 
The heart (Cor) is the source of life. 
Snow (Nix) is white. 
Therefore the raven (Cornix) is the source of white life. (DI 1117) 
 
It is obvious that during these lessons Bruno had come to know the phi-
losophy of Aristotle in the Averroistic version. The interpretation of Aristotle 
done by the Arab Averroes (1126–1198) had been a subject of theological 
controversies in the 13th century. With Padua as one of its centers, the Averro-
ism of the Renaissance represented a strict philosophical interpretation of the 
works of Aristotle which had partly been newly translated and were now stud-
ied critically. It supported two theories hardly reconcilable with Christian the-
ology: the eternity of the world and the unity of the intellect. Christian theolo-
gy teaches that the world has come to exist by an act of God’s creation, and 
even though it is impossible to name a “time before time,” the world is not 
without a beginning. From an Aristotelian perspective in which the idea of a 
creation does not exist, it follows that the world is permanent and exists from 
eternity. The problem of the unity of the intellect is dependent on the interpre-
tation of a passage in Aristotle’s treatise De Anima: Averroism interprets the 
individual human soul as an isolation of a universal soul, and after death the 
individual soul will be merged back into this universal soul. An alternative is 
the so-called Alexandristic solution according to the ancient commentator of 
Aristotle’s writings, Alexander of Aphrodisias (ca. AD 200); here the soul of 
the individual person begins to exist at birth and ceases to exist with death. 
This latter solution was eventually supported by Pietro Pomponazzi (1462–
1525), a renowned philosopher from Padua. In 1513, it was banned by the 
Church as, among other things, it renders superfluous the idea of sin and re-
demption. But the Averroistic solution also presents problems: according to 
Christian belief, human freedom and responsibility are dependent on the soul 

 
Pleasant Campania 
3 
of the individual person being created with birth and continuing to exist after 
death as an individual soul. Even though Bruno does not explicitly voice his 
opinion on Averroism in his writings, its influence is discernible in the fact 
that the problem of the soul and the tension between philosophical and theo-
logical interpretation of nature will become central themes of his philosophiz-
ing. 
During these early years of studying Bruno ought to have learned by 
reading his enormous fund of familiarity with philosophical and literary 
sources. He knows and quotes the atomistic philosophy of nature of Lucretius, 
as well as the writings of Plato and the Platonists in the translation of Marsilio 
Ficino. He is familiar with Ficino’s writings and those of other philosophers 
of the Renaissance era, especially those by Nicholas of Cusa; he is further-
more familiar with classical Latin authors, such as Ovid, Horace, and Vergil, 
but also with Italian poets such as Ludovico Ariosto or his fellow countryman 
Luigi Tansillo whose poetic works he often quotes in his Italian dialogues. If 
the young student at that time was able to move around freely in Naples, per-
haps he also had the opportunity to establish and maintain contacts with Val-
desians (named after Juan de Valdés [† 1541]; they are not to be confused 
with the Waldensians who joined the Calvinists, named after Peter Waldo [† 
1218]). The Valdensians relied on the humanist Erasmus of Rotterdam while 
at the same time being inclined to antitrinitarian doctrines. Antitrinitarianism, 
that is to say, the doctrine according to which God does not consist of three 
persons, and consequently Christ does not possess a divine nature, had many 
centers throughout Europe and continued to have an effect in various shades 
well into the Enlightenment era. It is quite possible that Bruno later on got in 
contact with groups such as these in various European cities. This much is 
certain: his rejection of the Trinitarian doctrine had already begun at the age 
of eighteen, and it was also the topic of his inquisitional trial (Firpo 1993, 
170). Likewise in early years Bruno had begun to study mnemonics (the art of 
memory), and this according to Peter of Ravenna († 1508), from whom he 
claims to have learned “even as a child” the principle of alphabetic tables, a 
principle which he compares to a spark which ignites countless fires and 
sparks (OL II 2, 130). Mnemonics is first of all an alternative discipline of 
learning and rhetoric, but Bruno expanded it into a peculiar epistemology. 
Around the middle of the sixteenth century, the European academic world, 
and also that at Naples, attended to alternative scientific models predominant-
ly marked by Renaissance Platonism, by the reading of pre-Socratic philoso-
phy, and also by such academic interests which one would nowadays describe 
as empiric. Thus emerged treatises on magic which could be interpreted as 
attempts to discover and control the natural energies, while in 1565 Bernardi-
no Telesio (1508–1588) published the first version of his treatise De rerum 
natura iuxta propria principia in Naples. Herein he attempts to explain nature 
to a large extent by means of non-spiritual principles, viz., the basic energies 
of heat and cold. All these and many other sources are almost simultaneously 

4 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
present in Bruno’s published works. Therefore we may assume that he has 
come to know most of these theories already during the first years of his 
course of studies. 
On June 15, 1565, Bruno enters the Dominican order. He becomes a 
novice of the monastery San Domenico Maggiore in Naples, the oldest local 
monastery where Thomas Aquinas had also been staying temporarily. On en-
tering the order Bruno gives up his baptismal name Filippo, and he was as-
signed the religious name Giordano which he retained for the rest of his life. 
His motive of becoming a friar certainly consisted in the fact that religious 
orders were the only corporations in which it was possible to obtain an aca-
demic education with an ensuing professional occupation free of cost. To 
Bruno, the Fathers of San Domenico were “gods on earth” at that time, as he 
is reported to have said to a fellow prisoner of the Inquisition, albeit with the 
additional remark: “And then I discovered that they were all asses and igno-
ramuses, and that the Church was governed by ignoramuses and asses” (Firpo 
1993, 251). Later on he dedicated a separate dialogue to the “asses,” in a 
word, to the quibbling philosophers. The only teacher of that time who be-
came well known due to philosophical publications was Matthias Aquarius de 
Gibbonis († 1591). He was the author of a treatise on memory, and he also 
wrote a commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics which gives insight into the 
teaching practice of the house in Naples. 
Bruno completed his novitiate and the diaconate according to the Rules; 
he studied theology at San Domenico, was ordained a priest in 1573, and two 
years later he was appointed lecturer of theology. His philosophical studies 
were partly done in Lombardy. At that time, the duration of studying philoso-
phy was three years for the Dominicans, and it entailed dialectics, philosophy, 
and metaphysics (according to the terminology then used), i.e., logic, physics, 
and metaphysics according to Aristotle (Spampanato 1933, 158). In this, and 
even more so as regards theology, the decisive factors for Dominicans were 
Thomas Aquinas and the Thomists such as Sylvester of Ferrara and Domingo 
Soto for the interpretation of Aristotle. The course of theological studies was 
four years, and after the Dominican friar Francisco de Vitoria in 1526 had el-
evated the Summa Theologiae to be the textbook in Salamanca, the Neapoli-
tan course of theological studies too was oriented towards this basic work. In 
1571 it was even reprinted with the involvement of San Domenico Maggiore. 
The final exam at that time (and for some centuries to come) consisted in the 
public defense or disputation of theses. Two of these theses supposedly read: 
“Everything that is said by Thomas in the ‘Summa contra gentiles’ is true,” 
and “Everything that is said by the teacher of the ‘Sentences’ is correct.” Ac-
cordingly Bruno’s exam was related to Thomas’ other “Summa,” not to the 
Summa theologica, and to the then customary medieval textbook written by 
Peter Lombard (Spampanato 1933, 652). By and large this information, hand-
ed down by a French interlocutor ten years later, ought to be correct, even 

 
Pleasant Campania 
5 
though it was not customary at the time to assign the candidate theses worded 
in such general terms and in this phrasing. 
Nonetheless the studies did by no means go over smoothly. Already as a 
novice he got into difficulties, as he himself will tell later on during the inqui-
sitional trial in Venice—obviously in an attempt to downplay the matter. 
First, he had given away pictures of saints—he explicitly mentions Catherine 
of Siena and Antonino of Fiesole—, but kept at least the crucifix. In addition 
to this, he had advised a fellow novice who happened to read a book on Marian 
devotions that he would do better to read The Lives of the Holy Fathers (by the 
Dominican friar Domenico Cavalca; Canone ed. 1992, 67–69) or something 
else. (It is yet not clear wherein the mentioned devotional books differ in such 
a way that Bruno’s choice had to appear suspicious.) Thereupon the master of 
novices drafted a charge against Bruno, but he again tore it to pieces the same 
day. After the outbreak of the Protestant Reformation, the veneration of saints 
and especially Marian devotions constituted characteristic elements of the 
Catholic religion. Bruno therefore had to have aroused suspicion of being a 
Protestant. Also telling is the fact that he deemed it worth mentioning in the 
context of his testimony and also of its reiteration that he had retained the cru-
cifix (Firpo 1993, 190f), for it would soon come to light that Bruno was enter-
taining philosophical doubts about the Second Divine Person, Christ. Like-
wise during the Venetian trial he confesses: 
 
In Christian terms and according to the theology which is to be firmly 
held by every faithful Christian and Catholic, I have in fact held doubts 
with regard to the term “person of the Son and of the Holy Spirit” be-
cause I did not understand these two persons as being separate from the 
Father save in the manner of speaking philosophically as I have said ear-
lier, in that I accorded the intellect of the Father to the Son, and the love 
to the Holy Spirit, without acknowledging this term “person,” the very 
same which Saint Augustine denotes as not an ancient, but rather a new 
and contemporary name. And this opinion I have retained from the time 
since I was eighteen years old to this very day. This I have never denied, 
though, and neither have I taught nor written, but rather—as was said—
have I doubted by myself. … I have believed and undoubtedly kept eve-
rything which every faithful Christian must believe and hold as the truth 
regarding the first person. … As for the second person, I say that I truly 
assumed it to be one in essence with the first, and likewise with the 
third. For since they are undifferentiated according to their essence, they 
cannot incur inequality, so that all attributes befitting the Father also be-
long to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. I have merely maintained doubts 
as to how this second person was to become flesh (incarnate) and was to 
suffer; but—as said before—I have never denied this, nor have I taught 
accordingly. (Firpo 1993, 170) 
 

6 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
But he had certainly denied it, and from a Catholic point of view, having 
doubted the Trinity and the Incarnation for years is already bad enough in and 
of itself. Furthermore, Bruno’s decisive philosophical positions were to be 
found in conflict with the elementary theological doctrines of the Counter-
Reformation. Bruno’s reference to a differentiation between a “theological” 
and a “philosophical” manner of speaking, as presented in this document, 
does not help either: this reference already presupposes and assumes a posi-
tion which was found to be unacceptable to Christian—and more specifically, 
Catholic—theology. Ever since the emergence of the so-called secular Aristo-
telianism in the medieval era—and here above all Siger of Brabant († 1284) 
must be mentioned—the attempt was made on the philosophers’ part to sepa-
rate theological theorems such as the creation of the world or the immortality 
of the individual soul from philosophical insights in conflict with the former 
on the basis of Aristotle and rational argumentation. Positions such as these 
fell into the category of “double truth” and were argued as such. In case it is 
correct that there is only one truth, then this position is either paradoxical, or 
one of the two “truths” is false. Whenever theology was affected, then it was 
heresy; if, however, it affected philosophy, then theology was exposed as be-
ing irrational. Therefore it fell to theology to show the rationality of the con-
tent of faith and revelation, and this was the task of the great medieval theolo-
gians, and certainly that of the Catholic reform. Today, this topic is discussed 
as “faith and reason.” A special hermeneutic and epistemology is required in 
order to reconcile both, and this is probably what Bruno was seeking; howev-
er, it has not yet been fully developed to this day. There is a certain potential 
in Bruno’s statement on his religious doubts since the time of his studies 
which might look like, and be interpreted as, an excuse or like a free fixation 
on mere philosophical positions. But this already bears a theological signifi-
cance in the scope of the contemporary discussion in and of itself, and seen 
from the perspective of the inquisitors, it is heretical. The fact that Bruno nev-
er claimed to be a theologian can only be understood in the sense that Catho-
lic theology at the time seemed to be insufficient to him from a philosophical 
perspective. But he also knew that one cannot simply philosophize apart from 
theology when dealing with topics which touch the heart of the doctrine about 
God and creation. 
Since Bruno indicates an age of eighteen years as the moment of his 
beginning religious problems, the first incident of a clash with his religious 
superiors already took place at the beginning of his studies. The proceedings 
were reopened (Firpo 1993, 157), so that in 1576, the young friar traveled to 
Rome in order to justify himself. On this occasion he took his quarters in the 
renowned monastery Santa Maria sopra Minerva, owned by his religious 
community and also a place where Thomas Aquinas had lived for a while. 
When he arrived in Rome, he learned that certain books which he had hidden 
before his departure had been found: works by John Chrysostom and Jerome 
with (albeit crossed out) passages from Erasmus of Rotterdam (illustration in 

 
Pleasant Campania 
7 
Canone ed. 1992, 70–73). The book by Jerome could also be the text of The 
Lives of the Holy Fathers, the same text which he had recommended to a fel-
low friar, because a similar treatise was circulating under the name and au-
thorship of Jerome. In any case, editions of the works of this Church Father 
were readily available; however, as of the early 1560s the Neapolitan Domin-
icans were explicitly prohibited to read the Fathers of the Church in the edi-
tions by Erasmus. At the same time they had been restricted and committed to 
the theology of Thomas Aquinas. 
In reading these books, Bruno had not only formally violated certain 
regulations, but for his part he had assumed a dangerous position. As a result 
of the interest of the humanists in the fourteenth and fifteenth century, the 
Greek and Latin Church Fathers had become relevant. Beginning with Augus-
tine, they were regarded as ancient authorities in whom the Greek and Latin 
stylistic elegance had been combined with Christian doctrine. Consequently 
they presented a welcome corrective to the pagan philosophers and poets. The 
technique of classical philology, developed in the fifteenth century, did now 
also affect the texts of Sacred Scripture; Erasmus of Rotterdam had contribut-
ed in a special way to this development. One of the consequences, in connec-
tion with new forms of individual piety, was the intense interest in Sacred 
Scripture as the sole source of faith (sola scriptura) as was propagated by the 
various Protestant reformatory movements. In this way, the Church Fathers 
now became some sort of paradoxes: they were pre-scholastic authorities of 
the truth of the Christian faith and, as such, independent from medieval scho-
lastic theology; they were witnesses of continuity (i.e., the tradition) of the 
Christian doctrine beginning with the era of the gospels until the present time; 
they represented divergent theological doctrines among themselves, since 
they were in fact the ones who had transformed the gospels into academic 
theology. In other words, they ultimately became bones of contention among 
the religious denominations parting among themselves in the sixteenth centu-
ry. Even though Erasmus’ influence on Bruno’s polemic style is clearly rec-
ognizable—and at the same time it may very well have been a model of hu-
manistic caviling—, the Erasmian reformatory theology is difficult to grasp 
with the scholar from Nola. Therefore it shall be sufficient to ascertain that 
the Dominicans could indeed see an indicator of Bruno’s heterodox views in 
the way he dealt with such patristic editions. 
Another suspicion, though, was by far more serious: to defend the heresy 
of Arius. The defendant expounds very precisely the dogmatic problem of the 
Arian heresy, which had already been condemned by the Council of Nicaea 
(325): 
 
It is generally assumed that what Arius intended to have said was the 
Word being the first creation of the Father; I, however, have explained 
that Arius refers to the Word neither as creation nor as creator, but rather 
an intermediate between creator and creation, just as the word is in the 

8 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
middle between the speaker and that what is being said. And therefore it 
was to be called “only begotten” before all creatures, not “from whom,” 
but “through whom” every object was created; not “to whom,” but ra-
ther “through whom” every object turns and returns toward the ultimate 
aim, namely the Father. Over this I was very excited. … And here in 
Venice, as I recall, I have said that Arius did not intend to say that 
Christ, that is, the Word, was a creature, but rather a mediator in the 
manner as has been mentioned. (Firpo 1993, 171) 
 
While yet standing in front of the Venetian inquisitors, the defendant 
does not seem to be willing to believe that merely deviating from the scholas-
tic method can already be heretical; he does not seem to be aware that during 
the heated era of the Counter-Reformation, experiments with canonical dog-
matic theology and recourse to earlier stages of dogmatic history were con-
sidered dangerous to the Catholic faith and orthodoxy. Regardless whether or 
not this interpretation of Arianism is historically correct, the fact that Bruno 
attempted to appreciate it in a differentiated interpretation must have been 
suspicious. In Naples as well as throughout all of Europe certain heresies of 
late antiquity and early Christianity had gained momentum due to patristic 
studies and the discussions about the right interpretation of the very words of 
the Bible. Among these heresies were also various versions of Arianism 
which, roughly speaking, amount to rejecting the Trinitarian doctrine and the 
Incarnation of the Son of God. Therefore a favorable interpretation of a here-
tic such as Arius was not only exciting for Bruno but also threw his audience 
into turmoil, as he continues on to report. For he argued that heretics were not 
“stupid just because they neglected to argue in scholastic terms,” rather, “just 
like the ancient Fathers of the Holy Church had done,” it should certainly be 
possible to “portray in terms other than scholastic ones” the relationship be-
tween God the Father and the Son. “At this, these Fathers jumped to their feet 
and said that I defended the heretics, and that I deemed them wise!” (Firpo 
1993, 191) In terms of dogmatic theology, the issue was about the relationship 
between the three divine persons; in terms of hermeneutic, the question was 
whether one could express the Christian doctrine using different terminolo-
gies. This last question, however, contravened “political correctness” as dog-
matic theology was leaning towards exact and unambiguous formulas for the 
sake of the uniformity of Christian doctrine, and taboos were imposed on di-
verging terminologies. Later on, the change of philosophical languages was 
to become one of the hallmarks of Bruno’s philosophy, and it is this change 
which makes it more difficult to interpret his writings. 

 
Two 
 
FLEEING INTO EXILE—NORTHERN 
ITALY, GENEVA, TOULOUSE: 
ASTRONOMY AS A MEANS OF 
EARNING A LIVING 
 
Bruno’s journey to Rome turns into a flight. On his first transit he allegedly 
dedicated a book to the pope, entitled L’Arca di Noè. It is rumored that during 
this stay he threw a secret informer into the Tiber River—unfortunately there 
is no evidence for either one of those events (cf. Spampanato 1933, 151ff, 
263–265). In the Ash Wednesday Supper, the author mentions that Noah’s Ark 
was a satire in which, among other things, the donkeys were concerned about 
their primacy (DI 79f). Apparently, his attempts to rehabilitate himself in 
Rome were not successful. Rather, the friar lays down his habit and sets out 
northwards. It appears that he sought shelter in various Dominican houses 
which he had gotten to know during his studies. There he was advised to con-
tinue presenting himself as a Dominican, since the affiliation with any profes-
sional or social group was important to survival. 
In Venice, as he indicates, he published a treatise entitled De segni de’ 
tempi (The Signs of the Time) which is also not preserved. Here, too, one can 
only speculate as regards its content. It might have been an astronomical or 
cosmological treatise, but it also might have been a work on the history of 
philosophy combined with cosmology. The title alludes to two biblical pas-
sages according to which God knows the signs of the time, reveals past and 
future, and makes known secret signs (Sir 42:19), and Jesus invites the disci-
ples to interpret the appearance of the sky in view of salvation (Matthew 
16:3–4). Associations of this kind are quite often to be found in Bruno’s writ-
ings, including the first treatise published in Latin, De umbris idearum. He 
explains that he had it printed for the sake of money, and the search for em-
ployment pushed him further on through Northern Italy. Between 1576 and 
1578 he stayed in Noli, Savona, Turin, Venice, Padua, Brescia, Bergamo, and 
Milan, among other places. Temporarily he taught children or gave lectures 
on Spheres; these were presumably foundational courses in astronomy, remi-
niscent of the customary textbook entitled Sphaera, written by John of Holy-
wood (Johannes de Sacrobosco). Now on the brink of becoming a “knight er-
rant of philosophy,” the fugitive then set out to Lyon—it is not clear whether 
or not he actually arrived there. After a short stay in Chambéry in Savoy he 
finally found a position as a proofreader at a printing shop in Geneva. 

10 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
From the Dominican headquarters and that of the entire Catholic Church 
in Rome, the renegade friar now had come to the Vatican of Calvinism. At 
that time, there was a small colony of Italian emigrants seeking shelter in Ge-
neva; these people had been forced to leave their hometowns for similar rea-
sons as was the case for Bruno. It is possible that he could have sympathized 
with Calvinism due to the mutual rejection of the veneration of the saints. At 
any rate, Bruno later on explicitly rejected the doctrine of predestination, or 
rather the Protestant doctrine of grace in general, according to which the sal-
vation of man depends on God’s predestination, or in any case, however, on 
his grace. He deemed the significance of “good works” indispensable, at least 
with regard to the social meaning of religion. His criticism of the Christian 
religion at that time also included its Calvinist variant. Even though the Span-
iard Michael Servet had been burned at the stake as a heretic, not without 
John Calvin’s assistance, it seems that there were also some antitrinitarians 
staying in Geneva in 1579, the year in which Bruno joined the local Italian 
dissidents. Servet is considered to have been the founder of the modern anti-
trinitarianism, and with regard to the Protestant characteristic of interpreting 
the Bible in its most literal sense, this theory insisted that the doctrine of three 
persons in one God was not biblically founded. According to him, it was only 
through a return to the original teaching of the Bible that a reform of Christi-
anity should be possible, including that of the Christian communities. As far 
as his reformatory intentions were concerned, they coincided with Calvin’s 
positions; with regard to theology, however, there was a clash. In 1541, Cal-
vin had established a theocratic rule in Geneva as a result of a strict ecclesial 
constitution. In 1559, he founded an academy (university); the renowned 
theologian Theodore Beza was to become its rector and also Calvin’s succes-
sor in governing the Church in Geneva. The exile’s ideological direction dur-
ing those years is unambiguous. Lyon had been a place of refuge in the 1530s 
for both Calvin and Servet. At times, the antitrinitarian Lelio Sozzini had 
stayed in Geneva; together with his relative Fausto Sozzini (both hailed from 
Siena), he became the eponym of the European antitrinitarian (or unitarian) 
movement: Socinianism. 
Bruno’s wish, however, of living “in peace and security” (Firpo 1993, 
160) in this city was not fulfilled. He enrolled at the academy of Geneva on 
May 20, 1579; of course, he did not use his religious name, Giordano, but ra-
ther his baptismal name, Philippus. As his professional title he wrote “sacrae 
theologiae professor.” One of Theodore Beza’s protégés, Antoine de La Faye, 
was in charge of this institution. In August 1579, Bruno had a pamphlet print-
ed in which he exposed twenty errors held by de La Faye, the professor of 
philosophy (Spampanato 1933, 632f). We do not know what these errors may 
have been and how they manifested themselves. However, it is certain that the 
Genevan philosophy was committed to Aristotle; Bruno was put on trial before 
the highest ranking secular and ecclesiastical Calvinist committee, i.e., the Con-

 
Fleeing Into Exile 
11 
sistory, and it ended with an apology on the part of the Italian, followed by his 
departure. 
Bruno continued his journey, and he went to Toulouse via Lyon. He 
stayed there for two years which is a comparatively long time on his odyssey. 
For the time being, he secured his existence once again by giving lectures on 
Spheres, that is to say, on the subject of astronomy. After six months he ob-
tained a position as a professor at the university of Toulouse where he then 
lectured on Aristotle’s treatise De anima. We do not know what exactly it was 
that he was teaching; the commentary on this text was part of the foundational 
course in philosophy, and there were several ways to treat it. In Toulouse the 
Italian met the Portuguese Francisco Sanches († 1623), another philosopher in 
exile who cordially dedicated to him one copy of his book Quod nihil scitur 
(Nothing is Known). This was a token of a friendship which was answered by 
the recipient with a handwritten note (and hopefully unbeknownst to the do-
nor): “It is amazing that this ass should call himself a doctor” (Canone ed. 
1992, 86f). Like so many other Renaissance writers, this skeptic had been at-
tacking the Aristotelian authority. The keyword “ass” reveals that Bruno 
counted him among those philologists whose merely rhetorically oriented sci-
entific views and positions he had rejected all of his life. 
Considered an apostate of both the Catholic as well as the Calvinist de-
nomination, he found himself in the middle of France. This country had been 
in turmoil due to religious wars in the second half of the sixteenth century, 
ensuing especially between reformed Calvinists, locally known as Huguenots 
(a parody on “Eidgenossen,” i.e., Confederates), and Catholics. The Queen 
consort of France, Catherine de’ Medici († 1589), together with the leader of 
the French league against the Huguenots and the king’s claim to power, Henri 
I, Duke of Guise († 1588), went so far as to instigate a massacre of Hugue-
nots. This was the so-called St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre which took 
place on August 24, 1572; together with thousands of sympathizers of Calvin-
ism, the philosopher Petrus Ramus (Pierre de la Ramée) was also among the 
dead. Even though Toulouse, by and large a Catholic city, was a good loca-
tion for Bruno with regard to the inquisitors, it had also always been a den of 
dissidents. Soon he was to go to Paris due to acts of war flaring up yet again 
between Huguenots and Catholics. 
 

 
Three 
 
PARIS: THE POWER OF MEMORY 
 
Paris was offering a wide-ranging milieu of cultural and intellectual groups. It 
was here that the Jesuit Order had originated as a result of a small conspirato-
rial circle of pious Spaniards, and the university life took place in numerous 
colleges. In the summer of 1581 the philosopher arrived, and he gave private 
lectures on mnemonics, as well as—allegedly—thirty lessons on the attributes 
of God. If one considers the number thirty, the content of these lectures im-
mediately becomes apparent. For this number appears in many of his system-
atic treatises; in general terms, it is the development of metaphysical terms on 
thirty levels, in thirty stages, and in thirty areas. As will have to be demon-
strated, this lecture is connected with mnemonics, and Bruno’s classifying it 
as a lecture on the attributes of God must be seen as motivated by his inten-
tion of giving the impression that this was a topic of philosophical theology. 
At the same time such a topic is prone to be understood in pantheistic terms, 
namely when the attributes of God are meant to signify that the supreme prin-
ciple is exhausting and emptying itself in the finite world. This is possible 
even if one was to give credence to Bruno’s claim made during the inquisi-
tional trial that he obtained these thirty attributes from Thomas’ Summa Theo-
logiae (Firpo 1993, 161). Based on the success of these lectures, it is evident 
that they had to do with mnemonics: Henry III, King of France, allegedly sent 
for Bruno after the regular lectures with the question of whether the memory 
of the Italian was natural or based on magic (Firpo 1993, 161). As the defend-
ant describes the connection, his first published Latin treatise, On the Shad-
ows of the Ideas (De umbris idearum), is a result of these lectures which he 
dedicated to King Henry (Firpo 1993, 162). 
Mnemonics (ars memoriae, artificial memory) was a trendy topic of the 
Renaissance. Its original meaning lay with rhetoric, as it was the product of an 
era when the spoken word was not being sight-read. Especially the ancient 
authors Cicero and Quintilian had established rules and made recom-
mendations as to how the memory could be supported on rhetoric occasions, 
i.e., especially on the occasion of a speech in court and the corresponding dis-
cussion. In simplified terms, this technique consisted in visualizing a system 
of locations such as a house while memorizing the text and linking the parts 
of the speech to these locations (in Greek: topoi; in Latin: loci). When pre-
senting the speech, the orator had to remember this system of locations, i.e., 
the house in the present example; in this way, he was enabled to retrieve the 
speech in its correct context and “interrelation,” and he could furthermore 
place the opposing arguments at the right position within his own argumenta-
tive context with the aim of formulating his counterargument. In this respect it 

14 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
was a simple psychological technique based on the fact that the association 
was not so much dependent on the actual content of the speech but rather on 
the topical context as imagined in the mind of the orator. The topical system 
supports the presence of mind in the speaker regardless of whether or not he is 
able to think factually of the right argument in the right place. There are two 
interesting philosophical aspects of this rhetorical aid. On the one hand, the 
inner structure of the speech is being detached from the factual content. It is 
therefore conceivable that intellectual issues are linked to each other in a way 
that does not depend on whether or not these issues are actually being 
thought. On the other hand, however, there is a tendency for something like a 
structure or an interrelation to become independent, a structure which is in 
and of itself universal and, as such, behind or above the issues. Mnemonics 
deals therefore with a universal structure, and it does so with regard to the 
functioning of the mental activity of the human being. It is, as it were, about 
metaphysics and cognition. 
Bruno transformed mnemonics into a universal theory, based on the uni-
ty of the intellect in the variety of its expression. The philosopher from Nola 
offered an important innovation to the French King in De umbris, and this in-
novation consisted in a new system used for the specification of words by 
means of a combination of letters and images. One such aspect ought to be 
mentioned; it has been reconstructed by Rita Sturlese due to the fact that the 
original edition contains disfiguring typographical errors. As a basis one must 
assume the construction of five concentric and independently rotating circles, 
each divided into thirty areas. Every one of these areas is assigned a syllable 
consisting of one vowel and one consonant, i.e., BA, BE, BI, BO, BU, CA, 
CE, etc. There are corresponding stages to each of the five circles, similar to a 
sentence: the first circle corresponds to an agens (an acting subject), the se-
cond to an actio (an action), the third to an insigne (a description or an attrib-
ute), the fourth to an adstans (something that is associated), and finally, the 
fifth to a circumstantia (another circumstance). Each single syllable is as-
signed a concrete image, a concrete attribute, etc. Now if a certain word is 
supposed to be memorized, then the syllables are put together, and a sentence 
is formed using their corresponding images, actions, attributes, and so forth, 
resulting in a general picture. Sturlese uses the word NUMERATORE as an 
example: following the method suggested by Bruno, the classification in this 
case is NU = Apis (the founder of medicine), ME = with a rug, RA = mourns, 
TO = bound, RE = a woman on a three-headed hydra. These result in an im-
age that can be formulated in the following sentence: Apis is weaving a rug, 
clothed in rags and with his feet bound together, while a woman sits on a 
three-headed hydra in the background (Bruno 1991, De umbris, p. LXV). This 
means that every word to be memorized can be composed in an image where-
as similar words (i.e., words stemming from predominantly common sylla-
bles) produce similar images. 

 
Paris: The Power of Memory 
15 
In principle, Bruno continues to build on extant textbooks on mnemon-
ics that had been in vogue towards the end of the Middle Ages and during the 
Renaissance period, be it to the end of political or juridical speech, be it also 
to the end of organizing knowledge, for instance in the realm of medicine. 
The special feature of Bruno’s system is the fact that from the outset there is 
no associative correlation between the images assigned to syllables or entire 
words on the one hand, and the words to be memorized on the other hand. A 
further effect stems from turning the concentric circles and thereby forming 
sentences, and thus complex images, to which no real word corresponds; 
however, on the basis of the affinity to similar extant words, images, and sen-
tences, the sense or point of it is open to speculation. Creating such complex 
word-image composites does offer an aesthetic aspect, apart from the tech-
nical one which we can only take for granted after 400 years of further devel-
opment in the areas of literacy and scientific organization. Bruno is using the 
twenty-three letters of the Latin alphabet to create these and other circles in 
De umbris idearum, and he includes Upsilon, Phi, Omega, and Theta from the 
Greek, and Aleph, Tsade, and Shin from the Hebrew alphabet. In his opinion, 
adding these seven letters to the Latin alphabet facilitates the formation of all 
the words of these three sacred languages as well as all those languages which 
are derived from them. This is so because the remaining letters of the Greek 
and Hebrew alphabet have equivalents in the Latin alphabet. In this way Bru-
no provides a technical justification for his preference for the number 30 in all 
of his combinatory treatises, first to last, even though there is no mentioning 
of mnemonics but rather gradations of being, cosmology, and suchlike. Thus 
far goes the technical example found in this treatise. 
With this, however, its content is by no means exhausted, as it consists 
of various sections. A large and important part deals with psychology of the 
memory, as well as with a metaphysical substantiation. Bruno portrays in 
many rounds a technique of producing images which in turn represent letters 
and words, and it may look like a complicated tool to assist in remembering—
and perhaps even constructing—verbal expressions, and it ought to be the task 
of a practitioner to determine its usefulness. The philosopher, however, won-
ders what exactly it is that is being produced: does it really exist? And if it 
does, what is the achievement of this production? What is it that the human 
intellect is doing when it produces terms and images on its own initiative? 
The intellect ties a basic structure to a form by way of an organ (Bruno 1991, 
De umbris, 77), as if painting inwardly, for writing also is an inward inter-
twining of words and assigning of symbols and letters (Bruno 1991, De um-
bris, 75). Thus far, the mnemonic images are fantasy products in the colloqui-
al sense. Now, however, this production of images and the combination of 
symbols and meanings parallels that which nature itself does. 
Nature in this sense, however, is not to be confused with the external 
condition in the Aristotelian sense, which we would describe using the terms 
“matter” and “form”; rather, it is an internal energy forming that which “is”—

16 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
an energy which “concretizes” in the visible things. Using an example of a 
classical Aristotelian term: human nature is not a logical term which can be 
said about one person or another and is thus an external comparability be-
tween individuals. (Modern metaphysics would call this a universal attribute.) 
Rather, as Bruno put it, it is “something physical which is contracted both in 
everything and in the individuals” (here he is using the term contractum; Bru-
no 1991, De umbris, 70). Thus it is not merely about human nature, but about 
nature in general; it is not merely a random principle, but rather about the 
universal principle: “It is nature which adapts the bodies to the souls. Nature 
provides the appropriate tools for the souls … Nature itself is present to you 
in everything and in all that is” (Bruno 1991, De umbris, 68f). If, therefore, 
one moves away from imagining art as working externally on some matter, 
and then proceeds to imagining art as an activity acting from within, creating 
the form from the matter, then “art is nothing but an capacity of nature which 
is akin to the intellect” (Bruno 1991, De umbris, 67). 
This, however, does not yet eliminate the argument according to which 
the images produced by mnemonics are merely imaginary products. Likewise, 
it is true that according to Bruno, the image is a means of cognition, and said 
image means “the representation of the matter known, inasmuch it is entitled 
to such representation due to an affinity to that which can be known; it [i.e., 
an image] also means a spiritual and nonmaterial entity according to which it 
exists in the one who recognizes it” (Bruno 1991, De umbris, 59). The Do-
minican had copied this concept of the image (species) word for word from 
Thomas Aquinas (Qu. de veritate III 1 ad 2); however, he used it so as to pro-
vide evidence of the productivity of the intellect, all the while (and unlike his 
teacher) presupposing that this spiritual and nonmaterial form of being pos-
sesses a continuing autonomy in the sense of this effective nature. If, then, 
one intends for the fantastic forms of mnemonics not to be mere chimeras, 
one is required to prove that the figurative products of the mind are realities. 
Since there are undoubtedly differences between real things (such as individ-
ual human beings or souls) and the entire course of nature, it needs to be 
demonstrated that these ontological differences are nothing but gradual differ-
ences, that is to say, differences with regard to the stages of existence. And it 
is exactly this gradation of existence, a hierarchy, as it were, with which Bru-
no is operating from the outset in De umbris idearum. 
To him, umbra (the shadow) is the image for the diversity of the various 
stages of existence, yet at the same time also their close connection. This pre-
sents the concern of cognition and memory. The shadow is thus not simply 
darkness, obscurity, something that renders the things unrecognizable, but ra-
ther an indication, possibly even a last sign of light. “Nature does not permit a 
direct progression from one extreme to the other (from the supreme principle 
to the lowest particulars) but rather makes use of the mediation between shad-
ows and shaded light.” (Bruno 1991, De umbris, 36) “The shadow does not 
belong to darkness; rather, it is a trace of the dark found in the light, or a trace 

 
Paris: The Power of Memory 
17 
of light in darkness, or an equal participant in light and darkness, or a compo-
site of light and darkness, or a mixture of light and darkness, or neither one of 
those and separated from them. And the latter is due to the fact that it is not 
the entire truth of the light, or because it is false light, or because it is neither 
true nor false, but rather a trace of what is true or what is false.” (Bruno 1991, 
De umbris, 26). As the title of this first published treatise (The shadows of 
Ideas) promises, the ideas (i.e., the pure intellectual forms; that what is ulti-
mately to be known and, as soon as it is recognized, is also the only truth) are 
recognizable in the form of shadows. In other words, it asserts that the dark-
ness of human cognition should not give rise to skeptical resignation; rather, it 
is an incentive to proceed through the shadows and progress to the light—and 
furthermore (and this might be even more important), to acknowledge and 
clarify the relative rights of the shadows as the lower gradations of being and 
of truth. 
Once again one might ask impatiently: is this metaphysical effort 
worthwhile in order to justify a technique of memorizing? One must look for 
an answer in the use of analogies. If there is an analogy between the pro-
duction of mnemonic images and the terms referring to the production of the 
nature of particularities (which are elements of a suspended nature, as it 
were), if therefore the images suggested by Bruno derive their right to exist 
exclusively from the creativity of the imagination, with their strict logic being 
situated on this level, and finally, if the productivity of the human imagination 
in turn derives its right to exist from the fact that human imagination in turn is 
a product of the intellectually and perhaps even intelligently acting nature—
then it ought to be possible, with the help of the intellect, to decipher the natu-
ral powers so as to produce things with the same right and the same power 
belonging to nature, and these things would then be real, because they are 
natural. Thus, if the analogy derived from a mere comparison is transferred 
and applied to a correspondence within nature itself, then all of a sudden the 
fantastic task presents itself to not only create imaginary products, but reality. 
This is the ideal of magic. 
A more modest variant reads as follows: the producer of mnemonic im-
ages (with the help of which he summarizes the topical content of his argu-
mentation or concepts) is not only the creator of his images and the guarantor 
of the coherence of his thoughts. He also knows the images because he him-
self has created them. Now it may be that he will never arrive at the level of 
nature in the sense of a universal intellectual force so as to act with it or on 
behalf of it. But it ought to be possible to understand the intellectual structure 
and the specific manner in which nature operates, produces, controls, and 
manifests itself, since the human intellect is of a similar nature and therefore 
operates on an analogous level. If, therefore, nature in its external visibility is 
not being formed, isolated, made finite, and fashioned by a creator who is po-
sitioned outside of it and influences it externally, but rather by an energy 
which is inherent in things, and if the human intellect itself is such an inner 

18 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
principle—even though it is not possible to be creative in a nature-like man-
ner or alongside it, then by virtue of the interrelation of the intellectual struc-
tures it ought at least to be possible to recognize reality as it “truly” is, by rec-
ognizing precisely these operating principles of nature. This is the task of 
cosmology or, more generally, the philosophy of nature. 
There is yet an unusual dialog which precedes this textbook on mne-
monics and its psychological and metaphysical grounds. This dialogue, on the 
one hand, formulates some objections to mnemonics, e.g., that it could be 
simpler to memorize the things themselves instead of the mnemonic sentenc-
es. On the other hand, it also presents the broader standards of the book. The 
world of things and the realm of cognition, as it is said, are in the process of a 
constant change and yet at the same time in the process of a constant duration, 
so that the intellect is oriented towards constancy while the senses are orient-
ed towards progress. An analogy of this is the sun which is always one and 
the same, and will remain as such, yet always appears differently and also al-
ways produces new things (Bruno 1991, De umbris, 13). As is said further on, 
this book “about the ideas contracted to an internal writing” (Bruno 1991, De 
umbris, 14) does not only provide simple mnemonics but rather introduces to 
a way of a manifold fabrication of skills (Bruno 1991, De umbris, 21). 
The peculiarity of this introduction is the fact that those participating in 
this dialog are Hermes, Philothimus, and Logifer. It seems that Logifer (“the 
one who is bearing the meaning”) is the spokesman of the author, and we may 
certainly associate Logifer with Lucifer, albeit not in the sense of the devil but 
rather in the sense of a quotation from Plotinus (VI 7:1). According to this, 
God has equipped the face with “light-bearing” eyes so that they might have 
an affinity to light (Bruno 1991, De umbris, 47). The other interlocutor is Phi-
lothimus the Well-meaning; it is he who usually raises the issues. Now Her-
mes is the main speaker, and one is reminded of the Egyptian sage Hermes 
Trismegistus who had become most popular in the Renaissance culture ever 
since Marsilio Ficino (1433–1499) had translated the Corpus Hermeticum 
from Greek to Latin. (Corpus Hermeticum are those writings which are asso-
ciated with the sage.) The relatively young philosopher Bruno has his debut 
treatise presented by no one less than the highest Christian-pagan authority of 
the Renaissance. 
The dialog opens with an impressive monolog of the same Hermes: 
“Pray proceed, for you know that the sun and the art are one and the same …” 
And ultimately the two other speakers urge Hermes (whose name also refers 
to the messenger of the gods) to present the agenda of this treatise. This is 
first of all an excellent PR trick. It arouses curiosity and raises the standards 
of the treatise to a universal philosophical and intellectual level; from there, 
the author is able, with the help of the messenger of the gods and the ancient 
sage, to look down on the extant literature regarding this topic, ranging from 
classical antiquity to his contemporaries. He is above such authors who “gather 
together sentences from others here and there and gather around those innu-

 
Paris: The Power of Memory 
19 
merable authors who strive for immortality with regard to future generations 
and at the expense of others” (Bruno 1991, De umbris, 20). The author inten-
tionally monopolizes all those who have made a genuine effort in using their 
own intellect to arrive at a philosophical contemplation of the things, be it in 
the form of the Pythagorean mysteries, the Platonic beliefs, or the Aristotelian 
logical calculations (Bruno 1991, De umbris, 22). He does this, however, with 
the generous gesture of one who is above all of these. The debutant on the Pa-
risian intellectual scene begins with an outrageous claim of authenticity and 
authority, of individually recognized truth which is universally valid, and he 
will uphold this claim until his very end. Certainly all of this is also rhetoric, 
but in the sense of rhetoric as understood in the Renaissance era, i.e., the en-
forcement of a rationally justifiable idea by means of images, literature, and 
also emotions. 
During his ten years of public appearance between 1582 and 1591, Bru-
no published numerous treatises on mnemonics and rhetoric. In addition to De 
umbris idearum he wrote Clavis magna (The Great Key), and time and again 
he refers to this treatise, but it is nowhere to be found. Almost at the same 
time as De umbris idearum the dialog Cantus Circaeus (Circe’s Song; OL II 
1) was published; it contains an appendix on mnemonics. Another contempo-
raneous treatise is On the Comprehensive Structure and the Supplement to the 
Lullian Art (De compendiosa architectura et complemento artis Lullii, OL II 
2), that is, a treatise dealing with the art of Raymond Lull. Furthermore, there 
are two related treatises on the Thirty Sigla (Explicatio triginta sigillorum and 
Sigillus sigillorum; all three OL II 2), published in England in 1583. Three 
years later, he published a commentary on Aristotelian physics by adapting 
mnemonic principles (Figuratio Aristotelici physici auditus, OL I 4), and fur-
thermore, two treatises on Lullian art, i.e., The Lamp of Combinations accord-
ing to Lull (De lampade combinatoria Lulliana, Wittenberg 1587) and The 
Search of Images and the Lamp of Combinations according to Raymond Lull 
(De specierum scrutinio et lampade combinatoria Raymundi Lullii, Prague 
1588, both OL II 2). During Bruno’s Wittenberg period, in 1587, a treatise on 
disputation appeared, entitled On Procedure and the Searching Lantern of the 
Logicians (De progressu et lampade venatoria logicorum), and finally, to-
gether with his great Frankfurt treatises, On the Composition of Images, Signs, 
and Ideas (De imaginum, signorum et idearum compositione, both OL II 3); 
the latter is a treatise on the technique of the production of images for mne-
monics. The likewise later treatise Lantern of the Thirty Statues (Lampas trig-
inta statuarum, OL III) is on the verge between both mnemonic rhetoric and 
cosmology. Those book titles were not unique at that time, and yet meant to 
arouse wonder and curiosity. Most treatises claim to have a practical sense: 
the technique of remembering and reproducing knowledge; it was this pur-
pose which was emphasized for the most part to patrons, starting with the 
French King. On the other hand, under the above mentioned claims the dis-
tinction between theory and practice cannot be strong, as the practice is based 

20 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
on a strongly Platonizing theory; thus Bruno says occasionally that “such a 
distinction [was made] only for the sake of the lessons” (OL II 1, 247). 
The references to the Lullian art are in need of some elucidation. Ray-
mond Lull (Raimundus Lullus, Ramon Llull, also Lully, 1232–1316), the Cat-
alan theologian, philosopher, and poet, had invented some sort of universal 
science, among other things. This universal science had become very popular 
in the Renaissance era up to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (†1716), for it was the 
boom of universal sciences, and Bruno also wished to contribute to these. 
Lull’s universal science, Ars generalis, was universal with regard to its inten-
tion and topic. The intention was to provide an instrument for science in gen-
eral and at the same time to contribute to reconciliation between the peoples, 
especially between Muslims and Christians, if not the conversion of the gen-
tiles. The basic principle was some sort of natural theology; in this theology, 
the contemplation of God was to be made possible through the analysis and 
connection of his basic “names” or attributes, respectively, such as goodness, 
greatness, duration, power, wisdom, etc. At the same time Lull presupposed a 
continuous gradation of the dignity of things, or the dignity of that which ex-
ists: from inanimate matter, such as stones, through the human being to God. 
A third model of thought was added to this: on condition that the attrib-
utes of God are to be found in creation in a sparser way and that creation is an 
expression of God’s being at work, there is a type of operating and relating 
among things that is common to God as well as to all things. This manifests 
itself in things as the aspiration to perfection, in view of the whole as a uni-
form metaphysical structure of being. Therefore the effect of the Good is ex-
pressed in the one who makes good, in what can be made good, and in making 
good (bonitas, bonificia, bonificabile, bonificare). Everything on any level is 
a reiteration of the first level. Within the realm of natural theology, according 
to which God’s attributes are simultaneously present and even identical in 
him, all the attributes of God are equivalent to each other and simultaneously 
combined. Consequently, Lull’s physics and epistemology consist in combin-
ing things, attributes, and stages of existence with each other as effects of 
God. To that end he used in his treatises varied models of concentric circles 
which could be rotated against each other; in these circles, the different levels 
and attributes were indicated with letters. 
It is apparent that Giordano Bruno has adopted such circular models 
from Raymond Lull or his successors. But it is likewise easily identifiable that 
this Lullian model of concentric circles has served as an example for the syl-
lable technique in De umbris idearum; here, following the structure of the 
grammatical sentence, images are being produced using the subject, predicate, 
adjective, and adverbs. In the same way Lull had already partly claimed that 
with the help of his combination theory, not only could knowledge be repro-
duced, but also newly created, namely by the virtually mechanical combina-
tion of attributes and things in the circular models. Such creativity likewise is 
no fantasy in Lull’s work; rather, on the basis of the continuous logic of eve-

 
Paris: The Power of Memory 
21 
rything which exists and every thought, it is a participation in the productive 
energy of nature and God’s working in all, including the realm of thought. 
The self-imposed missionary goal of the Catalan, by the way, was not based 
on a Eurocentric conceit of Christianity, but rather on the presupposition of 
the anthropological unity of all mankind, gentiles and Christians alike, and on 
the accessibility of the rationality of the world to each intellect inasmuch as 
the boundaries of languages and cultures are being overcome by a universal 
model. 
Roughly 300 years later the Lullian art provided a most welcome alter-
native to Aristotelian logic with which the Italian philosopher had grown up. 
Therefore, in his various treatises of mnemonics, he was eager to translate al-
so this logic to the language of the Aristotelian scholarly philosophy and, 
from there, make it comprehensible. Thus, in his early treatise On the Com-
prehensive Structure and the Supplement to the Lullian Art (De compendiosa 
architectura et complemento artis Lullii, OL II 2), he begins for example in 
an entirely scholarly manner with the four Aristotelian causes. He then 
claims, however, that this “art” even transcends classical metaphysics in that 
it “contains that which is thought to exist, and that which exists in reality” 
(OL II 2, 8). 
The difference between “that which is thought to exist” and “that which 
exists in reality” was a fundamental problem of scholastic logic and ontology. 
This problem had been discussed in great detail by Bruno’s contemporary, the 
Jesuit Francisco Suárez (1548–1617). According to the classical Aristotelian 
theory, the objects of our knowledge gained from the sensory perceptions are 
being processed by intellectual activity. Knowledge that is deserving of this 
name does only exist, however, if there is a corresponding “objective” being 
outside of the intellect. For there are also objects (imaginations)—so goes the 
scholastic explanation—which only exist in the intellect, that is to say, which 
have an “objective being” only in the intellect. This methodologically clean 
distinction between things that are merely thought and things that are real, 
however, marks a rift between the intellect and the world, or between 
knowledge and that which is known, respectively. This rift was to deepen 
more and more in the course of centuries and was highlighted most fiercely in 
the transcendental philosophy of Immanuel Kant († 1804). He declared the 
external reality to be virtually unrecognizable so that only visual forms, the 
‘forms of intuition’ are the basic conditions and guarantors of cognition. Tra-
ditional scholastic philosophy regarded fantasy as a transitional stage in ra-
tionally processing the sensory impressions to arrive at well-founded 
knowledge. 
Bruno, on the contrary, regards the creations of fantasy as objects of 
knowledge with equal rights as the signs for things and abstract concepts inso-
far the creativity of the fantasy keeps the inner structure of nature. As an ex-
ample for this, he uses the naturally inherent enmity between wolf and sheep; 
this enmity is at the same time a relationship which is being expressed in the 

22 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
exterior appearance of these two animals (OL II 2, 167f). In this connection it 
is useful (and for skeptics, entertaining) to know that in the realm of magic, 
the following is regarded as a common fact: a drum made of sheep skin will 
crack if a drum made of wolf skin is struck right next to it; this is so because 
even then the natural enmity between both animals is manifested in the fear of 
the sheep. Fantasy plays an important role at the beginning of the treatise on 
the Sigil of all Sigla (Sigillus sigillorum, OL II 2). Sigillus refers to the short-
hand symbol as well as a coat of arms in which an impresa, the motto of the 
owner, is expressed. (Bruno uses the latter in Eroici furori.) The fundamental 
sigil is said to imply all science and the art of all arts (OL II 2, 217). It is said 
there that in the realm of mnemonics, the “phantasibilia”—that is to say, eve-
rything which can be an object of fantasy, and that really includes every-
thing—contain the seed of everything (166). Whereas classical logic (and also 
the Renaissance logic) differentiates between the discovery, the arrangement, 
the assessment, and the recollection of the possible objects of knowledge, 
Bruno’s art summarizes all these skills in this one science, so much so that it 
bridges a rift between that which is merely perceived and that which is scien-
tifically known. This knowledge is the knowledge of reality since it has been 
produced by the same powers by which reality is brought forth. And because 
this is so, the rift between “that which is thought to exist” and “that which ex-
ists in reality” is likewise bridged, leastways to all appearances of the claim 
made to this effect. 
Bruno adopted the figurative representation in circles and diagrams part-
ly from scholastic logic, partly from Raymond Lull. It is an expression for the 
fact that he deliberately dismisses the tension between reality and cognition. 
Following the terminology of classical logic, he expresses it in this way (OL 
II 2, 325): in general there are three forms of proof. 1. the proof from the ul-
timate cause per se (this, however, is no scientific topic), 2. the proof from the 
cause of being (propter quid—“therefore”), and 3. the proof from the cause of 
knowledge (quia—“because”). Both actually scientific forms of proof had 
been subject to meticulous analysis in the sixteenth century, especially by Ja-
copo Zabarella (1533–1589), an Aristotelian philosopher from Padua. It 
seems generally certain that this discussion in the end led to Galileo Galilei’s 
new scientific method (e.g., H. Mikkeli, J. Zabarella, Helsinki 1992). This 
discussion as well has to do with the fundamental difficulty regarding the sub-
ject content of scientific statements in the realm of nature. Now Bruno adopts 
the claim (e.g., in De lampade combinatoria Lulliana which was quoted earli-
er on) that the Lullian proving method must be added to, if not given prece-
dence over, the two other methods as it assumes an inner relationship among 
all worldly things and all ideas. The proofs taken from the causes of being and 
cognition differ from each other in that the former works in an a priori man-
ner and the latter in an a posteriori manner. (In one case, the knowledge of 
causes precedes the effect which is to be determined; in the other case, the 
cause is deducted from the effect.) In contrast to this, the Lullian method sim-

 
Paris: The Power of Memory 
23 
ultaneously “brings along” (comportantur) both the causes and the knowledge 
at the same time. For the line of demonstration, based on the operating meth-
od that is derived from that which operates, evinces at the same time the cause 
and knowledge about it. Lull himself had called it the line of argumentation 
“from that which is equal, or that which can be equated” (ex aequalibus seu 
coaequaevis). We encountered it already as gradations of the one who makes 
good, what can be made good, and making good (OL II 2, 325). 
If one tries to comprehend this thought, the difficulty of understanding 
Renaissance mnemonics and especially Bruno’s mnemonics yet remains, al-
beit on a more technical level in that one must struggle with the production of 
wheels, tables, lists, and images. On a fundamental semiotic level, however, 
Bruno’s approach must be plausible. As he says in his treatise De imaginum, 
signorum et idearum compositione (OL II 3): “Idea, imagination, assimilation, 
composition, expression, and naming—all these are generally the task of God, 
nature, and the intellect. Appropriate to the analogy among these, then, nature 
relates to the divine activity in a miraculous way whereas the human genius—
in that it demands higher standards, as it were—reproduces the work of na-
ture” (OL II 3, 89f). However, one needs to see this process of multi-level im-
itation not only from the difference between the stages but also from the 
viewpoint of their connection. Modern philosophy, be it epistemology or se-
miotics, has provided instruments that facilitate understanding the signifying 
power of images and—in general—the products of the human intellect as re-
alities. Certainly Bruno could not have had such intentions, as he did not have 
the problems of post-rationalist philosophies. However, starting from the 
scholastic basis of the sixteenth century, in connection with alternative philo-
sophical concepts (such as the aforementioned concept of Lull), he is striving 
for similar results. 
 

 
Four 
 
OFF TO LONDON: SATIRE, 
METAPHYSICS, AND ETHICS IN ITALIAN 
 
Still in Paris, Bruno published his first book in Italian, Candelaio (Chandler 
or: Candlebearer); on the title page, the author refers to himself as “Bruno 
Nolano, Academico di nulla Academia, detto il Fastidio” (Bruno from Nola, 
Academic of no Academy, a.k.a. The Troublemaker). Every now and then the 
play is being performed in modern times, and it is as funny, complex, rude, 
vulgar, and learned as Italian comedies of the sixteenth century are known to 
be. One ought to be reminded of the comedy The Mandrake (Mandragola) by 
the political philosopher Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527). The main protag-
onists are a man who is in love, an alchemist, and a pedant; with this, it is 
clear that love, science, and erudition are thematic threads of the play. Alt-
hough it contains a great number of allusions to philosophical theories to be 
found in other treatises by Bruno, it does not make any sense to analyze the 
comedy at this point. Bruno himself says in one of the various prefaces: “the 
theme, subject, and its method, arrangement and other details will, I assure 
you, emerge in due order … which is much better than if that order were to be 
narrated to you” (Candelaio, Proprologo 41; Candlebearer, 68). 
This comedy marks the beginning of the series of Bruno’s Italian treatises 
which he was soon to publish in England; it was in Paris at the latest that he 
came to know Michel de Castelnau (1518/20–1592) who once again was sent 
on a royal commission to the court of Queen Elizabeth I in London. Castelnau 
was a diplomat who had traveled to many places, and his most important task 
on missions throughout Italy, the Holy Roman Empire, Switzerland, England, 
and Scotland was to even out conflicts between Protestants and Catholics. In 
1592, he composed informative memoirs about the 1570s in France. The Ital-
ian philosopher spent about two years with Castelnau in London. The various 
dedications of the works that had been produced in London reveal that Bruno 
had mixed with the courtly and diplomatic circles more than he had with 
those of the universities and colleges. His familiarity with the diplomat, how-
ever, also had the side effect that the English ambassador reported Bruno’s 
arrival in advance to the London court, with the additional remark: “a profes-
sor in philosophy … whose religion I cannot commend” (Spampanato 1933, 
329). 
Bruno reached his greatest achievement of his life (and beyond his life) 
in London, for he published a series of dialogues in Italian which dominate 
his fame until the present time. Here the critic of Aristotle, the herald of the 
Copernican theory, the knight errant of freedom of thought, and the opponent 

26 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
to Christianity enters the world; as such he was known especially since the 
late eighteenth century, and he was talked about as a secret tip in libertine cir-
cles. Now it is just “Bruno the Myth” which has provoked all sorts of specula-
tions about his adventures and activities in England, including a story about 
Bruno as a secret agent. Speculations are not bad as long as they can be re-
garded as an expression of unsolved and complex interrelations, as is the case 
with Bruno’s stay in England. In any case, the facts allow the assertion that on 
the one hand he sought a career at the University of Oxford (as he had previ-
ously done in Geneva and Toulouse); on the other hand, however, he found 
his audience at the court of Queen Elizabeth. The emigrant had a choice of 
two shark tanks, as it were: the renowned university where he had to make a 
name for himself as a new, yet acceptable, scholar—and the court where his 
host, the French ambassador, had to carry out a delicate mission in the midst 
of political tensions between Catholics and Protestants, France and Spain, 
England and Scotland. Here the apostate was apparently a problematic case in 
the area of religion and politics, just as the English ambassador had reported 
from Paris. Before acknowledging the London treatises in their entirety, a 
compilation of dates might be helpful (cf. Bruniana et Campanelliana 1995, 
21ff). 
Bruno left France in the spring of 1583 after he “had bid farewell due to 
the tumults which had been erupting there [in Paris], and went to London with 
letters from the King himself in order to live with the ambassador of His Maj-
esty, Michel de Castelnau, Lord of Mauvissière; in his house I did nothing but 
be his guest” (Firpo 1993, 162). In the month of June, the Polish Count Albert 
Laski (Alasco) visited England and was introduced to the University of Ox-
ford which arranged disputations in his honor. Laski (1536–1605) had origi-
nally been a Calvinist, but before the Polish Calvinists split up into Antitrini-
tarians (the so-called Arians, after Arius) on the one hand, and the remaining 
Calvinists on the other hand, he converted to Catholicism in 1569 for reasons 
of political opportunism. His trip to England was connected to his struggle for 
power among the Polish nobility. George Abbott, later Bishop of Canterbury, 
who was at Baliol College at that time, reported that Bruno took the floor at 
one of the disputations, eager to cause a stir and to make a name for himself 
in this famous place. It is also possible that Bruno wanted to impress the 
Polish guest and had therefore traveled with him from London to Oxford, 
perhaps in the hope of finding academic and religious accommodations in Po-
land. At any rate Abbott reported (p. 88): 
 
When that Italian Didapper [a diving duck], who intituled himselfe, Phi-
lotheus Iordanus Brunus Nolanus, magis elaboratae Theologiae Doctor, 
&c. with a name longer then his body, had in the traine of Alasco the 
Polish Duke, seene our Vniversity in the yeare 1583. his hart was on 
fire, to make himselfe by some worthy exploite, to become famous in 
that celebrious place, Not long after returning againe, when he had more 

 
London: Satire, Metaphysics, and Ethics 
27 
boldly then wisely, got vp into the highest place of our best & most re-
nowned schoole, stripping vp his sleeues like some Iugler, and telling vs 
much of chentrum & chirculus & chircumferenchia (after the pronuncia-
tion of his Country language) he vndertooke among very many other 
matters to set on foote the opinion of Copernicus, that the earth did goe 
round, and the heavens did stand still; wheras in truth it was his owne 
head which rather did run round, & his braines did not stand stil. 
 
Moreover one of his listeners claimed to have discovered that Bruno had 
quoted almost verbatim from the works of Marsilio Ficino in his lectures 
(ibid.; added in the margins: De vita coelitus comparanda), and that this dis-
covery led to Bruno’s being sent away, thus destroying his hopes for a lec-
tureship at Oxford (McMullin 1986, 86f). Another witness, the scientist Ga-
briel Harvey, reports that a disputation (most likely in honor of Laski) had 
taken place between John Underhill, Rector of Lincoln College, and Bruno 
who related everything in theology and philosophy to the commonplaces (lo-
cos topicos) and axioms of Aristotle, and “from there he began very quickly 
to argue about every topic” (McMullin). In letting a dialogue partner in the 
Ash Wednesday Supper say the following, Bruno narrates: “Allow me to tell 
you what happened to the man from Nola when he publicly disputed with the 
doctors of theology in the presence of the Polish Count Laski and the English 
nobility. Let me tell you how he knew to answer to the arguments; let me tell 
you how this poor doctor who had been introduced to him as an eminent au-
thority of the academy was caught fifteen times in the trap like a flea by fif-
teen syllogisms” (DI 133). And further: “Inform yourselves about how they 
interrupted and stopped his public lectures, the one on the immortality of the 
soul as well as the one on the fivefold sphere” (DI 134). Another witness 
“NW” who is not further identified reports—possibly on the basis of the 
events at Oxford—that Bruno (“that man of infinite titles among other phan-
tasticall toyes”) had taught “that all sciences come to exist by way of transla-
tions” (Aquilecchia 1993, 244). 
Since research is somewhat controversial and ambiguous as to what ex-
actly it was that Bruno had said at Oxford, it is worthwhile to compile the list 
of topics as they appear in the witnesses: 
 
• Center, circle, and periphery 
• Copernicus’ astronomy 
• The works of Marsilio Ficino 
• Aristotle’s Topics and axioms 
• Syllogisms 
• Immortality of the soul 
• Fivefold sphere 
• Translations 

28 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
While the events are still waiting for their solution, we may treat them as 
a detective story, which needs to consist of crime, opportunity, means, and 
motive. These eight topics, then, are the motive (and some also the weapons). 
These are in fact typical topics of Bruno’s London writings which had certain-
ly been in the process of development when he made his entrance at Oxford in 
an attempt to impress the academic community. A further indicator is his os-
tentatious letter to the vice chancellor and the lecturers of the university which 
was printed in the treatise Explicatio triginta sigillorum, together with the 
dedication to Castelnau (OL II 2). Already the self-introduction that begins 
with “magis laboratae (!) theologiae doctor” contains 140 words, and that is 
obviously what Abbot quotes in his mockery. The later witnesses were famil-
iar with this letter, if not the entire book, and it is probably theory of sigils 
which is meant by “phantasticall toyes.” Nonetheless this letter may have 
been written after the failure and with the arrogance of a loser, as he is hurling 
insults at the pedants and Aristotelians (and in the Italian works, these are the 
people at Oxford): “At the Flood, the donkeys’ droppings supposedly said to 
the golden apples: ‘As apples, we, too, float at the surface!’” (OL II 2, 78). In 
any case it will turn out how spheres, circles, and centers bear a special signif-
icance to Bruno if one puts them in relation to the doctrine of Copernicus and 
extrapolates them into infinity. It will become apparent to what extent Fici-
no’s doctrine of immortality influenced Bruno’s theory of the universal inher-
ence of a soul in everything, what role Bruno grants to Aristotle and his logic, 
and how he understands and interprets philosophizing as translating. The re-
jected applicant returns to the London court, and this also in the figurative 
sense, as he later writes on the condition of Oxford University: “Those who 
are noble by birth or otherwise (even though they conjoin it with the best part 
of nobility, i.e, learned education) are ashamed to work on a doctorate and be 
called ‘doctor’. They are content with being scholars. One finds such people 
in a greater number at the courts than one finds pedants at the university” (DI 
213). 
It is also a certain fact that all treatises which Bruno published in Lon-
don are directed to a courtly audience, not a university community. Apart 
from the aforementioned work on the Thirty Sigla all dialogues are written in 
Italian: the Ash Wednesday Supper; On the Cause, the Principle, and the One; 
On the Infinite, the Universe, and the Worlds; Expulsion of the Triumphant 
Beast; Cabala of Pegasus; Heroic Passions (Heroic Frenzies).. All these have 
Venice as their place of publication, but this was simply a marketing strategy 
on the part of the publisher as Bruno himself admitted later on: Italy had be-
come fashionable at court, just as only the educated nobility read Italian and 
spoke Italian. Incidentally the literary style of these dialogues as well as many 
others of Bruno’s writings fits courtly prose rather than academic material. 
All dialogues are preceded by poems, and by their form the Heroic Passions 
are nothing but educated conversations about Bruno’s sonnets and those of his 
fellow countryman Luigi Tansillo—predominantly sonnets of the English 

 
London: Satire, Metaphysics, and Ethics 
29 
type. There the sonnets are often thematically linked to emblems; this had 
been one of the most popular toys of the intelligent intellectuals. These writ-
ings are dedicated to his host, Castelnau, and the English poet Philipp Sidney 
who had been publishing similar cycles of sonnets. Therefore the Heroic Pas-
sions could also be read as courtly Petrarchian glamor on love, while the phil-
osophical reflections contained therein, on the other hand, had quite some 
parallels to contemporary English literature; a fundamental example of this 
are the so-called Metaphysical Poets in which, similar to the Italian, cosmo-
logical speculations meet paradox puns. This series of philosophical dia-
logues, published in 1584/1585, contains “many different theorems which are 
stuck together so that they do not appear to be science, but they rather appear 
now as dialogues, now as comedies, then as tragedies, then as poetry, then as 
rhetoric; … there is physics, mathematics, morals, logic” and much more (DI 
15)—what the author says about the Ash Wednesday Supper goes likewise for 
the entire work. This first London dialogue propagates especially Bruno’s 
discovery of the Copernican Revolution; the dialogue On the Cause critically 
analyzes Aristotelian physics on the basis of the doctrine of matter and form. 
On the Infinite (De l’infinito; its content is for the most part repeated and ex-
panded in the later treatise De Immenso) elaborates the Copernican and anti-
Aristotelian cosmology. Appropriating Greek mythology, Spaccio de la bestia 
trionfante (Expulsion of the Triumphant Beast) contains some sort of criticism 
of religion with ethical and political implications. Cabala of Pegasus takes up 
again the scolding of pedants, and it does so in the form of a Praise of Folly 
as written by Erasmus of Rotterdam. Finally, the treatise on the Heroic Pas-
sions is more strictly philosophical, again, in connecting epistemology and the 
philosophy of love. 
 

 
Five 
 
GOD IS NOT IDLE: INFINITE 
POSSIBILITIES AND INFINITE REALITY 
 
If we leave aside Frances Yates’ thesis according to which the Ash Wednes-
day Supper (La cena de le ceneri) is written in a threefold code, that is to say, 
a philosophical code about Copernicanism, a political code about the policies 
of Henry II of France, and a poetic code (Yates 1984, 314), then the Supper is 
dealing primarily with Copernicanism and the way Bruno sees himself. As is 
said there, Copernicus had come to the necessary conclusion that it is rather 
the globe which is moving in relation to the universe than it was possible that 
all the many innumerable celestial bodies have the globe as their midst and 
basis for their orbits and influences (cf. DI 29). As is known, the innovation 
proposed by Nicholas Copernicus of Thorn (now Toruń, Poland, 1473–1543) 
and published in his treatise De revolutionibus orbium coelestium was a 
roganization of the orbits traveled by the planets. He describes these as “revo-
lutiones” (revolutions in the sense of circulations), wherefrom the term 
“Copernican Revolution” was coined. The ancient astronomer Ptolemy had 
calculated the planetary orbits on the basis that the earth is at the center while 
the moon, the planets, and the sun are moving around the earth according to 
certain rules and regularities. There were several mathematical difficulties in-
volved with this theory, as some planets seemed to be visibly moving forward 
and backward and in loops, respectively, and this was explained using the 
theory of epicycles (additional circles). In his treatise published in 1543, Co-
pernicus now claimed to simplify these calculations in that he assumed the 
sun to be at the center of the planetary orbital system and the earth. Even 
though the majority of his work consists of tabular calculations, his theory be-
came known mainly through the first book of his treatise in which he present-
ed a general justification not least with reference to ancient examples. 
Bruno discusses this model especially in the fourth dialogue of the Ash 
Wednesday Supper, and he also offers an illustration. In this connection, he 
makes an interesting mistake. According to Copernicus, the earth is moving 
on the third orbit (after Mercury and Venus) around the sun whereas the moon 
is circling the earth on its own small orbit. He describes this in these words: 
“The annual rotation … in which—as we say—the earth is contained together 
with the lunar orbit as in one epicycle” (“annua revolutio locum tenet, in quo 
terram cum orbe lunari tanquam epicyclo contineri dicimus”; DI 141, Annota-
tion). Apparently, Bruno is reading “cum” as “uno” (“with” or “numerically 
one”) and paraphrases to the effect that Copernicus was suggesting for earth 
and moon to be contained in a single and conjoint epicycle. Here the protago-

32 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
nists in the dialogue are disputing whether the alleged marking for the earth 
was nothing but the puncture of a pair of compasses. (This gives rise to the 
supposition that what was available to them was not a printing but rather a 
manuscript.) It is important to note, however, that Bruno evidently had the 
original text written by Copernicus at hand, particularly since a printed edition 
of this book which had possibly belonged to Bruno has been found in the Bibli-
oteca Casanatense in Rome (O. Gingerich, An Annotated Census of Copernicus’ 
De revolutionibus, Leiden 2002, 115; McMullin 1987, 59; Canone ed. 1992, 
93, illustration). At that moment, therefore, when Bruno wants to act like a 
philologist, he is wrong, although his intentions are quite scientific. He at-
tempts to explain why the sun appears to be sometimes bigger, sometimes 
smaller by way of the alleged common rotation of earth and moon on their 
orbit around the sun (DI 140). It is possible that he has something in mind 
which later worked successfully by means of Johannes Kepler’s laws of plan-
etary motion which suggests elliptical orbits instead of circular ones. Bruno 
attributes a similar common circular motion to Mercury and Venus in the 
tenth chapter of the third book of De Immenso (OL I 1). Nonetheless, for him 
it is not about a geometrical structure of the cosmos; rather, he uses this geo-
metrical description in order to portray the “real” nature of the world. 
The new astronomy of Copernicus had raised the question of the math-
ematical structure of the world, and it was this question which continued to be 
discussed far into the seventeenth and eighteenth century, at least from the 
time of Galileo Galilei until Isaac Newton. If scientific knowledge consists in 
the ability of exactly naming the components of the world, and if there are 
various competing scientific theories on the market (as in the example at 
hand, Ptolemy’s and Copernicus’ astronomy), then there is a possibility of ex-
amining the accuracy of such theories: the measurement of results. Astrono-
my, which was especially significant for calendar calculations, could rely on a 
continuous screening by way of the occurrence of predictable constellations in 
star formation. Now astronomy in any case is based on a calculation of geo-
metrical figures, and ever since the time of Plato these figures are known to 
be not “something” by themselves but merely rational constructions. It was 
therefore a large step for Galileo to maintain that the mathematical structure 
of the universe was a reality. 
Copernicus was also aware of this disparity between calculation and reality. 
Therefore Bruno quotes his dedication to Pope Paul III in the third dialog of 
the Ash Wednesday Supper as well as in the ninth chapter of Book III of De 
Immenso; in this dedication, Galileo refers to the liberty of devising geomet-
rical models used to explain stellar motion (DI 90; OL I 1, 384). Bruno how-
ever insists that Copernicus also had assumed to have found the reality of na-
ture through this calculation. He attacks in detail the famous introduction by 
the Protestant theologian Andreas Osiander who had attempted for the first 
time to make the Copernican doctrine acceptable to faithful Christians in em-
phasizing the purely hypothetical character of the Copernican calculations. 

 
God Is not Idle 
33 
This may have sounded like a foolish excuse to the philosopher from Nola; in 
reality it was an important step in the direction of the so-called hypothetico-
deductive method. This method presupposes an explanation and applies it to 
empirical data, and this assumed explanation can claim validity until empiri-
cal data refute the hypothesis or restrict its area of applicability. Osiander says 
in the excerpt quoted by Bruno that it was the task of astronomers to collect 
the data of planetary motion and to “fabricate” geometrical principles as long 
as the “true causes” remain unknown, and with the help of these principles, 
one could calculate constellations. Osiander propagates the Copernican “Rev-
olution” because of its “wonderful and elegant simplification of the calcula-
tion” (DI 88f). Whenever science and reality are intended to be brought in 
line, this is a reductionist viewpoint. 
In the Ash Wednesday Supper now there follow geometrical arguments 
for the plausibility of the Copernican theory, but Bruno has other intentions. 
While Copernicus had pointed out in the aforementioned letter that “mathe-
matics is written mathematically” (OL I 1, 385), his interpreter reduces this 
claim to mere mathematics and in return demands the extension of the Coper-
nican model to reality as a whole. To him, Copernicus’ argumentation is still 
“more mathematical than natural” (DI 29). Bruno unmistakably assumes a 
hypothesis to be a vivid idea, namely that of “an immensely ethereal realm”; 
for him, the universe is “really a sky which is called a space and a dome in 
which there are many stars, thereupon fixed in no other way than the earth as 
well as the moon, the sun, and the countless other celestial bodies in this ethe-
real realm, just as we know about earth” (DI 130f). The stars are moving 
about in this infinite sky “so as to communicate with each other and to mutu-
ally share the principle of life; in certain spaces and at certain intervals some 
orbit around others as it is obvious with those seven planets which are orbit-
ing the sun” (DI 131). This idea is a fantastical image in the sense of the 
mnemonic theory of images; Bruno assumes it to be reality in saying: 
 
It is possible, appropriate, true, and necessary that the earth is rotating 
around its own center so that it may partake in light and darkness, day 
and night, warm and cold; that it is orbiting the sun so that it may par-
take in spring, summer, autumn, and winter; that it is rotating around the 
so called poles and the opposite points of the hemisphere [this seems to 
refer to the fluctuation and tilt of the earth’s axis] for the sake of renewal 
of centuries and the face of the earth so that where there once was the 
sea is now dry land; where there was heat, there is now cold; where the 
tropic makes the equinox occur, and where finally the change of all 
things can take place, and as it is with this planet, so it is with the others 
which, not without a reason, were called worlds by the ancient and true 
philosophers. (DI 131f) 
 

34 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
If Bruno declares this image to be real, then it is on the condition that for 
him a theory is possible, appropriate, true, and necessary at the same time. 
From an epistemological [scientific-theoretical] point of view, though, possi-
bility and reality, adequacy and necessity are opposites. Therefore one must 
ask how Bruno intends to transfer a fantastic idea, a cosmological hypothesis 
into truth. For this, necessity must be first a real and logic necessity at the 
same time, that is to say, the persuasive power of a logical hypothesis must go 
so far as that it presents nothing but a real correlation. The adequacy of the 
parts of the theory cannot be accidental but must consist in a strict manner of 
being mutually dependent. Then necessity is not merely a “thus it ought to 
be,” but truth. If that is so, however, then the congruence of the image or the 
theory turns out to be a possibility which is stylized (like the calculations of 
Copernicus, according to Bruno) to such an extent that it fits together in all its 
parts and consequently is a completely possible necessity. This part must be 
appalling to epistemologists then and now, and yet Bruno touches on a point 
to which all epistemology points, that is to say, the congruence of theory and 
reality. In the eyes of rigorous realists such as most of the Renaissance phi-
losophers, a hypothesis is not worth the paper on which it is written. There-
fore one must ask about the conditions on which a theory (i.e., a plausible 
composition of data and explanations) describes nothing but reality. If this 
requirement is met, then Bruno’s conditions as described above are accepta-
ble, only with the skeptic immediately stating that these conditions are unreal-
izable. Therefore modern-day epistemology concentrates on analyzing those 
forms of thinking which claim to be scientific. 
Here lies the reason why Bruno expands Copernican astronomy to a the-
ory of the infinite world: Possibility here does not mean a shrugging “maybe” 
but rather the plausibility of real connection. In terms of everyday thinking, 
reality is the realization of one of countless possibilities. If, however, the pos-
sibilities are to be regarded as real, then the possibility itself expands to the 
infinite and demands a likewise infinite realization. Thus no longer a field of 
indefinable options and a limited setting of actualities are facing each other; 
rather, infinite possibility now corresponds to infinite reality, for that what is 
necessary is the absolute realization of the possible connection, the possibili-
ties on their part being endless. This thought is much too fascinating for Bruno 
to examine it as regards to logical errors. For according to him, possibility has 
a name: it is God’s omnipotence. An indefinite setting of unrealized possibili-
ties is thinkable only as a logical construct. If, however, reality is supposed to 
be the realization of “real” possibilities, then these possibilities must not just 
be thought but real and actual, and yet again infinite possibility coincides with 
infinite reality. It is Christian theology which has thought about God as infi-
nite possibility although—until Bruno—it put a quite finite reality as its coun-
terpart. 
A very ambitious research program results from this, and Bruno will 
pursue it in the years to follow. He is required to demonstrate how finiteness 

 
God Is not Idle 
35 
is possible at all in view of the correlation of infinite possibilities. He needs to 
show how the parts of the world are interrelated. He needs to explain—and 
this is not meant in an ironic way—why nobody before him had this idea, and 
finally he constantly needs to keep in mind the theological implications of his 
theory. 
In light of the latter point, there are interesting expositions with regard to 
the interpretation of the Bible. The prologue to the Book of Ecclesiastes 
(Qoheleth), which Bruno likes to quote because of its natural-philosophical 
content, says: “The sun rises and the sun goes down; then it presses on to the 
place where it rises.” (Eccl 1:5; cf. DI 122) The philosopher comments this by 
cautioning “the divine Scriptures do not deal with proofs and speculations 
about the things of nature in the service of our comprehension as if it was a 
matter of philosophy; rather, the practice of moral actions is being organized 
by laws in the interest of our intellect and senses” (DI 120). He refers to the 
Book of Genesis as evidence in which sun and moon are called the “two great 
lights,” but one must not conclude from this that all other stars are smaller 
than the moon. This thought is usually compared with Galileo’s famous letter 
to Grand Duchess Christina of Lorraine, dated AD 1615. However, the differ-
entiation between factual information and religious instruction in the Bible, 
has a longstanding tradition since the time of Augustine, whereas Bruno him-
self refers to the Arabic philosopher Algazel (1058–1111); this philosopher 
describes the aim of legislation not to be the search for the truth of things and 
speculations, but rather the quality of customs, the use for society, the coex-
istence of nations, as well as the practice in human society, the preservation of 
peace and the growth of countries (DI 121f). Thus Bruno takes from this Ara-
bic critic of philosophy the distinction between morals and politics on the one 
hand, and the distinction between morals and academic philosophy on the 
other hand. This also means that in his understanding the Bible appeals to the 
natural understanding of ordinary men: “To talk in the terms of truth where it 
is not appropriate means to require a special understanding on the part of the 
people and the uneducated masses from whom the practice is being demand-
ed, just as if one wanted to demand from the hand to possess an eye, even 
though by nature it is not made to see but to act and to follow the vision” (DI 
123). Therefore the authors of Sacred Scripture do not possess any authority 
in matters of nature as regards to which they are “indifferent” as he says at 
this point. This of course entails further reflections on the metaphoric sense of 
Scripture. 
The self-confidence of the philosopher with respect to the fathers of 
Christian morals has its counterpart in the self-confidence with respect to all 
scientists and philosophers who differ from his opinion. Therefore he says re-
peatedly in the Ash Wednesday Supper, while he is referring to Copernicus 
and other authors, what he intends to do in reality is to follow his own 
thoughts. This also means that the originality of his theses must prove itself 

36 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
on the basis of the coherence of his theory, not (i.e., at least not exclusively) 
on the basis of the accordance with any one tradition or any colleagues. 
The question about how the parts of the infinite cosmos are being inter-
related, and superior to that, the question about the relation between infinity 
and particularity are another part of his research program, as has been stated 
earlier. These questions are addressed in the second London dialogue Cause, 
Principle, and Unity (De la causa, principio e uno). We may again take a pas-
sage from the Ash Wednesday Supper as a starting point: here Bruno deals 
with the question of the origin of the tides, a question that has indeed been 
long discussed. Bruno rejects the theory (which had been repeatedly brought 
forward, and which—from a modern perspective—is correct) according to 
which it is the lunar gravity that moves the sea; it is the same theory which 
Galileo will reject later on, albeit based on different arguments. At first Bruno 
produces a mechanistic argument, as it were, which had also been held by Ar-
istotle: movement could only originate by way of contact, i.e., a remote object 
such as the moon could not cause movement on earth without a mediating 
contact. However, since there is an observable temporal connection between 
the lunar phases and the tides, Bruno holds that the moon is not the cause but 
rather a “sign and indication.” The moon indicates what happens on earth, and 
this is possible because of the “order and correspondence of all things and be-
cause of the laws of change which are uniform and proportionate to the laws 
of other changes” (DI 147). The absence of a mechanistic explanation of the 
correlation between moon and tides leads to naming an invisible cause and the 
assumption of a uniform law with respect to both the moon and the earth. This 
law, however, is not a mathematical but a spiritual one, as it were. 
From a global perspective, Bruno does not stand alone with this. Not on-
ly has the doctrine of Copernicus already been taught at Oxford around 1573 
at least temporarily (thus before Bruno’s arrival in England), namely by Hen-
ry Savile; his contemporaries also had worked the Copernican theory of the 
centrality of the sun into their philosophy of nature: John Dee (1527–1608) 
who took an interest in numerous occult sciences and was traveling around 
Europe, just like Bruno, and Thomas Digges (1546–1595), a friend of Robert 
Dudley, Earl of Leicester, who was the chancellor of Oxford University at 
that time (Aquilecchia 1997, Granada 1997). One can describe their explana-
tions using the collective term “hermeticism” coined by Frances Yates, or as 
variants of Neo-Platonism and magic during the Renaissance era, and Bruno’s 
book would then belong to these variants. 
After his brilliant debut on the London scene in the Ash Wednesday 
Supper the Italian feels obliged to provide a few philosophical clarifications. 
In the dialogues Cause and On the Infinite Universe and Worlds (De 
l’infinito, universo e mondi), therefore, he takes a critical look at the Aristote-
lian philosophy of nature which was not only dominant at Oxford but 
throughout the whole of Europe. In Cause he takes apart the terms “cause” 
and “principle” and traces them back to a term of “the One,” while On the In-

 
God Is not Idle 
37 
finite refutes in a special way Aristotelian celestial physics. It had already 
been said in the Ash Wednesday Supper that the purpose of the rotation of the 
earth was its renewal and rebirth (DI 154). Obviously, purpose becomes cir-
cular. Aristotle had taught in his Physics that the purpose was the actual cause 
and the driving force behind the natural powers without there being the need 
to think about an intelligent being. Since late antiquity and especially during 
the Middle Ages, Christian philosophy had attributed the highest intelligent 
being, God, to this final cause. This highest intelligent being, however, is no 
longer an internally active principle of the things but rather an externally con-
trolling principle which is beyond nature, just as the creator with whom it is 
identical. Bruno likewise identifies the active cause and the final cause as a 
higher reason; only for him, this higher reason is identical with a world soul 
(anima mundi). He distinguishes “three kinds of reason: the divine reason 
which is everything, this worldly reason which makes everything, and the re-
maining individual ‘reasons’ which become everything” (DI 234); in all this, 
he retains a residue of transcendence. Nonetheless he proceeds quite quickly 
to demonstrating that this acting reason is both external and internal: internal 
in that it acts from within the matter, and external in that it is not identical 
with matter itself. This acting cause now sets as its goal the perfection of the 
universe; hence, it is also the final cause. 
The distinction between principle and cause had already been difficult in 
Aristotle. In Bruno’s text it expresses only the difference between internal and 
external cause as mentioned. An example from Aristotle’s On the Soul (II 1, 
413) serves Bruno as an explanation. Just as the helmsman is on the ship, so 
the soul is in the body: the helmsman is sailing on the ship, hence he is part of 
the ship; but insofar as he is steering the ship and keeping it in motion, one 
does not regard him as being part of it but rather as being distinct from it. 
Aristotle deemed this comparison to be unsuitable since in terms of natural 
creatures the soul cannot leave the body in the same way that the helmsman 
can leave the ship. According to Bruno as well, the helmsman can never leave 
the ship, for he does not talk about the soul of the individual body but rather 
about the soul of the universe. This soul, “insofar as it invigorates and forms, 
is an inner and formal part of it, but insofar as it directs and steers, it is not 
part nor principle, but cause” (DI 236). Elsewhere he explains the powers of 
the human soul by comparing it to the ship which is being saved or destroyed 
by either the presence or the absence of the helmsman. The power of God, 
however, is wholly and entirely in everything and cannot be absent whereas 
the human being can turn towards it or away from it (Eroici Furori II 1, DI 
1092). This comparison of the soul to a helmsman aroused the mistrust and 
suspicion of the inquisitors in Rome later on because Bruno possibly excludes 
the existence of an individual soul (Firpo 1993, 324f). 
The astronomical thesis of terrestrial motion now runs parallel with the 
animation and universal navigation of the earth and all other celestial objects. 
Or, vice versa: if the entire universe is an animate creature which is controlled 

38 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
by a reason in all departments, then Copernican astronomy is not only more 
plausible in terms of mathematics but even necessary, since this universal rea-
son cannot possibly cause the earth, of all planets, to stand still. From this re-
sult two further thoughts: if perfection is the intended effect of the universal 
reason, then it must also extend to the smallest parts of the matter (DI 235). 
Hence follows the next thought, namely, that all parts must be animate (DI 
239). 
Aristotle had treated the efficient cause and the purpose as factually 
equivalent to the form of the natural objects (e.g. Physics II 8), albeit only 
with regard to the individual objects to be explained scientifically. In this re-
spect, the soul had been thought to be the form of the animate body ever since 
Aristotle. Now for Bruno the soul as anima mundi or world reason is the uni-
versal form of all that exists, and since the emphasis is on “all,” it is infinite. 
Insofar as it is identical with the formed universe while being distinct from it 
at the same time, one is faced with the question about the opposite: that which 
is being formed and what is called “matter” in the Aristotelian tradition. In the 
Italian dialogues the author had presented his subject mixed with jokes and 
polemics; as part of a lecture during his time in Wittenberg (1587), he demon-
strated the same subject in a commentary on Aristotle’s Physics in scholastic 
style. Aristotle had presented the term “matter” as the indefinite, as the under-
lying principle of change, whereas form was the constant element beyond all 
changes; in this way, he managed to make motion and duration in nature phil-
osophically conceivable. Bruno, on the other hand, defines matter as the sub-
stance remaining identical within changes, and similarly to Aristotle (but in 
the opposite sense) he uses the example of carpentry: “Just as there is one 
matter in carpentry which remains, and it is this matter which is one and the 
same in all objects which are being produced through this art, and every alter-
ation takes place with the one and the same object, so one may see one sub-
stratum also in the multitude of forms brought forth by nature. This substratum 
is always recognized by an analogy to the various forms which seem to con-
secutively arise in the substratum” (OL III 304). The so-called “Primary Mat-
ter” of the Aristotelian-scholastic tradition which had always been regarded as 
indefinable, unnamable, and unrecognizable, even as “almost nothing at all” 
(Augustine, Confessions XII:7, 7; DI 289 and 307), now becomes a universal 
substance. 
Plato had already emphasized in Timaeus that one could only arrive at 
the quasi-material framework of natural events by way of analogical deduc-
tion (cf. OL III 9ff on “chaos”). Aristotle had introduced the term “Primary 
Matter” only as an auxiliary term as he was concerned about empirical objects 
of nature. Therefore he inferred analogously the principles of nature from the 
activity of the craftsman: his commentator now deducts the operation of na-
ture from the activity of the craftsman, and the universal matter from the ma-
terial. Bruno states in the fourth dialogue of Cause that the material of the 
craftsman is never formless. The universal matter is one, and in fact it is for-

 
God Is not Idle 
39 
ever so, namely as the whole and each individual thing, while the empirical 
material is gradually being formed in temporal moments, in varied ways, and 
one by one (DI 307). In this context his reference to Averroes († 1198) is con-
spicuous; Averroes is said to have taught that matter consisted in indetermi-
nate expansion; this theory has been opposed and fought by Thomas Aquinas, 
among others, since it renders conceivable the assumption that matter exists 
as infinite expansion, not dependent on forms and thus independent, i.e., it 
may be thought as autonomous substance (DI 306). 
With this new interpretation of the traditional theory of matter the phi-
losopher from Nola seems to take on the role of a materialist; however, he is 
not yet finished. In his opinion, matter itself produces the manifold changing 
forms which one can perceive in the sensual world; here, too, he holds fast to 
the basic philosophical rule that principles must be real and not only instru-
ments used for interpretation. This matter, however, unmistakably receives all 
those characteristics which had already been received by the form as principle 
and universal soul. Only a little later, during his second stay in Paris, Bruno 
published his Theses Against Aristotle (Acrotismus). There he states: “One 
cannot define anything more meager than this Primary Matter which, accord-
ing to Aristotle, is the principle of natural objects; according to the same Aris-
totelian principles, however, this Primary Matter must disappear if the natural 
objects require not a mathematical and logical principle but a natural one in 
the fullest sense” (OL I 1, 101f). 
In summarizing the detailed and multifaceted discussion about this prob-
lem, the following brief assertion can be made: universal form and universal 
matter mean one and the same thing to Bruno. It is a necessity of reason to 
make a distinction between them, just as principle and cause are the same in 
different aspects (DI 181). The universal form, i.e., the anima mundi, is tied 
together with the universal matter in a “great unity” (DI 274). It follows that if 
one thinks according to the Aristotelian thought patterns, the individual ob-
jects no longer constitute the reality. Substances are no longer individual and 
concrete (“composite”) objects consisting of matter and form and in which 
matter provides quantitative determination and form provides that which is 
identifiable. Rather, there is only one substance, the infinite universe as a 
whole which acts as form in certain respects while acting as matter in other 
respects. The individual objects are merely passing and changing manifesta-
tions, and this is exactly Bruno’s theory in this treatise Cause. 
Time and again it has been ascertained that this kind of metaphysics is 
similar to reducing the philosophical principles by René Descartes (1596–
1650) to only two principles, namely the intellectual substance and the mate-
rially extended substance (res cogitans and res extensa); yet, it is even more 
similar to the metaphysics of Baruch Spinoza (1632–1677) who traced these 
two Cartesian principles back to the one substance which he identified with 
God, so that all extant objects are nothing but God’s attributes. Based on his 
approach, Descartes tried to put forward a theory of a purely mechanical 

40 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
physical motion, while Spinoza drafted a theory of human freedom from the 
unity of the intellectual substance. 
Bruno sees an entirely different problem, namely how individual objects 
are supposed to be possible in the framework of a universally active divine 
power. This question is being posed in the concluding fifth dialogue, and it is 
not really being resolved. This famous fifth dialogue on Cause, Principle, and 
Unity begins with a hymn to the “One”: “Thus the universe is One, infinite, 
immovable. One—I say—is the absolute possibility, One is the act, One is the 
form or soul, One is the matter or body, One is the object, One is that which 
is, One is the maximum and optimum” and so forth (DI 318). It is a master-
piece of a rhetoric of unity, and there we find all the commonplaces of the his-
tory of philosophy up to that time, praising unity above multitude. Toward the 
end, however, the virtually prophetical phrase appears: “It is a profound mag-
ic to know how one is to bring out the opposite once one has found the point 
of unification” (DI 340). One can read Bruno’s philosophy of nature in such a 
way as if he wanted to prove the infinity of the cosmos, the omnipotence of 
God and of the anima mundi, and the productivity of matter—even against 
common sense, if necessary. However, it is also evident from the theorem 
quoted above that his rhetoric about philosophy to be “natural” is to be under-
stood in such a way that philosophy misses its target if it is only concerned 
with universalities; in that, it would not address the question of how, and in 
what way, and how understandably the universal principles serve to establish 
that which is concrete, perceptible, and individual. On the level of mnemon-
ics, Bruno has progressed from psychological-technical artifices to the intel-
lectual structure of the objects which one can comprehend intellectually and 
hence memorize. In the realm of cosmology, Bruno assumes a physics of natu-
ral objects (including the stars) in order to find the correlation which trans-
cends these particularities; however, this transcendence only goes far enough 
so as to be regarded as a real reason for the individual objects and their dis-
cernibility. 
Here in this fifth dialogue Bruno demonstrates this in the form of a short 
history of philosophy. He begins with this commendation: “Those philoso-
phers who have found this unity have found their friend Wisdom!” (DI 324). 
He then explains the meaning of this unity. First: This unity summarizes all 
“stages of nature” so that “the One,” the Infinite, does not consist of parts; ra-
ther, variety consists of “parts in the infinite and not parts of the infinite” (DI 
328). This One, then, is that which also produces the multitude. Bruno refers 
to the numerical speculation of Pythagoras and Plato because “mathematical 
constructs per se or by way of analogy contain the existence and the substance 
of things and in this respect trace back the multitude and variety of the species 
to an identical root” (DI 330). Those constructs of mathematical imagination, 
therefore, are based on the unity being understood in the sense of the number 
“one” which is found again in all numbers and, correspondingly, the unity in 
all individual unfoldings. At this point Bruno already reverses the outlook; he 

 
God Is not Idle 
41 
is not concerned with the demonstration of “the One,” but rather with the 
question how this “One” produces “the Many.” This thought in turn demands 
that unity relates to multitude, the infinite relates to the finite, the indivisible 
relates to the divisible not simply as a point relates to pictorial figures; rather, 
“unity is the cause and reason for being individual and being point, and it is 
an absolute principle which can be applied to all that exists” (DI 331). This is 
a strong statement; it is a philosophical postulate, not the result of research. 
For “the intellect clearly proves how the substance of objects consists in uni-
ty, and the intellect then searches for this unity either in truth or in similarity” 
(DI 332). 
So as to properly understand this philosophy of unity, one ought to be 
reminded of the thoughts and observations in De umbris idearum. There the 
author was concerned with the demonstration of the uniform principle of 
thinking and cognition, yet always with regard to the “clarification of shad-
ows” which are seen in their twofold function as signs of light and loss of 
light. Thus the reflections on the unity of the universe make sense to Bruno 
only if they provide information about the structure of the sensual world 
which is accessible to human beings. Therefore, his critique of Plato’s trans-
formation of the Pythagorean theory of numbers aims at establishing that the 
finite objects are not merely figures and depictions of “the One” but rather 
that this “One” is to be found in the objects just as the number “one” is found 
in each number; in this way, the cognition of “the One” leads back to the cog-
nition of “the Many,” and the cognition of “the Many” vice versa leads back 
to the cognition of the real “One.” Here, too, we can see that Bruno does not 
want to understand thinking and cognition as a mere analogy, parallelism, or 
abstraction with regard to reality but rather as a manifestation of just this uni-
ty (cf. Sigillus OL I 2, 212–215). 
Based on various treatises by Aristotle and scholastic commentaries, it 
was possible for Bruno to put Pythagoras’ and Plato’s theory in relation to 
that. Thomas Aquinas, for example, emphasizes in his commentary on Aristo-
tle’s Metaphysics (I 987b; Comm. § 156f) that the Platonic Theory of Ideas 
had adopted the participation of the sensual objects in the unchangeable ideas 
from Pythagoras and modified it. But he points out the difficulty that such a 
theory of ideas is not suitable for the justification of the individual objects: 
there can only be one idea (e.g., the idea of a human being) while multiplica-
tion is based on the nature of numbers. Thomas then accuses Plato of an error, 
and from his point of view the same error would also be held by Bruno: both 
the theory of ideas and the theory of numbers are founded on the assumption 
that “the mode of being of the known object is the same as the mode of 
knowledge.” Therefore “the idea has to be inherent in the intellect in the same 
way as it is in the known object.” But one ought to discern “between the One 
as the principle of numbers and the One as that which is exchangeable with 
that which exists” (ibid., § 158f). Bruno’s philosophy, however, is based on 
the postulate of the identity of the mode of cognition and the mode of being. 

42 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
Thomas needs to present the mathematical mode of cognition as a purely 
intellectual work of abstraction in order to maintain the difference between 
spiritual substances and the products of the intellect. Bruno, on the contrary, 
needs to attribute a form of being to the number “one” and the numbers which 
derive from it, and this form of being is not abstract but rather produces the 
multitude. 
He also appeals to the authority of Euclid who had reduced geometry to 
only a few principles from which all mathematical laws can be derived. It is 
Bruno’s ideal to reduce all these geometrical forms of thinking contained in 
his principles to just one; thus it would be possible “to ascend to perfect cog-
nition and to summarize the multitude, just as unity unfolds in a descending 
way to the production of objects” (DI f). 
According to Bruno, the universal substance is one, so that all individual 
objects are “circumstances” or accidents of the substance, as it were; here he 
must distinguish in passing between the non-quantitative unity of the “One” 
and the quantitative measures of the individual objects. In order to repeal this 
distinction, he introduces so-called signs (segni) so as to prove that every 
finite number nonetheless contains the infinite number “one” which, “if re-
peated a finite number of times, results in the number, while negating the 
number as an infinite ‘one’” (DI 335). 
For this, Bruno uses geometrical paradoxes of Nicholas of Cusa (1401–
1464) who had formulated speculations about the coincidence of opposites in 
his treatise On Learned Ignorance (De docta ignorantia); he had claimed that 
the maximum coincided with the minimum under certain conditions. To this 
end, he used geometrical figures in his treatise On the Beryl (De beryllo) and 
in various other, especially mathematical treatises, and Bruno repeats these 
geometrical figures here and in other works. For instance, it is reasonable that 
circles and straight lines are opposites. However, since the arc of a circle be-
comes more and more flat with an ever increasing radius and thus comes 
closer to a straight line, and since on the other hand the arc of a circle comes 
closer to a point on a straight line with an ever decreasing radius, both an infi-
nitely large circle and an infinitely small circle coincide with the straight line 
(DI 335). Nicholas of Cusa was concerned to demonstrate that it is possible to 
understand God externally, so to speak, in that the possibilities of thinking are 
being pushed toward those boundaries where the reality of the infinite God 
begins. He, too, speculates on the presence of the “One” in that which is fi-
nite. He experiments with numbers and geometrical figures in order to illus-
trate the creative power of the all-powerful God (in this, he is very close to 
mysticism) but also in order to demonstrate how the human mind functions as 
seen from its limit (and in this regard he is one of the fathers of modern dia-
lectic and the philosophy of subjectivity). In the context of these reflections 
he even arrived at the assumption that the earth was moving, or that it could 
be a planet like other planets, and Bruno acknowledges this in the Ash 
Wednesday Supper (DI 91 and 102). However, unlike the philosopher from 

 
God Is not Idle 
43 
Nola, it is not the reality of an infinite world which matters to Nicholas but 
rather the inconceivability of a finite world; to him, “world” means all that 
which exists, and this has been caused by an infinite creator who cannot be 
approached by thought. His argument is seemingly mathematical: “For since 
the center is a point which keeps a regular distance to the circumference, and 
since it is impossible that there exists a pure sphere, or such a circle that there 
is no purer circle, it is clear that there is no center which could not be indicat-
ed in a more pure and accurate way” (De docta ignorantia II, chapter 8). Thus 
it is the weakness of human cognition and the presumed inaccuracy of the fi-
nite objects which suggests an infinite world. 
Bruno, on the other hand, regards the geometrical figures of Nicholas as 
evidence of the reality of the infinite in the finite and as evidence of the iden-
tity of thinking and being which is expressed in geometry. The philosopher 
from Nola calls these geometrical examples “signs,” but since for him signs 
are themselves products of an intellectual process (as could be seen in his the-
ory of mnemonics), in his opinion they hold the rank of proofs by experience. 
It is only then that he also gives references for examination purposes (verifi-
cazioni), i.e., examples which he rhetorically takes from everyday experience 
and from applied sciences. 
The entire treatise Cause thus amounts to the objective identification of 
the One, the Principle, and the Cause on the following condition: “He who 
approaches the understanding of the One comes also close to understanding 
the Whole” (DI 342). 
With the idea of an infinite universe thus being proved using the means 
of Aristotelian metaphysics, Bruno now feels obliged to deal with the scien-
tific theories of Aristotle; he does this in the third Italian dialogue On the 
Infinite Universe and Worlds (De l’infinito, universo e mondi). Here he pro-
vides epistemological arguments in the narrower sense, e.g., that sensory 
perception can only be useful to comparison, but that truth must lie beyond 
the sensory perception. The author deals, most importantly and one by one, 
with the classical Aristotelian and scholastic arguments against the plurality 
of worlds and the infinity of the cosmos. If one leaves aside the rhetorical, po-
lemical, and jocular dialogue elements, this book then reveals the structure of 
a scholastic tractate in which the opposing opinion about each problem is be-
ing presented, discussed, and refuted. 
Thus the definitions of world, place, space, perfection, and infinite pow-
er are being tested; furthermore, the meaning of the stars, the elements, and 
especially the so-called quintessence are being tested. Finally, Bruno presents 
his physical conception of the world, that is to say, how one can conceive the 
infinite number of worlds which are distributed throughout the infinite cosmos, 
and this in turn affects the problem of gravity and lightness, of the comets and 
the determination of above and below. In the fifth and final dialogue he re-
futes once again the scholastic arguments against the multitude of worlds. The 
interlocutors in this dialogue are again a spokesman, called Filoteo, and some 

44 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
who are there to cue him. Among those is a certain Fracastorio, apparently 
reminiscent of the Renaissance philosopher Girolamo Fracastoro (1478–1553) 
who had become well-known for his didactic poem on the new disease syphi-
lis, as well as a natural-philosophical book On the Sympathy and Antipathy of 
Things; this book likewise clearly contrasts with the Aristotelian theory of na-
ture, albeit in a different form. The advocate of the Aristotelian position in the 
fifth dialogue is newly introduced by the name Albertino, and it has been puz-
zled over whether this could have been a historical figure associated with 
Bruno. However, it is presumably an allusion to scholastic authors, for Alber-
tino is the diminutive form of Albertus, and many of the arguments used by 
Bruno are found in the commentary on Aristotle’s treatise De caelo (which is 
the subject of Bruno’s critical examination) by Albertus Magnus († 1280), as 
well as in the Quaestiones on the same subject by Albert of Saxony, known as 
Albertus parvus (‘minor,’ † 1390). Incidentally, Albertino is convinced by Fi-
loteo, especially since Bruno masters the scholastic argumentation well, for as 
Bruno himself says quite often, without scholasticism one can barely under-
stand his philosophy and whoever masters scholasticism can easily access the 
true philosophy (DI 498; OL I 2, 243 and 482). It should be mentioned here 
that one of Bruno’s later treatises, Summa terminorum metaphysicorum, has 
been reprinted posthumously as an encyclopedia of scholastic terms; in this 
work, he treats the predicates of God in thirty stages. At any rate, from this 
dialogue and its Latin counterpart De immenso (1591) one can ascertain that 
Bruno’s cosmology (as far as the doctrines are concerned) is entirely based on 
the scholastic speculations of the past two hundred years; it is also based on 
the argumentation of Aristotle himself, only that Bruno reverts it in its deci-
sive points. 
The conceivability of an infinite world and of many worlds had been in-
creasingly discussed in detail. The aforementioned Albert of Saxony talks 
about the conceivability of many worlds, be it as concentric circles (which 
contradicts the Aristotelian doctrine of the elements according to which earth, 
water, air, and fire are stacked in concentric globes), be it “like marbles in a 
bag,” or in such a way that the stars and planets are to be understood as 
worlds just like the earth (l. 1, q. 13, dist.). Albertus Magnus—to use another 
example—had established in his commentary on De caelo (l. 1, 13 ch. 5) that 
there could be only one world since there can only be one “Unmoved Mover” 
who is immaterial as had been proved earlier. From this Mover could result 
only one movement and only one First Moved, and consequently all moved 
objects would be within one single system so that there could be only one 
world and not many worlds. Albertino makes a similar argument (DI 508), to 
which Bruno has his spokesman answer that for infinitely many worlds there 
may also be infinitely many movers; these movers, however, could be traced 
back to one mover, just as all numbers can be traced back to the number 
“one” in that the infinite number coincides with the number “one.” What Bru-
no rejects is the gradual orientation of the multitude of moved objects to the 

 
God Is not Idle 
45 
one “First Mover.” Rather, he understands unity as the internally constant 
principle of the multitude of worlds, and here he explicitly refers to De la 
causa. 
In Aristotle’s Physics VIII and Metaphysics XII, the “Unmoved Mover” 
had been established as the final and infinite level of finite world. Christian 
Aristotelianism has identified this “Unmoved Mover” as God. Bruno’s “One” 
as a substitute for God, therefore, suggests pantheistic ideas. However, his 
teacher Matthias Aquarius had already dealt in great detail with the relation 
between God and world in cosmology—entirely in the tradition of his con-
temporaries. As a result he had put forward the thesis that God is a part of the 
universe; to justify this, he differentiated the term “world” as follows: 1. the 
inhabited earth, 2. the aggregate of all bodies, including the celestial bodies, 
3. the totality of all creation, including angels, and 4. finally the totality of 
God, angels, and all bodies. In this sense God is part of the world, even 
though he does not make up the world but rather must only be included in it, 
as it were (Blum 1990). With this, however, the layering of the world, which 
Bruno occasionally described as onion cosmos (DI 472), is dissolved by itself. 
Therefore, scholastics such as Aquarius need to examine whether the sky dif-
fers from the earthly things in not containing any matter. A possible solution 
was that the sky does contain matter, but that it is matter of a different kind 
than the earthly matter; otherwise, matter would no longer have the function 
which it had since Aristotle, i.e., to individualize the forms and to transfer the 
possibilities inherent in the forms to finite reality. Albertus Magnus empha-
sized that the concept of matter is only defined by its mere ability to be local-
ly and essentially designated by the form. One may therefore not assume that 
there is an absolute matter which faces an absolute form. With this he attacks 
the famous commentator of Aristotle, the Arab philosopher Averroes who had 
claimed that the four elements were the matter of the sky. Thus the sky was 
moved close to a universal form so that the individual sensory objects are 
merely special cases of the universal “whole.” In this point, too, Bruno’s theo-
ry comes close to Averroism in that he does not assume substantial forms and 
merely potential matter of the individual objects. 
Just as the entire treatise On the Infinite, so too the series of arguments 
and counterarguments of the fifth dialogue can be found in detail in De Im-
menso, even though the scholastic form is more concealed there (OL I 2, 
242ff). 
In addition to the natural-theoretical problem of Aristotelianism, Bruno 
had to deal with a serious theological problem which appears time and again 
in his Italian cosmological dialogues, namely the theory about God’s omnipo-
tence in relation to the finiteness of His creation. Based on the Neo-Platonic 
interpretation of Christian revelation, this relation had to be thought as a rela-
tion between the infinite and the finite, and it was the pagan Neo-Platonist 
Proclus († 485) who had found the formula which states that the finiteness of 
the world belongs to, and is included in, the perfection of the infinite God, the 

46 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
One. Proclus’ writings had also been available in Latin since the thirteenth 
century, and Marsilio Ficino had partly translated them again. Especially 
since Christian theology had been interpreted using the terms of Aristotelian 
metaphysics in the thirteenth century, reality was thought of as the realization 
of a possibility, as the action of a power. The origin of all power was the infi-
nite God. Since the term “power” has a double meaning of a sheer possibility 
and of the executive power, the imbalance between the infinite, all-powerful 
God and the finite, imperfect world came to be understood as a differentiation 
within the power of God, namely as potentia absoluta and as potentia ordina-
ta (absolute potency and ordered/applied potency). One interpretation stated 
that God’s power, in absolute terms, is unlimited and infinite while it is lim-
ited to that which is realized in the actual implementation of God’s own will. 
Another interpretation stated that the applied power corresponds to the ordi-
nary way in which things work and that it is insofar limited, but that the abso-
lute power is always and constantly active in the background, i.e., not in a 
merely hypothetical or theoretical way. For only the real and active absolute 
power of God can serve as an explanation of those events which occur beyond 
the natural course of things, i.e., the miracles like the one reported in the Bible 
where the young men in the furnace (Daniel 3) did not burn as it would have 
been in accordance with the nature of fire. 
This complicated differentiation has been discussed many times, and it 
had a long history of which Bruno was only one episode. In order to understand 
it, one ought to be reminded of its later continuation, namely the definition of 
the sovereign of a state: as a ruler, the sovereign is defined by his superiority 
to the laws in that he alone decides on the state of emergency. This means that 
he has a power which remains in the background as long as the public affairs 
proceed according to the legislation; his power becomes effective only in an 
emergency. Such power, however, could not become effective if it were not 
constantly present and did not supersede the ordinary course of events, alt-
hough this advantage does not become apparent normally. 
The conception of potentia absoluta in God was used in Aristotelian scho-
lasticism as a reason for the existence of a finite creation without diminishing 
God’s omnipotence. It was for exactly this reason that this omnipotence could 
not simply be hypothetical. Now, according to the Aristotelian concept of 
possibility and reality, every power has a counterpart. Since the world is fi-
nite, God in his absolute power must have a surplus of power which is not re-
alized; Thomas Aquinas explains this by saying that there is not adequate ob-
ject to the absolute power (Summa theologiae I 7, 3; Granada 1994). The Re-
naissance philosopher Marcello Palingenio Stellato (Pier Angelo Manzoli, † 
1543; Zodiacus vitae 1534-1537), among others, had demanded that there 
ought to be an infinite world corresponding to the infinite power of God, and 
for that Bruno refers to him with praise (OL I 1, 17; OL I 2, 292). But he also 
criticizes him in the eighth book of the treatise De immenso (which picks up 
the argumentation of De l’infinito) because simple and direct equivalence of 

 
God Is not Idle 
47 
infinite omnipotence and infinite creation renders exactly this creation unrec-
ognizable and unreal. According to Palingenio’s theory, God is paralleled by 
an Elysium without matter, without space, body, weight, mass, measure, and 
number, and therefore without individual species (OL I 2, 303f). In physical 
terms: simple pantheism is no scientifically acceptable explanation of nature. 
But Bruno adopts the idea of the equivalence of absolute power and its object, 
explicitly declared to be unbalanced by Aquinas, and he postulates that God’s 
omnipotence is active and that it is therefore equivalent to an infinite object of 
action, namely the infinite world. This world, however, must be at the same 
time concrete if it is to be real and not plainly identical with God. Therefore 
the object of God’s creation is not one single, even finite, world, but rather 
infinitely many worlds of an infinite cosmos. Bruno, therefore, states in ex-
plicit polemic against a certain scholastic opponent whom he calls “priest,” 
but who is not further identified: 
 
You assume an active power in God to which there is no corresponding 
passive power, according to your theory … We want to assume that this 
which is voluntarily active is divine and invariable, in which the will 
does not contradict the power, and in which the power satisfies the will, 
in fact in which it is the will itself because thus it can only want what it 
wants, and it cannot lack its immovability, its unity, and its simplicity, 
as it also cannot do anything except what it wants. We therefore also do 
not imply that there is an inherent differentiation between absolute and 
applied or ordinary power [absoluta, ordinata, ordinaria] since this is not 
a sign of freedom but rather an open contradiction. It is a perfection 
within us human beings, if you will, that we can do many things which 
we do not do, but it is blasphemy to make God different from God and 
to let his will be now this way, now that way; that is to assume one will 
to be paralleling power, and one to contradict power, and yet another to 
be inclined towards the better or worse of opposites. (De immenso III; 
OL I 1, 320) 
 
Bruno presents a bundle of theological and philosophical problems in 
this sentence, and they can be summarized as follows: the differentiation be-
tween absolute and applied power and likewise the differentiation between 
God’s omnipotence and its object are abolished. However, they are not abol-
ished so as to divinize the world, and neither to secularize God, but rather 
with the claim of thus having provided both an adequate field of activity of 
the all-powerful God who is the creator and a reason for the reproduction of 
things to infinity. Bruno has the Aristotelian Albertino state in De l’infinito: 
Although God could create many worlds, it does not follow that they exist, for 
in addition to God’s active power a passive power of the objects is required. 
However, not every active power passes over to a passive power, but only that 
active power which has a proportionally corresponding object capable of ab-

48 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
sorbing such an effective act (DI 512). Bruno mockingly states that God 
would then be like the musician who knew how to play, but who could not 
play as he was missing a musical instrument (DI 358): “Why would we want 
to believe, or why could we believe, that the divine efficacy was idle?” (DI 
380; cf. OL I 1, 238) 
At the beginning of De immenso he puts forward the following as one of 
the first principles of natural philosophy: 
 
To the infinite cause and principle nothing is great; in fact, there is nothing 
but the infinite: if, therefore, it communicates itself to the bodily objects, 
or rather, if it unfolds itself into the existence of bodily objects and the 
multitude, it must take an object as the likeness (insofar this is possible) 
and as the trace of the power, and this object must be infinite in its mag-
nitude and without any number. … In the realm of the infinite, nature is 
as great as the power, the act, and the effect, and this is as easily disput-
able as it is impossible to prove it. (OL I 1, 242) 
 
Bruno knows that he makes a decision here which had already been the 
basis of the entire scholastic theology of creation; he merely makes this deci-
sion in the opposite direction. Whereas his theological contemporaries and 
predecessors had opted for a surplus of power in the infinite God for the pur-
pose of justifying the finiteness and imperfection of the world, Bruno now de-
cides in favor of a truly all-powerful God, with a proportionally infinite world 
corresponding to Him, in the hope of better rendering conceivable the finite-
ness of the world as the creation of the Almighty than it had been done before. 
At this point there follow basic principles of his argumentation (OL I 1, 242–
244), and in these the Lullian form of thought reappears again, the same form 
which had been fundamental to his theory of images and his mnemonics: the 
identity of ability, action, will, essence, possibility, and reality, all of which 
amount to truth. Thomism and later voluntaristic scholasticism placed great 
importance on the differentiation between divine will and action. Bruno advo-
cates the unity of divine will and action, with the result of necessity (of na-
ture) and freedom (of God) being one. Thus God’s freedom consists in that he 
acts according to nature which he creates himself; at the same time, the infi-
nite will, or the infinite power, must not become “frustrated” (243) as this 
would mean an inner limitation. 
Here too, Bruno touches on a number of problems which will be taken 
up later by Spinoza. However, they also were urgent problems during the Re-
naissance era. Thus the humanist Coluccio Salutati († 1406) from Florence 
had already dealt with the stoic conception of destiny. Likewise, the question 
there was how a universal natural law limits the human freedom. Another 
question was, if—according to Christian interpretation—God is the originator 
of destiny, how either God’s freedom is limited by the course of events, or 
how the way of the world is unpredictable due to God’s freedom. Finally, an-

 
God Is not Idle 
49 
other question was the role of human freedom of action. The last point, i.e., 
the human freedom, is not thematic in this discussion of Bruno, but the free-
dom of God is. It seems that human freedom becomes unimportant in Bruno’s 
conception since Bruno takes the view of the Almighty, as it were, and from 
this viewpoint all activity can progress without restrictions, and this means 
down to the individual parts, and forward to infinity. Later on, Leibniz formu-
lated metaphysics as the basic question: “Why is there something rather than 
nothing?” Bruno now attempts to answer the same question in a different 
phrasing: “Why is there something finite rather than something that is only 
infinite?” 
Christian theology predominantly endorsed an interpretation of God’s 
omnipotence which, as has been mentioned, had a double objective: on the 
one hand, the potentia ordinata guaranteed the ordinary course of natural 
events; on the other hand, the potentia absoluta facilitated miracles, para-
natural events, so to speak, due to the surplus of the divine power in comparison 
with nature. By abolishing the difference between the active and the passive 
power, and consequently also the difference between the absolute and the ap-
plied power, Bruno not only treated the infinite cosmos and the infinite crea-
tor objectively as equals (even though some differences are still imagina-
ble), but also excluded the possibility of miracles. For since miracles are 
supernatural, they do not explain natural events; thus they allow an imbalance 
between the ordering power and the ordered world. Moreover, miracles are 
usually interpreted as special signs of God for human beings, and this in-
cludes the idea that there exists a form of communication between God and 
human beings, i.e., revelation. This form of communication is situated beyond 
nature, yet it takes place within nature, in a selective way, and independent of 
Sacred Scripture. All this Bruno cannot accept. On the occasion of the con-
temporary discussion about the nature of comets he criticized those who were 
talking about extra-natural signs of God: “As if truly there were no better, and 
best, signs of the deity than those which are in the ordinary course; under 
those these signs do not deviate from the ordinary course, even though their 
origin is not known to us.” (OL I 2, 51; cf. 228) God’s omnipotence therefore 
proves itself in its regularity. In that their naturalness is being proved, mira-
cles help people to comprehend God’s omnipotence. Ultimately the question 
arises whether Bruno accepts a special form of communication between God 
and human beings at all. 
One generation later the French priest Marin Mersenne (1588–1648) saw 
this danger and the connection between Bruno’s cosmology and his theory 
about fantasy and memory (he was a friend of Descartes and many other aca-
demics of his time). In his apology against The Impiety of the Deists, Atheists, 
and the Libertines of Our Time (L’impiété des Déistes, Athées et Libertins de ce 
temps, Paris 1624, X, 229ff) he demonstrates the logical correlation between 
the philosophy of universal oneness as it is being propagated in Cause, and 
the theory of the migrating soul which is found in particular in the treatise De 

50 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
minimo (I 3, OL I 3, 142f). Mersenne argued: if there is only one substance, 
every change is an alteration of this substance, as if the anima mundi assumed 
this body, then another body. This is what Bruno actually held: “We are who 
we are only because of the indivisible [individual] soul, for it is around this 
soul, like a center, that the atoms are scattered and gathered. Therefore at birth 
and during adolescence the artistic spirit reaches this mass of which we con-
sist, and it expands from the heart … Birth, therefore, is the expansion of the 
center, life is the existence of the sphere, and death is the retreat to the center.” 
(OL I 3, 143) Mersenne points out that the individual soul is being denied 
here, in fact the freedom of God is being denied, for “God is tied to this earth, 
and his infinity is tied to the finite things, so much so that he cannot be all-
powerful and infinite without them” (Mersenne 232). Having come to this 
conclusion, Mersenne reminds of the treatise Sigillus sigillorum in which 
those powers of the soul are being described that are needed to produce imag-
es. This happens in such a way, however, that they explain phenomena which 
today we would call para-psychological and which Mersenne considers to be 
evidence of miracles and saintliness. Thus in the first so-called “contraction” 
of the Sigillus, examples are provided for the abilities of the soul by concen-
trating on the place, for example by retreating to solitude. Such examples also 
include the miracles of Jesus of Nazareth which were made possible by his 
overcoming of the devil in the seclusion of the desert. In another example the 
temporary rapture to heaven, experienced by both Thomas Aquinas and Paul 
the Apostle, are explicitly not called miracles but rather an achievement of the 
natural power of the intellect by concentration in contemplation. Mersenne un-
covers a correlation, and this correlation is valuable for the history of criticism 
of religion and its advocates: each “spiritualist” worldview has a tendency to 
abolish transcendence by explaining it “away” and to level off the difference 
between the spiritual and the material. Conversely, religion is dependent on a 
balanced relation between that which is natural and that which is supernatural, 
between that which can be comprehended by the human intellect and that 
which is miraculous, between the ordinary and the extraordinary. With regard 
to the interpretation of Bruno’s philosophy, this reference demonstrates that 
Bruno does not intend to plead the case for woolgathering, witchcraft, or oc-
cultism by presenting his theory of fantasy and the creativity of the human 
intellect; rather, on the opposite he wants to portray the “miraculous” to be 
natural. 
 

 
Six 
 
RELIGION AND ETHICS FOR 
THE PEOPLE AND THE HERO 
 
Bruno’s first three London treatises written in Italian thus deal with his phi-
losophy of nature and their metaphysical grounds. Therefore the editors of the 
Dialoghi italiani called them dialoghi metafisici as opposed to the following 
three dialogues that are entitled dialoghi morali. For indeed it was seen that 
the metaphysical foundation of cosmology has “moral” consequences in that 
it concerns human freedom and religion. The treatise Spaccio de la bestia tri-
onfante, commonly translated as The Expulsion of the Triumphant Beast, deals 
with some sort of reformation of the heaven with important consequences situ-
ated in the realm of the philosophy of religion. Cabala del cavallo pegaseo (The 
Cabala of Pegasus), with an appendix Asino Cillenico (Cyllenian Donkey), is 
a very complex satire, some kind of “Praise of Folly” in the style of Erasmus 
of Rotterdam. The dialogues Degli eroici furori (Heroic Passions) finally 
consist of interpretations of poetry; they mainly contain an epistemology and 
some sort of metaphysics. All three treatises unmistakably continue the cos-
mological and metaphysical argumentation of the preceding dialogues. 
Ethics can be interpreted as a theory of human actions, motivations, 
norms, responsibilities, regulations, values, and virtues—either according to 
Aristotle or according to Stoicism, Epicureanism, or Christianity. Ethics can 
also be interpreted simply as a discipline of philosophy, along with logic, 
physics, and metaphysics; it can further be interpreted as part of practical phi-
losophy, which also comprises economics and politics. If understood in these 
facets, however, one ought to ask whether there can be any ethics at all in the 
thought of Giordano Bruno, that is to say, whether he fits any of these schools. 
Bruno’s dialogues deal neither with individual ethics nor with a theory of social 
behavior, although virtues and vices are mentioned quite frequently in them. 
The reasons for this will soon become apparent. 
The dialogues on the Expulsion of the triumphant Beast stage a conference 
of the Greek realm of the gods for the purpose of reforming heaven. Following 
different examples, among others the Greek author Lucian of Samosata and 
the Renaissance philosopher Leon Battista Alberti († 1457), Bruno offers a 
satire on the Greek gods. This was a literary genre which had been quite styl-
ish among the intellectual English society at that time, and it allowed him to 
offer provocative theses under the guise of satirical writing. Sophia, wisdom 
herself, is the main protagonist of the dialogues and the spokesperson for the 
author. She reports about this discussion among the Greek gods, and the lead-

52 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
ing parts are attributed to Jupiter and Momus, the traditional critic of the 
realm of gods. 
Jupiter reports in his programmatic speech about the classical astronom-
ical constellations in mythology being connected with morally questionable 
and depraved actions. Thus, in symbolic terms, heaven which is known to be 
full of starts and full of gods now has sunk so low that it has become a broad 
system of vices and a symbol for the loss of the veneration of the gods (DI 
598). Constellations and stars are particularly seen in light of their mythologi-
cal context and in their mutual correlation, so that for example there is a de-
piction of Jupiter abducting Europa and Ganymede. Therefore Jupiter sug-
gests purging the sky by driving away these figures and replacing them by 
concepts of virtue “so that the sky does not remain empty but is being culti-
vated and inhabited in a better way than it was before” (DI 613). “We must 
cleanse ourselves internally and externally. Therefore, let us first order the 
heaven which intellectually is within us, and let us then order the visible sky 
which shows itself to the eyes in a bodily manner. Let us remove from the 
heaven of our intellect the Bear of depravity, the spear of diversion, … the 
Hercules of violence, the Lyra of conspiracy, the Triangulum of impiety …” 
etc. (DI 611). Jupiter calls this a fundamental conversion to righteousness, for 
“since we had been estranged from it, we are being estranged from ourselves 
so that we are no longer gods and no longer ourselves. Let us return to right-
eousness if we want to return to ourselves” (DI 610). Thus the main concern 
is about “expelling the triumphant beast, that is to say, the vices which prevail 
and which always obscure the divine” (DI 561), and in the course of the fol-
lowing discussions, Truth takes the place of the Bear, Prudence takes the 
place of the Dragon, etc. 
It is quite obvious that Bruno is relying on the vast array of literature in 
the fields of astronomy and the mythology of the Greeks, such as Aratus, Ov-
id, Hyginus and others. However, Bruno is not concerned about astrology or 
astronomy, but rather about the combination of visible celestial bodies, dei-
ties, and abstract terms. If, then, Jupiter says, “Onwards, onwards, you gods, 
let us remove from the sky those masks, statues, figures, images, portraits, 
events, and stories of our greed, yearning, plunder, shame, contempt, and 
blemish” (DI 611), then it becomes immediately clear that this is a pictorial 
program. This program is constructed in a similar way as are the images of 
mnemonics; astronomical and mythological “figures” are being interpreted as 
images which summarize in themselves complex relations and “stories.” The-
se “figures” are now to be transferred to a discourse on morality or to a sys-
tem of virtues. The return to themselves which is being demanded from the 
gods, therefore, means neither more nor less than a new interpretation of the 
message which can have a mythological system for the human being. 
Nonetheless Bruno does by no means present a new ethics here. The in-
troductory letter, this time addressed to the English poet Philipp Sidney, 
marks as usual the intentions and aims of the treatise and summarizes the con-

 
Religion and Ethics 
53 
tent, and in this letter Bruno merely announces some new ethics. He calls his 
dialogue a prelude to a future moral philosophy: 
 
These three dialogues are being presented merely as matter and basis for 
a future art [artificio], for since I intend to present a moral philosophy 
according to the inner light which the divine intellectual sun has irradi-
ated, and continues to irradiate, in me, I deem it practical to present first 
a few preludes in the style of the musicians … And it seemed to me that 
I could not carry this out in a more adequate way than in enumerating all 
forms of morality, namely the most important virtues and vices, and ar-
ranging them in a certain order. (DI 554) 
 
The dialogues on the Heroic Passions will demonstrate what Bruno means by 
the divine light about which he is talking. At this point, however, we may as-
sume that—if there is such a thing as moral philosophy—it will be an art, a 
system of fantastic images. For in this introduction as well the author hints to 
reading the gods and constellations of the Spaccio as a system of terms simi-
lar to the thirty images or statues in the mnemonic and logical treatises; it is 
his explicit intention to present “the order, the depiction and arrangement, the 
methodical key, the tree, the theater, and the area of virtues and vices” (DI 
555). All those are technical terms taken from the area of mnemonics. Thus 
we may interpret Jupiter’s exhortation to an intellectual, inner, and exterior 
reform as a program of the conceptual interpretation and pictorial representa-
tion of moral terms. 
Thus it also follows that Bruno by no means intends to radically ques-
tion Greek mythology, as one may first assume. Rather, he takes his theory of 
the presence of universal principles in the finite world and the figuration of 
complex conceptual interrelations within images and applies it to ethical prin-
ciples. The divine images invite to the permutation of abstract statements 
about virtues and deities. Jupiter says, “Let us cleanse the inner emotion, for it 
will not be difficult to progress from the ‘information’ of this interior world to 
the ‘reformation’ of the sensible and exterior world” (DI 612). Information, 
however, is one of the key words of Bruno’s theory of cognition and passion. 
For instance, there is a passage in the Eroici furori which states that the “well-
formed affect loves the bodies or the bodily beauty insofar as it indicates the 
beauty of the intellect” (DI 992). This is a reference to the intellectual for-
mation of emotions, and it is only this formation which is capable of sensing 
intellectual beauty by means of bodily beauty. For beauty—as is said in this 
context—is not being abstracted from the bodily relations, but the intellect 
“forms” it in the mind so that the beauty which is being intellectually con-
structed becomes a representation or shadow of the divine (DI 996). If one 
recalls at this point the relation of matter and form within the universe as pre-
sented in On the Cause, according to which matter forms itself from itself (DI 
263), and if one connects this thought to Bruno’s theory of images, then it is 

54 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
obvious that he cannot radically reject images; he can only plead for their cor-
rect usage. The fact that definitely not all images are being “expelled” from 
the sky (and this applies in a special way to the image of the Altar) is a clear 
indicator for this. 
The Altar—and we may certainly think of the table of the Christian sac-
rifice of the Mass—here represents religion, piety, and faith in contrast to gul-
libility and superstition, impiety, and atheism (DI 570, 825). As Jupiter says, 
there is no place for the Altar on the earth; rather, it should be placed in the 
sky as a sanctuary “like a relic or like the plank of the sunken ship of religion 
and the cult of the gods” (DI 602). With this image we approach the peak of 
Bruno’s criticism of religion which is quite critical of the cult but does not 
completely reject it; rather, it intends to lead it to appropriate forms. For Jupi-
ter makes the Centaur the priest of this Altar—the mythical creature, half man 
and half horse. Momos, the court jester of Mount Olympus, mocks him as a 
human being who has been put into an animal or an animal which is trapped 
in a human being, in which “one person is being created from two natures and 
two substances come together in a hypostatic union” (DI 823). “Hypostatic un-
ion” in Christian theology refers to the union of the divine and human natures in 
Christ. The centaur thus represents the person of Christ, with the animal and 
human natures proportionally relating to the human and divine natures. Momos 
furthermore mocks the paradoxes of this concept, including the paradox of the 
human being’s need to appear like an animal if he intends to prove to be di-
vine. This can be translated theologically in such a way that God has proven 
his divinity exactly in the Incarnation of Jesus Christ (DI 824). 
Jupiter blocks off all these blasphemies by decreeing that the centaur 
Chiron was a most righteous man and therefore most worthy, for in the heav-
enly temple at this Altar there was no other than him. Jupiter then goes on in 
making a blasphemous allusion to the Body and Blood of Christ in the Eucha-
rist: “… with this sacrificial animal in hand and a sacrificial bottle tied to the 
belt.” Momos then gives in and explains: “If he has well-distributed this ani-
mal which he holds in his hands, then it is impossible that he should ever lack 
this animal, for he himself, and only he, can be the sacrifice and the one who 
sacrifices, that is to say, priest and victim,” and Jupiter adds, “From here on-
wards bestiality, ignorance, and useless and dangerous fable must disappear; 
and where the centaur is, righteous simplicity and the moral fable shall re-
main.” According to the traditional theological imagery, Christ is the victim 
and simultaneously the high priest of the religion. In him, the sacrifice, that 
which is being sacrificed, and the one who sacrifices are identical. 
Bruno confirms a fundamental truth of Christian—and especially Catho-
lic—theology, but he does so only to save it as a symbol and relic of an 
extinct religion and as a moral story. In presenting the salvific message of the 
victim and of the two natures of Christ as a moral fable, he intends not to de-
stroy it but rather to present it as a moral principle put into an image. From his 
perspective it is not Christianity per se which is the enemy but rather the “use-

 
Religion and Ethics 
55 
less and pernicious fable” (DI 825). Here Bruno recognizably uses the scholas-
tic distinction of religions as natural, fabulous, and political theology, according 
to Augustine (Civitas Dei 6, 5; cf. Thomas, Summa theologiae II-II 94, 1). This 
thread can be followed in the direction of the moral fable and in the direction of 
the erroneous fable. 
Sophia and the gods present a broad spectrum of knowledge pertaining 
to the history of religions; in this context, besides the Greek gods, it is espe-
cially the Egyptian cults which play a major role. Bruno may have acquired 
the knowledge about these cults from the so-called “Hermetic Writings” 
(Corpus Hermeticum), that is, the literature which has been ascribed to the 
mythical Egyptian priest Hermes Trismegistus and which was held in high 
regard throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and beyond. Fur-
thermore Bruno clearly refers to the treatise On the Mysteries of the Egyptians 
by Iamblichus Chalcidensis and to Asclepius, a treatise handed down from the 
Latin author Apuleius which had been attributed to the Greek “Hermetic 
Writings.” Here, too, the philosopher is not concerned with the finer points of 
the distinction but rather with the comparability of the phenomena. 
In comparing the Greek, Egyptian, and Christian religions he begins 
with the contrast stating that the divine names are being derived from the dei-
ty; on the other hand, however, Jupiter was nothing but a king on the island of 
Crete, a mortal human being, just like Venus is said to have been a particular-
ly beautiful queen on the island of Cyprus. Based on this paradox of divine 
origin and human form he explains veneration as human routine and the cus-
tom of venerating preeminent human beings as gods because in them the deity 
communicates itself to humanity: “They did not worship Jupiter as if he was a 
deity, but they worshiped the deity as if it was in Jupiter” (DI 779). Thus, ac-
cording to Bruno, while the divine mode of self-communication was being 
venerated in Jupiter, the divine wisdom, interpretation, and presence was be-
ing venerated in the Egyptian sage Hermes. Without explicitly mentioning 
Christianity, he concludes this thought with the reflection that “what is being 
celebrated in this and that human being is nothing but the name and the repre-
sentation of that deity which has deigned to communicate itself to men 
through their birth; with their death, the deity regarded its work as being com-
pleted or returned to heaven” (Di 780). This or that person, any human being 
served the deity as a means to communicate itself to men through the birth of 
that particular person, and this work of self-communication is either being 
completed with the death of the person (in this case, the death of the crucified 
Christ), or the deity returns to heaven. 
With this imprecise phrasing, Bruno keeps open the alternative of the 
deity either dying or rising to life in those human beings in whom it is being 
represented and in whom it communicates itself. In a figurative sense Bruno 
regards the second possibility as valid by means of the centaur’s rehabilita-
tion. A passage in the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 14:11; DI 780) serves him as 
a piece of evidence for his religious-historical combination of Greek, Egyp-

56 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
tian, and Christian myths. In this passage, having just seen Paul healing a 
crippled man, the people exclaim: “The gods have come down to us in human 
form.” And they venerated Barnabas as Jupiter and Paul as Hermes. Subse-
quently, Bruno reaffirms that human beings at all times have venerated the 
gods in the form of animals and other things because the godhead was to be 
found at certain times and in certain places in various mortal objects one after 
another and at the same time. In all of this, it revealed itself in its similarity to 
the finite objects and not in its abstractness and absoluteness (DI 780). There-
fore, since the divine extends itself and communicates itself in innumerable 
forms, it also has countless names and is being searched for in countless ways 
with its own proper means; consequently, it is being venerated in countless 
rites because we also ask for manifold graces to result from these rites (DI 
781). Thus, for Bruno cult and rite mirror the universal self-communication of 
God in his creation. 
Bruno’s contemporary fellow theologians exerted great efforts to prove 
that the external cult with its worded prayers, ecclesial rituals, and visible ex-
pressions of the faith are by no means placed outside the religion or even alien 
to it; certainly they are not idolatry but rather essential expressions of the faith 
and, as such, commandments demanded by God himself. Especially the 
aforementioned Francisco Suárez, the same age as Bruno, dedicated a major 
treatise to this topic, De religione. This treatise was written as a commentary 
of the main source of theology, and Bruno must have been familiar with it as 
well: the Summa theologiae of Thomas Aquinas (II-II q 81). Albeit not with-
out satirical woof, Bruno rather takes sides with Catholics than Protestants 
who interpreted the Eucharist in a much weaker sense and criticized the point 
of external cultic celebrations. Bruno seems to defend the veneration of the 
gods as he seems to anticipate a particular thought peculiar to the era of En-
lightenment, namely that the veneration of the transcendental is a basic form 
of human thought which seeks for idols for this purpose. This is done on the 
basis of the insight that the human being cannot but seek the effect of this 
transcendental element, this god, in the natural objects and in all human be-
ings (cf. Kant, Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason III 5). This shall 
suffice for the time being as far as the positive side of Christian symbolism is 
concerned. 
The detrimental and pernicious fables obviously consist in that men are 
to be deceived as regards the true meaning of the divine and its presence in 
the world. In this dialogue, Orion has to pay for this. As a favorite of Neptune 
and possessing the ability of working miracles and walking on water, he can 
be identified as a metaphor of Peter and thus the Pope of the Roman Church. 
Momos who describes him as such becomes annoyed at Orion (who is Greek) 
demanding that everything should be Greek. If one translates “Greek” as 
“Roman,” then Bruno may have alluded to the claim to universality for the 
whole of Christianity made by the Roman Catholic Church. It is being suggest-
ed that Orion should be sent to dwell among men so as to make them believe—

 
Religion and Ethics 
57 
by way of a reevaluation of values (as done later by Friedrich Nietzsche)—that 
white was black, that the human intellect was blind where it appeared to see, 
that that which seemed extraordinarily well in the eyes of reason was in fact 
worthless, disgraceful, and extremely bad, etc. (DI 803f). One ought to keep 
in mind the fact that the founder of the Jesuits, Ignatius of Loyola, had said in 
his Spiritual Exercises that being faithful to the Church could even demand 
that something was regarded as being black if so taught by the Church, even if 
it appears to be white to the eyes (Regulae 13). In an allusion to Paul the 
Apostle, Orion is being quoted as saying that philosophy was madness and 
heroism was cowardice; in a special way, however, Orion is credited with the 
presumption that he himself was Jupiter, and that all the other gods were noth-
ing but figments of fantasy (DI 804f). This is the passage which justifies most 
clearly that Spaccio was in fact infamously known as a satire on the pope, be-
ginning with the inquisitional proceedings through the era of Enlightenment. 
Bruno’s diatribe furthermore aims at any kind of deceiver who might take 
advantage of the stupidity of the masses and thus destroy civilian life (DI 805f). 
Orion, therefore, is being deprived of his power, and diligence, warfare, and 
military art takes his place “so that the fatherland, peace, and authority may re-
main” (DI 807). It is remarkable that on the one hand Bruno is unable to expose 
the falseness of the cults at their root while on the other hand he is fighting 
them for the sake of the political order. For through the entire text, the func-
tion of religious cults in the eyes of Bruno is twofold: theological, with regard 
to the representation of the divine in the world, and political-moral-social, 
with regard to the order of civilian and individual life. Religious symbols are 
therefore not obsolete, but they are being reinstated to their rightful place by 
reason and interpretation. To this he also adds the yearning for fame and hero-
ic gestures (DI 651). 
Deities who permit that people venerate and worship them are being de-
posed, for since they are “most glorious in and of themselves so that their glo-
ry cannot be increased from the outside,” they did not establish the laws and 
religions so as to receive honor, but rather so that honor might be mediated to 
men (DI 657; an allusion to Thomas, Summa theologiae II-II 81 a 7, though 
the aim there is the subjection of the human intellect). Likewise, Spinoza will 
later say that God does not require the honor given to him through adoration. 
For the cult of the gods is made for the sake of human beings and the social 
order. This, however, presupposes that men are capable of acting responsibly 
and prosperously. Therefore Bruno’s mockery is also aimed at something 
else, namely the Protestant (and especially Calvinist) reformation which in his 
portrayal “consider the action and the act of good works to be an error be-
cause the gods do not care, and in their sight human beings can never be justi-
fied, no matter how great the works accomplished may be” (DI 654f). Bruno 
calls this an “invented religion” (DI 655) and demands that one ought to be 
able to see the meaning of a particular religion by its fruits; with this, he in-

58 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
terprets religious communities as social organizations which have the right 
and the duty to enact and enforce laws which benefit the human coexistence. 
Bruno’s criticism of religion contains the essential elements of modern 
philosophy of religion in a satirical and entwined form. These are the re-
striction of the function of religion to moral and political management on the 
one hand and to natural theology on the other hand. This second aspect be-
comes immediately clear if one calls to mind that he justified the variety of 
cults and the veneration of gods in animals, plants, and other objects in main-
taining that they were reflections of the presence of the gods in the world: 
“The Egyptians came to worship living images of animals and thus venerate 
the gods in this form …, for one should know that the animals and the plants 
are living effects of nature; this nature, however, is nothing but God dwelling 
in things” (DI 776). “Natura est Deus in rebus” (nature is God in things) is the 
formula which connects Bruno’s cosmology with his philosophy of religion. 
In his cosmological writings, Bruno was concerned with a principle with 
which the discernibility of nature could be justified, and he identified this 
principle with “the One” which communicates itself in infinite variety. This 
“One” also serves him as an explanation of religions behavior. For access to 
the divine—whether one interprets this in the sense of a creator and preserver 
or in the sense of a sensual resource of human behavior—is only possible by 
way of finite appearances; for cosmological reasons, as well as for reasons of 
cognitive psychology, these appearances must be viewed as manifestations or 
representations of the divine (in other words, as somehow determined forms 
of the presence of the divine). In the same way in which the divine communi-
cates itself to men, man has access to the divine. One form of this access is 
religious veneration, and therefore religion, politics, and cosmology run paral-
lel in Spaccio. 
Nonetheless Bruno does not offer a simplified physico-theology as it 
came to exist in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and which sets the 
tone for most discussions about the relationship between science and religion 
until the present day. The laws or nature and its discernibility are a proof of 
God’s existence, science is probably similar to worship. One might be able to 
infer from this the conception of a god in the sense of the author of the plan of 
creation which can be traced in the laws of nature; this god, however, has no 
practical relevance for science and the orientation within the world. Such kind 
of reassurance of religious thinking by way of science, such secularism is 
completely unknown to Bruno. 
This can be seen in connection with the main character of the events, Ju-
piter, since he himself is a crossbreed, so to speak. On the one hand, he is the 
“representative and governor of the first principle” (DI 555, 560, 641f); on the 
other hand, he is being portrayed in quite human terms. He is a finite being 
among all others, and it is exactly in this double function as the leader of the 
gods and changeable individual which matures, reaches adulthood, grows old 
and gains wisdom that he “represents every single one of us” (DI 560, cf. 

 
Religion and Ethics 
59 
556). The inner reform which is the topic of his speech at the beginning is al-
so the reform of the human being; it is the inner formation with the aim of 
recognizing the nature of God and of the moral principles. Thus it may seem 
as if Bruno intended to offer an individually ethical recommendation which is 
valid for every human being. However, one needs to take into consideration 
that he allows one of the divine principalities to make his own decisions, 
sometimes even against the opinion of the other gods in the gathering; fur-
thermore, in the introduction he had explicitly described this treatise to be 
merely a prelude to a prospective code of ethics. One might expect the treatise 
on the Heroic Passions to fulfill this promise. 
As an interlude the philosopher from Nola presents the relatively short 
satire on the Cabala of Pegasus with the appendix Cyllenian Donkey (Cabala 
del cavallo pegaseo con l’aggiunta dell’Asino Cillenico; in bilabial pronunci-
ation of the ‘b’ in Cabala, it sounds like cavallo, meaning “The Horse Ride 
…” or “Mare of Pegasus …”—ambiguity is the means of a satire). This 
treatise is peppered with funny sentences, and it also includes an apology of 
Aristotle about his intentions to dull the people and finally a rehabilitation of 
the donkey. It is as difficult to interpret as is the comedy Candelaio; with eve-
ry sentence, one needs to retrace the accidentals of irony or deeper meaning as 
they determine how this sentence should be read. Here the Orion of Spaccio 
appears in an adaptation as Onorio, simultaneously reminiscent of the corre-
sponding Greek word for donkey and the Latin ‘honorius’ (honorable). He is 
the flying donkey and the horse Pegasus, respectively (DI 884), and he acts at 
the same time as messenger of the gods and also as Aristotle. Moreover, the 
donkey is being referred to as Cyllenian Donkey; accordingly he belongs to 
Hermes/Mercury who is said to have been born in a cave of Mount Cyllene. 
Among the numerous allusions permitted by the figure of the donkey, one 
ought to remind of that donkey on which Jesus sat as he solemnly entered the 
city of Jerusalem before his passion. The treatise concludes with the speech of 
Mercury (Hermes, the messenger of the gods and the Egyptian sage) directed 
to the donkey who is now being elevated to the level of an academic and the 
supreme authority of all sects: “Correspond with everybody, debate with 
everybody, make friends, unite, identify yourself with everybody, rule over 
everybody, be everything” (DI 923). This final turn of the complex satire in-
tends to say at least this much: he who wants to understand everything needs 
to be above everything while at the same time making himself a part of every-
thing so that he understands nothing like a donkey while simultaneously 
permeating and transcending everything like a god. 
The treatise consists of three dialogues, the second of which in turn has a 
three partite structure. The third dialogue, however, simply dropped out be-
cause one of the participants needed to look after inheritance matters, the oth-
er participant (a pedant) suffered from gout, and the main character had gone 
to the baths. Instead, there is the appendix on the Cyllenian Donkey. All of 
this is preceded by a letter of dedication and a declamation to the readers. As 

60 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
is right and proper, these prepare the level of expectations: the person to 
whom the treatise is dedicated seems to be a relative of Bruno, a certain Don 
Sapatino Savolino; Savolino was the name of Bruno’s mother, and a certain 
Saulino is also Bruno’s narrator in the dialogues. As regards the audience to 
which the treatise is directed, the following is said: No, this treatise could not 
be dedicated to a Cavalliere, nor to a priest, a lady, or an old maid, nor to a 
pedant or a poet; it only befits a “enciclopedico ingegno” who is also a theo-
logian, a philosopher, and a Cabalist, for this treatise is “una cabala di teologia 
filosofica, una filosofia di teologia cabalistica, una teologia di cabala filosofi-
ca” (a cabal of philosophical theology, a philosophy of cabalistic theology, 
and a theology of a philosophical cabal) (DI 837). But so as to ease the expec-
tations, Bruno makes the following promise to the reader: “Everything of 
partly nothing, part of the whole in nothing, nothing of the part in the whole.” 
And just in case we should not like the treatise, we (or rather, Don Sapatino) 
are to give it to a peasant who may distribute it to horse and ox, or to a hunter 
who may give it to goats and deer, or to a precocious young madam who may 
use it as her lapdog, or to a cosmographer who may use it to wander between 
the North and South Poles. We receive only one clear piece of information, 
and that is that Bruno intends to confuse his readers. Even more ironical is the 
declamation to the “studioso, divoto e pio lettore”: by way of allusions to the 
entire rhetoric on the donkey, we learn here that the metaphor of the donkey 
plays with the ambivalence of foolishness and wisdom. 
The dialogue is opened with the remark that the reader will consider 
everything that follows to be metaphors, fables, parables, images, allegories, 
mysteries, and tropes. The mythology already found in Spaccio is being re-
sumed, and an explanation is given as to why the places of the Great Bear and 
Eridanus remain empty: this is because they would be reassigned the stupidity 
in the abstract and in the concrete, and one would have interpreted this as a 
mere parable. Now there was to be explained—as it had never been done be-
fore—the meaning of the insight that ignorance and asinine folly in this world 
signified wisdom, doctrine, and divinity in the other world (DI 864). By 
means of Plutarch, Tacitus, and others the claim is made that the Jews had 
adopted their wisdom from the Egyptians, and that they furthermore had 
masked their “Egyptian disgrace” with the sign of the donkey. Saulino/Bruno, 
however, defends “this sacred generation” because it had brought forth the 
Light of the World; rather, the Jews had reasonably and voluntarily cultivated 
the cult of the donkey (DI 869). Excursions now follow in which the sacred 
stupidity is being identified with the docta ignorantia while at the same time 
being distinguished from forms of skepticism. 
Onorio joins the circle in the second dialogue. He is a specimen of me-
tempsychosis, that is, the transmigration of souls from body to body. Bruno 
twists the term and spells it “metamfisicosi,” suggesting transformation of na-
ture and transcorporation (DI 885). One of Onorio’s incarnations was Aris-
totle, and in the person of Aristotle he perverted philosophy on the basis of 

 
Religion and Ethics 
61 
complete ignorance of nature. In another incarnation he appeared as Xenoph-
anes who is being portrayed as a skeptic. Thereupon the pedant asks how On-
orio managed to maintain his memory through the course of his realizations 
and “hypostatic unions” (DI 899). In the background is the scholastic ques-
tion, whether individual human souls retain what they learned in life after the 
body died.  
The answer is that Onorio always returned after his adventures as a fly-
ing donkey or Pegasus to the heavenly “asinity” where he reported about his 
experiences. Propelled by a Plotinic inclination of the soul towards the bodi-
ly realm, he returned time and again to the earth while leaving behind his 
constellation in the sky. The Flying Donkey therefore shares in the idea of 
ignorance/wisdom as well as in the changeability (vicissitudo) of the physical 
world. Thus from time to time Onorio returns from his wanderings and re-
ports about the “memoria of the species” (i.e., the intelligible concepts of the 
finite things) which he had acquired during his bodily indwelling, and he 
leaves them behind as in a library whenever he had to return to an earthly 
dwelling (DI 892). This library is an embellishment and ornamental belt of his 
virtue which is placed in the sky (one ought to remember that this is a sequel 
to Spaccio in which the constellations are being transformed to virtues, and 
Orion is wearing a belt). For it does not only contain the memory of the opin-
ions (specie opiniabili, sofistiche, apparenti, probabili e demonstrative) but in 
addition also the power of judgment needed to discern between the right and 
the wrong opinions (DI 900). 
Again, we may not forget that this is a satire. The knowledge acquired as 
a result of earthly wisdom, which has taken the form of opinion, sophistry, 
pretense, appearance, and line of argument, is being elevated to the rank of 
the species intelligibilis. Everything is merely metaphor and fable, and yet at 
the same time it is the heavenly library (i.e., the realm of the Platonic Forms). 
But when Onorio recommends, “if you are not willing to listen under the ap-
pearance of doctrine and science, then do it just for fun” (DI 891), then not 
only the foolishness becomes a metaphor, and not only the malicious portrait 
of Aristotle becomes a fable, but rather the entire wisdom displayed through-
out this dialogue becomes a narrative. Kabbalah becomes a cabal. The third 
dialogue which allegedly failed turns the entire work into an unfinished Kab-
balah, a little preparatory and paradigmatic intrigue for beginners: “Cabala 
parva, tironica, isagogica, microcosmica” (DI 912). 
Bruno makes a lavish and abundant use of the satirical models of the 
Renaissance period. Whereas the donkey was a popular satirical figure, the 
term “Kabbalah” and quotations from cabbalistic treatises are somewhat puz-
zling. The ten “sephiroth” are of a particular importance as Bruno describes 
them as parts and disguises of the divine and the universe (DI 865). The book 
De occulta philosophia by Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim († 
1535) may have been the most important source of the ten stages of the Kab-
balah. The Kabbalah is a form of mysticism which was developed in Jewish 

62 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
religious literature during the Middle Ages and reached a high point in Spain 
at the end of the fifteenth century before the expulsions of the Jews. Jewish 
scholars lived in Italy as well, and they cultivated both the cabbalistic tradi-
tion and the important sources of mysticism and Neo-Platonism which were 
important for the Latin culture. Giovanni Pico della Mirandola († 1494), Jo-
hann Reuchlin († 1522), and Agrippa von Nettesheim were among the first to 
attempt making Jewish mysticism fruitful for Christian philosophy. A central 
question of Jewish mysticism was God as being unpronounceable and unnam-
able against the background of the infinite interpretability of Revelation in 
Sacred Scripture and in the world. In this sense, the Kabbalah is among other 
things a hermeneutics, an interpretational procedure, and at the same time an 
exhortation to link as large as possible areas of knowledge and being. This is 
in accordance with Bruno’s mentality. 
In Spaccio, he classifies the Jewish religion as descendant of the Egyp-
tian religion anyway, since it is known that Moses has been educated in 
Egypt, and therefore he declares the Kabbalah to be a variation of the Greek 
local gods (Neptune in charge of the sea, Apollo in charge of the sun, etc.), 
whose peculiarity was based on the hierarchical derivation from a primary in-
describable principle (DI 782f). Jupiter poses the serious question to himself 
as to whether he was a god of the Greeks, the Jews, the Egyptians, or any oth-
er people, and which religions were fables and which ones were true stories 
(as not all of them could be true); moreover, if all of them were fables, he 
wants to know which one was the mother and which one the daughter so that 
it eventually mattered to reduce all fables to one single metaphor which was 
worth to be regarded as occult (DI 799). From these questions of Jupiter it is 
evident that Bruno regards the Jewish Kabbalah merely as another invitation 
to a general syncretism of religions or to the abolition of the historically and 
geographically diverse modes of expression within a universal philosophy. 
The Hebrew sages are not donkeys, but they report from the Third 
Heaven, and above all the supreme donkey Onorio reports from the workshop 
of the gods. Bruno’s Cabala demonstrates the attempt to view wisdom from 
the perspective of the omniscient sage—not in an ascending mode, but in a 
descending mode. It is only from this point of view that the philosophical 
schools turn out to be forms of deception and presumption, and the earthly 
world is not merely the scene of changeability but at the same time incorpo-
rated into heaven. The vicissitudes of earthly life, the course of wisdom’s his-
tory grows and becomes the heavenly library. The divine donkey not only 
talks about everything—he is everything. 
When Bruno’s spokesperson claims at the beginning of the satirical Ca-
bala, “I deliver the facts exactly as they occur, and exactly as they are I point 
them out,” what credit can we give to him? 
The sixth and final dialogue treatise of Bruno’s creative period in Eng-
land, the Heroic Passions (Degli eroici furori—also translated as Heroic 
Frenzies), consists of a series of interpretations of symbolic images and po-

 
Religion and Ethics 
63 
ems originating partly from Bruno himself, partly from his fellow countryman 
Luigi Tansillo (1516–1568), also a resident of Nola who appears as one of the 
participants in the dialogue. In terms of its external form, this treatise is situ-
ated in the tradition of poetic and philosophical reflections beginning with 
Dante’s Vita nova and reaching the most authoritative Renaissance form with 
Petrarch’s sonnets. This is true even though Bruno attacks Petrarchism in his 
dedication to the English poet Philipp Sidney. Naturally the poems and subse-
quent reflections and discussions deal with love, and since Bruno intended to 
secure his position in the closer circle of the unmarried Queen Elizabeth by 
means of his dedication to the court poet Sidney (so much so that there are 
allusions to her virtue and intelligence, as had been the case also with earlier 
dialogues), we do not need to search for a concrete cause, for instance a secret 
lover of the poet-philosopher. 
Thus one can—and should—read this opus on three levels, namely (1) 
as a model of philosophical and lyrical poetry and its interpretation in the late 
Renaissance (or early Baroque), (2) as a theory of cognition, and (3) as a form 
of Platonic metaphysics. As far as this subject is concerned, the philosopher 
from Nola is not unique, for it was already in Plato’s Symposium that love is 
being discussed as model and metaphor of cognition since love offers the 
most widely known experience of the transition from bodily to intellectual 
feelings and the experience of practical and merely theoretical insights. In his 
commentary (or rather, his imitation of the Platonic dialogue) and in connec-
tion with his medical knowledge, Marsilio Ficino had connected the theory of 
love, beauty, and cognition to the ascension of the cognitive soul from bodily 
data to the vision of “the One.” 
Faced with the question as to whether Bruno in this treatise keeps his 
promise of offering a systematic ethics, one will immediately realize that Ar-
istotle’s Nicomachean Ethics (which was a substantial component of the phil-
osophical literature of the Renaissance) plays only a little role here. One of 
the most significant achievements of the Nicomachean Ethics was the presen-
tation of the virtues as balance in between extremes (a standard example: 
courage as medium between daring and cowardice). But this form of balance 
is not Bruno’s message. In one passage he states that a certain so-called heroic 
passion consisted not in temperance and balance but rather in the excess of 
the opposites (DI 978); for it was not wise to keep a balance between cheer-
fulness and sadness, but he who was the least sad was also the least cheerful, 
and he who was the least cheerful was also the least sad—and thus wise. The 
negative extremes converge in one singular virtue while the vice dominates 
through the existence of opposites. Once again he applies the Cusanian meth-
od of the coincidence of opposites. Thus the argumentation leaves the realm 
of daily experience in which it is possible to outbalance emotions and circum-
stances. The ethical argumentation is being transferred to a metaphysical 
principle, i.e., the principle of indifference. Indifference, however, is not just a 
stoic balance in the face of facts as shown by experience, as it were; rather, it 

64 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
transcends experience as a principle of indifference of opposites inherent in a 
unity which is intellectually graspable. 
This example already shows that all the reader may expect is a system of 
absolute virtues, not a set of guidelines to individual and collective moral 
behavior. A polemical interpolation directed at Aristotle makes this clear; it is 
contained in a similar manner in other treatises, but here it apparently con-
cerns the interrelation of virtues. Bruno first rails against those philosophers 
who intend to abolish the natural differences between craftsmen, peasants, 
servants, lower people, the poor, etc. on the one hand, and philosophers, think-
ers, those who have possessions, captains, noblemen, sages, etc. on the other 
hand. After all, “it was nature which divided the universe into greater and 
smaller things, higher and lower things, famous and obscure things, worthy 
and unworthy things, and it did so not only externally but also within our-
selves, within our very substance” (DI 1114). Such is the case with Aristotle. 
According to the accusation brought forward, he had fought against the Py-
thagorean doctrine and: 
 
intended with his logical grumbling to take all sorts of definitions, terms, 
certain kinds of quintessence and other products and failures of fantasti-
cal thoughts and reflections and determine them to be principles and 
substance of the things. He did this because he studied the views and 
opinions of the people and the stupid crowd; the crowd, however, should 
be spoon-fed and guided with sophisms and outward appearances, which 
are located at the surface of the things, rather than telling them the truth 
which is buried in the substance of these things and which is the sub-
stance of the things itself. (DI 1114f) 
 
Even among his contemporaries (this is probably a reference to Petrus Ramus, 
† 1572), Bruno complains, there were certain people who were pinching 
words, who “have grown old in boys’ bottoms and the anatomy of sentences 
and words” and therefore devised new logics and metaphysics because they 
could reckon and rely on the approval of the “ignorant crowd” (DI 1115). 
(Bruno always associates pedants with pederasts, and he had already done so 
in the comedy Candelaio, since they combine uncontrolled zeal with scientific 
sterility.) Ethics, as well as logic, is not suitable for the crowds. For Bruno, it is 
an elitist business. 
The virtues and the affects connected to them—that is to say, emotional 
movements which connect intensive feelings and clear reflections—are being 
presented in sonnets, then in symbols such as emblems and mottos. Emblems 
consist of a poem which portrays a conceptual interrelation in the form of an 
image, preferably taken from mythology. This image also bears an inscription 
which at the same time serves as motto, and there is usually also a depiction 
which shows the situation described in the poem and the thought summarized 
in the motto. Ever since the humanist Andrea Alciato published such poems 

 
Religion and Ethics 
65 
with illustrations in 1531, the production of these kinds of emblematic books 
expanded vastly. Its aesthetic and hermeneutic appeal consists in synesthesia, 
so that both the pictorial understanding and the linguistic performance togeth-
er with the intellectual analysis are being addressed. The genesis of mottos is 
slightly different, but they have the same effect of the interaction between im-
age and thought, for they are coats of arms, so to speak, in which a certain 
personality presents itself to its contemporaries by means of a motto which 
the picture then explains. As is the case with any artistic production of this 
kind, emblems and mottos cannot be completely transferred to a rational por-
trayal because one may reproduce the elements in an elucidating manner and 
name the respective interrelations, but it is not possible to reproduce the inter-
action itself. This is crucial in the case of Bruno who regards this interaction 
as the decisive element; the poems and the emblems are meant to represent 
the enfolding and unfolding of the universal principle in the world and in the 
human person. However, since Bruno himself takes over the task of explain-
ing his sonnets and images, he reduces the tension described in them; on the 
other hand, he increases this tension because his text in turn is highly inter-
pretable and in need of interpretation. 
Undoubtedly the most famous picture from these dialogues is the myth 
of Actaeon (I 4, DI 1005f). Actaeon is a hunter who owns two dogs which 
represent the intellect and the will. Accompanied by these dogs, he goes hunt-
ing and discovers Diana, the goddess of the hunt, standing in the water. 
“Lo!—Bust and face more beautiful than any mortal man and any god could 
ever behold … He saw, and the great hunter became the hunt.” Antlers grow 
on his head, and his dogs tear him to pieces. “I expand my thoughts to a great 
prey, and these turn on me and bestow death on me by their gruesome and 
wild bites.” (DI 1005f) What is the philosophical significance of this image 
according to which the thoughts aspiring to great heights devour the thinker 
himself? A mystical or even Neo-Platonic interpretation will probably state 
that the human being striving for the divine, the good, wisdom, and beauty 
needs to leave the wilderness of the sensual world; in doing so, he begins to 
go wild and is thus destroyed as he identifies himself with the supreme good 
to which he aspired. Therefore, he is not the same as he was when he set out 
for his intellectual quest. Someone like Marsilio Ficino would perhaps inter-
pret this myth according to his imagery of ascent and leaving the sensual 
realm. Bruno supports this imagery until a certain point in saying that the 
death brought about by the dogs means the end of his life in the delusional, 
sensual, blind, and fantastic world and the beginning of the intellectual life; 
now he leads the life of the gods (DI 1008f). In addition, philosophizing has 
often been portrayed as “hunting for wisdom,” for instance and among others 
by Nicholas of Cusa. He had maintained that just as all living creatures strive 
to survive, the intellect needs wisdom for nourishment so that this kind of 
hunting is natural and genuine to it (De venatione sapientiae 1). What is unu-
sual about this hunt is the circumstance that its “prey” is distant and yet at the 

66 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
same time within the hunter, especially since the intellectual hunting is at 
least an expression of wisdom, if not synonymous with it. 
Therefore, one must take into consideration that it is not the goddess 
who hunts Actaeon. He is not devoured by the gods but by his own dogs, his 
own intellectual abilities which he used to venture forth towards the divine. 
Since a poem is not just about rhyming words, it should also be noted that the 
verses do not explicitly state, “the hunter became the prey,” but “the hunter 
became the hunt”; the Italian word for hunt (caccia) can signify both the ac-
tion and the purpose or the game whereas the word for prey (preda) only 
means that what has been caught as a result of the hunt. In the philosophy of 
the absolute, hunt and prey are the same. For as Bruno explains through his 
spokesman Tansillo, “the hunter went hunting, and he became the prey 
through the operation of the intellect with which he transformed into himself 
the things he had grasped” (DI 1007). And immediately afterwards he de-
scribes the metaphorical process as follows: 
 
Actaeon’s thoughts are looking outside of him for that which is good; 
they look for wisdom and beauty in the wild forest, and to the extent to 
which he becomes aware of it, he is being torn apart from himself by 
such beauty. He becomes the prey, and he sees himself being trans-
formed into that which he sought. At the same time he becomes aware of 
himself becoming the prey chased by his dogs—of his thoughts—
because he has already contracted the prey within himself and does not 
need to look for the deity outside of himself anymore. (DI 1008) 
 
This is first and foremost a well-known epistemological statement. Love 
transforms and changes the one who loves into the one who is being loved. In 
the dialogue Alcibiades I, ascribed to Plato, Socrates in conclusion suggests 
reversing the roles of disciple and teacher (135 d 8); it is thanks to the loving 
dialogue that Alcibiades is able to put himself in the position of Socrates, and 
Socrates in turn is able to take the position of the disciple. Marsilio Ficino’s 
philosophy of love (De amore) presupposes the human experience that unre-
quited love ends in nothingness, and fulfillment comes from requited love on 
the part of the partner who is the object of love. From this it follows that love 
dwells in the other person, namely, that the thought of the one who loves—
while being oblivious of himself—dwells in the person whom he loves. Ficino, 
Augustine, and many others regard love as model or metaphor for the quest 
for wisdom and truth, that is to say, philosophy. Time and again, the basic 
common thought is that possession of truth (which is being sought) at the 
same time destroys and enables the ability to think. For as long as one seeks, 
that which is being sought is still at a distance; once the seeker reaches it, it 
transforms him because—and this is different from physical encounters—the 
truth becomes so clear to the intellect that it in turn becomes wise and the 
place (locus) of truth. Another passage states that love transforms the object 

 
Religion and Ethics 
67 
of love into the one who loves in the same way as fire is able to transform all 
other simple and mixed elements into fire because it is the most active ele-
ment (DI 964). Translating love as philosophical cognition, the concept now 
reads in scholastic terminology as follows: the intellect understands the things 
only according to its own manner (DI 1007). To use an example of Aristotle: 
in the soul, the stone does not exist as a stone but merely as its image. With 
this, one must keep in mind that in the aforementioned comparison it is not 
that which is being loved, but the lover who is being compared to fire: it is the 
lover who transforms the object of his love into himself. It might seem that 
the hunter-philosopher himself becomes the truth which he seeks, but it is also 
the truth which “becomes the philosopher.” For such truth is not a possession, 
but it is the activity of the intellect. 
Love is also a most suitable model for comparison because it is exactly 
in its capacity as activity that it is unfulfilled by nature, at any rate in those 
aspects which mostly concerns the human person. Just like most of the Re-
naissance philosophers, especially those influenced by Neo-Platonism and 
mysticism, Bruno does not regard cognition as a fact which is being under-
stood proportionally clearer the more distinct terms are being used to analyze 
cognition. Rather, it is in and of itself a paradox, and this paradox can be phil-
osophically grasped best if the point of convergence of opposites is precisely 
indicated. From the perspective of the lover, courting is the most essential fea-
ture, and it is also the source of happiness and despair. Earthly love may reach 
its fulfillment, but the essence of love consists in the ability to strive for the 
other person, and there is no rational explanation for this phenomenon. (Mar-
silio Ficino described it in this way in his adaptation of Plato’s Symposium.) 
And in an analogous manner, it is the essential characteristic of the intellect to 
set, and aspire to, new and hitherto unknown goals of cognition. The fulfill-
ment of this striving would rob the intellect of exactly that ability which 
would lead it to its goal. Thus it follows that the object of cognition does not 
cease to exist beyond the quest for cognition, and the human spirit conse-
quently tends towards the infinite: 
 
Once the intellect has come to capture a certain delimited intelligible 
form and if the will emotionally corresponds to such comprehension, 
then the intellect does not stand still here. For its own light propels it and 
moves it to think about that which contains in itself every kind of that 
which can be recognized and aspired; it continues to be moved until to-
gether with the intellect it grasps the highest rank of the source of ideas, 
the ocean of all truth and goodness. (DI 1011f) 
 
One antinomy of cognition consists, therefore, in the fact that the ful-
fillment of its quest time and again sets new goals; thus the goals which have 
already been accomplished are being debased in that they were achievable. In 
a comparison reminiscent of Nicholas of Cusa (Idiota de mente) it is said that 

68 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
the intellect concludes from the fact that it discerned something that there 
ought to be greater things than this; the measuring intellect understands every-
thing that is being understood as something that has already been measured, 
and it deducts that this cannot satisfy its striving because it is not in and of 
itself sufficiently good and beautiful. Seized by its goal (which is only infini-
tesimally attainable), the intellect searches for that which has not yet been 
measured—the infinite. Bruno calls this movement itself useless. And yet, if 
one looks at the term ‘infinite,’ it also belongs to its infinity that people infi-
nitely search for it and strive to follow it—hunt it. Such a quest is no longer 
an earthly hunt but rather a “metaphysical movement” (DI 1012). Because of 
the change in perspective from the hunter to the sought-after infinite, the phi-
losopher can describe this metaphysical movement as a “cycle through the 
stages of perfection towards the infinite center which is neither being formed, 
nor is it form.” Faced with the counterquestion, “And how does one reach the 
center if one goes in circles?” Bruno replies, “I cannot know that.” “Why do 
you say it, then?”—“Because I can say it, thus making you think about it.” 
(DI 1012f) 
 

 
Seven 
 
RETURN TO PARIS: CHALLENGING 
MATHEMATICS AND ARISTOTELIANISM 
 
Although the Italian guest had presented Queen Elizabeth with the first four 
of his London Dialogues in one volume in December 1584, and even though 
he had dedicated the dialogues Spaccio and Eroici furori (which are more lit-
erary in style) to the poet Philipp Sidney, he had to leave England in late 
summer of the year 1585. He had certainly hoped to attain protection from 
Sidney at the royal court, but Sidney himself lost his influence and left in No-
vember of the same year in order to fight in the war in the Netherlands. Bruno 
had praised Queen Elizabeth as “sole Diana” in the Heroic Passions, her 
place among the “nymphs of England” just as prevalent as the sun among the 
stars; he had praised the “divine Elizabeth” in De la causa due to her physical 
beauty, her education and wisdom (DI 936, 951, 222f). The same Queen Eliz-
abeth apparently had no use for the poet and philosopher. His host, the French 
ambassador Michel de Castelnau, was ordered back to Paris; his task had con-
sisted mainly in representing the interests of France in the sense that he 
sought to balance the tensions between the religious groups, just as he had 
done on earlier missions. During the journey the poor philosopher, together 
with the family of the ambassador, was attacked and robbed, but at least he 
seems to have salvaged the manuscript of the first three books of De immenso 
(Spampanato 1933, 387). This work was published six years later. 
Bruno arrived in Paris in October 1585 where the political climate had 
changed. Pressured by the Catholic League, King Henry III revoked protec-
tive measures in favor of the Huguenots, so that Bruno himself considered 
reentering the Catholic Church. He asked the Spanish ambassador in Paris, 
Bernardin Mendoza, to petition the Pope (at that time, Sixtus V) as regards his 
case; Mendoza, however, refused to do so even though (or because) he still 
knew Bruno from his time in England. As he had done already in Toulouse, 
Bruno turned to a Jesuit (here a certain Father Alonso) who told him with re-
gard to his confession that he could receive absolution only from the Pope 
(Firpo 1993, 176 and 197). For the time being, Bruno somehow managed to 
lead a life as a private person conducting studies; he used the library of the 
Abbey of St. Victor among others. There he read—certainly not for the first 
time—the didactic poem on nature written by the Latin philosopher Lucretius 
(Spampanato 1933, 650); this philosopher would influence the later Frankfurt 
didactic poems in terms of the literary form, and he was Bruno’s most im-
portant source of Epicurean atomism. For two months Bruno conducted 
scholarly and private conversations with the librarian Guillaume Cotin who 

70 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
summarized them in his diary so that we are able to gain some information as 
to Bruno’s private life and his personal thoughts (Spampanato 1933, 642–
659). 
In January 1586 Bruno became acquainted with the mathematician Fab-
rizio Mordente; not only did he originate from Southern Italy (Salerno), but 
his brother Gaspare had been in the military together with Bruno’s father 
Giovanni. A man of sixty years at that time, Fabrizio Mordente worked on the 
famous problem of the squaring of the circle; in this context, he had invented 
some sort of pair of compasses. Since it was apparent that he did not under-
stand Latin, Bruno, out of friendship and professional admiration, offered to 
make his invention known to the public through a Latin treatise. With this, 
Bruno broke new ground; however, earlier on he had already discussed geo-
metrical figures and used them for philosophical argumentation, for example 
in Sigillus sigillorum and De la causa. As a precursor to the sector, also 
known as proportional compass, Mordente’s new compass was not only the 
simple two-part instrument with points used to draw circles or measure dis-
tances and lengths; rather, it was equipped with needles at the points and the 
hinge set at right angles with the legs so that one could also measure angles 
within circles or produce arcs of a certain angle. Thus the inventor joined the 
great number of practitioners and theoreticians of the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries who worked towards solutions of geometrical problems. 
Geometry was a decisive technique used in the realms of astronomy, ge-
ography, architecture, and fine arts. At the same time it was the means and 
subject matter of metaphysical speculation, because it was in geometry where 
lucidity and precision, theory and practice met. It was a commonplace of the 
Renaissance philosophers who insisted that geometry was fit to be regarded as 
a model science because cognition and construction coincide in geometry. 
This is so because the thinking mathematician is in principle identical with the 
one who produces the geometrical relations. Nicholas of Cusa had therefore 
used geometry to demonstrate the similarity between human intelligence and 
the creative power of the divine intellect, only to discover the differences 
which are due to the fact that the objects of human geometry are ultimately 
finite; thus, the essence of God begins exactly at the point where the capaci-
ties of human thought reach their limitations. Ever since antiquity, the circle 
had been the paradigm of the speculative appeal of lucid geometry, for—as 
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim wrote in his Three Books Con-
cerning Occult Philosophy (II 23)—the circle is “an infinite line which does 
have neither starting point nor end, for its beginning and its end is in every 
point, wherefore the circular motion is also called infinite, not according to 
time, but in terms of space. Therefore, the circle is the most comprehensive 
and most perfect of all figures.” Thus, the construction of the circle and with 
it also the ratios in parts of the circle, such as central angle, chord of a circle, 
inscribed and circumscribed polygons constituted the areas of theoretical and 
applied geometry. 

 
Return to Paris: Mathematics and Aristotelianism 
71 
Using Mordente’s compass and placing it on the circle to be measured, it 
was possible to produce certain proportions in a quasi-mechanic manner. 
Obviously, in geometry there are figures and proportions which can be either 
produced only graphically with compass and ruler (for example the diagonal 
within a square) or determined only by calculation (such as the transformation 
of a circle to a square equal in area). Here, too, geometry combines the ten-
sion between lucid practice and the intellectual rational process, as well as the 
fundamental contrast between continuous quantities in geometrical figures 
and discrete quantities in arithmetic numbers. Therefore Bruno’s fascination 
about the invention of his fellow countryman was due to the practical ad-
vantage connected with the production of certain circular lines and angles 
(OL I 4, 248f). 
According to Bruno, the philosophical return of this discovery lies in 
overcoming the contrast between graphical geometry and arithmetic calculus; 
from this, he deducts the practical provability of the existence of minima or 
atoms, respectively. Mordente had “implemented in a mechanic and visible 
way” that which refutes a principle of natural philosophy, namely that all 
things according to their form were not infinitely divisible. For one ought to 
differentiate between the smallest quantities of the continuous quantity and 
the smallest basis (subjectum) which contains the form; thus the form of a 
human being was not contained in any arbitrary matter, but there was indeed a 
minimal and a maximal mass from which the form of the human being could 
be produced. In other words, if one divides mechanically, the quality or form 
will be lost at some point, but not the quantity; the latter, however, could be 
divided into ever smaller parts until a “smallest part,” a minimum, is reached, 
but in such a way that the form of that of which it constitutes a minimum is 
being lost. Accordingly, the smallest part of a curved or straight line, or of a 
regular or irregular line, are indistinguishable. If, therefore, it is the form that 
defines a certain thing, according to Aristotelian ontology and natural philos-
ophy, then this does not yet reveal anything as to the limitation through mat-
ter. Therefore in Bruno’s opinion, Mordente has demonstrated in a mechanic 
way that there are ultimate parts of things, and he has done so lucidly and by-
passing “the arduous business of arithmetic” (Idiota triumphans 14f). 
The philosopher from Nola literally idolizes his fellow countryman Fab-
rizio Mordente, albeit not without the irony of accusing him of not having un-
derstood, or even known about, the philosophical meaning of his discovery. 
Using quite similar words as he had done in praising Copernicus in the Ash 
Wednesday Supper, he presents the mathematical practitioner as someone 
who from the limited view of his professional discipline had made a discovery 
of great philosophical significance, and it requires a genius to understand and 
disseminate it. Bruno will indeed repeatedly return to the theory of the mini-
mum and the philosophical significance of mathematics in later years; the en-
counter with Mordente perhaps signified a turning point in his philosophical 
development. His fellow countryman, however, was definitely not delighted 

72 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
to see how his discovery was being presented to the scholarly world. Mor-
dente appears as his own interpreter in three out of four small treatises by 
Bruno (two of them in OL I 4, all in Due dialoghi ed. Aquilecchia 1957), even 
though he unmistakably speaks the language of Philotheus/Bruno who takes 
the floor in the fourth treatise (Idiota triumphans). The philosopher deemed it 
important to present the discoverer as a practitioner and someone who is not 
an expert in matters philosophical (Idiota) as this corresponded to his opinion 
of the mob; as a rule, the people are not aware of the wisdom and potencies of 
the human intellect while still participating in it. This is the anthropological 
parallel to the theory which Bruno now was developing, according to which 
the divine wisdom is inherent in the finite things, down to the smallest atoms. 
The mathematician was simply offended. The two Italian scholars living 
in Paris got into an argument which they continued when they met again in 
1588 at the court of Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II in Prague. There was al-
so the fact that they belonged to different groups in the political tensions be-
tween Huguenots, Catholics, and conciliatory so-called “politiques” in Paris. 
Whereas Bruno sympathized with the conciliatory party since his protection 
through Castelnau and in light of his own precarious denominational situa-
tion, Mordente apparently belonged to the Catholic party, as well as Boterus. 
This person appears as an interlocutor in the mentioned dialogues and must be 
identified as the political author and diplomat Giovanni Botero (1533–1617) 
who had stayed in Paris through the end of 1585 (Due dialoghi p. XXI). De-
scribed as being a hot-tempered person by a contemporary, Mordente bought 
up the first two dialogues with his own money because he considered them to 
be shameful so that there are only two copies which have survived. 
Bruno’s attempts to come back to the Catholic Church failed. He fell out 
with the Catholic group and—under the conditions at the time—threw away 
his chances to succeed at court. Now he prepared a scandal to take place at the 
university. He published the aforementioned Figuratio Aristotelici Physici 
Auditus … (Schema of the Aristotelian “Physics,” to be Set Forth in Fifteen 
Images for the Purpose of Understanding and Recollection), and just as he 
had done with Idiota triumphans, he dedicated the Figuratio to Abbot Pietro 
Del Bene. Del Bene was a supporter of the King of Navarra, heir to the throne 
and sympathizing with the Huguenots; his kingship as Henry IV was to be-
come definitive only in 1593 after he had converted to Catholicism. This trea-
tise as well was directed at the wrong party. 
The author promulgates his scientific-political program in the dedicatory 
letter (OL I 4, 133–135): some people had already attempted to criticize Aris-
totle, and in doing so they made a fool of themselves; it seems to be better to 
err with Aristotle than to join the clamor of his critics. Hence it is important to 
improve and strengthen the inherent weakness of Aristotelian philosophy and 
to give it a consistency which it lacks in its present form. For this purpose the 
arguments as regards content must be listed in numerical order and missing 
arguments must be added so as to prepare everything for a potential critique. 

 
Return to Paris: Mathematics and Aristotelianism 
73 
On this occasion the meaningless and dispersed theorems are being joined to-
gether, and the entire immature system of theories is being put in shape and in 
order. Then it will become apparent that Aristotelian philosophy is not some-
thing like an open secret, but that it does not contain any more ambiguities 
and vagueness than are being secretively inserted in it. The term “figuratio” 
used as part of the title does not signify an external schematization, but it ex-
presses the claim of bringing meaning and structure into natural philosophy. For 
according to Bruno, the function of mnemonics is not to use arbitrary schema-
ta as a peg on which to hang the subjects and topics to be memorized, but ra-
ther to fabricate imaginary pictures in such a way that they initially—or on 
the intellectual level—establish the inner meaning and the external context. 
At the beginning of the treatise the author has placed several series of fifteen 
or ten images; he then proceeds to win the favor of the academic readers by 
means of a seemingly scholastic categorization of the philosophical sciences. 
The main body of the treatise consists in a concise summary of Aristotle’s 
Physics; the flukes and unorthodox interpretation of this summary can only be 
noted if meticulously compared to Aristotle’s text and its standard commen-
taries. This treatise, evidently, was not so much aimed at the nobility in Paris 
rather than the University of Paris. 
On May 28, 1586, Bruno organized a public disputation at the Collège 
de Cambrai, an earlier version of the Collège de France. It was affiliated with 
the university, but it was supported by the royal court. As was customary with 
academic disputations, Giordano Bruno wrote the text and had a student pre-
sent the theses: the young nobleman Jean Hennequin. It was his declared 
intention to provoke the professors at Paris to participate in a profound and 
thorough discussion about Aristotelian philosophy. The text of the disputation 
has come down to us in two versions: one, in a printing published 1586, prob-
ably before the disputation itself: One Hundred and Twenty Articles on Nature 
and the World Against the Peripatetics (Centum, et viginti articuli de natura 
et mundo adversus Peripateticos); then, two years later at Wittenberg under 
the title Proclamation of Cambrai Or  
Reasons of the Articles on Phys-
ics Against the Peripatetics, Proclaimed in Paris, etc. (Camoeracensis Acro-
tismus seu rationes articulorum physicorum adversus Peripateticos Parisiis 
propositum, etc.; OL I 1). The word “Acrotismus” is not part of the classical 
Latin vocabulary; it insinuates the Greek word akroasis which means lecture 
or talk, and it is the generic name for Aristotle’s Physics. It contains the sen-
sual perception of something that is outstanding or excellent. Therefore, and 
because of the programmatic intention of the treatise, I deem “proclamation” 
to be the best translation. 
The first printing consists of ten folios; this is the usual format of an 
academic disputation as it was customary at that time and also later on. Some 
articles have been reorganized in the second version, and especially the theses 
have been provided with extensive commentaries. For the spectacle of such a 
public disputation consisted in the defendant or respondent (the one who de-

74 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
fended the theses) publishing the theorems of his professor, thus offering to 
defend these theorems in the course of the disputation. In a formal examination 
process, an opponent was appointed who had prepared counterarguments; in 
this manner, he put the defendant to the test. The number of theses proposed 
by Bruno, but especially their content, by far exceeds the usual academic ritu-
al. One ought to be reminded, however, that approximately one hundred years 
earlier the philosopher Giovanni Pico della Mirandola had presented a spec-
tacular number of nine hundred theses for the purpose of a public disputation, 
and he too claimed to reform the entire philosophical system. 
The second version, published in 1588, reveals the philosophical reasons 
which Bruno used to equip his student Hennequin. The Parisian version is 
dedicated to King Henry III (a reprint of the only remaining copy can be 
found in Canone ed. 1992, 159f); the letter mainly addresses the fact that the-
se theses are intended for discussion at the “princess of universities.” The ac-
tual title and the brief preface, however, expand this claim to all of Europe: 
here the “articles on nature and the world” are being referred to as theses which 
are being presented at the most important and indeed all European academies 
(OL I 1, 82). Accordingly, for Bruno this is not merely an incidental event at a 
particular college but rather a challenge to the entire University of Paris, and 
he expresses this view in a letter to the rector of this university, Jean Filesac. 
On the one hand, he takes it upon himself to prove to his Parisian colleagues 
“that Aristotelian philosophy is always and forever more than true” and that 
“this university owes more to Aristotle than Aristotle owes to this university” 
(that is to say, the university depends on Aristotle, but it has not contributed 
anything to the knowledge of Aristotle). On the other hand, he insists that it 
must be possible at this university “to think freely philosophically when it 
comes to philosophy and to maintain an individual teaching” (OL I 1, 57). 
The programmatic speech given by the defendant on behalf of the philosopher 
from Nola is also a defensive speech, and in the Wittenberg version it is enti-
tled “Excubitor” (watchman), for as the imagery of light and dark as used in 
this speech shows, the author thinks of himself as guardian of the light in a 
universal darkness. 
Using similar words as he had already done in the Ash Wednesday Sup-
per, Bruno holds the opinion that light and darkness, error and truth follow 
each other naturally throughout the course of history. This also includes the 
consequence that a new view held in the present will be revealed as an ancient 
doctrine upon closer examination, and this ancient doctrine is being held by 
those who are familiar with the nature of the matter, just as conversely there is 
no ancient doctrine which appeared to be new at some point (I 1, 60f). If we 
want to simply believe the author that he had presented his theses at various 
European universities, then we should be reminded first of all of his appear-
ance on the scene in Oxford, where, according to the witnesses, he dealt with 
Aristotelian cosmology. Even the quotations from Marsilio Ficino of which 
he was accused might be traced and identified by means of an exact textual 

 
Return to Paris: Mathematics and Aristotelianism 
75 
comparison, particularly since Bruno puts three times ten theorems on nature, 
the universe, and the visible world in front of his one hundred and twenty the-
ses, and he collects them under the title “Pythagorean and Platonic Sentences, 
deemed impossible by the Peripatetics.” It is not clear whether Bruno claims 
to implicitly defend these thirty sentences in the one hundred and twenty the-
ses, or if he rather intended to explain them in addition to the other theses. 
This might have been the subject matter of the Oxford debate. 
As an example of the provocative tone, here the first article: “The sub-
ject of natural science: most Peripatetics do not understand that Aristotle never 
regards the natural, bodily, moving beings as objects of science, and they do 
not listen when Aristotle himself in many places explicitly calls nature by its 
name.” (I 1, 83) He plays Aristotle (or the tradition of Aristotelian natural phi-
losophy, respectively) off against himself. He touches on a sore point of Aris-
totelian philosophy of science which is being discussed amongst his inter-
preters to this day: the thesis contained in Posterior Analytics according to 
which there cannot be a science of that which is changeable, visible, and 
movable; there can only be a science of that which is constant, regular, and 
unchangeable. The practice of Aristotle himself is at odds with this: he deter-
mined nature as the principle of motion, and he identified the realm of natural 
science exactly in the finite and changeable things. Bruno rightly points out 
that some scientific works of Aristotle (especially on biology) ought to be de-
scribed as natural history, that is to say, as stocktaking of the natural things 
and not as philosophy in the narrow sense. In his first thesis Bruno quotes a 
solution of the scholastics which consisted in circumscribing the object of 
physics as science: this object is the “natural, bodily, or movable being.” The 
stress is on “being,” for physics obtains its scientific character in the sense 
of the universal, uniform, and regular from the concept of “being” which in 
this case is finite and multiplied. Bruno objects—and this is paradigmatic of 
his reinterpretation of Aristotelianism—that Aristotle defines nature as the 
principle of motion and thus aims at “the universal nature itself.” Traditional 
Aristotelian philosophy regarded nature as a special case of being, and ac-
cordingly the scientific nature of physics was maintained in using logical 
conclusions which are formally correct. Bruno’s critique states that if this is 
the case, this science only moves around in the realm of the visible, movable, 
and particular without combining the things objectively in a uniform principle 
(OL I 1, 83–87). 
But what may this uniform principle look like? To this end, Bruno goes 
back to the difference between the terms subjectum and objectum. Subject, 
that which forms the basis, is the topic of physics in the sense that it is the 
universal realm with which this science is concerned in general and in particu-
lar. Object, however, in the scholastic sense means that which is being offered 
or represented in the scientific intellect as result of thinking. Such objects are 
as manifold as the items with which they are dealing; they resemble the ob-
jects of technology and craft which never constitute an entirety but always 

76 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
remain material things consisting of many parts. Nature, on the contrary, 
should be a uniform and underlying nature—hence, subject (OL I 1, 89f). 
Therefore the Anti-Aristotelian favors the concept of a uniform nature, as was 
emphasized in the aforementioned Pythagorean and Platonic theses, namely 
nature as “eternal and indivisible essence, instrument of divine providence 
which is active because of an inherent wisdom” (OL I 1, 80). Aristotle had 
explicitly argued against such a conception at the beginning of his Physics. 
On this condition “that which is most knowable (even though it might not be 
actually known) is the most being and the most constant, i.e., not a natural 
thing but nature” (OL I 1, 88). Thus he reverses the objective of ‘cognition of 
nature’ to the objective of the ‘naturalness of cognition’: “That which is natu-
rally perceivable is nothing but nature itself; nature itself gives that which 
eventually results as that which can be known from natural things.” (OL I 1, 
88) Subsequently, this can only be achieved if the scientific statement corre-
sponds to the manner of nature as “being true”: “That which is in all and 
which proves to be true in everything (verificetur) and which is said to be true 
about everything is nothing but nature.” Since Nature reveals itself to human 
beings in its diversity and finiteness as well as contingency, Bruno does not 
understand verification in the sense of empirical or experimental examination 
of the accuracy of scientific statements on a particular issue; rather, verifica-
tion is exactly the way in which nature reveals itself diversely. Research then 
means “search for nature,” be it in the scientific sense that the things of nature 
are being ordered in the way in which nature has ordered them, be it also in 
the particular scientific disciplines as natural history which puts the empirical 
facts in order (OL I 1, 88). 
Just as Bruno plays off Aristotle as the physicist against Aristotle as the 
philosopher of science, so he constantly repeats the contrast between logical 
and natural definitions in Aristotle’s theory. It is not acceptable that natural 
science results in a construct of terms which are mere objects of reason and 
logical in themselves; rather, the result must be completely congruent with the 
object of cognition so that “thinking of nature” must be brought into line with 
the “nature of thinking.” Bruno proceeds paragraph by paragraph to bend the 
Aristotelian text in accordance with his cosmology as already presented in the 
Italian dialogues. In a clever and hermeneutical work he transforms Aristotle 
into a “Brunian” so as to be able to present himself as a true Aristotelian. 
This masterwork of scholastic-antischolastic polemic was meant to be 
the ticket with which the homeless philosopher wished to gain access to the 
academic world. At least he succeeded one or two years later in giving private 
lectures on Aristotle’s Physics at the University of Wittenberg; these lectures 
are also handed down in a manuscript. He interprets Aristotle less polemically 
but with the same intentions and closeness to the text in order to break it 
down and refute it. Apparently he was also permitted to put the comprehensive 
version of the programmatic Parisian treatise on the market. These treatises 
give us an insight into his studio. For unlike his numerous and often con-

 
Return to Paris: Mathematics and Aristotelianism 
77 
cealed references to other authors in the dialogues, these writings reveal his 
method and his use of specified philosophical sources. With regard to the 
numerous other allusions—even if he mentions names—one must arduously 
locate the passages which he may have had in mind or which he may have 
even used in their written form; thus one may be easily tempted to make 
sweeping allocations such as Platonism, Stoicism, Cusanus, Virgil, Lucretius, 
Hermeticism, Neo-Platonism, etc. Bruno connects all these sources in a pecu-
liar and syncretistic manner. However, he acknowledges Aristotle in such a 
punctual and exact analysis so that one can realize that this is not the result of 
vague influences or unfocused reading; rather, this is a program of offensive 
reception and philosophical reinterpretation. As he says himself, he is follow-
ing the threefold step: reception—comprehension—critique. Aristotle is being 
examined with regards to clear theses and problems; Bruno suggests a solu-
tion by which he twists the common meaning to mean just the opposite (OL I 
4, 134). The cosmology of the infinite results from denouncing the terms of the 
Aristotelian space, expansion, division, etc., to be merely logical terms which 
address a particular phenomenon and not a “natural” reason. All Aristotelian 
natural principles, including the causes, are being examined with regard to a 
uniform principle, and the result is that there can be only one uniform princi-
ple of nature which must be at the same time the principle of thought and 
diversification (and in this respect also the principle of human errors). 
The consequence is a paradoxical freedom and dependence with regard 
to philosophical sources. On the one hand, Bruno boasts about his insolence 
of disproving the highest authorities of Western thought or harnessing them 
for his own benefit; on the other hand, he makes himself—or remains—
dependent on them. He philosophizes independently and in a very original 
way within the categories of tradition. At the peak of its diversification and 
academic distribution he poses the central question of Western philosophy: 
how can a theory of extramental objects be possible? However, he looks for a 
solution in the opposite direction than some of his contemporaries, and espe-
cially scientists after him such as Galileo and Francis Bacon: he does not look 
in the direction of validation of empirical data and experimental sequences by 
means of which the accuracy of scientific conclusions is meant to be recorded 
in a methodical and orderly manner. Rather, he seeks his answer in the re-
moval of the distance between thought and its objects. He can only succeed in 
presenting the variety of objects as an expression of unity, as well as present-
ing the search for this unity in philosophizing as the restoration and actual es-
tablishment of this unity. In the area of epistemology, therefore, he focused on 
the operations of the mind as the ability to produce unity in diversity; in deal-
ing with historical philosophies, he tried to present the unity of the philosoph-
ical problem and the variety of its expression as part of this problem. Thus far 
the program. 
The great disputation in Paris was scheduled for three days as one could 
gather from a notice: “After the Solemnity of Pentecost, from Thursday until 

78 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
Saturday, God willing, Jordanus Bruno Nolanus will defend one hundred and 
twenty articles on nature and the world against the Peripatetics, with Johannes 
Hennequin as the speaker and respondent. Daily from the first hour until the 
evening in the Royal Auditorium at Cambrai.” The same source then reports: 
 
The young man Hennequin gave a speech against the teaching of Aristotle 
in the presence of the philosopher from Nola. After the speech the man 
from Nola challenged everybody to take part in a competition. When 
nobody came forward, he went to the lectern and said many things 
against the finite world of Aristotle; finally a professor came forward 
who insulted the philosopher from Nola with abusive words, calling him 
Jordanus Brutus [like Brutus, Julius Caesar’s murderer, in Latin ‘ani-
mal’]. He produced a few arguments in a confused manner, and when he 
did not permit the man from Nola to answer, there was a commotion, 
and the session was disbanded. This man from Nola calls himself a de-
vourer of Aristotle, and he calls Aristotle the god of the philosophers’ 
ignorance. (Canone ed. 1992, 108f) 
 
Another contemporary reports: “The man from Nola is still against Mordente, 
and he is writing new dialogues. Now he is interested in destroying all of Per-
ipatetic philosophy, and based on how little I understand these things, he 
seems to have good arguments. But soon he will go to Germany. It is enough 
that he left behind a great controversy in England; he is a pleasant and fun-
loving chap” (Due dialoghi p. XII). The librarian Cotin in turn has this to say 
on the entire affair: “Giordano sat on a small chair near the gate to the garden 
while Jean Hennequin, his student, presented his theses.” And regarding to 
commotion he reports that Bruno might have escaped the agitated audience 
only because a continuation of the disputation was scheduled for the next day, 
“but Bruno did not turn up, and nobody saw him ever since in this town” 
(Spampanato 1933, 659). Indeed one finds his next sign of life in Germany—
in Marburg. 
 

 
Eight 
 
“HOUSES OF WISDOM” IN GERMANY: 
HISTORY, MAGIC, AND ATOMISM 
 
Bruno tells in his biography at the time of the trial in Venice that he had trav-
elled from Paris to Germany in the wake of the tumults. First he set out to 
Mainz, an important archiepiscopal and electoral see; after twelve days he 
turned towards a place called Vispure (perhaps referring to the name Wiesba-
den, in imitation of the local dialect), only to continue onwards to Wittenberg 
due to the fact that he had been unable to earn his living (Firpo 1993, 162). He 
prudently neglects to mention that at first he attempted to teach at Marburg, 
the location of the most prominent Calvinist university. In light of the fact, 
however, that the rector denied to grant permission, Bruno must have caused a 
scandal which, in turn, only accelerated his departure (Spampanato 1933, 
663). It is safe to assume that the reason for the denial rested with Bruno: He 
had registered himself as a Doctor of Roman (Catholic) Theology. Nonethe-
less, the hapless Bruno was indirectly to be associated with Marburg: It was 
Raphael Egli, later a professor in Marburg, who had heard his lectures in Zur-
ich in 1591 and in 1595 had them printed under the title Summa terminorum 
metaphysicorum (Handbook of Metaphysical Terms), and fourteen years later 
he issued an expanded edition. Johann Heinrich Alsted, a philosopher who 
had tied close friendships with Marburg scholars due to Calvinism, also pub-
lished Bruno’s Wittenberg lecture on rhetoric in Frankfurt in 1612, entitled 
Artificium perorandi. 
Bruno attained a position as a private outside lecturer in Wittenberg 
through the initiative of a fellow countryman, Alberigo Gentili, a law professor 
at the Protestant university. He had become acquainted with Gentili in Lon-
don. In his new position, he was now allowed to give lectures on the topics of 
logic, rhetoric, and philosophy of nature. In this context, it is important to 
know that Marburg was strongly influenced by Ramistic logic. At the exact 
same time, complaints were raised in Wittenberg that “Aristotle is not being 
read due to Ramism catching on, and that there are attempts to quench the 
teaching method of Philipp Melanchthon” (Canone ed. 1992, 113). It is hence 
safe to assume that Bruno’s offer of teaching Aristotle was gladly accepted, 
seeing as he regularly spoke disparagingly about the Ramistic method. Philipp 
Melanchthon (1497–1560) had substantiated Lutheran theology with an Aris-
totelian philosophy interspersed with elements of Humanism and Platonism. 
In this way, and combined with the promulgation of new academic regula-
tions, he had made Wittenberg University the leading Lutheran institution. 

80 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
After the international and courtly intrigues in London and in the after-
math of the permanent civil war in France, Bruno did by no means escape the 
German denominational controversies; rather, he had now stepped onto the 
German rag rug of small states and inner-Protestant parties. For in the second 
half of the sixteenth century, Protestantism consisted not only of Calvinists 
and Lutherans; there were also the followers of Melanchthon, so-called au-
thentic Lutherans, crypto-Calvinists, and some more trends. Bruno describes 
it to the inquisitional tribunal as follows: “I found two groups in Wittenberg, 
the philosophers who were Calvinists, and the theologians who were Luther-
ans … At that time [1586] the son had succeeded the old duke in office 
[Christian I succeeded Augustus I as Elector of Saxony]; the son was Calvin-
ist, and whereas his father had been Lutheran, he now began to support that 
party which was opposed to Lutheranism, the same party which supported 
me” (Firpo 1993, 162). Christian was regarded as a crypto-Calvinist; thus he 
supported Calvinism in Saxony which was Lutheran. We can deduct that Bruno 
was more inclined towards the Lutherans at this time and that his supporters 
were among the theologians, not the philosophers. Since the influence of the 
Calvinists increased, Bruno left the “Athens of Saxony” in the spring of 1588 
and again tried his luck at court, this time at the court of Emperor Rudolf II in 
Prague who had been residing there since 1583. He bid farewell with a speech 
in which he unfolded his philosophy of a history of philosophy. 
His entry in the album of the university at Wittenberg reads as follows: 
“Salomon et Pythagoras. Quid est quod est? Ipsum quod fuit. Quid est quod 
fuit? Ipsum quod est. Nihil sub sole novum.” (What is that which is? That 
which was. What is that which was? That which is. Nothing new under the 
sun.) He wrote the same adage in the autograph book of Hans of Warnsdorf, 
one of his students (Canone ed. 1992, 121–125). It is notable that both Salo-
mon and Pythagoras, i.e., the wise man of the Old Testament and the first of 
the Greek pagan philosophers, are credited with this aphorism. Bruno will 
make reference to this saying during the trial in Venice as well so as to sup-
port his thesis about all things being animate and therefore immortal “since 
there is no other death than separation and connection” (Firpo 1993, 169). In the 
same declaration he connects this thought with the wisdom of Salomon: “The 
Spirit of the Lord fills the world, and that which holds everything together [has 
knowledge of the voice]” (“Spiritus Domini replevit orbem terrarium, et hoc, 
quod continent omnia [, scientiam habet vocis]”; Wisdom 1:7). He compares 
this in turn to Virgil’s aphorism which is being quoted time and again in the 
context of Renaissance philosophy: “The spirit nourishes heaven and earth 
from the beginning … from within, and reason which is poured out into all 
limbs moves the mass.” (Virgil, Aeneid VI 724f) 
The theologians who were sitting in judgment on Bruno deemed it im-
portant that Bruno thus had explicitly expressed his doubts on the Holy Spirit 
as the third person of the Trinity in identifying him cosmologically with the 
world spirit and world reason. Bruno’s motto “nothing new under the sun,” 

 
Germany: History, Magic, and Atomism 
81 
however, not only contains this specifically theological and cosmological 
meaning but also a summary of his role as a philosopher of his time. His mot-
to is a quotation from the Book of Ecclesiastes (Qoheleth) (1:9–10) which 
primarily warns about the fleeting nature of the wisdom of this world. It 
should be noted that Bruno changes the wording, and it remains unsolved why 
he does that. The biblical text does not address present and past, but past and 
future: “What is that which was? That which will be. What is that which has 
been done? That which is to be done.” (“Quid est quod fuit? Ipsum quod futu-
rum est. Quid est quod factum est? Ipsum quod faciendum est.”) Without any 
doubt this is a motto of Bruno, for he quotes it many times (DI 247, 324; OL 
II 1, 44, II 2, 213; III 341; Spampanato 1933, 664, 711; cf. Firpo 1993, 169, 
301, 304); therefore, one cannot explain the change in wording by saying, 
Bruno quoted this passage from memory (DI 247 annotation)—especially 
since he was famous for his memory. 
Rather, by altering the tenses from past and future to past and present 
Bruno draws attention to the fact that this biblical text unfolds a natural theory 
which one can generously describe as stoical, since the cosmos is being por-
trayed as eternal recurrence and thus in itself identical. The biblical text goes 
on to conjure the vanity of human labor and studies; by shifting the verb from 
“doing” to “being,” Bruno might have been particularly interested in the con-
stant recurrence of human wisdom in view of the infinite universe and the to-
tality and changeability of history. He continues the quotation as follows: 
“And nobody can say: Behold, this is new, for it already existed in earlier cen-
turies.” Looking back from this perspective to the quotation from the Book of 
Wisdom, on will notice that Bruno also quotes “incorrectly,” for the original 
passage reads: “That which holds everything together knows every word said” 
(New Jerusalem Bible). Bruno cuts off the sentence in such a way as to give 
the impression that the passage would imply that the world spirit fills the 
cosmos and all its parts. The tactical reasons as to why Bruno is doing this are 
not clear—after all, he addressed theologians who were biblically sound. But 
in this phase of the trial at Venice he clearly demonstrates the connection be-
tween his cosmology, his theology of God’s spirit permeating everything, his 
syncretism and the deliberate use of the most various sources, and last but not 
least his philosophy of history: there is but one universal wisdom, and it is the 
task of the philosopher of his time to update it again and again. 
Bruno’s farewell discourse at Wittenberg opens with a prayer to the 
“God of my Fathers” who bestows wisdom “in the shadow of the light”: 
 
For there is first the nature of the sun which is merely being touched up-
on by reason alone; secondly, there is the existence of the sun which has 
its own circle and absolutely consists and lives where it lives; thirdly, 
there is the assistance or the effect of the sun which entails everything 
and is embraced by everything. In like manner one can interpret the Sun 
of Understanding in a threefold sense. First, in the nature of the divine; 

82 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
secondly, in the substance of the world which is an image thereof; third-
ly, in the light of the meaning of those who share in life and knowledge. 
According to the first degree, Cabbalists interpret it and refer to it by 
way of the sephirot cochma; according to the second degree, orphic the-
ologians call it Pallas Athena or Minerva; according to the third degree, 
it is generally credited with the name of Wisdom. (OL I 1, 12f) 
 
In a relatively simple form Bruno describes the condition of the cogni-
tion of the world as the threefold presence of divine wisdom, in fact as ab-
solute wisdom, as manifestation within creation and as “helmsman on the 
ship of the soul” (OL I 1, 14). Surprisingly, there is a division of labor of the 
threefold stratification of wisdom and cognition connected to this; this divi-
sion of labor is executed among Cabbalists, Orphics, and philosophers in gen-
eral. Similarly, there are different speakers in the “House of Wisdom,” the 
constant metaphor of this farewell discourse praising the university of Wit-
tenberg. Job speaks on behalf of the first house; the narrator of the second and 
third house is Salomon (OL I 1, 14). Even if we may immediately deem such 
a threefold stratification to be plausible according to the neo-Platonic thought 
pattern, it still needs to be explained why different groups interpret such a 
stratification in different ways; moreover, even individual groups of interpret-
ers (viz., Cabalists, Orphics, and philosophers) are said to be responsible for 
different representations of the same wisdom. According to this application 
the House of Wisdom “wanders” between the ontological stages of the divine 
manifestation as well as throughout the chronological and geographical se-
quence. 
Fortunately Bruno’s flow of words continues. He touches upon the sep-
tem artes liberales not without adding unscholarly disciplines such as astrolo-
gy, alchemy, and magic, only to present a translatio sapientiae in which the 
House of Wisdom is handed down from the Egyptians and Assyrians via the 
Persians, Indians, etc., to the Germans. (This is an obvious bow to his audi-
ence, crowned with a eulogy on Martin Luther.) The orator refers to the 
wandering of the House of Wisdom as “memoria hominum,” memory of hu-
manity, in which the numerous peoples and sages appear in roundelay. How-
ever, why does he not say “history”? History and memory mean the same 
thing to Bruno. They contain within them the entirety of truth and the facts, 
and it is the task of the philosopher to grasp this totality as unity and to unfold 
it as multiplicity. Therefore he describes the so-called second House of Wis-
dom, the manifestation of divine wisdom in creation, not only as “voices of 
wisdom and traces, works of the deity, which indicate the supreme provi-
dence,” but also as “most reasonable book in which one can read the history 
of divine power, wisdom, and benevolence” (OL I 1, 14). This is not merely a 
resumption of the widely known metaphor of nature as a book in which God 
reveals himself to humanity parallel to Sacred Scripture; rather, the kenosis 

 
Germany: History, Magic, and Atomism 
83 
and self-revelation of God is itself being understood as Scripture, not only by 
way of analogy, but as a foundational pattern of that which is written: “For 
that which is invisible in God is being understood by way of that which is 
created: this is Scripture” (ibid.). 
Just as in the realm of mnemonics the construction of images takes place 
as the disposition of that which can be known in the tension of contraction 
and unfolding, so the entire creation—that is, the entirety of the objects of 
human cognition—is a “history” of the divine creative power. This “history” 
is a “memoria,” that is to say, the entirety of memory, if it is being portrayed 
as the perceived object of human cognition. This, however, means that the en-
tirety of creation—unlike the objects of mnemonics, with the peculiarity of 
combining the contents of discursive and successive argumentation—is the 
representation of reality as a whole, including the index of temporality. Thus 
history differs from memory only by virtue of gradual formation. Nonetheless 
it remains questionable whether we may talk about temporality at this point, if 
temporality is understood as characteristic of objects, not merely as accidental 
sequence. A living and finite organism is necessarily temporal insofar as it is 
determined at each point by that what it used to be earlier and what it is sup-
posed to become. It is ontologically undetermined as to whether “the heavens 
which proclaim the glory of God”—another metaphor applied by Bruno—are 
“homiletic voices” (OL I 1, 14) in the sense that they teach humanity and the 
philosophers trans-temporarily, as it were. 
Such reflections would be nit-picking, had Bruno himself not expounded 
the thesis—maybe so as to flatter his hosts—that wisdom had built its seventh 
and final house among the Germans of his time. As the number seven makes 
it clear, the fulfillment of the wisdom program in Wittenberg is not meant to 
be coincidental; rather, it is in the nature of wisdom itself which, accordingly, 
is said to have a teleological structure. In light of the destruction of teleologi-
cal thinking in medieval philosophy (and Bruno follows this schema), this is 
relatively improbable: Christianity interprets the Aristotelian ‘final’ cause as a 
merely metaphorical talk about causation; a development is interpreted “as if” 
it were driven by its purpose. Another possibility would be to attribute a plan-
ning subject to the final cause, and with regard to the totality of creation this 
means that its cause is rooted in the planning of the all-knowing God (cf. DI 
154). At this point, there is no need of further explanation that Bruno regards 
this all-knowing, planning Designer-God to be identical with the world creat-
ed by him—at least in terms of extent, if not even factually. This is also what 
he expresses in his speech about the three Houses of Wisdom: according to 
this speech, the eternal divine wisdom is found in the first-created wisdom, 
namely the visible world, and the second-created wisdom, namely the human 
soul. Therefore, the divine wisdom cannot be different in the various human 
souls, even though these are the souls of Egyptian or Assyrian Chaldeans, 
Persian magicians, Indian gymnosophists, Thracian Orphics, Greek sages, 
Italic philosophers or German Protestants. 

84 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
For this reason one must go on to ask whether the presence of divine 
wisdom in the world of humanity can increase. It must rather be a recurring 
revelation, and temporality does not belong to its nature. Therefore the eulo-
gist immediately explains to his audience at the university of Wittenberg that 
wisdom (by means of dominion) and science (Jupiter and Minerva) “seem to 
have changed country and domicile in successive alteration” (OL I 1, 16). 
This is a determining keyword for Bruno’s cosmology and metaphysics: “vi-
cissitudo,” the change in which the unity of the principle manifests itself 
again and again. The continuous change, the merging of elements and appear-
ances in general, is a distinguishing feature of the stoic concept of nature as 
one can find it in Cicero’s writings (De natura deorum II 84). Bruno uses the 
continuous change of elementary properties and forces in De immenso as the 
epitome of order and consistency of the things. In doing so, he refers to the 
thought of uniting opposites according to Nicholas of Cusa (OL I 1, 279f). 
If the continuous change represents the object of cognition, and if this 
corresponds ontologically to the universal principle, and epistemologically to 
the one who understands it, then there is no philosophy which can claim any 
progress of science as its own, let alone any accumulation or gathering of 
knowledge. Rather, it needs to prove that it has found its place in the continuous 
change and that it reflects this continuous change as a unity. Consequently, 
the historicity of Bruno’s philosophy must manifest itself at that suitable and 
convenient moment which, as one among others, is “at the height of the time,” 
that is to say, in unison with eternal truth. Therefore he says towards the end 
of De immenso, Wisdom (Sophia) was naked, she had no face nor clothes nor 
a title, insignia, or parts, for “she bears witness to herself” (“Ipsa fidem facit 
ipsa sibi”); however, it is Wisdom who expects and welcomes the one who 
loves her, and in doing so she—paradoxically—assumes the quality of Fortu-
na, the unforeseeable fortune. Fortuna in turn is the wheel of time, and she 
causes everything that comes into being “repeat ancient positions in that she 
carries everything while flying away” (OL I 2, 290). 
This is Bruno’s philosophy of history: “The best thing which can happen 
to a mortal being in this destiny is a life related to the nature of the gods; you 
can only accomplish this if you have been embraced by this goddess so that 
you may despise the dreams of the miserable mob, deeply sunken into the 
musty floods of Lethe.” (OL I 2, 290f) On the conditions of the finality of 
human thought and the eternity of wisdom and truth, philosophizing appears 
to be fate, a stroke of luck, a fortunate moment in fleeting time. The fleeting 
nature of the finite things is reflected in the fleeting nature of grasping the 
truth: 
 
Time takes everything and gives everything; everything changes, noth-
ing is being destroyed; there is only one thing which cannot change, one 
is eternal and can persist eternally as one, equal, and the same.—My 
soul rises in this philosophy, and my intellect expands in it. For whatever 

 
Germany: History, Magic, and Atomism 
85 
is awaiting me this evening, if the change is true, I who am in the night 
await the day whereas those who live in the day await the night. Every-
thing that exists is here or there, near or far, now or hereafter, earlier or 
later. Therefore, enjoy yourselves, and stay healthy as far as possible, 
and love those who love you. (Candelaio 13f) 
 
Even though this passage is taken from the highly ironic dedication of a 
comedy to Morgan le Fay (alluding to Ludovico Ariosto), it demonstrates the 
philosophical-historical meaning in Bruno’s philosophizing, in connection 
with the Wheel of Fortuna in the didactic poem. If the course of history de-
stroys nothing but preserves and contains everything so that it is exactly here 
that eternity, unity, equality, and identity are found, and if the solace of phi-
losophy consists in the joyful knowledge of the one who loves that which 
loves him, then it is apparently the task of the philosopher to embark the 
wheel of time and to enter the transiency of things in order to transcend it. He 
exposes himself to the naked truth in understanding that which is consistent as 
something transient and vice versa; this is what transforms his philosophy into 
a form of life—the form of life according to the nature of the gods. 
The treatise Sigillus sigillorum praises mnemonics as nectar which puri-
fies the “lethargic fluids of Lethe” and thus gives “heavenly life with the 
heavenly gods and afterwards even the supercelestial circulation with the 
supercelestial gods” (OL II 2, 162). Thus, being forgetful of history is tanta-
mount to the end of philosophical life; “memoria” is the transition from per-
ceived knowledge to the supernatural perspective. This promise, however, 
does not offer any possession which one might acquire or refuse to do so; ra-
ther, it signifies a dialectic tension between ability and failure: history does 
not cease to be transient in memory, the nectar does not replace Lethe, and 
history retains its “forgetfulness” in “memoria.” For the quoted passage is ac-
companied by the memento of Prometheus who brought the treasure of the 
gods to humanity, and it is also accompanied by reference to the simultaneity 
of “Pythagorean” and “Simonidean times” of forgetfulness and remembrance 
(OL II 2, 162f). Prometheus signifies the boundary between divine and hu-
man, impartial to both, which cannot belong to either one of them, especially 
when it attempts to combine them. The philosopher is not a god, and he can-
not offer any lasting improvement to the human being. Both “times” either 
extinguish everything through oblivion, or they bring it forth anew—the prob-
lem consists in Bruno’s explicit statement: He (and only he) who accepts the 
time of oblivion also agrees to the time of recurrence. The past of history is 
the fleeting matter of the memory. Alluding to the myth of Prometheus, how-
ever, philosophy makes the philosopher rise above the masses who do not un-
derstand this union and therefore is prone to oblivion. Here oblivion is both 
on the side of the insightful philosopher who despises the masses and on the 
side of the mob, oblivious to truth and wisdom. And yet: even though fleet-
ingness is “incorrigibly foolish” (in terms of the “Pythagorean time”), the 

86 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
thinker of history remains dependent on it. He is the historian/philosopher 
who is completely self-absorbed. Bruno wants both, the naked truth and the 
fullness of reality. His concept of “vicissitudo,” the changeability of truth in 
reality, demonstrates this. 
In De umbris idearum Bruno writes about various models of ascent and 
descent from the material things to the spiritual things and vice versa—on the 
condition that there is “an order and linking in all things” (OL II 1, 23–25). 
He reminds of the ascent metaphor of the Platonists, the eternal circulation of 
the sky according to the theory of some Aristotelians, the theological implica-
tions, and finally the traditional classification of that which is according to 
genus and species, concluding with the following thesis: antiquity may have 
taught how the memory works, but it did not understand—unlike Bruno—
how one could use a multiplicity of images to advance towards a universal 
image of that what is possible to be memorized (OL II 1, 25). Here Bruno 
places the universal correlation of the things within the interrelation of vari-
ous theories about the things in order to eventually emphasize his own new 
invention. Time and again, the philosophy of the “One” is the philosophy of 
the “only one.” 
If one wishes to examine Bruno’s relationship with the history of phi-
losophy, one repeatedly comes across the antithesis of a universal world order 
which is insufficient and finite in terms of it peculiarities; at the same time, 
however, it refers back to a union and is found in insufficient and momentari-
ly positive accomplishments of human thought. With regard to these accom-
plishments, Bruno asserts that he sees them clearly, thus emphasizing his 
claim of being in a superior position with general overview. As philosopher 
and historical person, Bruno apparently attempts to retain simultaneously a 
global perspective and his personal idiosyncrasy. 
On the occasion of a sonnet in Eroici Furori on the subject of past, 
present, and future, Bruno once again connects the natural order and the 
seeming circulation of science and wisdom. “Today, there is no evil and no 
shame to which they [the Jews] are not exposed, but there is also no good and 
no honor which are not in prospect.” (DI 1075) Hope, it is said, recompenses 
for the bad present. However, Bruno adds: thus it is with all generations and 
conditions. It is exactly the changeability of the things which makes them 
long-lasting so that good follows evil, superior follows the lowly, and dark-
ness brings forth light: “Thus is the order of nature.” Although the subject 
here, too, is the general topic of love, Bruno talks about the decline and con-
tinuance of philosophical wisdom, and he refers to the famous lament of As-
clepius about the decline of religion which he quotes extensively in Spaccio 
(DI 1074 and 784–786). The history of culture turns out to be a sequence of 
light and darkness, captivity and liberation. However, in this chapter we also 
learn that the hope placed in the future compensates more than enough the 
loss of the past and the evils of the present: “In each condition of this order 
the present hurts more than the past, and both together do not reimburse us in 

 
Germany: History, Magic, and Atomism 
87 
the way in which the future does—the future which always consists in expec-
tation and hope.” (DI 1073) 
Just as consistency of the change takes precedence over the change of 
the constant in this speech about changeability, hope in the ascent or recur-
rence takes precedence over the other conditions of loss in the Wheel of 
Fortune. In this context, there is an allusion to the eternal recurrence of the 
same: “The circulation and the Great Year of the World is that period of time 
in which one returns from various conditions and effects to the same by 
means of the opposite means and conditions; we see the same in the individu-
al years: in the solar year, the beginning of a contrasting position is the end of 
another position, and the end of the former is the beginning of the latter” (DI 
1072f). However, this eternal recurrence is not the recurrence of the same in 
the sense of that which is equally bad, but rather the recurrence of the hope in 
the good. By switching the perspective from the transtemporal observer to the 
participant in this constant change, then the good, the hope, the recurrence of 
the good, is the propellant of the circulation. Thus the protagonist of the dia-
logue asserts immediately following the description of the “Great Year” that 
one had arrived at the hidden reservoir of the sciences, at the end of educa-
tion, customs, and traditions, but that exactly because of that one could expect 
the return of a better status (DI 1073). 
One can observe this figure of thought in all of Bruno’s treatises: the 
thought that in finite reality, opposites clash and the infinite is present in the 
finite; the thought that philosophy is supposed to be the representation of this 
changeability. At the beginning of De umbris idearum he postulates that cer-
tain heralds (mercurii) appeared from time to time because wisdom was not 
always present and not in everybody present; this in turn is being tied to stoic 
circulation of the elements (OL II 1, 9 and 24; cf. OL I, IV 227). Likewise, 
the dialogue De la causa opens with the metaphor of light and darkness, and 
the third dialogue of Spaccio mentions that darkness was not dark it if was 
recognized, and “profound magic” consisted in finding the hidden deity in the 
natural things; this is the condition for keeping the change of light and dark-
ness as determined by fate in motion. It is the same “profound magic” which 
he demands in the fifth dialogue of De la causa so as to be able to oppositely 
develop the contrasts from unity (DI 778 and 340). And yet again it is in the 
Eroici Furori where Bruno states that it is the wise person who deems the 
changeable things to be non-being because time relates to eternity as a point 
relates to a line (DI 976). This means that the wise person is required to place 
himself on this point. Thus the question remains as to whether and how the 
wise person is able to do that; how he finds himself and holds his ground in 
the constant change of the opposites into each other and way from each other, 
in the discovery of the “One” and the consistent as opposed to the “Many” 
and the finite, and in turn exactly in these diversities. Therefore Bruno arrang-
es historical phases of philosophy in a systematic sense, just as if these phases 

88 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
were to demonstrate certain aspects of philosophy which in turn is only one 
expressing itself in many ways. 
Of course, the historical placement of the philosopher from Nola in the 
first dialogue of the Ash Wednesday Supper—which has been interpreted 
many times—is also related to this. It opens with a prelude on duality and the 
coordination of primary opposites such as “finite/infinite,” “bent/straight” etc. 
(DI 22) after which it continues on to the “paradoxes” of the new philosophy 
which primarily consists in Bruno’s claim to see with his own eyes without 
denying the scientific progress (DI 26f): judgment and empirical research are 
being played off against each other. While the “observations” (osservazioni) 
are being accumulated in time, judgment and the formation of concepts 
(giudizio e determinazione) occur punctually; in a special way, however, ex-
perience and philosophical judgment are separated from each other, and they 
are different entities just like an interpreter and a listener are different (DI 27). 
Copernicus, too, speaks in the manner of an interpreter when he reports about 
a forgotten theory, leaving purely mathematical and empirical research behind 
(DI 29), because fate has determined him to be the dawn of the revival of an-
cient true philosophy. This kind of repetition is structurally congruent with 
Bruno’s description of “breaking through the walls of the celestial spheres” 
(DI 33); for truth proceeds forth from contrariety, be it temporal or conceptu-
al. All this is a prelude to a version of the querelle des anciens et modernes 
that culminates in the adage: “Wisdom lies with antiquity, and many years 
bring forth prudence” (DI 39). It is the competence to judge which makes 
“old,” and in this sense everybody who sees the truth is “older than the prede-
cessors” (DI 39). Especially since wisdom is only found “within ourselves” 
(DI 34), antiquity itself is nothing more than a metaphor of truth which can be 
discovered at any time, again and again, and only punctually. In comparison, 
the course of time is the realm of prudence which has just about as little to do 
with truth as the interpreter who translates it, so that the “years” are the 
garment of the seclusion of truth. In this sense Bruno applies the famous 
aphorism “Veritas Temporis Filia” (truth is a daughter of time): he can mere-
ly laugh about the ancient theories of the comets, and if truth comes with 
time, then only against the intention of those who report about it (in this case, 
Aristotle who has unintentionally preserved the correct meaning in a doxo-
graphical way in his Meteorology - OL I, II 229f). 
Bruno may claim that he was a chosen figure or even a point in the his-
tory of thinking in which truth and wisdom, reality and thinking coincide. 
However, he is unable to explain why the potentially infinitely many other 
“points in history”—all the pedants, scholastics, and other fools—are not 
likewise peaks in the process of thinking the “One.” What remains is the “he-
roic effort.” The result, however, is that the imagery of allowing oneself to be 
grasped by the object of thinking (as he already had recommended to Morgan 
le Fay, and as he had presented in the myth of Actaeon) transforms the vicis-
situde of time, the historical succession of moments of wisdom, and the very 

 
Germany: History, Magic, and Atomism 
89 
history of thinking into a metaphor: this is the metaphor of the profound dis-
tance that separates the philosopher from his cultural and natural environ-
ment. 
If the eternal recurrence of the same, the heroic passion, polemics, satire, 
and last but not least mannerist rhetoric (with its overextravagant examples, 
metaphors, and literary style) are being interpreted in this sense, then they be-
come an indication of the philosophical problem per se, namely the question: 
“How is thinking possible after all, in light of the fact that it is by far more 
likely to be thought, to be a possible object of a cognitive intellect—than to 
actively think?” If that is so, then the philosopher is unable to perceive him-
self as only a cog in the works of a large thinking machine in which he makes 
a modest contribution to the transmission of verifiable truth. Rather, he must 
see himself as the critical authority left to itself—and authority which is repels 
itself from truth so as to attain it. Therefore Sophia states in the first dialogue 
in Spaccio—presuming, of course, that the present must be evil, but that the 
future promised by fate must be successful: “With the help of my divine object 
of truth—the truth which has been hidden, suppressed, submerged on its flight 
for such a long time—I have decided to accept this moment according to the 
arrangement by fate as the beginning of my return, appearance, exaltation, and 
veneration which is all the more magnificent the greater the opposition was.” 
(DI 573f) Wisdom takes up her position. “Whoever wishes to take off from 
earth with greater momentum needs to bend well first, and whoever strives to 
jump effectively over a ditch takes a run-up by stepping back eight or ten 
steps.” (DI 574) In other words: the world does not provide any friendly ad-
vice on the truth of philosophy. In the end, the philosopher needs to push him-
self off from within himself. 
The homeless philosopher now put his hopes in Prague. The Bohemian 
capital had become the Mecca of sciences and arts of every kind, due to the 
patronage of Rudolf II and a general religious tolerance which enabled 
Protestants, Catholics, and dissidents to coexist peacefully. The external pres-
sure of the Turkish threat contributed to this (the Turks had conquered vast 
parts of Hungary in 1526). To mention only two examples: John Dee (1527–
1608), whom Bruno might have met in London and whose biography was 
similarly turbulent, tried his luck with Rudolf II; also, the astronomer Tycho 
Brahe (1546–1601)—reputable, from a modern perspective—at times worked 
in Prague. While he was still at Wittenberg, the philosopher from Nola had 
sent him a copy of his Theses Against Aristotle (Acrotismus) to Uraniborg; he 
took Brahe’s observation of the stars as confirmation of his cosmology. Bra-
he, however, wrote this annotation in his copy: “Nullanus, nullus et nihil, 
conveniunt rebus nomina saepe suis” (Zero, nobody, and nothing—names of-
ten fit the object.) Finally, Bruno’s mathematical friend and adversary, Fab-
rizio Mordente, had found his way to Prague. It was the German neo-Latin 
poet, Philipp Nicodemus Frischlin who had advised Bruno in Wittenberg to 
go to Prague; he claimed to have received an annual salary of three hundred 

90 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
Thalers (Canone ed. 1992, 126). Bruno introduces himself to the audience there 
with a reprint of a short Lullian treatise (De specierum scrutinio), and he dedi-
cates a polemical treatise of One Hundred and Sixty Theses Against the Math-
ematicians and Philosophers of Today’s Time (Centum et sexaginta articuli 
adversus huius tempestatis mathematicos atque philosophos) to the Emperor. 
After all, Rudolf gives three hundred Thalers to the wandering philosopher; 
with this money, Bruno sets out on his way to Tübingen. 
At that time, Tübingen was the stronghold of Lutheran orthodoxy; many 
theologians who later worked in Wittenberg came from Tübingen, such as 
Polykarp Leyser the Elder, whom Bruno will soon see again in Helmstedt. 
Bruno’s meeting with Martin Crusius, a professor of the Greek language, was 
also inevitable; Crusius was the chatterbox of Tübingen, and he kept a diary 
of everything he heard and saw. He was also a sworn enemy of Frischlin, and 
he questioned Bruno about him. Bruno’s request to be admitted to the university 
was granted at first; however, the senate decided eventually to “deal with him 
humanely so that he might stay here no longer”; he was offered four Thalers on 
the condition that he disappeared as soon as possible (Canone ed. 1992, 129). 
The next stop was Helmstedt; the university had been founded in 1575 
by Julius, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel. When the Duke died in May of 
1589, Bruno gave a solemn speech of consolation (Oratio consolatoria). 
Apart from the generic commendation of the Duke and praise of the universi-
ty founded by him, this speech contains a system of virtuous symbols—
astronomical signs as had been presented in a satirical way in Spaccio (OL I 
1, 27–52). 
If we can trust a handwritten letter of protest which is preserved in the 
Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel, then the refugee was also excluded 
from the third of the major denominations, as fate would have it. At any rate, 
on October 6, 1589, Bruno complains that the local pastor and superintendent 
(Johannes Mebesius) had excommunicated him in a public sermon; Bruno 
demands the vice chancellor to conduct a public investigation of the case 
(Spampanato 1933, 665; Blum 1984). The vice chancellor was the theologian 
Daniel Hoffmann who shortly afterwards became the instigator of the so-
called Hoffmannian Dispute (Hoffmannscher Streit). This dispute was about 
the interpretation of the Formula of Concord (1577) whereby the various Lu-
theran groups had reached an agreement; in a special way, however, the dis-
pute was about the relationship of philosophy and theology within the Luther-
an denomination. Bruno’s case seems not to have had wide repercussions. In 
any case he was able to stay in Helmstedt until April of 1590. There he wrote 
(or prepared for printing) his final treatises he was to publish later, and he col-
lected some material which was only printed in the 1891 edition of his works. 
One of Bruno’s most dedicated students was Hieronymus Besler (whose 
brother was the renowned botanist Basilius Besler from Nuremberg) who had 
studied with Bruno in Wittenberg and Helmstedt. Later on, Hieronymus 
worked as a medical doctor in his hometown. Both met again in Padua to-

 
Germany: History, Magic, and Atomism 
91 
wards the end of 1591, for the student had become Bruno’s secretary. At Wit-
tenberg and Helmstedt, the philosopher must have had a pile of papers on his 
desk as he was preparing the mnemonic treatise De imaginum compositione 
and the great trilogy of didactic poems which were printed in Frankfurt in 
1591; he worked on the lecture soon to be given at Zurich, and he also looked 
intensively into certain problems in the realm of magic and medicine, the lat-
ter maybe under the influence of the future medical student, Besler. 
Magic in the Renaissance era appears to be a suspicious and at the same 
time electrifying topic, especially as it has been discussed for a long time 
whether the theory and practice of magic served as a bridging element from 
the natural science of the scholastic period to that of the modern times. Fran-
cis Bacon, regarded to be the father of modern empirical-scientific research, 
had recognized that magicians and alchemists worked on an empirical and 
practical level, except that their theoretical reasons were made rashly and 
thoughtlessly. On a closer look one needs to subdivide the term “magic” into 
various aspects and areas, such as charms, wizardry, interpretation of the in-
fluence of the stars on earthly nature, etc. The treatise De occulta philosophia 
by Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim (which has been mentioned 
multiple times) is the easiest-to-manage compendium on this topic. Giordano 
Bruno used it extensively in the preserved manuscripts on this topic (OL III). 
For example, before he addresses the force of attraction of magnets, the ef-
fects of ghosts and demons, etc., he organizes the different kinds of magic in 
an almost scholastic manner. He enumerates various types of magicians, and 
it stands out immediately that those are the same sages who make an appear-
ance throughout the history of mankind: Hermes Trismegistus in connection 
with the Egyptians, druids with the Gauls, gymnosophists among the Indians, 
Cabbalists and the Jews, magicians of the Persians, sages among the Greeks 
and Latins. Magic, then, means first of all “to do amazing things through the 
mere application of active and passive powers as it is done in the realms of 
medicine and alchemy; and this is natural magic in the general sense.” Apart 
from fraud and witchcraft, Bruno lists seven different kinds of magic activi-
ties, including clairvoyance. In short: “A magician is a wise human being with 
the ability to create effects.” (OL III 397–400) Since it is the effect that mat-
ters, magic differentiates between two kinds of that which is at work: nature 
and will. The will can be human, demonic, or divine. Nature can be internal or 
external: internal, as basic matter or as form with active characteristics; exter-
nal, as image, trace, or shadow, as the light belongs to the sun and is being 
reflected in the things which are being touched by this light (OL III 404). 
Bruno unmistakably reproduces his philosophy of nature in these notes, ac-
cording to which internal and external principles are simultaneous, as well as 
his theory of continuous unity and expression in diversity, as was seen earlier. 
For: 
 

92 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
This is the primary principle and the root of all principles used to ex-
plain everything in nature which is astonishing, namely that on the basis 
of the active principle and the spirit or the universal soul, there is noth-
ing preliminary, imperfect, incomplete, and, finally, totally negligible by 
its outer appearance which could not be the principle of great operations 
and activities. Most of the time, one even needs to make use of these so 
that a new world might originate from them, so to speak. (OL III 497) 
 
This, however, means that the magician is aware of the presence of the 
universal principle in these smallest and most insignificant parts (OL III 408). 
As Girolamo Fracastoro (1478–1553) had done, Bruno emphasizes the mutual 
“sympathy” of all things in this context. Furthermore, it is only logical that 
such connectivity of active and passive characteristics of sensorial things can-
not take place on one level alone (such as the world spirit or God’s provi-
dence); rather, these connections multiply themselves, and Bruno uses the 
term vinculum (bond, string, ties, connection) to signify this. 
Thus at that time the treatise On Ties in General (De vinculis in genere) 
was developed which remained incomplete. In this treatise, all thinkable 
forms of links and ties, bonds, subjects (i.e., the ones who do the linking and 
the binding), methods and objects of linking and tying are being discussed. 
Here, too, the number 30 is being used to orderly arrange the various groups. 
Generally binding in this sense are God, the demon, the soul, living beings, 
nature, coincidence, fortune, and fate. It becomes immediately clear that 
“binding” is not a bodily activity but rather a spiritual accomplishment, for 
“the body does not drive the intellect spontaneously but rather by means of a 
power which exists within the body and which proceeds forth from the body.” 
The logical consequence is that the binding of a hand can only metaphorically 
be called as such because it “bends and commences to bind only after mani-
fold preparation” (OL III 655). Similar to the magician, whoever intends to 
bind or tie something in any way and in any sense must have a universal un-
derstanding, i.e., he must know the nature, aptitude, inclination, condition, 
use, and purpose of the object to be bound (OL III 695). Love is of course the 
strongest bond, for: “he who does not love anything has nothing to fear; there 
is no hope for him; he has no reason to boast or be arrogant, to dare or des-
pise, to accuse or apologize, to humiliate, to imitate, to grow angry, or to feel 
anything else” (OL III 684). The special structure of the bond of love is then 
being described in a similar way as it had been done in the Heroic Passions, 
namely, as stepping away from oneself. The bond consists exactly in wanting 
to be in a place where one is not, and wishing to have what is missing; this, 
however, is a reciprocal relationship: “It is due to the change and reciprocity 
(vicissitudo) of that which is special that the particular things step away from 
themselves in a certain sense” (OL III 692f). The particularity of this theory 
of magic consists therefore in the fact that Bruno’s metaphysical and episte-
mological problem of linking the disparate and unfolding the universal unity 

 
Germany: History, Magic, and Atomism 
93 
is being treated under the general concept of “bond” on a trivial, practical, 
psychological, but also cosmological level. 
This treatise has come down to us in two versions: an early one, and a 
more elaborate version. Therefore one can observe how Bruno adopts even 
those sources which are well known and obvious; in this case, it is especially 
Marsilio Ficino’s philosophy of love (De amore). For example, in the first 
version, he says this about love: “The bond of beauty is called an act or ray of 
the good; first, it radiates in the spirit, secondly in the soul, thirdly in nature, 
fourthly in matter.” In the edited version the same passage reads as follows: 
“The Pythagoreans and Platonists call the bond of beauty a flash of lightning, 
ray, and act, or rather, their shadow and image, as well as a trace which un-
folds first in the spirit, adorning it with the order of things; secondly, in the 
soul, filling it with the ranking of things; thirdly, in nature, honoring and 
strengthening it with seed; fourthly, in matter, providing it with forms” 
(Scapparone/Tirinnanzi 223 and 196). Here, Ficino’s doctrine of the stages of 
that which exists, expressing themselves in beauty, is not merely rhetorically 
embellished but rather filled with the specific thoughts of Bruno. A specific 
example is the similar analogy of the various levels, as well as the play of 
light and shadow in which one is the trace of the other so that the connection 
consists exactly in the absence of light or shadow at the same time being the 
indicator if its presence. 
Due to the systematic gathering of indications, cases, and usage exam-
ples of influencing things and human beings, Bruno’s excerpts on magic—
and De vinculis in particular—have been branded as a manual on manipulat-
ing the masses and individuals, comparing them to Niccolò Machiavelli’s 
treatise The Prince (Il Principe) (Couliano 89f). That happens whenever phi-
losophy gets practical. Moreover people noticed that Bruno’s inventory of vir-
tues and his theory of the heroic act are unable to produce an ethical theory 
because of the extreme concentration on intellectual abilities demanding to 
find the absolute in the vastness of the limited. Practice and morals are not the 
same. It is already apparent in the case of Marsilio Ficino that magic and as-
trology have a tendency to get practical: not only had Ficino given realistic 
hints regarding the psychology and physiology of love in his dialogue on 
love, besides the ascent to pure beauty—in his great medical work Three 
Books on Life (De vita libri tres) he had unfolded the theory and practice of 
the spiritual connection between the bodily and intellectual world in the form 
of astrological medicine. Therefore, medicine was counted to the wider circle 
of magical theory and practice as well, since it was traditionally placed on the 
intersection of the theory of nature and the dealings with the functions of the 
living organism and its material constitution. 
One ought to be reminded that the turning away of Renaissance human-
ism from scholastic science consisted in praising the complexity of the human 
being and to see its superiority in creation not only in its intellectuality but 
also in the practicality of the body; Giannozzo Manetti (1396–1459) had de-

94 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
scribed this in an exemplary way. Just as medicine occupied either the noblest 
place among all techniques or was regarded to be the most technical of all 
natural sciences in hierarchical terms, magic was also able to assume such an 
intermediate position because it was regarded to be the application of intellec-
tual metaphysics and philosophically-based practice, respectively. Giovanni 
Pico della Mirandola who has been mentioned earlier also shared the same 
opinion; he referred to magic as the practical—and even noblest—part of nat-
ural science, albeit (unlike Bruno) trying to differentiate distinctively between 
divine miracles and magical practice (900 Theses, ed. S.A. Farmer, 1998, p. 
494f). 
Even though the animation of all things was a common precondition of 
all theoreticians of magic in the Renaissance era, one must attempt to demon-
strate differences between the individual authors, especially when their mutu-
al dependence is apparent (as it is quite clear in the case of Bruno and Ficino). 
If one pays attention to slight changes in direct or indirect quotations, one can 
observe that similar terms can assume various meanings. Bruno, for example, 
inserts his theory of light and shadow in Ficino’s Platonic theory of light, and 
even Ficino uses the obvious phenomenon of the shadow in the light, for ex-
ample in his commentary on Plato’s Sophist (ed. M.J.B. Allen, Icastes, 1989, 
271–277). However, he recognizes that shadows have a fundamentally indi-
vidual ontological status in comparison with light, and he explains the shadow 
on the basis of the existence of an obstacle. In this sense, Ficino’s cosmology 
is probably by far more dualistic than Bruno’s cosmology, according to which 
the shadow is a phenomenon of light itself. This also includes Marsilio Fici-
no’s presupposition of a clear hierarchy of ontologically independent levels—
for example, divine, human, and demonic actions—so that he can claim that 
even the images in the innermost being of the human person come from a de-
monic action insofar they are being produced by a spiritual and demonic be-
ing (Allen, p. 273). Ficino considered demons to be a reality, Bruno regarded 
them as images of reality. D.P. Walker has therefore not included Bruno in his 
historical account of Renaissance magic (Spiritual and Demonic Magic from 
Ficino to Campanella, 1958). 
Thus Bruno repeats Ficino’s question about the spiritual effects in the 
material world, and he gives a similar—and yet, new—answer. His spiritual 
effects cannot be put on a separate ontological level; rather, they are ultimate-
ly found in the one who operates magically. Beginning with the humanistic 
reverence of the intermediate position of the human being within the cosmos 
of the spiritual and bodily world, Bruno arrives unmistakably at the central 
position of the human being as an individual, more specifically: as Bruno, in a 
world which can only be ordered by himself and by imitating the cosmic or-
der. For he presupposes spiritual forms of various quality which are found ex-
clusively in matter itself, as he explicitly repeats in his treatise On Ties in 
General, referring back to his De l’infinito and De la causa (OL III 696); he 
who wants to “bind” needs to observe and know the conditions of matter. 

 
Germany: History, Magic, and Atomism 
95 
Moreover, he refers back to his earlier London treatise Sigillus sigillorum in 
which he had unfolded the psychology of comprehending natural relations 
(OL III 694). In the practical aspect (for example, erotic temptation), every-
thing depends on the psychological and emotional capabilities of Bruno’s he-
ro; thus his theory of images, albeit not empiricist, is very similar to some 
psychological trends of the twentieth century. Looking back to the Platonizing 
theory of magic prior to Bruno, however, one must ask whether there were 
alternatives to the subjectivist and epistemological access to knowledge and 
knowledge of the world; these might have searched for a totality of 
knowledge in an extra-human—and in this sense, objective—intellectuality of 
reality, that is, in an autonomous all-knowing intellect. 
Even though Bruno took on new material with the aforementioned mag-
ical treatises and excerpts (De rerum principiis and Medicina lulliana), the 
years in Wittenberg and Helmstedt were obviously dedicated to summarizing, 
editing, and completing his philosophy which he presented in the most com-
prehensive form in his Frankfurt trilogy. He received a notification from the 
Frankfurt town hall in July of 1590, telling him to “consume his penny some-
where else,” and his residence permit is being revoked. Bruno is given shelter 
with the Carmelites (Canone ed. 1992, 134) as their monastery was not under 
the city’s jurisdiction; they were used to accept foreign visitors of the book 
fair. Bruno publishes the following treatises with one of the most powerful 
publishing houses at that time, Johann Wechel and Petrus Fischer: The Three-
fold Minimum and the Measure as Principle of the Three Speculative and 
Many Active Techniques (De triplici minimo et mensura ad trium specula-
tivarum scientiarum et multarum activarum artium principia), Monad, Num-
ber, and Figure: Sequel to the Five Books on the Smallest, Great and Meas-
ure (De monade, numero et figura, liber consequens quinque de minimo mag-
no et mensura), The Innumerable, the Immense, and that Which is Without 
Figure, or: The Universe and the Worlds (De innumerabilibus, immenso et 
infigurabili, seu de universo et mundis). Note that this is the correct order 
whereas the works were incorrectly arranged in the late nineteenth-century 
edition of his works. 
The Frankfurt trilogy was published in two volumes at the time of the 
fairs in spring and autumn of 1591; Bruno gave lectures in Zurich in the 
meantime. For the same reason the foreword to the entire work is contained in 
the third part, De immenso, together with an elaborate dedication and laudato-
ry speech addressed to Henry Julius, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel (1564–
1613). The author summarizes the intention laid out in his work as follows: 
De minimo contains “the insight into the first principles”; in De Monade one 
will find “the rudiments and traces” of ideas, opinions, and experiences with 
regard to revelation, faith, and prophesy; De immenso presents “the order or 
nature as comprehensible and incomprehensible” by means of evident, cer-
tain, and strong lines of argumentation insofar as they are available in this 
world. He says that wisdom has a body in the first treatise, a shadow in the 

96 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
second treatise, and a soul in the third treatise. We must pay attention to the 
fact that the body is assigned to the “minimum” while the rudiments of 
knowledge and opinion are being portrayed as shadows, with the natural order 
as the soul. This seems to be contrary to popular opinion. What is meant is 
that the “minimum” (e.g., as atom) makes up the substance of everything; 
monads, numbers, and figures are “shadows of principles,” and the natural 
order has the quality of a soul in terms of the thing as well as in terms of cog-
nition. Accordingly, De minimo deals with limits, the smallest, and the great-
est—in geometrical terms: lines, angles, and triangles which originate from 
intersecting circles. De monade addresses the substance of things insofar as 
they are qualitative and quantitative. The topic of the third book De immenso, 
finally, is the visible world in the usual sense, albeit as regards its infinity, el-
ements, etc. (OL I 1, 196–198). The third book by and large repeats the con-
tents of the Italian dialogues on cosmology and metaphysics; the first two 
books are in direct relation to the mathematical interests of Bruno, claiming a 
geometric-mathematical justification of cosmology and metaphysics. All three 
treatises are written in hexameters with comments in prose; the verse parts 
imitate an archaic Latin, and the form is reminiscent of the basic work on an-
cient atomism—De rerum principiis by Lucretius. 
Other Renaissance philosophers, too, have disseminated their knowledge 
in didactic poems—a few examples are the first scientific description of syphilis 
by Girolamo Fracastoro and the philosophical poems of Tommaso Campanel-
la. Atomism may mean all sorts of things in the early modern era, especially 
as scientific discussion since the time of René Descartes and Pierre Gassendi 
assumed atoms or corpuscles to be the building blocks of the visible world. 
(Gassendi, by the way, owned a copy of De monade: Sturlese 1987, 123.) 
This scientific hypothesis was more successful in terms of a mechanizing the 
conception of the world than the scholastic theory of forms and accidents in 
relation to indefinite matter. Even though Bruno potentially prepares the 
grounds for these thoughts, it is not his primary intention. On his quest for the 
universal principle of the totality of the world and the visible and particular 
things he adopts atomic thinking, focusing it on a theory of the smallest, the 
minimum, the monad, or the atom. This theory claims from the start to be a 
universal doctrine, i.e., not only in an empiricist manner, but also metaphysi-
cally. Therefore, at least at that time, he considers his major challenge to es-
tablish geometry as a science which is able to mediating everything. 
As competition for the manual of geometry per se—Elementa by Eu-
clid—Bruno presents an ambitious new geometry in the Theses Against the 
Mathematicians written in Prague, as well as in the Geometrical Lectures 
(Praelectiones geometricae) which were published only in 1964. It is the task 
of the historians of mathematics to study this geometry and its foundations. 
He structures his presentation into axioms, definitions, theorems, etc., but the 
difference becomes already apparent in the first theorem. Whereas Euclid be-
gins with the definition, “that which has no parts is a point,” Bruno opens 

 
Germany: History, Magic, and Atomism 
97 
with the thesis: “The universe is the maximum. The Whole is greater and per-
fect. The part is smaller, imperfect, and closer to the measure. The individual 
is the minimum, neither perfect nor imperfect, and it is the general measure. 
The limit is not a part; it is indivisible in the negative sense” (OL I 1, 10). 
With regard to the last term, “limit” (terminus), Euclid states as follows: “The 
limit is that which is the most external of something” (I 13). Bruno begins his 
Geometrical Lectures with the following axiom: “There is one term for one, a 
similar term for the similar, the same term for the same, an opposite term for 
the opposite, a reversed term for the reversed” (Praelectiones 7). This tauto-
logical formula refers on the one hand to the Lullian argumentation of the 
comparability of terms and levels of being; on the other hand, it refers to the 
“law of relatives” which Bruno uses during the trial to signify the equality of 
infinite power and infinite creation by God (Firpo 1993, 300). 
The difference consists in the fact that Euclid understands geometry as 
something that is to be constructed and drawn, developing it from the simplest 
assumptions to complex constructional directives and proofs. Bruno, on the 
other hand, starts from fundamental assumptions of metaphysics and episte-
mology and immediately sets his geometry in the extremes of the Greatest and 
the Smallest so as to mark out the working field of geometry: the paradoxes 
contained in the extremes (e.g., the term “limit”), as well as the elementary 
intellectual processes such as conceptual comparisons. Thus he summarizes 
Mordente’s quantitative and qualitative mathematics (i.e., the mathematics of 
quantitative units and geometrical figures) as he had already done in his trea-
tise on the compasses (OL I 1, 16). To him, geometry means as much as “fig-
uration”: the sensory shaping of abstract terms and the demonstration of uni-
versal principles in geometrical figures. 
To this end, he constructs three basic geometrical shapes to which nu-
merous other figures are added, mostly as applications or developments of 
these basic shapes. He calls the first the Figure of the Spirit: it consists of four 
circles, equal in size, which intersect with the centers of the other three cir-
cles. The second is the Figure of the Intellect: it consists of one circle in the 
center and six other circles, equal in size, surrounding the one in the center 
and tangential to it. The third shape, called the Figure of Love, consists of 
four circles, two of which face each other and touch in one central point (OL I 
3, 20, 78–80; cf. De minimo IV, OL I 3, 277–282). At first glance it seems 
clear that these three basic shapes produce a host of possible angles, tangents, 
and secants which can be used to demonstrate numerous geometrical axioms. 
However, Bruno puts special emphasis on proving that in reality the elemen-
tary geometrical figures cannot consist of incommensurable quantities; rather, 
they can be reduced to simple basic quantities. In a special way, though, he is 
eager to demonstrate that adding surrounding and touching circles to a central 
circle (and there can always only be six surrounding circles) results in the 
basic pattern of the structure of the sensory world. Accordingly, every finite 
object is basically composed of accumulations of such “spheres.” It seems 

98 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
that these reflections were adopted by Johannes Kepler (1571–1630) in his 
explanation of the hexagonal structure of snow crystals (Strena seu de nive 
sexangula, 1611) while Joachim Jungius (1587–1657) developed them further 
in terms of the philosophy of mathematics (Lüthi in Bruniana et Campanelli-
ana 4, 1998). 
This may seem absurd at first glance, but its philosophical meaning is 
rooted in Bruno’s personal conviction that traditional geometry—insofar it 
uses compasses and ruler to construct that which it is unable to calculate 
arithmetically—necessarily gets only inaccurate results. In other words, in 
terms of measures (and this includes the reality of that which is being por-
trayed geometrically) geometry is not at all mathematically precise but most 
inaccurate. There are numerous passages in his treatise where he inveighs 
against the assumption that the geometrical representation of the world cannot 
be exact since nature (as it really is) cannot consist of irrational quantities. 
This is true for the stellar orbit (OL I 1, 186; OL III 469) and all other circula-
tions in nature (OL I 1, 364f), the globe (I 1, 360; cf. DI 442), any kind of lo-
cal motion (OL I 1, 160 and 189f); furthermore, it is necessarily valid for the 
movements of the soul (OL I 1, 365 and II, 7, 92 and 260). It is only on the 
basis of a minimum as the real and mathematical starting point of any calcula-
tion and any reality that Bruno regards geometry to be possible, as he states: 
“Ignorance of the minimum turns the geometers of our time into geameters, 
and philosophers into philasophers” (earth-measurers into geo-un-measurers, 
wisdom-lovers into would-be-stupids; OL I 3, 21). Bruno wants to transform 
the geometry of continuous quantity into a geometry of discrete quantity. 
The advantages and disadvantages of this procedure are quite apparent: it 
needs to remain unclear as to whether “minimum” ought to be understood as a 
point without quantity, an imaginary object, or rather a material sphere. This 
and the resulting paradoxes are the subject of De minimo and De monade. The 
new mathematician has not made it easy for himself, for his theory contains a 
mixture of thinking which is mathematically abstract, ontological, and viv-
id—hard to tell apart. He argues against the century-old doctrine according to 
which quantities are divisible to infinity, stating in De minimo (I 6): It ought 
to be apparent to everyone that the nature of things could arbitrarily add more 
and more to a given quantity, and this was valid for numbers as much as it 
was valid for knowledge or terms, voices or words. If we, therefore, add mass 
to mass, number to number, then there is no natural end at any point. Bruno 
describes here totally different forms of augmentation, at the very least, how-
ever, qualitative and quantitative growth. But from there he twists the thought 
and states: Just as we may arbitrarily add anything, we may also always take 
something away; in taking away “something,” however, we reduce by a finite 
“something” so that according to this vivid concept we must necessarily ar-
rive at an atom or a “smallest,” a minimum from which it is impossible to fur-
ther take something away. Were we able to infinitely reduce, then the adding 
would be missing its principle. In light of the vast knowledge of literature in-

 
Germany: History, Magic, and Atomism 
99 
sinuated by Bruno in these treatises we must not assume that he did not know 
the difference between logical, metaphysical, and material elements or princi-
ples. Consequently, we must assume that he intentionally mingles these dif-
ferent meanings of principle, beginning, origin, element, and—therefore—
also minimum, monad, and atom, with the result of identifying them with 
each other (OL I 3, 150–154). 
If one summarizes Bruno’s intention in this sentence, “The whole world 
is based in mathematical structures,” and if one reminds of the fact that ever 
since the era of Galileo, modern mathematically oriented science is based on 
similar (i.e., Platonic and Pythagorean) sources like the ones used by Bruno, 
then one could think that Bruno had actively contributed to the modern scien-
tific world view. (It was especially Marsilio Ficino who had distributed these 
ancient sources in Latin; according to them, the cosmos consists of propor-
tions and the unfolding of numerical relations [cf. Ficino, Opera 1576, p. 386–
390, 1451–1453].) On the other hand, the difference could not be greater, for 
the development of the scientific world view since the seventeenth century is 
based on the methodical separation of quantitative research and theologically 
justified metaphysics. Bruno, however, conversely wants to connect these ar-
eas indissolubly. Therefore he begins his treatise De minimo with the triad 
God, nature, and reason: 
 
The spirit above everything is God, the spirit in all things is nature, and 
the spirit which permeates everything is reason. God prescribes and ar-
ranges orderly, nature executes and creates, and reason observes and 
thinks through. God is the monad as the source of all numbers, the sim-
plicity of every quantity, and the substance of every composition—that 
which exceeds every moment, everything that is innumerable and be-
yond measure. Nature is the countable number, the measurable quantity, 
and the attainable moment. Reason is the counting number, the measur-
ing quantity, and the perceiving moment. (OL I 3, 136) 
 
As was mentioned, he calls the three basic shapes Spirit, Intellect, and 
Love; so that we may be assured that Bruno has not lost his interest in mne-
monics and symbolic representation, he uses verses to summarize the axioms 
in his Geometrical Lectures, providing them with names taken from Greek 
mythology—Orestes, Pylades, Amyntas, etc. Thus Bruno’s geometry is in 
turn a summary of his philosophical endeavors to grasp the unity of the vari-
ous intellectual abilities and the variety of the world. Therefore the term 
“monad”—unity—serves as a cipher for this endeavor itself, that is to say, to 
be unity itself, to think unity, to find unity, and to multiply it by way of con-
struction. Unity may thus be found on all levels of knowing and thinking and 
in all objects. The monad guarantees that atomism does not degenerate into an 
anarchy of immediate points; rather, order generates itself from unity, and this 

100 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
order binds together the whole construct, defining the particular in its respec-
tive place. 
It seems that it was while working on his tripartite principal work that 
Bruno also composed a major mnemonic and cosmological treatise, the Lan-
tern of the Thirty Statues (Lampas triginta statuarum, OL III) which was not 
published during his lifetime. He also gave the lecture at Zurich mentioned at 
the beginning of this chapter, entitled Lantern on the Descent of Being which 
was sent to be printed by one of the students, Raphael Egli; it appeared 1595 
under the title Summa terminorum metaphysicorum (Handbook of Metaphysi-
cal Terms) and was reprinted in 1609, with explanations of the philosopher 
Rudolf Goclenius (also known as Rudolf Göckel; 1547–1628). It is possible 
that Egli and Bruno met in Frankfurt on the occasion of the book fair, and 
maybe they already knew each other from the time of Bruno’s short stay in 
Geneva where Egli had been a student. This so-called Summa undoubtedly 
reflects Bruno’s philosophy, and his student may have understood him cor-
rectly in publishing his notes as a short philosophical encyclopedia, even as 
Outline of Metaphysical Terminology; Bruno had often used conventional and 
scholastic forms in order to enter the academic world. 
 

 
Nine 
 
OFF TO VENICE: 
THE TRIAL OF THE HERETIC 
 
Upon his return to Frankfurt, two Venetian booksellers present Bruno with an 
invitation from Giovanni Mocenigo, a patrician who was enthusiastic about 
De minimo. He arrives there in the autumn of 1591, but he immediately trav-
els on to Padua, the university of the Venetian territory. Here he meets his 
student Hieronymus Besler, and he submits his application for a professorship 
of mathematics which had been vacant for years. For this purpose he compos-
es the aforementioned Geometrical Lectures with excerpts from his Frankfurt 
trilogy. Once again he goes back and forth between the university and the no-
bility; it is only when his hopes are shattered that he moves into the house of 
Mocenigo. His host reports him to the Inquisition on May 23, 1592; according 
to his own statements and Bruno’s defense, he was disappointed in Bruno be-
cause he did not teach the mysteries of practical magic as he had expected 
him to do. The philosopher had finally found a patron and admirer—and now 
he was unable to live up to the reputation which preceded him. 
This was the beginning of an inquisitional trial, documentarily and juris-
tically reconstructed by Luigi Firpo (Firpo 1993), which ended after almost 
eight years with conviction and execution. The documents and procedurals of 
the process are witnesses of superior philosophical and theological quality 
combined with endless bureaucracy. The trial at Venice seemed to pass off 
without serious consequences because Mocenigo’s accusations could not be 
confirmed and the defendant admitted to his philosophical thoughtlessness, 
showed remorse, and asked for forgiveness (July 30, 1592; Firpo 1993, 195f). 
As was customary, the proceedings were reported to Rome; the Roman Inqui-
sition, however, recalled Bruno’s earlier case during the 1570s and sought to 
take the trial into their own hands. After some diplomatic tug-of-war—Venice 
was concerned about its independence (and this might have caused the ex-
communicated emigrant to think himself safe)—the defendant was extradited, 
and he arrived in Rome in February of 1593. Perhaps here, too, the trial would 
have led to a short prison sentence which corresponded to the legal position at 
Venice, had the Capuchin friar Celestino da Verona not accused Bruno once 
again of heresy all of the sudden (cf. Firpo 1993, 47f); these accusations were 
passed on from Venice to Rome. (Celestino had been a fellow prisoner of 
Bruno in Venice, and he was executed as a heretic in 1599.) The trial was re-
opened, particularly as Mocenigo added some accusations as well. At the be-
ginning of 1594 the usual phase of review of the process began, and the wit-

102 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
nesses and the defendant were once again interrogated in Venice and in 
Rome. 
Now Bruno’s treatises were to be examined, and this dragged on until 
the end of 1597, including the procuring of rare prints, reports, and interroga-
tions. In the meantime, Bruno’s file had become so extensive that a summary 
was ordered at the beginning of 1598 (Mercati 1942, Firpo 1993, 247f), and 
this meant a further waiting period for the prisoner. Historians regard this 
summary as one of the few documents of the Roman part of the trial since the 
original documents have been lost, probably during the deportation of the 
Vatican Secret Archives to Paris by Napoleon Bonaparte at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century. One of the most famous authorities of the inquisitional 
tribunal, the Holy Office, was the Jesuit Cardinal Robert Bellarmine who was 
a theological advisor of Pope Clement VIII since January 1597 and who had 
recently published a multi-volume treatise on the disputes between Catholics 
and Protestants (Disputationes de Controversiis). In January of 1599 he re-
duced the accusations against Bruno to eight theses in order to shorten the tri-
al; the verdict was made dependent on either recanting or defending these the-
ses (Firpo 1993, 312f). Bruno seemed to have responded positively to this 
(Firpo 1993, 317 and 324f). Nonetheless the trial was not over, for there were 
other errors to be treated. Since these open questions were neither admitted by 
Bruno nor adequately supported from a legal point of view as they were based 
on statements made by other heretics (such as Celestino), the Cardinals of the 
Inquisition suggested torture. Clement VIII, however, already considered the 
defendant to be guilty because of the admitted charges; thus he ordered the 
usual time of re-consideration that was normally granted in the context of the-
se trials, i.e., four weeks (Firpo 1993, 328f). 
There is no other evidence, by the way, to support the thesis that Bruno 
was tortured, but there is proof of the fact that he was allowed the basic ne-
cessities such as cloak, writing utensils, and glasses. When he asked for a 
knife (to sharpen the quills) and compasses, his request was denied—as was 
probably customary in prisons (Firpo 1993, 324). He might have used the 
compasses to represent his atomistic geometry or the Copernican planetary 
system. 
At any rate, during the last phase of the trial, the prisoner presents the 
Pope with a letter, together with the declaration of his intention to submit to 
the Church (September 16, 1599; Firpo 1993, 331). Surprisingly, however, he 
states on December 21, 1599, that there was “nothing to reconsider and he 
was not aware of anything for him to think about”; thereupon two superiors of 
the Dominicans were sent to him in order to persuade him (Firpo 1993, 333). 
Apparently he now claimed never to have written anything heretical; rather, 
he was being misunderstood, and thus he was ready to give an account as re-
gards all his treatises and to defend them in the face of any theologian—
though he was not accountable to them but only to the Apostolic See and the 
ecclesial decrees (Firpo 1993, 338). Bruno had acknowledged the eight theses 

 
Venice: The Trial of the Heretic 
103 
to be heretical at first, but since he faced more accusations, he probably 
moved his defense at this point to the principle “nulla poena sine lege” (no 
punishment when there is no law). Already in February of 1599 he had react-
ed to the eight theses with the question as to whether these were doctrines that 
had been declared to be heretical only recently, or if these had already been 
declared and condemned as such by the Fathers of the Church, the Catholic 
Church, and the Apostolic See. If the latter was the case, then he was ready to 
recant (Firpo 1993, 315). With this, he called the canonical competence of the 
inquisitors into question, and this was interpreted as persisting on his errors. 
At any rate, the Pope ordered the trial to be ended and to hand the heretic over 
to the worldly jurisdiction (Firpo 1993, 338). 
The Inquisition, unlike secular jurisdiction, did not punish past offenses 
or the expression of heretical doctrines that had been made earlier but rather 
the persistence on these doctrines during the trial. Thus the recantation was of 
such great significance, even though such recantation meant the prohibition of 
earlier publications and a “muzzle” for the future. The verdict of February 8, 
1600, therefore repeats five times and in conclusion that the defendant re-
mained in his heresy “without remorse, obstinately, and hardened” (heretico 
impenitente, pertinace et ostinato) and was thus to be handed over to the 
worldly jurisdiction (Firpo 1993, 341f). On February 17, 1600, Bruno was 
burned alive at the stake on Campo de’ Fiori in Rome. Thus far the legal as-
pect of the trial. 
As regards their content, the case files are not only one of the most im-
portant sources of Bruno’s life, they also contain numerous quotations and 
references to his philosophy, so much so that one almost might be able to re-
construct it, had the original treatises all been lost. However, so as to under-
stand the thought processes of the inquisitors it is not so much important what 
kind of accusations the informers brought forward against which Bruno had to 
defend himself. It is much more interesting to see how the trial is structured in 
terms of topics in the official summary (Mercati 1942). The approximately 
thirty topics contain disciplinary questions such as the obligation to abstain 
from meat on Fridays, celibacy, or reading prohibited books (Firpo 1993, 291, 
288, 292); they also contain a large amount of dogmatic questions such as the 
doctrine about sin or the veneration of saints and relics (Firpo 1993, 263 and 
277f). It begins, however, with Bruno’s relation to Church and the doctrine 
about God. 
It is reported that in the context of a play, he had to recite a verse written 
by Ludovico Ariosto: “D’ogni legge nemico e d’ogni fede” (Hostile to any 
law and any faith; Orlando furioso [The Frenzy of Orlando] 28, 99; Firpo 
1993, 249–252). Mocenigo, on the other hand, reports that Bruno had ap-
praised Pope Clement VIII (who had been elected only in January of 1592) to 
be a “sophisticated man” (galant’uomo) which is correct insofar as Clement 
had appointed great scholars to be Cardinals, such as Robert Bellarmine or the 
historian Cesare Baronio; in a special way, however, “the Pope supports the 

104 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
philosophers, and thus I may hope to be supported as well, just like the phi-
losopher Patrizi who believes in nothing” (Firpo 1993, 248). In fact, Frances-
co Patrizi (1529–1597), whom Bruno had insulted as “lousy pedant” in De la 
causa (DI 260), had become professor of Platonic philosophy at the Sapienza 
University of Rome in 1592. It is possible that Bruno misjudged the philo-
sophical tolerance of the Pope, and—what was even more fatal—that he did 
so towards the end of the trial. At the same time, however, these chapters of 
the trial state that Bruno planned on founding his own sect, or to have already 
done so in Germany—the Giordanists (Firpo 1993, 248–253, 294). The de-
fendant denied this, and the inquisitors apparently did not come back to this 
charge again. One the one hand, Bruno constantly demanded a general refor-
mation, especially in Spaccio; on the other hand, it was apparent that his rela-
tion to philosophical theology was thoroughly elitist so that it is doubtful that 
he actually wanted to set himself up to become the leader of a vast movement. 
He saw his role in proclaiming philosophical and theological truth—hardly in 
practicing of a religion to which he granted a relative function—even during 
the trial—according to times and regions, unlike philosophy (Firpo 1993, 
278). He could assert in good conscience that he had nothing to do with Cath-
olic Dogmatic Theology, for “philosophy is my profession” (Spampanato 
1933, 720). 
His attitude towards Trinitarian doctrine, his conception of God, and his 
view of the Incarnation were of utmost theological significance; this had al-
ready been addressed at the earlier trials in Naples, together with his relation 
to the veneration of the saints. As mentioned, in this case he differentiated es-
pecially between the philosophical and theological interpretation, but this 
could not save him as he himself did not really believe in a “double truth.” He 
agreed with the ecclesiastical authorities that philosophy (if conceived to be a 
philosophical doctrine about God) could not remain without conflict as re-
gards the theology of revelation and the institutions administering it. 
Since the philosophical treatises were censored on the basis of the pre-
sent statements and defense, the list of topics on which the defendant was in-
terrogated is an indication of the intentions of the inquisitors: 
 
– First, he is being asked about the creation of things; these were eter-
nal—as he now says—insofar as they were created by the eternal 
God; he repeats his doctrine of the equality of the creative potentiali-
ty of God and the world created by him, for “if one assumes a finite 
effect, one can impossibly ascribe it to an infinite cause” (Firpo 
1993, 229). 
– Secondly, he continues to deny the difference of active and passive 
potentiality between God and creation; the denial of this relation (“la 
legge irrefragabile delli relativi”) resulted in heretical doctrines, for 
if one agrees to such “unbalanced elements of relation” and “as-

 
Venice: The Trial of the Heretic 
105 
sumes that God had caused finite effects, one can only presuppose a 
limited cause and power” (Firpo 1993, 299f). 
– Thirdly, the human soul was created by the universal principle and 
would return to it in that the created spirit was created by the uncre-
ated spirit, and the individual spirit was created anew by the created 
spirit (Firpo 1993, 300). 
– Fourthly, accordingly there was nothing new in this world in a cer-
tain sense (see above p. 80), even though the human soul remained 
an individual soul after being separated from the body, while the 
souls of animals did not cease to exist but rather returned into the 
one spirit (Firpo 1993, 301f) 
– Fifthly, in justifying the planetary motion of the earth, he interprets 
the biblical quotation “The sun rises and the sun goes down” (Eccl 
1:5) not in favor of the traditional Ptolemaic solar system but rather 
as proof (and quite correctly so, according to the biblical context) 
that the created world changes constantly (Firpo 1993, 302). 
– Sixthly, he justifies the claim that the stars were angels with the fa-
mous sentence that the heavens proclaim the glory of God (Ps 19 
[18]:1)—a metaphor of creation as a whole referring to its creator 
(Firpo 1993, 303). 
– Seventhly, he has a biblical verse ready to hand to support the claim 
that the earth was a rationally animated living organism—Gen 1:24: 
“Let the earth bring forth all kinds of living creatures [literally: Let 
the earth produce living soul],” omitting the postscript “according to 
its kind” (Producat terra animam viventem in genere suo); thus the 
creation of the various living beings is now interpreted in the sense 
that the world soul emerges from earthly matter (Firpo 1993, 303). 
– Eighthly, Bruno is reported to have claimed that the intellectual soul 
was not the form of the human body; in doing so, he used the image 
of the soul wandering among the bodies, saying that “the internal 
human being lived in the external human being as a prisoner was 
captured in prison” (Firpo 1993, 304). 
– The ninth thesis repeats the reference to Salomon according to which 
the finite things under the sun were nothing but “vanitas” (Firpo 
1993, 304). 
– The tenth and last point is the doctrine of the multiplicity of worlds; 
the author of the Sommario merely refers to “wild statements” (Firpo 
1993, 304). 
 
Had it not been a matter of life and death to the defendant, one could no-
tice that his adversaries were not incompetent and had recognized central 
concerns of his philosophy. 
Bruno was convicted on the basis of the eight heretical theses compiled 
by Bellarmine; however, we do not know the exact wording of these except 

106 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
for two which Bruno had been asked to clarify on August 24, 1599; these are 
the first thesis regarding the Novatianist heresy and the seventh thesis in 
which the soul is being compared to the helmsman of a ship (Firpo 1993, 
324f). The erroneous doctrine of the Novatianists from the third century con-
sisted in denying the Church’s authority to reaccept sinners, amounting to re-
jecting the Sacrament of Penance. Bellarmine accused the Calvinists and Lu-
therans in his Disputationes de Controversiis (I 4, l. c. 9) of repeating exactly 
this mistake. It is astonishing that this accusation came to fruition: the accused 
Bruno had already been questioned in Venice as to his relation to this sacra-
ment, but he had said that he had occasionally gone to confession, and he had 
emphasized that he believed that “unrepentant sinners are condemned and go 
to hell” (Firpo 1993, 176). The author of the Sommario has also paraphrased 
this statement without comment. The Sacrament of Penance was not on the 
list against which the published works were being examined. However, the 
suspicion of Novatianism may indirectly be related to the other uncertainty, 
namely the doctrine of the soul. 
Among the queries on the basis of the censorship of his treatises were 
two questions about his doctrine of the soul. Bruno had used the comparison 
of the body as the prison of the soul (Firpo 1993, 304), and Bellarmine traces 
it back to the Platonists and Origen (De Controversiis III 2, l. 4 c. 11). The 
error consists in seeing the soul not as a form of the human being but inde-
pendent from it; accordingly, birth would be punishment for souls which had 
existed prior to the connection with the body. Hence, the doctrine of Original 
Sin (in which context Bellarmine reports about the problem) and redemption, 
but also the possibility of penance would be at stake. Bruno’s comparison of 
the soul to the helmsman of a ship (see may possibly go even further, for the 
Origenists also assumed the individual creation of the souls from nothing; 
Bruno’s comparison, however, tends to connect the soul of the individual with 
the world soul which is thus the manifestation of divinity, eternal, and trans-
individual. Bellarmine certainly needed clarification as to whether Bruno was 
able to accept within the framework of such a doctrine that the individual sin-
ner remains personally responsible. 
Bellarmine’s joining the body of inquisitors was fatal for the philosopher 
possibly insofar as two high-ranking thinkers had to compete with each other. 
Bruno’s query as to the status of the erroneous doctrines—whether they were 
new or traditional—was probably based on the self-awareness that he, the phi-
losopher from Nola, proclaimed a completely new philosophy which could 
therefore not be affected by old condemnations and anathemas. Thus he did 
not hesitate to recant the eight false doctrines, refuting them at the same time: 
heretical, yes, but he never held them. On the other hand, Bruno had always 
promised that he wanted to revive an ancient wisdom which had been forgot-
ten in the darkness of the times. As regards this train of thought, however, he 
was very close to the Cardinal, for the special accomplishment of Bellar-
mine’s manual of controversies consisted in historicizing the present heresies 

 
Venice: The Trial of the Heretic 
107 
of Protestantism: Calvinists, Lutherans, and others merely taught repetitions 
of ancient errors which had long been anathematized. The theologian of the 
Catholic Counter-Reformation was conservative insofar as he wanted to save 
the status quo of dissociation form theological errors in making plausible that 
the Reformation had nothing new to offer. Applied to Bruno’s philosophy, 
this could mean: maybe new, but nonetheless old and just as wrong. Bruno’s 
insistence on his originality thus changed into canonically decisive obstinacy. 
 

 
Ten 
 
AFTERLIFE: FROM 
HERETIC TO HERMETICIST 
 
On the very day of Bruno’s execution, February 17, 1600, the philologist, po-
lemic, and publicist Caspar Schoppe (1576–1649) who had converted from 
Lutheranism to Catholicism only two years prior to Bruno’s execution (1598) 
and who had been living in Rome during that time wrote a letter to his teacher 
and friend, Conrad Rittershausen in Altdorf near Nuremberg. In this letter, he 
reported about the dramatic event, and according to this letter, he had been an 
eye- and earwitness of both the pronouncement of judgment on February 8 
and the actual burning. He unmistakably paraphrases the formal pronunciation 
which contained the most important phases of the heretic’s life as well as the 
various accusations made against him. The zealous Schoppe summarizes Bru-
no’s heresy as follows: “He has propagated whatever has been claimed by pa-
gan philosophers or our ancient and modern heretics” (Firpo 1993, 351). 
Schoppe also reports about Bruno’s famous dictum after the verdict: “You 
pronounce the verdict against me probably with greater fear than I accept it!” 
(Firpo 1993, 351) And the letter also contains the observation that Bruno 
turned away from the crucifix held up before him at the stake. Thus Schoppe 
provides the most important elements of the narrative about the philosopher’s 
death as a martyr as it can be found in dramas and novels written in the twen-
tieth century. His actual intention was to convince his friend that this was “the 
manner in which we deal with these human beings, nay monsters” (Firpo 
1993, 352), but this intention was mostly lost in the further process of reception. 
He wanted to assure Rittershausen that Lutherans were warmly welcomed in 
Rome and had nothing to fear because they did not spread such false doctrines 
as Bruno had done. Thus the eyewitness makes Bruno a heretic within the 
Catholic Church and explicitly sets him apart from the Reformation. This may 
also be an indication that the eight theses which have been quoted did not 
contain any explicit accusations of sympathizing with Lutherans or Calvinists, 
even though in the course of the trial there had been a constant interest in the 
activities of the defendant in the Protestant countries. 
The report of the eyewitness proved to be quite convenient for many 
purposes, for its first printing was done by a Calvinist, Peter Alvinczi, in 
1621. This was done to pillory the cruelty of the Roman Inquisition (Salves-
trini 1958, No. 296). 
The further fate of Bruno’s philosophy can be gleaned from the distribu-
tion of the original works by the philosopher from Nola among the various 
European libraries. Rita Sturlese has compiled a critical inventory, since some 

110 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
printings are very rare. There is also the fact—analyzed by Giovanni Aquilec-
chia (see his introductions to the Italian treatises)—that Bruno developed a 
habit of editing his texts repeatedly during printing so that there are various 
versions of some treatises. The list of temporary owners of first editions reflects 
the interest group—from circles of dissidents and bibliophiles to specialists on 
philosophy, and finally the public libraries. The underlying factor for this are 
changing interests of reception. 
Saverio Ricci has divided Bruno’s heritage until 1750 into the following 
strands: Lullism, new science, speculation on infinity, Spinozism, and Free-
thought. In 1598, while the philosopher from Nola was in prison in Rome, Jo-
hann Heinrich Alsted together with the printer Lazarus Zetzner in Strasbourg , 
published a great collection of the works by Raymond Lull and the most sig-
nificant commentaries on Lullism, among them also some treatises by Bruno. 
Since then Bruno’s mnemonics was a basic component of all attempts made 
in the seventeenth century to set up a universal science on the basis of a theo-
ry of combinations interpreted in terms of Neo-Platonism—until Gottfried 
Wilhelm Leibniz who considered him to be intelligent but not very profound 
(Ricci 265). It was also Leibniz who was one of the first to assume similari-
ties between Bruno’s theory of the infinite and the Cartesian theory of vorti-
ces in an undetermined and infinite universe; Leibniz had had the opportunity 
to read these treatises in his capacity as librarian of the Herzog August Li-
brary in Wolfenbüttel (Ricci 172). 
Bruno seemed to be an anti-Aristotelian at first in scientific circles, for 
example in the Northumberland Circle led by Henry Percy, Earl of Northum-
berland. Some direct or indirect witnesses of Bruno’s appearance in London 
around the beginning of the seventeenth century belonged to this group. Espe-
cially the magnetism theory of William Gilbert apparently was influenced by 
Bruno’s Italian dialogues on cosmology and metaphysics. For in all parts of 
Europe alternatives to the scholastic and metaphysical concept of nature were 
sought; consequently, the same sources which had inspired Bruno were being 
incorporated and amalgamated, such as atomism, Stoicism, and the most vari-
ous forms of Platonism and esoteric lore. Famous philosophers such as 
Thomas Hobbes, René Descartes, John Locke, and finally Isaac Newton 
emerged successfully from these contradicting trends. 
In connection to the cruel fate of the philosopher and the reports about 
his provocative appearance throughout Europe, Bruno assumed the role of the 
dissident par excellence in the course of time. Pierre Bayle devoted an article 
to Bruno in his Dictionnaire historique et critique (1st ed. 1697), calling him a 
“knight errant of his philosophy” and comparing him to Spinoza for the first 
time. For even though Benedict (Baruch) Spinoza (1632–1677) most likely 
did not know Bruno’s writings, he nonetheless took the Animism of the phi-
losophy of the Renaissance and the dualism between matter and spirit as oc-
curring in Cartesian thought, coming to a similar conclusion as Bruno’s phys-
ics of unity—monistic metaphysics in which all finite things are nothing but 

 
Afterlife 
111 
attributes of the infinite God. According to Bayle the difference between Bru-
no and Spinoza merely consisted in the former arguing rhetorically (i.e., in-
cluding mnemonics) while the latter argued geometrically, i.e., strictly deduc-
tively. However, it was apparent that Bruno experimented with the geomet-
rical method as well. 
Both authors had implicitly criticized religion of revelation; for this rea-
son, the British philosopher John Toland (1670–1722) was particularly inter-
ested in Bruno’s Spaccio which was interpreted as unambiguous polemics 
against the Pope of Rome, not least since Schoppe’s report on the verdict of 
the Inquisition. Toland was regarded to be a freethinker because of his at-
tempts to explain Christian theology in a rationalist way. Thus a discussion 
emerged about the legal and religious causes of the execution of the heretic, 
and this discussion is explicitly described by Johann Jakob Brucker (1696–
1770) in his work on the history of philosophy (Historia critica philosophiae, 
1744, IV 2 p. 12f). This was to become a standard work for a long time, and 
Bruno was listed as the first important philosopher after the Renaissance and 
as the representative of a new eclecticism. 
In the meantime, Spinozism had become the battle cry against any kind 
of religiously unreliable thinkers even though some of those using it probably 
only had second-hand knowledge of the sources. In 1789, therefore, Friedrich 
Heinrich Jacobi (1743–1819) published excerpts from Bruno’s De la causa in 
German in a treatise entitled On the Doctrine of Spinoza, in Letters to Men-
delssohn. It was Jacobi’s intention to prove, with the help of Bruno, that 
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729–1781) was a Spinozist and thus a pantheist. 
All three of them, allegedly, made attempts—incompatible with the Christian 
religion—to prove the unity of God, world, and human beings in a rational 
way. 
Bruno now became the touchstone of a cultural-philosophical discussion 
within German Protestant Enlightenment, including participants such as 
Herder and Goethe. There was also the fact that Bruno broadly referred to 
Egyptian wisdom as well; Lessing, too, was impressed by it, and thus chose 
the formula “Hen kai Pan” (One Therefore All)—allegedly originating from 
Hermes Trismegistos—as his motto. This matched the formula “Deus sive 
Natura” used by Bruno as well as Spinoza (God Therefore Nature—kai and 
sive mean exchangeability; Jan Assmann, Moses the Egyptian: The Memory 
of Egypt in Western Monotheism, 1997, 193). Thus Jacobi specifically chose 
those passages in De la causa for his translation where Bruno almost identi-
fies matter with form; Jacobi wrote the following ending to Bruno’s text: “For 
the glorification of the infinite being which is cause, principle—one and all.” 
Following in Jacobi’s footsteps (and using copies stemming from his proper-
ty), Thaddäus Anselm Rixner and Thaddäus Siber dedicated Volume 5 of 
their Leben und Lehrmeinungen berühmter Physiker [Life and Doctrines of 
Renowned Physicists] (1824) to the philosopher from Nola, with further ex-
cerpts in translation. 

112 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling (1775–1854) paved the way for 
Bruno’s return to one of the philosophical mainstreams—German Idealism. In 
1802, Schelling published the dialogue Bruno, or On the Divine and Natural 
Principle of Things as contribution to his philosophy of identity in order to 
present pantheism as a preliminary phase of the development of thinking the 
“One”; this phase is overcome by the thought of identity. Thus, Schelling has 
Bruno quote from Jacobi’s excerpt: “In order to penetrate the deepest myster-
ies of nature one must not grow tired of examining the opposite, conflicting, 
outermost parts of the things; it is not the greatest to find the point of conver-
gence, but rather, the true and deepest mystery of this art is developing the 
opposite from this point of convergence as well.” The author describes this as 
“the symbol of true philosophy” (Werke I 4, 1859, 328). Bruno’s image now 
shifts from the heretic, Lullist, dissident, and pantheist towards the dialecti-
cian of the congruence of opposites. In a letter to Johann Gottfried Herder 
(1744–1803) written on November 18, 1782, Johann Georg Hamann (1730–
1788) had already referred to Bruno’s principle of coinciding opposites as 
“worth more than all Kantian critique.” Hamann owned De minimo and had 
long been looking for a copy of De la causa (J. Nadler, Hamann, 1949, 408f). 
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel still recognizes some Spinozist body of 
thought in Bruno’s treatises; however, he calls the main character of his 
works “a beautiful enthusiasm of self-awareness” which sought to overcome 
the trivialization of the concept of God according to traditional philosophy. 
As an example he depicted scholastic notions of God as creator with these 
words: “The benevolence of God was merely external in the final causes or 
purposes … [so as to say:] the cork tree grows so that we have stoppers to seal 
the bottles.” Hegel was the first to appreciate Bruno’s mnemonics as “system 
of thought determinations,” extensively quoting from De umbris which he 
acknowledges as “an attempt to present the logical system of the inner artist—
the producing thought—in such a way that the forms of the exterior nature 
correspond to it” (Lectures on the History of Philosophy II 3 B 3). 
Franz Jacob Clemens, Catholic and Neo-Scholastic professor of philos-
ophy in Bonn and Münster, was the first to investigate the source of Bruno’s 
doctrine of coincidence, systematically comparing it in his book Giordano 
Bruno und Nikolaus von Cusa (Giordano Bruno and Nicholas of Cusa; 1847). 
An expert and critic of Hegelianism, he categorized the philosopher from No-
la under the philosophy of subjectivity which had its beginnings with Des-
cartes. In terms of morals, Clemens identified the philosophy of subjectivity 
with arrogance; in terms of theology, it meant agnosticism. Nicholas of Cusa, 
on the other hand, was the representative of the traditional scholastic doctrine 
of God and—simultaneously—its peak. Clemens barely hides the fact that he 
is kicking the “dog” Bruno in order to mean the “master”—German Idealism 
and its effects in modernistic theology. 
In the meantime, the ‘Hegelian’ Bruno continued to make a career for 
himself: in his book The Philosophical Worldview of the Reformation Era in 

 
Afterlife 
113 
Its Relations to the Present (1847), Moritz Carrière, one of Hegel’s last stu-
dents, equated Giordano Bruno and the dark and unsystematic mystic Jakob 
Böhme (1575–1624)—albeit not the first in doing so, but with lasting effect. 
In the same year, 1847, Christian Bartholmèss, a scholar at Strasbourg, pub-
lished the first modern scientific biography on Giordano Bruno (Jordano 
Bruno, Paris 1846–1847); this biography sheds a better light on Bruno’s time 
in Paris in particular. 
After Bruno’s Italian and Latin treatises had been critically collected and 
edited for the first time by the German scholars Adolf Wagner and August 
Friedrich Gfrörer in 1830 and 1836, the time had come for the Italian culture, 
too, to remember the Italian thinker. This was done particularly in Naples in 
the middle of the nineteenth century, by philosophers influenced by Hegel 
such as Bertrando Spaventa, Benedetto Croce, and—later—Giovanni Gentile. 
Each worked in his own way towards elevating Hegelianism to the level of 
Italian national philosophy, presenting Giordano Bruno as the Italian precur-
sor to the German Hegel while at the same time outlining specific national 
character traits of thinking. This influenced the Italian Renaissance research 
until the pioneering works of Eugenio Garin in the 1940s (among others 
Storia della filosofia italiana, 1947; History of Italian Philosophy, Amster-
dam: Rodopi, 2008). Francesco Fiorentino as well belonged to the group of 
Neapolitan scholars; when the literary critic Francesco De Sanctis was Minis-
ter of Education and the Arts, Fiorentino presented the first volume of a Latin 
edition of Bruno’s works subsidized by the government. Since then, this edi-
tion with all its conceptual and philological weaknesses has been replaced on-
ly in part. 
For the most part the thinker eked out an existence between diffuse oc-
cultism and anticlericalism, or as personal tip among a few experts. He was 
seen as a martyr of intellectual freedom, even though the expert on his trial, 
Luigi Firpo, maintained that he may have been a victim of intolerance “which, 
however, one can only understand within the historical framework” (Firpo 
1993, 114). What was not taken into consideration anymore was the paradox 
that Bruno’s case had nurtured the discussion about tolerance and freedom of 
the intellect since the era of Enlightenment, because he had claimed it for 
himself; and yet, as a polemicist he did not set an example of tolerance him-
self. In 1889, accompanied by journalistic polemics and at the peak of a pro-
verbial “Brunomania,” anticlerical groups erected a monument in Campo de’ 
Fiori where there had been no more burnings of heretics for a long time. In an 
inscription on a plaque, these anticlerical groups called themselves “the centu-
ry which he had envisioned.” 
It was in that same spirit that Eugen Diederichs published a six-volume 
German edition (Gesammelte Werke) in 1904–1909, translated by Ludwig 
Kuhlenbeck; this publishing house showed various esoteric or mystic tenden-
cies. Both Diederichs and Kuhlenbeck sympathized with the Monistenbund 
(Monist League), a fellowship of freethinkers founded by Ernst Haeckel in 

114 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
1905, which itself emerged from the Giordano-Bruno-Bund (Giordano Bruno 
League), founded in 1900. This edition contains only the Italian dialogues, 
apart from the documents of the Inquisition, and it is still the only German 
translation of some texts. 
Under the impression of the cultural-philosophical program of Aby 
Warburg, Ernst Cassirer regarded Bruno as the witness of a new “world feel-
ing” (Weltgefühl) when he published his book on Individual and Cosmos in 
the Philosophy of the Renaissance (1927) in which he passed from Neo-
Kantianism to his own philosophy of symbolic forms. According to Cassirer, 
Bruno had turned away from medieval cosmological dogmatic, however, 
without understanding the infinite in the sense of exact sciences. Bruno’s key 
function consisted in his “new dynamic concept of the world” preparing the 
“science of dynamic.” 
Hans Blumenberg, too, interpreted Bruno’s philosophy to be the begin-
ning of the modern era in reiterating the comparison of “Cusan and Nolan”; to 
him, these two figures marked the “epochal threshold.” What Hegel had un-
derstood to be self-awareness, and what Cassirer thought was world feeling, 
Blumenberg transformed into a historical-philosophical indication of “self-
assertion” of the modern human being by means of abolishing the difference 
between divine omnipotence and potentially infinite cognitive ability (Die 
Legitimität der Neuzeit [The Legitimacy of the Modern Age] 1966). 
There had been no new Bruno edition in Germany since the translation 
of De la causa by Adolf Lasson in 1872 and the Kuhlenbeck edition until 
1947 when Ernesto Grassi, a student of Gentile who worked in Germany, 
published an anthology entitled Heroische Leidenschaften und individuelles 
Leben (Heroic Passions and Individual Life). He suggested a humanistic phi-
losophy interpreted by existential philosophy, delimiting it from the dominat-
ing trends of Cartesian rationalism but also Heidegger’s existentialism. In this 
context, he used the hero of Bruno as a model of anthropology in which poets 
and philosophers carry out the human intellectual potential and continue the 
tradition of the history of ideas. 
The publication of Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition by 
Frances A. Yates in 1964 (after some preparatory work) marked a decisive 
turning point in Bruno research. Yates was a British independent scholar who 
had connections to the Warburg Institute in London. She reconstructed the 
sources and the circles in which Bruno had moved without any respect of 
scientific disciplines and terminological limits. Her conclusion was that Her-
meticism and magic had been the essential elements of his thought. To this 
end, she reconstructed the reception of the writings ascribed to Hermes Tris-
megistus, especially in the Renaissance era, as well as the techniques and 
literature of mnemonics (The Art of Memory, Yates 1966). At one point she 
summarized her interpretation as follows: “Bruno conveys a remarkable vi-
sion of an infinite universe in which the earth and all the heavenly bodies 
move through the divine life which is in them. This concept of universal ani-

 
Afterlife 
115 
mation Bruno found in the Hermetic writings, which he attributed to ‘Hermes 
Trismegistus’. Expanding it to cover an infinite universe and innumerable 
worlds, Bruno arrived at a world view which is a curious foreshadowing, in 
magical and animistic terms, of the mechanical world view. The Ash Wednes-
day Supper is the text in which Bruno most fully presents his Hermetic uni-
verse, a concept which is indissolubly connected in his mind with his Hermetic 
religious reform.” (Yates 1983, 148f). Thus she made all varieties of Renais-
sance occultism acceptable. 
There has been a lot of polemics against this kind of interpretation, but 
even more so the hints were accepted and processed further so that presently 
several aspects can be combined and presented in the figure of Bruno—the 
magician, the heretic, the Copernican thinker and the proponent of mnemon-
ics, the precursor of subjectivist philosophy, as well as the heir of medieval 
scholasticism. Yates’ interpretation is a syncretism of theories. Thus it is con-
genial and useful to the history of philosophy insofar as it represents to scale 
the all-embracing gestures with which Bruno utilizes his sources for his own 
philosophy—in spite of intentional lack of conceptual clarity in terms of ter-
minology and the differentiation of philosophical problems and trends. The 
exact interpretation of Bruno’s way to appropriate the philosophical strains 
that were available to him at that time permits access to the Renaissance way 
of thinking. We don’t need to project our philosophical problems into the Re-
naissance, just to find them to be insufficiently answered; rather, we discover 
those philosophical problems which philosophers like Giordano Bruno at-
tempted to answer. 
 

 
CHRONOLOGY 
 
1548; ca. January/February: born in Nola, east of Naples; baptismal name Fil-
ippo; Giovanni Bruno, his father, was in the military; his mother was 
Fraulissa Savolino. 
1562; Studying the humanistic subjects attending public and private lectures 
at Naples. 
1565; June 15: Joins the Order of the Dominicans at San Domenico Maggio-
re, Naples. Assumes the name Giordano. 
1566–1570; Studies of philosophy as a Dominican friar. 
1566/1567; Criticism of Marian devotions and the veneration of images of 
Saints leads to a first conflict with the Order. 
1570–1575; Studies of theology. 
1573; Ordination to the priesthood; first mass in Campagna near Salerno. 
1575; Completion of studies with a defense of the Summa contra gentiles of 
Thomas Aquinas and the Sentences of Peter Lombard. 
1576; February: Suspected of heresy regarding the Incarnation and Arianism 
and due to reading Patristic literature according to the edition of Eras-
mus of Rotterdam. Trip to Rome. Leaving the Dominican Order, flight 
to Genoa and Noli/Liguria; private lectures on astronomy.  
1577; Noli, Savona, Turin, Venice (publication of the—lost—treatise De se-
gni de tempi), Padua, Brescia, Bergamo; he often stayed with Domini-
cans. 
1578; Milan; on the way to Lyon, spent the winter in Chambéry/ Savoy. 
1579; Geneva: Worked in a printing house; converted to Calvinism; universi-
ty registration on May 20. Consistory proceedings because of a philo-
sophical polemic treatise (which is lost); continued the journey to Lyon, 
arrived at Toulouse in the autumn. Private lectures on astronomy; degree 
of magister artium; associate professor of philosophy; lectures on Aris-
totle’s De anima among others. 
1581; Due to the French Wars of Religion he went to Paris in the autumn. 
Private lectures on the Attributes of God, attracting King Henry III’s at-
tention as regards his mnemonics. 
1582; De umbris idearum with Ars memoriae; Cantus Circaeus; De compen-
diosa architectura & complemento artis Lullij; Candelaio (comedy). 
1583; April: Arrival in London with a recommendation of the king to the 
French ambassador Michel de Castelnau. Disputations at Oxford. Return 
to Castelnau in London; friendship with intellectuals associated with the 
court. Recens et completa ars reminiscendi, Explicatio triginta sigillo-
rum and Sigillus sigillorum. 
1584; La cena de le Ceneri; De la causa, principio et Uno; De l’infinito, uni-
verso et mondi; Spaccio de la bestia trionfante. 

118 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
1585; Cabala del cavallo pegaseo con l’aggiunta dell’Asino Cillenico; De 
gl’heroici furori. Return to Paris, together with Castelnau. Attempt to 
come back to the Catholic Church. 
1586; Figuratio Aristotelici Physici auditus; Dialoghi duo de Fabricii Mor-
dentis Salernitani prope divina adinventione ad perfectam cosmimetriae 
praxim; Idiota triumphans seu de Mordentio inter geometras Deo dia-
logus; Dialogus de somnii interpretatione seu Geometrica silva; polem-
ics with Fabrizio Mordente. Centum et viginti articuli de natura et mun-
do adversus peripateticos, intended for a public disputation at the 
Collège de Cambrai. Escape to Germany: Mainz, Wiesbaden, Marburg. 
July: Refusal of a teaching license. August: Registration in Wittenberg, 
private lecturer, among others lectures on Aritotle’s Logic. 
1587; De lampade combinatorial lulliana; De progressu et lampade venatoria 
logicorum; Artificium perorandi (published 1612). Production of Ani-
madversiones circa lampadem Lullianam and Lampas triginta statu-
arum; Libri physicorum Aristotelis explanati (published 1890/1891). 
1588; Camoeracensis Acrotismus, reprint of the theses presented at the 
Collège de Cambrai in 1586. Leaving Wittenberg due to increasing in-
fluence of Calvinists (Oratio valedictoria); arrival in Prague in the 
spring. De specierum scrutinio et lampade combinatoria; Articuli adver-
sus huius tempestatis mathematicos atque philosophos. November: Tü-
bingen; later: Helmstedt. 
1589; Oratio consolatoria on the occasion of the death of Julius, Duke of 
Brunswick. Treatises and excerpts (published 1891): De magia, Theses 
de magia, De magia mathematica, De rerum principiis et elementis et 
causis; Medicina lulliana; De vinculis in genere. Protest against the ex-
communication by the local pastor. 
1590; In April: Departure from Helmstedt en route to Frankfurt; residence 
permit was not granted. 
1591; Frankfurt trilogy De triplici minimo et mensura (printed on the occa-
sion of the spring fair), De monade numero et figura and De innumera-
bilibus, immenso et infigurabili (on the occasion of the autumn fair), 
published by Johann Wechel and Petrus Fischer, dedicated to Henry Jul-
ius, Duke of Brunswick. Private lectures in Zurich, entitled “Lampas de 
Entis descensu,” published in excerpts 1595 and expanded in 1609 under 
the title Summa terminorum metaphysicorum by Raphael Egli. Again in 
Frankfurt: De imaginum, signorum et idearum compositione.—August: 
Arrival in Venice due to an invitation by Giovanni Mocenigo.—
September: Efforts to acquire the vacant Chair of Mathematics at the 
University of Padua: Praelectiones geometricae and Ars deformationum 
(published 1964). Return to Mocenigo in Venice. 
1592; May 23: Giovanni Mocenigo informs the Inquisition on the case of 
Bruno. 
1593; February: Extradition to the Holy Office in Rome. 
1600; February 8: Bruno is sentenced as a heretic; on February 17, he is being 
burned at the stake on Campo de’ Fiori. 

 
 
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
Abbreviations: 
DI = Bruno 1958. Dialoghi italiani 
OL = Bruno 1879–1891. Opera latine conscripta 
 
Giordano Bruno: Works 
 
Bruno, Giordano. (1879–1891) Opera latine conscripta, publicis sumptibus edita, re-
censebat F. Fiorentino. 3 vols. in 8 fascicles. Edited by F. Tocco, G. Vitelli, V. 
Imbriani, and C. M. Tallarigo. Naples and Florence, 1879–1891 (Stuttgart-Bad 
Canstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1961–1962).  
———. (1957) Due dialoghi sconosciuti e due dialoghi noti: idiota triumphans; de 
somnii interpretatione Mordentius; de Mordentii circino. Edited by Giovanni 
Aquilecchia. Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura,  
———. (1958) Dialoghi italiani: Dialoghi metafisici e dialoghi morali. Edited by G. 
Aquilecchia, Florence: Sansoni.  
———. (1964) Praelectiones geometricae, e Ars deformationum. Edited by Giovanni 
Aquilecchia. Rome: Edizioni di Storia e letteratura. 
———. (1964) The Expulsion of the Triumphant Beast. Translated by Arthur D. Imer-
ti. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers (Lincoln: University of Nebraska, 2004). 
———. (1965) Giordano Bruno’s the Heroic Frenzies. Translated by Paul E. 
Memmo. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press (Ann Arbor, Mi.: UMI 
Books on Demand, 2004). 
———. (1975) The Ash Wednesday Supper. Translated by Stanley L. Jaki. The 
Hague: Mouton.  
———. (1977) The Ash Wednesday Supper. La cena de le ceneri. Translated by Ed-
ward A. Gosselin and Lawrence S. Lerner. Hamden, Conn: Archon Books.  
———. (1991) De umbris idearum. Edited by R. Sturlese. Florence.  
———. (1991) On the Composition of Images, Signs and Ideas. Edited by Dick Hig-
gins, translated by Charles Doria. New York: Willis, Locker & Owens.  
———. (1993–1999) Oeuvres complètes Edited by G. Aquilecchia. Paris. [French-
Italian] 
———. (1995) The Ash Wednesday Supper = La Cena de le Ceneri. Translated by 
Lawrence S. Lerner and Edward A. Gosselin. Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press. 
———. (1998) Cause, Principle, and Unity. Translated and edited by Robert de Luc-
ca; Essays on Magic, translated and edited by Richard J. Blackwell. Cambridge, 
U.K: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
———. (1999) Opere italiane. Ristampa anastatica delle cinquecentine. Edited by 
Eugenio Canone. 4 vols. Florence: L.S. Olschki  

120 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
———. (2000) Poemi filosofici latini: De triplici minimo et mensura, De monade nu-
mero et figura, De innumerabilibus, immenso et infigurabili. Edited by Eugenio 
Canone. La Spezia: Agorà. 
———. (2000) Candlebearer. Translated by Gino Moliterno. Ottawa: Dovehouse. 
———. (2001) Corpus iconographicum: le incisioni nelle opere a stampa. Edited by 
Mino Gabriele. Milan: Adelphi. 
———. (2002) The Cabala of Pegasus. Translated by Sidney L. Sondergard and Mad-
ison U. Sowell. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.  
Online resource:  
La biblioteca ideale di Giordano Bruno. L’opera e le fonti. Edited by Michele 
Ciliberto, Simonetta Bassi et al. http://bibliotecaideale.signum. sns.it/index.php  
 
Secondary sources: 
 
Abbot, George. (1604) The reasons vvhich Doctour Hill hath brought, for the vphold-
ing of papistry, which is falselie termed the Catholike religion… Oxford: Ioseph 
Barnes. 
Blum, Paul Richard. (2003) “Istoriar la figura: Syncretism of Theories as a Model of 
Philosophy in Frances Yates and Giordano Bruno,” American Catholic Philo-
sophical Quarterly 77, pp. 189–212. 
———, ed. (2000) Early Studies of Giordano Bruno (Series of reprints: Bartholmèss 
1846–1847; Clemens 1847, Frith 1887; Tocco 1889–1892), 6 vols. with Intro-
duction and Bibliography, Bristol: Thoemmes Press. 
Blumenberg, Hans. (1983) The Legitimacy of the Modern Age. Cambridge, Mass: MIT 
Press. 
Canone, Eugenio. (2010) “Giordano Bruno (1548–1600): Clarifying the Shadows of 
Ideas.” In Paul Richard Blum, ed. Philosophers of the Renaissance. Washington: 
Catholic University of America Press. 
———, ed. (1992) Giordano Bruno. Gli anni napoletani e la “peregrinatio” europea. 
Cassino: Università degli Studi.  
———, ed. (1998) Brunus redivivus. Momenti della fortuna di Giordano Bruno nel 
XIX secolo. Pisa and Rome: IEPI.  
———, and Ingrid D. Rowland, eds. (2007) The Alchemy of Extremes. The Laborato-
ry of the Eroici furori of Giordano Bruno, Pisa-Rome: IEPI.  
Catana, Leo. (2005) The Concept of Contraction in Giordano Bruno’s Philosophy. 
Aldershot: Ashgate  
Ciliberto, Michele, and Nicholas Mann, eds. (1997) Giordano Bruno 1583–1585: The 
English Experience/L’esperienza inglese. Florence: Olschki.  
Couliano, Ioan P. (1987) Eros and Magic in the Renaissance. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
De Léon-Jones, Karen S. 1997. Giordano Bruno and the Kabbalah: Prophets, Magi-
cians, and Rabbis. New Haven, Conn., and London: Yale University Press. 
Encyclopedia Bruniana e Campanelliana. (2006). Edited by Eugenio Canone and 
Germana Ernst. Pisa and Rome: Istituti Editoriali e Poligrafici Internazionali.  
Firpo, Luigi. (1993) Il processo di Giordano Bruno. Edited by D. Quaglioni. Rome.  

 
Select Bibliography 
121 
Gatti, Hilary. (1999) Giordano Bruno and Renaissance Science. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell 
University Press. 
———. (2011) Essays on Giordano Bruno. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press. 
———, ed. 2002. Giordano Bruno: Philosopher of the Renaissance. Aldershot: Ash-
gate. 
Giordano Bruno 1548–1600: mostra storico documentaria, Roma, Biblioteca Casana-
tense, 7 giugno-30 settembre 2000. 2000. Florence: Olschki. 
McMullin, Ernan. (1986) “Giordano Bruno at Oxford,” Isis 77, pp. 85–94. 
———. (1987) “Bruno and Copernicus,” Isis 78, pp. 55–74. 
Mercati, Angelo. (1942) Il sommario del processo di Giordano Bruno. Città del Vati-
cano: Biblioteca apostolica vaticana. 
Ordine, Nuccio. (1996) Giordano Bruno and the Philosophy of the Ass. New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University Press. 
Rowland, Ingrid D. (2008) Giordano Bruno: Philosopher/Heretic. New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. 
Saiber, Arielle. (2005) Giordano Bruno and the Geometry of Language. Literary and 
Scientific Cultures of Early Modernity. Aldershot: Ashgate. 
Salvestrini, Virgilio. (1958) Bibliografia di Giordano Bruno (1582–1950). 2nd ed. Ed-
ited by L. Firpo. Florence: Sansoni. 
Singer, Dorothea Waley. (1950) Giordano Bruno, His Life and Thought. With anno-
tated translation of his work, On the Infinite Universe and Worlds. New York: 
Schuman. 
Spampanato, Vincenzo. (1933) Documenti della vita di Giordano Bruno. Florence.  
Sturlese, Rita. (1987) Bibliografia, censimento e storia delle antiche stampe di Gior-
dano Bruno. Florence: Olschki. 
Yates, Frances A. (1964) Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
———. (1966) The Art of Memory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
———. (1982) Lull & Bruno. (Collected Essays, vol. 1), London: Routledge & K. 
Paul.  
———. (1983) Renaissance and Reform: The Italian Contribution. (Collected Essays, 
vol. 2), London: Routledge & K. Paul. 
———. (1984) Ideas and Ideals in the North European Renaissance. (Collected Es-
says, vol. 3), London: Routledge & K. Paul. 
 

 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
 
PAUL RICHARD BLUM is T.J. Higgins, S.J., Chair in Philosophy at Loyola 
University Maryland in Baltimore. His main research interest is in Renais-
sance philosophy, Early Modern Aristotelianism, and philosophical anthro-
pology. His most recent publications were Das Wagnis, ein Mensch zu sein 
(Münster 2010), Philosophy of Religion in the Renaissance (Farnham 2010); 
furthermore the edition of Philosophers of the Renaissance (Washington 
2010) and of Jacobus Pontanus: Stratocles or: War (with Thomas D. 
McCreight, Baltimore 2009). 
 

 
INDEX 
 
Agrippa von Nettesheim, Heinrich 
Cornelius, 61, 62, 70, 91 
Albert of Saxony, 44 
Alberti, Leon Battista, 51 
Albertus Magnus, 44, 45 
Alciato, Andrea, 64 
Alexander of Aphrodisias, 2 
Alsted, Johann Heinrich, 79, 110 
Alvinczi, Peter, 109 
Analogy, 17, 18, 23, 38, 40, 41, 83, 
93 
Antitrinitarianism, 3, 10, 26 
Antonino of Fiesole, 5 
Aquarius, Matthias, 4, 45 
Aquilecchia, Giovanni, 110 
Aquinas, Thomas, 4, 6, 7, 13, 16, 39, 
41, 46, 47, 50, 56, 57, 117 
Aratus, 52 
Arian heresy, 7, 8, 117 
Ariosto, Ludovico, 3, 85, 103 
Aristotle, Aristotelianism, 
Aristotelian, 2, 4, 6, 10, 11, 
15, 16, 19, 21, 22, 25, 27–29, 
36–38, 39, 41, 43, 44–47, 51, 
59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 67, 71–79, 
83, 86, 88, 89, 110, 117 
Astronomy, 9, 11, 27, 32, 34, 38, 52, 
70, 117 
Atomism, 3, 50, 69, 71, 72, 96, 99, 
102, 110 
Augustine, 5, 7, 35, 38, 55, 66 
Augustinians, 2 
Augustus I of Saxony, 80 
Averroes, Averroism, Averroistic, 2, 
3, 39, 45 
 
Bacon, Francis, 77, 91 
Balduinus, Hieronymus, 2 
Baronio, Cesare, 103 
Bartholmèss, Christian, 113 
Bayle, Pierre, 110, 111 
Bellarmine, Robert, 102, 103, 105, 
106 
Besler, Basilius, 90 
Besler, Hieronymus, 90, 91, 101 
Beza, Theodore, 10 
Blumenberg, Hans, 114 
Böhme, Jakob, 113 
Botero, Giovanni, 72 
Brahe, Tycho, 89 
Brucker, Johann Jakob, 111 
Bruno, Giovanni, 1 
 
Calvin, John, 10 
Calvinism, Calvinists, 3, 10, 11, 26, 
57, 79, 80, 106, 107, 109, 
117, 118 
Campanella, Tommaso, 94, 96 
Carrière, Moritz, 113 
Cassirer, Ernst, 114 
Castelnau, Michel de, 25, 26, 28, 29, 
69, 72, 117, 118 
Catherine de’ Medici, 11 
Catherine of Siena, 5 
Cavalca, Domenico, 5 
Celestino da Verona, 101 
Center, 1, 31, 33, 43, 50, 68, 97 
Chambéry, 9, 117 
Chaos, 38 
Christ, 3, 5, 8, 54, 55 
Christian I of Saxony, 80 
Church Fathers, 7 
Cicala, 1 
Cicero, 13, 84 
Clemens, Franz Jacob, 112 
Clement VIII, Pope, 102, 103 
Colle, Giovanni Vincenzo (Sarnese), 
2 
Combinatorics, 15, 20, 22 
Copernican Revolution, 25, 29, 31–
34, 36, 38, 102, 115 
Copernicus, Nicholas, 27, 28, 31–36, 
71, 88 
Cosmology, 9, 15, 18, 19, 29, 40, 44, 
45, 49, 51, 58, 74, 76, 77, 81, 
84, 89, 94, 96, 110 
Cotin, Guillaume, 69, 78 
Counter-Reformation, 6, 8, 107 
Creator, 7, 17, 37, 43, 47, 49, 58, 105, 
112 
Croce, Benedetto, 113 
Crusius, Martin, 90 

126 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
Dante, 63 
De Sanctis, Francesco, 113 
Dee, John, 36, 89 
Del Bene, Pietro, 72 
Descartes, René, 39, 40, 49, 96, 110, 
112 
Diederichs, Eugen, 113 
Digges, Thomas, 36 
Dominicans, 1, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 102, 117 
Double truth, 6, 104 
Dudley, Robert, 36 
 
Egli, Raphael, 79, 100, 118 
Elizabeth I, Queen of England, 25, 26, 
63, 69 
Emblems, 65 
Epicureanism, 51 
Erasmus of Rotterdam, 3, 6, 7, 29, 51, 
117 
Ethics, 51–53, 59, 63, 64 
Euclid, 42, 96, 97 
 
fantasy, 15, 20, 21, 49, 57 
Ficino, Marsilio, 3, 18, 27, 28, 46, 63, 
65–67, 74, 93, 94, 99 
Filesac, Jean, 74 
Fiorentino, Francesco, 113 
Firpo, Luigi, 101, 113 
Florence, 2, 48 
Fracastoro, Girolamo, 44, 92, 96 
Frankfurt, 91, 95, 100, 101 
Freedom, free will, 2, 25, 40, 47–51, 
77, 113 
Frischlin, Philipp Nicodemus, 89, 90 
 
Galileo Galilei, 22, 32, 35, 36, 77, 99 
Garin, Eugenio, 113 
Gassendi, Pierre, 96 
Geneva, 9, 10, 26, 100, 117 
Gentile, Giovanni, 113, 114 
Gentili, Alberigo, 79 
Geometry, 32, 33, 42, 43, 70, 71, 96–
99, 102, 111 
Gfrörer, August Friedrich, 113 
Gilbert, William, 110 
Goclenius, Rudolf, 100 
Grassi, Ernesto, 114 
 
Haeckel, Haeckel, 113 
Hamann, Johann Georg, 112 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 
112–114 
Heidegger, Martin, 114 
Helmstedt, 90, 95, 118 
Hennequin, Jean, 73, 74, 78 
Henri I, Duke of Guise, 11 
Henry II, King of France, 31 
Henry III, King of France, 13, 69, 74, 
117 
Henry IV, King of France, 72 
Henry Julius, Duke of Brunswick-
Wolfenbüttel, 95 
Herder, Johann Gottfried, 111, 112 
Hermes Trismegistus, 18, 55, 59, 91, 
115 
Hermeticism, 18, 36, 55, 77, 114, 115 
History, 62, 80–86, 88 
Hobbes, Thomas, 110 
Hoffmann, Daniel, 90 
Horace, 3 
Huguenots, 11, 69, 72 
Hyginus, 52 
 
Iamblichus, 55 
Ignatius of Loyola, 57 
Incarnation, 6, 8, 54, 104, 117 
Inquisition, 4, 101–103, 109, 111, 
114, 118 
 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, 111, 112 
Jerome, 6 
Jesuits, 13, 21, 57, 69, 102 
John Chrysostom, 6 
John of Holywood (Johannes de 
Sacrobosco), 9 
Julius, Duke of Brunswick-
Wolfenbüttel, 90 
Jungius, Joachim, 98 
 
Kabbalah, 61, 62, 82, 91 
Kant, Immanuel, 21, 56 
Kepler, Johannes, 32, 98 
Kuhlenbeck, Ludwig, 113, 114 
 
La Faye, Antoine de, 10 
Laski, Albert, 26, 27 

 
Index 
127 
Lasson, Adolf, 114 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 20, 49, 
110 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, 111 
Leyser, Polykarp, 90 
Locke, John, 110 
Logic, 2, 4, 17, 19–22, 28, 29, 34, 51, 
64, 79 
London, 25, 26, 28, 36, 51, 69, 79, 80, 
89, 95, 110, 114, 117 
Love, 5, 25, 29, 63, 66, 67, 85, 86, 92, 
93, 97, 99 
Lucian, 51 
Lucretius, 3, 69, 77, 96 
Lull, Raymond, 19–23, 110 
Lullism, 19–23, 48, 90, 97, 110 
Luther, Martin, 82 
Lutherans, 79, 80, 90, 106, 107, 109 
Lyon, 9–11, 117 
 
Machiavelli, Niccolò, 25, 93 
Magic, 3, 13, 17, 22, 36, 40, 82, 87, 
91–95, 101, 114 
Mainz, 79, 118 
Manetti, Giannozzo, 93 
Marburg, 78, 79, 118 
Mathematics, 29, 33, 38, 71, 96–98, 
101 
Matter, Primary, 38, 39 
Mebesius, Johannes, 90 
Melanchthon, Philipp, 79, 80 
Memory, art of (mnemonics), 3, 13–
16, 18, 19, 21–23, 40, 43, 48, 
52, 53, 73, 83, 85, 99, 110–
112, 114, 115, 117 
Mendoza, Bernardin, 69 
Mersenne, Marin, 49, 50 
Minimum, 42, 71, 96–99 
Mocenigo, Giovanni, 101, 103, 118 
Mordente, Fabrizio, 70–72, 78, 89, 
97, 118 
Muslims, 20 
 
Naples, 1–4, 8, 104, 113, 117 
Napoleon Bonaparte, 102 
Newton, Isaac, 32, 110 
Nicholas of Cusa, 3, 42, 43, 63, 65, 
67, 70, 84, 112 
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 57 
 
One, 37, 40–43, 45, 46, 58, 63, 86–88, 
111, 112 
Ovid, 3, 52 
Oxford, 26–28, 36, 74, 117 
 
Padua, 2, 9, 22, 91, 101, 117, 118 
Palingenio Stellato, Marcello, 46, 47 
Pantheism, 13, 45 
Paris, 11, 13, 25, 26, 39, 49, 69, 72–
74, 77, 79, 102, 117, 118 
Patrizi, Francesco, 104 
Paul III, Pope, 32 
Pedant, 25, 59–61, 104 
Percy, Henry, 110 
Peter Lombard, 4, 117 
Peter of Ravenna, 3 
Petrarch, 63 
Philosophy vs. theology, 3, 5, 6, 101, 
104 
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni, 62, 
74, 94 
Plato, 3, 32, 38, 40, 41, 63, 66, 67, 94 
Platonism, 3, 19, 20, 36, 41, 45, 61–
63, 65, 67, 75–77, 79, 82, 86, 
93, 94, 99, 104, 106, 110 
Plotinus, 61 
Plutarch, 60 
Poetry, 2, 29, 51, 63 
Pomponazzi, Pietro, 2 
Prague, 19, 72, 80, 89, 96, 118 
Proclus, 45 
Ptolemy, 31, 32 
Pythagoras, Pythagoreanism, 19, 40, 
41, 64, 75, 76, 80, 85, 93, 99 
 
Quintilian, 13 
 
Ramus, Petrus (Pierre de la Ramée), 
11, 64 
Reformation, 5–8, 107, 109, 112 
Reuchlin, Johann, 62 
Ricci, Saverio, 110 
Rittershausen, Conrad, 109 
Rixner, Thaddäus Anselm, 111 
Rome, 1, 6, 9, 10, 37, 101, 103, 104, 
109–111, 117, 118 

128 
GIORDANO BRUNO 
Rome, University, 2 
Rudolf II, Emperor, 72, 80, 89 
 
Salutati, Coluccio, 48 
Sanches, Francisco, 11 
Savile, Henry, 36 
Savolino, Fraulissa, 1, 60 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, 
112 
Schoppe, Caspar, 109, 111 
Servet, Michael, 10 
Siber, Thaddäus, 111 
Sidney, Philipp, 29, 52, 63, 69 
Siger of Brabant, 6 
Sixtus V, Pope, 69 
Soto, Domingo, 4 
Soul, 2, 3, 6, 11, 27, 28, 37–40, 50, 
61, 63, 67, 82–84, 92, 93, 96, 
98, 105, 106 
Sozzini, Fausto, 10 
Sozzini, Lelio, 10 
Spaventa, Bertrando, 113 
Spinoza, Baruch, 39, 40, 48, 57, 110, 
111 
Stoicism, 51, 77, 110 
Sturlese, Rita, 14, 109 
Suárez, Francisco, 21, 56 
Sylvester of Ferrara, 4 
 
Tacitus, 60 
Tansillo, Luigi, 3, 28, 63, 66 
Telesio, Bernardino, 3 
Thirty (order of things), 13–15, 19, 
28, 44, 53, 75, 92 
Toland, John, 111 
Toulouse, 11, 26, 69, 117 
Trinity, 3, 5, 6, 8, 80, 104 
Tübingen, 90, 118 
 
Vairanus, Theophilus, 2 
Valdés, Juan de, 3 
Valdesians, 3 
Venice, 5, 8, 9, 28, 79–81, 101, 106, 
117, 118 
Vergil, 3 
Vesuvius, 1 
Virgil, 77, 80 
Vitoria, Francisco de, 4 
 
Wagner, Adolf, 113 
Waldensians, 3 
Waldo, Peter, 3 
Walker, D.P., 94 
Warburg, Aby, 114 
Wiesbaden, 79, 118 
Wittenberg, 19, 38, 73, 74, 76, 79–84, 
89, 90, 95, 118 
 
Xenophanes, 61 
 
Yates, Frances A., 31, 36, 114, 115 
 
Zabarella, Jacopo, 22 
Zurich, 79, 91, 95, 100, 118 
 

VIBS
 
The Value Inquiry Book Series is co-sponsored by:
Adler School of Professional Psychology
American Indian Philosophy Association
American Maritain Association
American Society for Value Inquiry
Association for Process Philosophy of Education
Canadian Society for Philosophical Practice
Center for Bioethics, University of Turku
Center for Professional and Applied Ethics, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
Central European Pragmatist Forum
Centre for Applied Ethics, Hong Kong Baptist University
Centre for Cultural Research, Aarhus University
Centre for Professional Ethics, University of Central Lancashire
Centre for the Study of Philosophy and Religion, University College of Cape Breton
Centro de Estudos em Filosofia Americana, Brazil
College of Education and Allied Professions, Bowling Green State University
College of Liberal Arts, Rochester Institute of Technology
Concerned Philosophers for Peace
Conference of Philosophical Societies
Department of Moral and Social Philosophy, University of Helsinki
Gannon University
Gilson Society
Haitian Studies Association
Ikeda University
Institute of Philosophy of the High Council of Scientific Research, Spain
International Academy of Philosophy of the Principality of Liechtenstein
International Association of Bioethics
International Center for the Arts, Humanities, and Value Inquiry
International Society for Universal Dialogue
Natural Law Society
Philosophical Society of Finland
Philosophy Born of Struggle Association
Philosophy Seminar, University of Mainz
Pragmatism Archive at The Oklahoma State University
R.S. Hartman Institute for Formal and Applied Axiology
Research Institute, Lakeridge Health Corporation
Russian Philosophical Society
Society for Existential Analysis
Society for Iberian and Latin-American Thought
Society for the Philosophic Study of Genocide and the Holocaust
Unit for Research in Cognitive Neuroscience, Autonomous University of Barcelona
Whitehead Research Project
Yves R. Simon Institute

Titles Published
 
Volumes 1 - 218 see www.rodopi.nl
219. Mary K. Bloodsworth-Lugo and Carmen R. Lugo-Lugo, Containing 
(Un)American Bodies: Race, Sexuality, and Post-9/11 Constructions of 
Citizenship. A volume in Philosophy of Peace
220. Roland Faber, Brian G. Henning, Clinton Combs, Editors, Beyond 
Metaphysics? Explorations in Alfred North Whitehead’s Late Thought. 
A volume in Contemporary Whitehead Studies
221. John G. McGraw, Intimacy and Isolation (Intimacy and Aloneness: A 
Multi-Volume Study in Philosophical Psychology, Volume One), A volume in 
Philosophy and Psychology
222. Janice L. Schultz-Aldrich, Introduction and Edition, “Truth” is a 
Divine Name, Hitherto Unpublished Papers of Edward A. Synan, 1918-1997. 
A volume in Gilson Studies
223. Larry A. Hickman, Matthew Caleb Flamm, Krzysztof Piotr 
Skowroński and Jennifer A. Rea, Editors, The Continuing Relevance of John 
Dewey: Reflections on Aesthetics, Morality, Science, and Society. A volume 
in Central European Value Studies 
224.  Hugh P. McDonald, Creative Actualization: A Meliorist Theory of 
Values. A volume in Studies in Pragmatism and Values
225. Rob Gildert and Dennis Rothermel, Editors, Remembrance and 
Reconciliation. A volume in Philosophy of Peace
226. Leonidas Donskis, Editor, Niccolò Machiavelli: History, Power, and 
Virtue. A volume in Philosophy, Literature, and Politics
227. Sanya Osha, Postethnophilosophy. A volume in  Social Philosophy
228. Rosa M. Calcaterra, Editor, New Perspectives on Pragmatism and 
Analytic Philosophy. A volume in Studies in Pragmatism and Values
229. Danielle Poe, Editor, Communities of Peace: Confronting Injustice and 
Creating Justice. A volume in Philosophy of Peace
230. Thorsten Botz-Bornstein, Editor, The Philosophy of Viagra: 
Bioethical Responses to the Viagrification of the Modern World. A volume in 
Philosophy of Sex and Love

231. Carolyn Swanson, Reburial of Nonexistents: Reconsidering the 
Meinong-Russell Debate. A volume in Central European Value Studies
232. Adrianne Leigh McEvoy, Editor, Sex, Love, and Friendship: Studies 
of the Society for the Philosophy of Sex and Love: 1993–2003. A volume in 
Histories and Addresses of Philosophical Societies
233. Amihud Gilead, The Privacy of the Psychical. A volume in  
 
Philosophy and Psychology
234. Paul Kriese and Randall E. Osborne, Editors, Social Justice, Poverty 
and Race: Normative and Empirical Points of View. A volume in  
 
Studies in Jurisprudence
235. Hakam H. Al-Shawi, Reconstructing Subjects: A Philosophical 
Critique of Psychotherapy.  A volume in Philosophy and Psychology
236. Maurice Hauriou,  Tradition in Social Science. Translation from 
French with an Introduction by Christopher Berry Gray. A volume in   
Studies in Jurisprudence
237. Camila Loew, The Memory of Pain: Women’s Testimonies of the 
Holocaust.. A volume in Holocaust and Genocide Studies
 
 
238. Stefano Franchi and Francesco Bianchini, Editors, The Search for 
a Theory of Cognition: Early Mechanisms and New Ideas. A volume in 
Cognitive Science
239.    Michael H. Mitias, Friendship: A Central Moral Value. A volume in 
Ethical Theory and Practice
240.    John Ryder and Radim Šíp, Editors, Identity and Social 
Transformation, Central European Pragmatist Forum, Volume Five. A 
volume in Central European Value Studies
241.    William Sweet and Hendrik Hart, Responses to the Enlightenment: An 
Exchange on Foundations, Faith, and Community. A volume in Philosophy 
and Religion
242.    Leonidas Donskis and J.D. Mininger, Editors, Politics Otherwise: 
Shakespeare as Social and Political Critique. A volume in Philosophy, 
Literature, and Politics

243.    Hugh P. McDonald, Speculative Evaluations: Essays on a Pluralistic 
Universe. A volume in Studies in Pragmatism and Values.
244.    Dorota Koczanowicz and Wojciech Małecki, Editors, Shusterman’s 
Pragmatism: Between Literature and Somaesthetics. A volume in Central 
European Value Studies
245.    Harry Lesser, Editor, Justice for Older People, A volume in Values in 
Bioethics
246.    John G. McGraw, Personality Disorders and States of Aloneness 
(Intimacy and Aloneness: A Multi-Volume Study in Philosophical Psychology, 
Volume Two), A volume in Philosophy and Psychology
247.    André Mineau, SS Thinking and the Holocaust. A volume in 
Holocaust and Genocide Studies
248.    Yuval Lurie, Wittgenstein on the Human Spirit. A volume in 
Philosophy, Literature, and Politics
249.    Andrew Fitz-Gibbon, Love as a Guide to Morals. A volume in Ethical 
Theory and Practice 
250.    Ronny Miron, Karl Jaspers: From Selfhood to Being. A volume in 
Studies in Existentialism 
251.    Necip Fikri Alican, Rethinking Plato: A Cartesian Quest for the Real 
Plato. A volume in Philosophy, Literature, and Politics
252.    Leonidas Donskis, Editor, Yet Another Europe after 1984: Rethinking 
Milan Kundera and the Idea of Central Europe. A volume in Philosophy, 
Literature, and Politics
253.    Michael Candelaria, The Revolt of Unreason: Miguel de Unamuno and 
Antonio Caso on the Crisis of Modernity. A volume in Philosophy in Spain
254.    Paul Richard Blum, Giordano Bruno: An Introduction. A volume in 
Values in Italian Philosophy

