Policy Futures in Education      
Volume 12 Number 4 2014 
www.wwwords.co.uk/PFIE 
491                                                                                           http://dx.doi.org/10.2304/pfie.2014.12.4.491 
When Schools Become Dead Zones of the  
Imagination: a critical pedagogy manifesto 
HENRY A. GIROUX 
English and Cultural Studies Department,  
McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada 
ABSTRACT This article examines the so-called new school reform movement led by a host of right-
wing ideologues, billionaires, and foundations. It argues that instead of being reformers, the latter are 
part of a counter-revolution in American education to dismantle public schools not because they are 
failing but because they are public and make a claim, however deficient, to serve the public good. Not 
only have these non-reformers pushed for classroom practices that are utterly instrumental and 
reductionistic, they have turned American public schools into disimagination machines divorced from 
any viable notion of democratic governance and values. They kill the imagination of teachers and 
students by confusing education with training and teaching with mind-numbing instrumental practices. 
In opposition to these non-reforms, the article argues for schools as democratic public spheres and 
develops a theoretical architecture for developing elements of a critical pedagogy that offer a direct 
challenge to the notion of schools as dead zones engaged in mostly training and testing students. 
Some of us who have already begun to break the silence of the night have found that the calling 
to speak is often a vocation of agony, but we must speak. We must speak with all the humility 
that is appropriate to our limited vision, but we must speak. (Martin Luther King, Jr.)  
If the right-wing billionaires and apostles of corporate power have their way, public schools will 
become ‘dead zones of the imagination’, reduced to anti-public spaces that wage an assault on 
critical thinking, civic literacy and historical memory.[1] Since the 1980s, schools have increasingly 
become testing hubs that deskill teachers and disempower students. They have also been refigured 
as punishment centers, where low-income and poor minority youth are harshly disciplined under 
zero tolerance policies in ways that often result in their being arrested and charged with crimes 
that, on the surface, are as trivial as the punishment is harsh.[2] Under casino capitalism’s push to 
privatize education, public schools have been closed in cities such as Philadelphia, Chicago and 
New York to make way for charter schools. Teacher unions have been attacked, public employees 
denigrated, and teachers reduced to technicians working under deplorable and mind-numbing 
conditions (see Yates, 2013).[3] 
Corporate school reform is not simply obsessed with measurements that degrade any viable 
understanding of the connection between schooling and educating critically engaged citizens. The 
reform movement is also determined to underfund and disinvest resources for public schooling so 
that public education can be completely divorced from any democratic notion of governance, 
teaching and learning. In the eyes of billionaire un-reformers and titans of finance such as Bill 
Gates, Rupert Murdoch, the Walton family and Michael Bloomberg, public schools should be 
transformed, when not privatized, into adjuncts of shopping centers and prisons.[4] 
Like the dead space of the American mall, the school systems promoted by the un-reformers 
offer the empty ideological seduction of consumerism as the ultimate form of citizenship and 
learning. And, adopting the harsh warehousing mentality of prison wardens, the un-reformers 

Henry A. Giroux 
492 
endorse and create schools for poor students that punish rather than educate, in order to channel 
disposable populations into the criminal justice system, where they can fuel the profits of private 
prison corporations. The militarization of public schools that Secretary of Education Arne Duncan 
so admired and supported while he was the chief executive officer of the Chicago School System 
was not only a ploy to instill authoritarian discipline practices against students disparagingly labeled 
as unruly, if not disposable. It was also an attempt to design schools that would break the capacity 
of students to think critically and render them willing and potential recruits to serve in senseless 
and deadly wars waged by the American empire. And, if such recruitment efforts failed, then 
students were quickly put on the conveyor belt of the school-to-prison pipeline. For many poor 
minority youth in the public schools, prison becomes part of their destiny, just as public schools 
reinforce their status as second-class citizens. As Michelle Alexander points out: ‘Instead of schools 
being a pipeline to opportunity, [they] are feeding our prisons’ (Sokolower, 2013).[5] 
Market-driven educational reforms, with their obsession with standardization, high-stakes 
testing and punitive policies, also mimic a culture of cruelty and instrumental rationality that neo-
liberal policies produce in the wider society. They exhibit contempt for teachers and distrust of 
parents, repress creative teaching, destroy challenging and imaginative programs of study, and treat 
students as mere inputs on an assembly line. Trust, imagination, creativity and a respect for critical 
teaching and learning are thrown to the wind in the pursuit of profits and the proliferation of rigid, 
death-dealing accountability schemes. As John Tierney points out in his critique of corporate 
education reforms in the Atlantic, such approaches are not only oppressive – they are destined to 
fail. He writes: 
policies and practices that are based on distrust of teachers and disrespect for them will fail. Why? 
‘The fate of the reforms ultimately depends on those who are the object of distrust.’ In other 
words, educational reforms need teachers’ buy-in, trust, and cooperation to succeed; ‘reforms’ 
that kick teachers in the teeth are never going to succeed. Moreover, education policies crafted 
without teacher involvement are bound to be wrongheaded. (Tierney, 2013)  
The situation is further worsened in that not only are public schools being defunded and public 
school teachers attacked as the new welfare queens, but social and economic policies are being 
enacted by Republicans and other right-wingers to ensure low-income and poor minority students 
fail in public schools. For instance, many Tea Party-elected governors in states such as Wisconsin, 
North Carolina and Maine, along with right-wing politicians in Congress, are enacting cruel and 
savage policies (such as the defunding of the food stamp program) that directly impact on the 
health and well-being of poor students in schools (see, for example, Rawls, 2013). Such policies 
shrink, if not destroy, the educational opportunities of poor youth by denying them the basic 
provisions they need to learn, and then utilizing the consequent negative educational outcomes as 
one more illegitimate rationale for turning public schools over to private interests. 
When the billionaires’ club members, such as Bill Gates, and right-wing donors, such as Art 
Pope, are not directly implementing policies that defund schools, they are funding research projects 
which turn students into test subjects for a world that even George Orwell would have found hard 
to imagine.[6] For instance, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has provided a half-million-
dollar grant to Clemson University to do a pilot study in which students would wear galvanic skin 
response bracelets with wireless sensors that would track their physiological responses to various 
stimuli in schools. A spokesperson for the foundation argues in defense of this creepy obsession 
with measuring students’ emotional responses by claiming that the biometric devices are a help to 
teachers, who can measure ‘“real-time” (reflective feedback), kind of like a pedometer’ (Kroll, 
2012).  
It is not the vagueness of what this type of research is trying to achieve that is the most 
ludicrous and ethically offensive part of this study: it is the notion that reflective feedback can be 
reduced to measuring emotional impulses rather than produced through engaged dialogue and 
communication between actual teachers and students. How can bracelets measure why students 
are acting out if they are hungry, bored, fearful, sick or lack sleep because their parents might be 
homeless? How do such studies address larger structural issues, such as the 50 million people in the 
USA who go hungry every night, one-third of whom are children? And how do they manage to 
ignore their own connection to the rise of the surveillance state and the ongoing destruction of the 
civil rights of children and others? Research of this kind cannot speak to the rise of a Jim Crow 

When Schools Become Dead Zones of the Imagination 
493 
society, in which the mass incarceration of poor minorities is having a horrible effect on children. 
As Michelle Alexander points out, these are children  
who have a parent or loved one, a relative, who has either spent time behind bars or who has 
acquired a criminal record and thus is part of the under-caste – the group of people who can be 
legally discriminated against for the rest of their lives. (Sokolower, 2013)  
And the effect of such daily struggle is deadly. She writes: 
for these children, their life chances are greatly diminished. They are more likely to be raised in 
severe poverty; their parents are unlikely to be able to find work or housing and are often 
ineligible even for food stamps. For children, the era of mass incarceration has meant a 
tremendous amount of family separation, broken homes, poverty, and a far, far greater level of 
hopelessness as they see so many of their loved ones cycling in and out of prison. Children who 
have incarcerated parents are far more likely themselves to be incarcerated. (Sokolower, 2013) 
In contrast to the socially and ethically numb forms of educational research endorsed by so-called 
reformers, a recent study has linked high-stakes testing to lower graduation rates and higher 
incarceration rates, indicating that such testing plays a significant role in expanding ‘the machinery 
of the school-to-prison pipeline’, especially for low-income students and students of color (Noor, 
2013b). Most critics of the billionaires’ club ignore these issues. But a number of critics, such as 
New York University education professor Diane Ravitch, have raised significant questions about 
this type of research. Ravitch argues that Gates should ‘devote more time to improving the 
substance of what is being taught ... and give up on all this measurement mania’ (Simon, 2012). 
Such critiques are important, but they could go further. Such reform efforts are about more than 
collapsing teaching and learning into an instrumental reductionism that approximates training 
rather than education. As Ken Saltman (2012) points out, the new un-reformers are political 
counter-revolutionaries and not simply misguided educators. 
Noam Chomsky gets it right in arguing that we are now in a general period of regression that 
extends far beyond impacting education alone (Falcone, 2013). This period of regression is marked 
by massive inequalities in wealth, income and power that are fueling a poverty and ecological 
crisis, and undermining every basic public sphere central to both democracy and the culture and 
structures necessary for people to lead a life of dignity and political participation (Sirota, 2013). 
State violence has proliferated, just as the paramilitary forces and war zones necessary for it to be 
legitimated have proliferated. The burden of cruelty, repression and corruption has broken the 
back of democracy, however weak, in the USA. America is no longer a democracy, nor is it simply 
a plutocracy. It has become an authoritarian state steeped in violence and run by the commanding 
financial, cultural and political agents of corporate power (see, more recently, Pollack, 2012). 
Corporate sovereignty has replaced political sovereignty, and the state has become largely an 
adjunct of banking institutions and financial service industries. Addicted to ‘the political 
demobilization of the citizenry’ (Wolin, 2008, p. ix), the corporate elite is waging a political 
backlash against all institutions that serve democracy and foster a culture of questioning, dialogue 
and dissent. The apostles of neo-liberalism are concerned primarily with turning public schools 
over to casino capitalism in order to transform them into places where all but the privileged 
children of the 1% can be disciplined and cleansed of any critical impulses. Instead of learning to 
become independent thinkers, they acquire the debilitating habits of what might be called a moral 
and political deficit disorder, which renders them passive and obedient in the face of a society based 
on massive inequalities in power, wealth and income. The current powerful corporate-based un-
reform movement is wedded to developing modes of governance, ideologies and pedagogies 
dedicated to constraining and stunting any possibility for developing among students those critical, 
creative and collaborative forms of thought and action necessary for participating in a substantive 
democracy. 
At the core of the new reforms is a commitment to a pedagogy of stupidity and repression 
that is geared towards memorization, conformity, passivity and high-stakes testing. Rather than 
create autonomous, critical and civically engaged students, the un-reformers kill the imagination 
while depoliticizing all vestiges of teaching and learning. The only language they know is the 
discourse of profit and the disciplinary language of command. John Taylor Gatto (2002) points to 
some elements of this pedagogy of repression in his claim that schools teach confusion by ignoring 

Henry A. Giroux 
494 
historical and relational contexts. Every topic is taught in isolation and communicated by way of 
sterile pieces of information that have no shared meanings or context. 
A pedagogy of repression defines students largely by their shortcomings rather than by their 
strengths, and in doing so convinces them that the only people who know anything are the experts 
– increasingly drawn from the ranks of the elite and current business leaders, who embody the new 
models of leadership under the current regime of neo-liberalism. Great historical leaders who 
exhibited heightened social consciousness, such as Martin Luther King, Jr., Rosa Parks, Nelson 
Mandela, John Dewey, Paulo Freire and Mahatma Gandhi, are relegated to the dustbin of history. 
Students are taught only to care about themselves and to view any consideration for others as a 
liability, if not a pathology. Ethical concerns under these circumstances are represented as 
hindrances to be overcome. Narcissism, along with an unchecked notion of individualism, is the 
new normal. 
Under a pedagogy of repression, students are conditioned to unlearn any respect for 
democracy, justice and what it might mean to connect learning to social change. They are told that 
they have no rights and that rights are limited only to those who have power. This is a pedagogy 
that kills the spirit, promotes conformity and is more suited to an authoritarian society than a 
democracy. What is alarming about the new education un-reformers is not only how their policies 
have failed, but the degree to which such policies are now embraced by liberals and conservatives 
in both the Democratic and Republican Parties, despite their evident failure.[7] The Broader, 
Bolder Approach to Education study provides a list of such failures which is instructive. The 
outcomes of un-reform measures noted in the study include: 
Test scores increased less, and achievement gaps grew more, in ‘reform’ cities than in other 
urban districts ... Reported successes for targeted students evaporated upon closer examination ... 
Test-based accountability prompted churn that thinned the ranks of experienced teachers, but 
not necessarily bad teachers ... School closures did not send students to better schools or save 
school districts money ... Charter schools further disrupted the districts while providing mixed 
benefits, particularly for the highest-needs students ... Emphasis on the widely touted market-
oriented reforms drew attention and resources from initiatives with greater promise ... The 
reforms missed a critical factor in achievement gaps: the influence of poverty on academic 
performance ... Real, sustained change requires strategies that are realistic, patient, and 
multipronged. (Weiss & Long, 2013, pp. 3-6) 
The slavish enthusiasm of the cheerleaders for market-driven educational policies becomes 
particularly untenable morally and politically in light of the increasing number of scandals that 
have erupted around inflated test scores and other forms of cheating committed by advocates of 
high-stakes testing and charter schools (see, for instance, Noor, 2013a). David Kirp offers an 
important commentary on the seriousness and scope of the scandals, and the recent setbacks of 
market-oriented educational reform. He writes: 
In the latest Los Angeles school board election, a candidate who dared to question the 
overreliance on test results in evaluating teachers and the unseemly rush to approve charter 
schools won despite $4 million amassed to defeat him, including $1 million from New York City 
Mayor Michael Bloomberg and $250,000 from Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp. Former Atlanta 
superintendent Beverly Hall, feted for boosting her students’ test scores at all costs, has been 
indicted in a massive cheating scandal. Michelle Rhee, the former Washington D.C. school chief 
who is the darling of the accountability crowd, faces accusations, based on a memo released by 
veteran PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] correspondent John Merrow, that she knew about, 
and did nothing to stop, widespread cheating. In a Washington Post op-ed, Bill Gates, who has 
spent hundreds of millions of dollars promoting high-stakes, test-driven teacher evaluation, did 
an about-face and urged a kinder, gentler approach that teachers could embrace. And parents in 
New York State staged a rebellion, telling their kids not to take a new and untested achievement 
exam. (Kirp, 2013) 
While pedagogies of repression come in different forms and address different audiences in various 
contexts, they all share a commitment to defining pedagogy as a set of strategies and skills to use in 
order to teach prescribed subject matter. In this context, pedagogy becomes synonymous with 
teaching as a technique or the practice of a craft-like skill. There is no talk here of connecting 

When Schools Become Dead Zones of the Imagination 
495 
pedagogy with the social and political task of resistance, empowerment or democratization. Nor is 
there any attempt to show how knowledge, values, desire and social relations are always 
implicated in power. Any viable notion of critical pedagogy must reject such definitions of teaching 
and their proliferating imitations, even when they are claimed as part of a radical discourse or 
project. In opposition to the instrumentalized reduction of pedagogy to a mere method that has no 
language for relating the self to public life, social responsibility or the demands of citizenship, 
critical pedagogy works to illuminate the relationships among knowledge, authority and power.[8] 
For instance, it raises questions regarding who has control over the conditions for producing 
knowledge, such as: Are the curricula being promoted by teachers, textbook companies, corporate 
interests or other forces? 
Central to any viable notion of what makes a pedagogy critical is, in part, the recognition that 
pedagogy is always a deliberate attempt on the part of educators to influence how and what forms 
of knowledge and subjectivities are produced within particular sets of social relations. In this case, 
critical pedagogy draws attention to the ways in which knowledge, power, desire and experience 
are produced under specific conditions of learning, and in doing so rejects the notion that teaching 
is just a method or is removed from matters of values, norms and power – or, for that matter, the 
struggle over agency itself and the future it suggests for young people. Rather than asserting its 
own influence in order to wield authority over passive subjects, critical pedagogy is situated within 
a project that views education as central to creating students who are socially responsible and 
civically engaged citizens. This kind of pedagogy reinforces the notion that public schools are 
democratic public spheres, education is the foundation for any working democracy, and teachers 
are the most responsible agents for fostering that education. 
This approach to critical pedagogy does not reduce educational practice to the mastery of 
methodologies. It stresses, instead, the importance of understanding what actually happens in 
classrooms and other educational settings by raising questions such as: What is the relationship 
between learning and social change? What knowledge is of most worth? What does it mean to 
know something? And in what direction should one desire? Yet the principles and goals of critical 
pedagogy encompass more. Pedagogy is simultaneously about the knowledge and practices 
teachers and students might engage in together, and the values, social relations and visions 
legitimated by such knowledge and practices. Such a pedagogy listens to students, gives them a 
voice and role in their own learning, and recognizes that teachers not only educate students, but 
also learn from them. 
In addition, pedagogy is conceived as a moral and political practice that is always implicated 
in power relations because it offers particular versions and visions of civic life, community, the 
future and how we might construct representations of ourselves, others, and our physical and 
social environment. Pedagogy provides a discourse for agency, values, social relations and a sense 
of the future. It legitimates particular ways of knowing, being in the world and relating to others. 
As Roger Simon observed, it also  
represents a version of our own dreams for ourselves, our children, and our communities. But 
such dreams are never neutral; they are always someone’s dreams and to the degree that they are 
implicated in organizing the future for others they always have a moral and political dimension. 
(Simon, 1987, p. 372)  
It is in this respect that any discussion of pedagogy must begin with a discussion of educational 
practice as a particular way in which a sense of identity, place, worth and, above all, value is 
informed by practices which organize knowledge and meaning. 
Central to my argument is the assumption that politics is not only about power, but also ‘has 
to do with political judgements and value choices’ (Castoriadis, 1996, p. 8), indicating that 
questions of civic education and critical pedagogy (learning how to become a skilled citizen) are 
central to the struggle over political agency and democracy. Critical pedagogy rejects the notion of 
students as passive containers who simply imbibe dead knowledge. Instead, it embraces forms of 
teaching that offer students the challenge to transform knowledge, rather than simply ‘processing 
received knowledges’ (Mohanty, 1989-90, p. 192). Under such circumstances, critical pedagogy 
becomes directive and intervenes on the side of producing a substantive democratic society. This is 
what makes critical pedagogy different from training. And it is precisely the failure to connect 
learning to its democratic functions and goals that provides rationales for pedagogical approaches 

Henry A. Giroux 
496 
that strip what it means to be educated from its critical and democratic possibilities (Gutman, 
1999). 
Critical pedagogy becomes dangerous in the current historical moment because it emphasizes 
critical reflection, bridging the gap between learning and everyday life, understanding the 
connection between power and difficult knowledge, and extending democratic rights and identities 
by using the resources of history. Rather than viewing teaching as a technical practice, pedagogy in 
the broadest critical sense is premised on the assumption that learning is not about memorizing 
dead knowledge and skills associated with learning for the test, but engaging in a more expansive 
struggle for individual rights and social justice. The fundamental challenge facing educators within 
the current age of neo-liberalism, militarism and religious fundamentalism is to provide the 
conditions for students to address how knowledge is related to the power of both self-definition 
and social agency. In part, this suggests providing students with the skills, ideas, values and 
authority necessary for them to nourish a substantive democracy, recognize anti-democratic forms 
of power, and fight deeply rooted injustices in a society and world founded on systemic economic, 
racial and gendered inequalities. 
Any viable notion of critical pedagogy must be understood as central to politics itself and, 
rather than disconnect public education from larger social, economic and political issues, it must be 
connected to such forces as part of a wider crisis of both education and democracy. At the very 
least, education must be viewed as part of an emancipatory project that rejects the privatization 
and corporatization of public schools, and the tax and finance forces that support iniquitous school 
systems. For pedagogy to matter, it must support a culture and the relations of power that provide 
teachers with a sense of autonomy and control over the conditions of their labor. Teachers must be 
viewed as public intellectuals and a valuable social resource, and the conditions of their labor and 
autonomy must be protected. In this instance, the fight to preserve labor unions must be viewed as 
central to preserving the rights and working conditions necessary for public school teachers to 
teach with dignity under conditions that respect rather than degrade them. 
Critical pedagogy must reject teaching being subordinated to the dictates of standardization, 
‘measurement mania’ and high-stakes testing. The latter are part of a pedagogy of repression and 
conformity, and have nothing to do with an education for empowerment. Central to the call for a 
critical pedagogy and the formative and institutional culture that makes it possible is the need to 
reconfigure government spending and to call for less spending on death and war, and more funding 
for education and the social programs that make it possible as a foundation for a democratic 
society. Schools are about more than measurable utility, the logic of instrumentality, abject testing 
and mind-numbing training. In fact, the latter have little to do with critical education and 
pedagogy, and must be rejected as part of an austerity and neo-liberal project that is deeply anti-
intellectual, authoritarian and anti-democratic. 
As a moral and political project, pedagogy is crucial for creating the agents necessary to live 
in, govern and struggle for a radical democracy. Moreover, it is important to recognize not only 
how education and pedagogy are connected to and implicated in the production of specific agents 
and a particular view of the present and future, but also how knowledge, values and desires, and 
social relations are always implicated in power. Power and ideology permeate all aspects of 
education and become a valuable resource when critically engaged around issues that problematize 
the relationship between authority and freedom, ethics and knowledge, and language and 
experience, reading texts differently, and exploring the dynamics of cultural power. Critical 
pedagogy addresses power as a relationship in which conditions are produced that allow students 
to engage in a culture of questioning, to raise and address urgent, disturbing questions about the 
society in which they live, and to define in part the questions that can be asked and the disciplinary 
borders that can be crossed. 
Education as a democratic project is utopian in its goal of expanding and deepening the 
ideological and material conditions that make a democracy possible. Teachers need to be able to 
work together, collaborate, work with the community and engage in research that informs their 
teaching. In this instance, critical pedagogy refuses the atomizing structure of teaching that informs 
traditional and market-driven notions of pedagogy. Moreover, critical pedagogy should provide 
students with the knowledge, modes of literacy, skills, critique, social responsibility and civic 
courage needed to enable them to be engaged critical citizens who are willing to fight for a 
sustainable and just society. 

When Schools Become Dead Zones of the Imagination 
497 
Critical pedagogy is a crucial antidote to the neo-liberal attack on public education, but it 
must be accompanied and informed by radical political and social movements that are willing to 
make educational reform central to democratic change (Aronowitz, 2010). The struggle over public 
education is inextricably connected to a struggle against poverty, racism, violence, war, bloated 
defense budgets, a permanent warfare state, state-sanctioned assassinations, torture, inequality and 
a range of other injustices that reveal a shocking glimpse of what America has become and why it 
can no longer recognize itself through the moral and political visions and promises of a substantive 
democracy. Such a struggle necessitates both a change in consciousness and the building of social 
movements that are broad-based and global in their reach. 
The struggle to reclaim public education as a democratic public sphere needs to challenge the 
regressive pedagogies, gated communities, zones of racial segregation, and massive inequality in 
wealth and income that encourage the production of the cultural, economic and political war zones 
which now characterize much of contemporary America. Yet, these sites of terminal exclusion 
demand more than making visible and interrogating critically the spectacle of cruelty and violence 
egregiously used by the apostles of neo-liberalism to energize the decadent, yet powerful, cultural 
apparatuses of casino capitalism. Their obscene presence in the body politic calls for a fresh 
understanding of politics, a new language of critique and possibility, and a sustained critical 
encounter with new forms of pedagogy, modes of moral witnessing and collective action. 
Neo-liberalism is a disimagination machine that remakes social identity by turning civic 
subjects into consuming and marketable subjects. As a public pedagogy, it works aggressively in 
multiple sites – extending from the new screen culture and mainstream media to the schools – to 
produce desires, needs and values as a form of second nature, internalized as a habit and common 
sense. As Doreen Massey (2013) points out: ‘It is an internalisation of “the system” that can 
potentially corrode our ability to imagine that things could be otherwise’. This is cultural politics 
with a vengeance, and necessitates a new understanding of culture as an educational force and 
pedagogy as central to any viable notion of politics. What I am suggesting is that the educative 
nature of politics calls for new modes of social responsibility, civic engagement and collective 
struggle. It also calls for the translation of political outrage into civic and moral courage. 
As Martin Luther King, Jr. (1967) insisted: ‘We are called to speak for the weak, for the 
voiceless, for victims of our nation and for those it calls enemy, for no document from human 
hands can make these humans any less our brothers’. We can update King’s speech to encompass 
the marginalized, voiceless and victims of our nation who are now represented by the low-income 
and poor minority youth, who inhabit both the public schools and, increasingly, the prisons. These 
are the throwaway youth of an authoritarian America who have zero jobs, hopes and futures. They 
are the excess populations of the new punishing state who disturbingly remind the corporate and 
financial elite of the need for social provisions, the viability of the public good and those principles 
of economic life in need of substantial rethinking. 
Under neo-liberalism, it has become more difficult to fulfill the claims of the social contract, 
public good and the social state, which have been pushed to the margins of society – viewed as 
both an encumbrance and pathology. And yet such a challenge must be engaged and overcome in 
the drive to reform public education and prevent it from becoming another ‘dead zone of the 
imagination’. The struggle over public education is the most important struggle of the twenty-first 
century. It is one of the few public spheres left where questions can be asked, pedagogies 
developed, modes of agency constructed and desires mobilized. It is one of the most valuable sites 
in which formative cultures can be developed that nourish critical thinking, dissent, civic literacy 
and social movements capable of struggling against those anti-democratic forces that are ushering 
in dark, savage and dire times. We are seeing glimpses of such a struggle in Chicago and other 
states, as well as across the globe, and we can only hope that such movements offer up not merely 
a new understanding of the relationship among pedagogy, politics and democracy, but also one 
that infuses both the imagination and hope for a more just and democratic world. 
Notes  
[1] I have taken this term from Graeber (2012).  
[2] I address this issue in great detail in Giroux (2010). 

Henry A. Giroux 
498 
[3] See also the June 2013 special issue of Monthly Review, edited by Michael Yates, entitled Public School 
Teachers Fighting Back. 
[4] For an excellent critique of this type of corporate educational un-reform, see Saltman (2013). 
[5] These themes are more fully developed in Alexander (2012). 
[6] For two examples of the appropriation of culture by corporate power and its donors and foundations, 
see Stewart (2013) and Nichols and McChesney (2013).  
[7] On the predatory nature of such reforms, see Giroux (2012) and Gecan (2013). On the failure of such 
reforms, see the work of Kenneth Saltman, Diane Ravitch, Henry A. Giroux, Jonathan Kozol, Shirley 
Steinberg, bell hooks and others. 
[8] For examples of this tradition, see Nikolakaki (2012) and Giroux (2011). 
References 
Alexander, M. (2012) Jim Crow: mass incarceration in the age of colorblindness. New York: New Press. 
Aronowitz, A. (2010) Education Rediscovered, Indypendent, 155, 9 September. 
http://www.indypendent.org/2010/09/09/education-rediscovered/ 
Castoriadis, C. (1996) Institutions and Autonomy, in P. Osborne (Ed.) A Critical Sense. New York: Routledge. 
Falcone, D. (2013) Noam Chomsky on Democracy and Education in the 21st Century and Beyond, Truthout, 
1 June. http://www.truth-out.org/opinion/item/16651-noam-chomsky-on-democracy-and-education-
in-the-21st-century-and-beyond 
Gatto, J.T. (2002) Dumbing Us Down: the hidden curriculum of compulsory schooling, 2nd edn. Gabriola Island, 
British Columbia: New Society. 
Gecan, M. (2013) How Predatory Reformers Are Destroying Education and Profiting at Our Children’s 
Expense, AlterNet, 14 June. http://www.alternet.org/education/how-predatory-reformers-are-
destroying-education-and-profiting-our-childrens-expense 
Giroux, H.A. (2010) Youth in a Suspect Society: democracy or disposability. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Giroux, H.A. (2011) On Critical Pedagogy. New York: Continuum. 
Giroux, H.A. (2012) Education and the Crisis of Public Values. New York: Peter Lang. 
Graeber, D. (2012) Dead Zones of the Imagination, HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory, 2(2), 105-128. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.14318/hau2.2.007 
Gutman, A. (1999) Democratic Education. Princeton: Princeton University Press.  
King, M.L, Jr. (1967) ‘Beyond Vietnam’: a time to break silence, Information Clearing House. Speech at a 
meeting of Clergy and Laity Concerned, Riverside Church, New York City, 4 April. 
http://www.informationclearinghouse.info/article2564.htm 
Kirp, D.L. (2013) Failing the Test: why cheating scandals and parent rebellions are erupting in schools in New 
York, Washington, D.C., and Atlanta, Slate, 7 May. 
http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/science/2013/05/cheating_scandals_and_parent_re
bellions_high_stakes_school_testing_is_doomed.html  
Kroll, L. (2012) Gates Foundation Responds to GSR Bracelets Controversy, Forbes, 13 June. 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/luisakroll/2012/06/13/gates-foundation-responds-to-gsr-bracelets-
controversy/ 
Massey, D. (2013) Vocabularies of the Economy, Soundings. 
http://lwbooks.co.uk/journals/soundings/pdfs/Vocabularies%20of%20the%20economy.pdf 
Mohanty, C. (1989-90) On Race and Voice: challenges for liberal education in the 1990s, Cultural Critique, 14, 
179-208. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1354297 
Nichols, J. & McChesney, R.W. (2013) Dollarocracy: how the money and media election complex is destroying 
America. New York: Nation Books. 
Nikolakaki, M. (Ed.) (2012) Critical Pedagogy in the Dark Ages: challenges and possibilities. New York: Peter Lang.  
Noor, J. (2013a) Massive Cheating Scandals Rock School Districts Nationwide, Real News Network, 20 April. 
http://therealnews.com/t2/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=31&Itemid=74&jumival
=10102 
Noor, J. (2013b) Study Links High Stakes Testing to Higher Incarceration Rates, Real News Network, 20 July. 
http://therealnews.com/t2/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=31&Itemid=74&jumival
=10458 

When Schools Become Dead Zones of the Imagination 
499 
Pollack, N. (2012) Toward a Definition of Fascism, CounterPunch, 6 August. 
http://www.counterpunch.org/2013/08/06/toward-a-definition-of-fascism/ 
Rawls, K. (2013) North Carolina Becomes the Front Line of a Brutal Corporate Assault on Education Raging 
in America, AlterNet, 31 July. http://www.alternet.org/activism/moral-monday-and-education 
Saltman, K.J. (2012) The Gift of Education: public education and venture philosophy. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Saltman, K.J. (2013) The Failure of Corporate School Reform. Boulder, CO: Paradigm. 
Simon, R. (1987) Empowerment as a Pedagogy of Possibility, Language Arts, 64(4), 370-382. 
Simon, S. (2012) Biosensors to Monitor Students’ Attentiveness, Reuters, 12 June. 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/06/13/us-usa-education-gates-idUSBRE85C01820120613 
Sirota, D. (2013) It’s No Coincidence That the Public Education and Poverty Crises Are Happening at the 
Same Time, Alternet, 3 June. http://www.alternet.org/education/us-department-education-releases-
study-schools-and-poverty-rate 
Sokolower, J. (2013) Schools and the New Jim Crow: an interview with Michelle Alexander, Truthout, 4 June. 
http://www.truth-out.org/news/item/16756-schools-and-the-new-jim-crow-an-interview-with-
michelle-alexander 
Stewart, K. (2013) The Rightwing Donors Who Fuel America’s Culture Wars, Guardian, 23 April. 
http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/23/rightwing-donors-fuel-america-culture-
wars 
Tierney, J. (2013) The Coming Revolution in Public Education, Atlantic, 25 April. 
http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2013/04/the-coming-revolution-in-public-
education/275163 
Weiss, E. & Long, D. (2013) Market-Oriented Education Reforms’ Rhetoric Trumps Reality: the impacts of test-based 
teacher revaluations, school closures, and increased charter school access on student outcomes in Chicago, New 
York City, and Washington, D.C., 22 April. Washington, DC: Broader, Bolder Approach to Education. 
http://www.epi.org/files/2013/bba-rhetoric-trumps-reality.pdf 
Wolin, S.S. (2008) Democracy Incorporated: managed democracy and the specter of inverted totalitarianism. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.  
Yates, M.D. (2013) Public School Teachers: new unions, new alliances, new politics, Truthout, 24 July. 
http://truth-out.org/opinion/item/17756-public-school-teachers-new-unions-new-alliances-new-politics 
 
 
 
HENRY A. GIROUX holds the Global TV Network Chair in English and Cultural Studies at 
McMaster University, Canada. His most recent books include: Education and the Crisis of Public 
Values (Peter Lang, 2012); Twilight of the Social: resurgent publics in the age of disposability (Paradigm, 
2012); and Disposable Youth, Racialized Memories, and the Culture of Cruelty (Routledge, 2012). His 
newest book, Youth in Revolt: reclaiming a democratic future, was released by Paradigm in 2013. 
Correspondence: girouxh@mcmaster.ca  

