
GLOBAL ASSET ALLOCATION
A SURVEY OF THE WORLD’S TOP INVESTMENT STRATEGIES

MEB FABER

Contents
Copyright
Dedication
About the Author
Epigraph
Introduction
1.
 A History of Stocks, Bonds, and Bills
2.
 The Benchmark Portfolio: 60/40
3.
 Asset Class Building Blocks
4.
 The Risk Parity and All Seasons Portfolios
5.
 The Permanent Portfolio
6.
 The Global Market Portfolio
7.
 The Rob Arnott Portfolio
8.
 The Marc Faber Portfolio
9.
 The Endowment Portfolio: Swensen, El-Erian, and Ivy
10.  The Warren Buffett Asset Allocation Portfolio
11.  Comparison of the Strategies
12.  Implementation (ETFs, Fees, Taxes, Advisors)
13.  Summary
Appendix A – FAQs
Appendix B – The Tobias Portfolio
Appendix C – The Talmud Portfolio
Appendix D – The 7Twelve Portfolio
Appendix E – The William Bernstein Portfolio
Appendix F – The Larry Swedroe Portfolio
Disclaimer


Copyright © 2015 The Idea Farm, LP
All rights reserved.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and the author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specially disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability
or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or
written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation.
You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable
for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 Unites States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per copy fee.
ISBN: 978-0-9886799-2-4

To Mom

A B O U T  T H E  A U T H O R
Mr. Faber is a co-founder and the Chief Investment
Officer of Cambria Investment Management, LP.
Faber is the manager of Cambria’s ETFs, separate
accounts, and private investment funds for accredited
investors. Mr. Faber is also the author of the Meb
Faber Research blog, Shareholder Yield, Global
Value, and the co-author of The Ivy Portfolio: How to
Invest Like the Top Endowments and Avoid Bear
Markets. He is a frequent speaker and writer on
investment strategies and has been featured in
Barron’s, The New York Times, and The New Yorker.
Mr. Faber graduated from the University of Virginia
with degrees in Engineering Science and Biology. He
is a Chartered Alternative Investment Analyst
(CAIA), and Chartered Market Technician (CMT).
C O N T A C T  I N F O R M A T I O N :
Twitter: @MebFaber
Email: Mebane@gmail.com
Phone: 310-683-5500
Blog: mebfaber.com
Research: theideafarm.com

Company: cambriafunds.com
Sign up for our mailing list here

“However beautiful the strategy, you should occasionally look at the results.”
WINSTON CHURCHILL

I N T R O D U C T I O N
To help put the reader in the right mindset for this book, let’s run a little
experiment. We want to make sure you’re paying attention, so turn off the TV,
close your email, and grab a cup of coffee.
Below is a test. It is simple, but requires your utmost concentration. Here is a
video for you to watch. So click on this link and then come back to this book
after watching – it’s only about 20 seconds long so we’ll wait.
Selective Attention Test Video
Did you watch?
Okay, do you have your number? If you do your job correctly, you learn that the
ball is passed 15 times. Did you get the number correct? Congratulations!
But, of course, that’s not the whole story.
In this particular experiment, which many of you have probably seen already,
while you were fastidiously counting basketball passes, what you might have
missed was someone dressed in a gorilla costume walk into the frame, pound his

chest, and walk off. Don’t feel bad – most participants in the experiment don’t
notice the gorilla at all. While they kept their eye trained on what they assumed
to be the most important task—the passing of the basketball—they simply failed
to notice anything else.
Go back and watch again and be amazed that you would have missed this very
obvious intruder. What the research actually finds is that when we narrow our
focus to one specific task, we tend to overlook other, significant events.
What does this have to do with investing and this book? Conventional wisdom
tells us that, as investors, we have to keep our eyes trained on our asset
allocation. However, how much time do you spend thinking about the following
questions:
“Is it the right time to be in stocks, or should I sell?”
“Should I add gold to my portfolio? If so, how much?”
“Aren’t bonds in a bubble?”
“How much should I put in foreign stocks?”
“Are central banks manipulating the market?”
With all of our focus on assets – and how much and when to allocate them – are
we missing the gorilla in the room?
Our book begins by reviewing the historical performance record of popular
assets like stocks, bonds, and cash. We look at the impact inflation has on our
money. We then start to examine how diversification through combining assets,

in this case a simple stock and bond mix, works to mitigate the extreme
drawdowns of risky asset classes.
But we go beyond a limited stock/bond portfolio to consider a more global
allocation that also takes into account real assets. We track 13 assets and their
returns since 1973, with particular attention to a number of well-known
portfolios, like Ray Dalio’s All Weather portfolio, the Endowment portfolio,
Warren Buffett’s suggestion, and others. And what we find is that, with a few
notable exceptions, many of the allocations have similar exposures.
And yet, while we are all busy paying close attention to our portfolio’s particular
allocation of assets, the greatest impact on our portfolios may be something we
fail to notice altogether. In this case, the so-called “gorilla” are the fees that we
often fail to consider. In one shocking example, we find that the best performing
strategy underperforms the worst strategy when we tack on advisory fees.
Ultimately, smart investing requires that we not only monitor asset allocation,
but of equal weight, we focus on the advisory fees associated with the
investment strategy.

1
A  H I S T O R Y  O F  S T O C K S ,  B O N D S ,  A N D  B I L L S
Let’s start with a history lesson. Many people begin investing their money
without a true understanding of what has happened in the past, and often bias
their expectations toward their own personal experiences. My mother always
told me the way to invest was to buy some stocks and then just hold on to them.
But her experience, living in the United States and investing particularly in the
1980s and 1990s, was very different from her parent’s generation, which lived
through the Great Depression. Both of these experiences would be vastly
different from those of the average Japanese, German, or Russian investor.
So what is possible and reasonable to expect from history? We should begin
with a discussion about the value of money.
A few years ago, my father and I were talking and he decided to demonstrate a
real world example of inflation. A couple weeks later, I received a letter with a
check inside written by my great grandfather in the 1910s for $0.50. He was a
farmer who immigrated from Les Martigny-Baines, Voges France and ended up
in Nebraska. That $0.50 is equivalent to about $13 today and shows a very
simple example of inflation. As a side note, look at that penmanship!
FIGURE 1 – Real World Inflation

Source: Faber
A more familiar example is the oft-used phrase, “I remember when a Coca-Cola
cost ten cents.” (Another fun example is “Superhero Inflation.”) Inflation is an
emotional topic. It usually goes hand-in-hand with a discussion of The Federal
Reserve, and there are not many topics that incite more vitriol in certain
economic and political precincts than “The Fed” and the U.S. dollar.
One of the most famous charts in all of investing literature is the one below that
illustrates the U.S. dollar’s purchasing power since the creation of The Federal
Reserve in 1913.  The description usually goes along the lines of this ZeroHedge
post:

“This is the chart they don’t want you to see: the purchasing power of the dollar over the
past 76 years has declined by 94%. And based on current monetary and fiscal policy, we
have at least another 94% to go. The only question is whether this will be achieved in 76
months this time.”
The above statement is factually true – $1.00 in 1913 is only worth about three
cents in current dollars due to the effects of inflation (which have averaged about
3.2% a year).  But that is all the chart tells you – the U.S. has had mild inflation
this century (with fits of disinflation, deflation, and high inflation mixed in):
FIGURE 2 – U.S. Dollar Purchasing Power, 1913-2014
Source: Global Financial Data, Shiller
The chart is then used to justify any number of arguments and conclusions,
usually laden with exclamation points!!!, bold text, and CAPITALIZATIONS.
Cries to end the Fed, buy gold, sell stocks, and build forts stocked with guns,

food, and ammunition usually follow in a stream of rants and raves. These
articles are written like this for a reason. They elicit an emotional response (who
doesn’t enjoy grumbling about the government?) and they certainly make for
great headlines.
The problem that most miss is that investors have to do something with those
dollars. Pretend you were an investor in 1913. You could choose to put your
dollars under a mattress, in which case your purchasing power would decline as
indicated in the chart above.  You could also spend the money on consumption,
such as vacations, entertainment, clothes, or food. Or you could invest in
Treasury bills, in which case the dollar was a perfectly fine store of value, and
your $1 would be worth $1.33 today (for a real return of about 0.26% per year).
So you didn’t really make any money, but you were not losing any either.
Note that “real returns” refer to the returns an investor receives after inflation. If
an investment returned 10% (what we call nominal returns) but there was
inflation of 2% that year, the real return is only 8%. Real returns are a very
important concept as they make comparisons across timeframes more relevant.
A 10% return with 8% inflation (2% real) is very different than a 10% return
with 2% inflation (8% real). It is helpful to think about real returns as “returns
you can eat.” That $1 Coke likely costs about the same as the $0.10 Coke, you
are just paying with inflated dollars (and probably getting corn syrup instead of
real sugar).
If you had decided to take on a little more risk, you could have invested in
longer duration bonds, corporate bonds, gold, stocks, housing, or even wine and
art—all of which would have been better stores of value than your mattress.  
Figure 3 shows the real returns of stocks, bonds, and bills.  While $1 would be

worth only three cents had you put your hard-earned cash under the mattress, it
would be worth $1.33 had you invested in T-bills, worth $5.68 in 10-Year
Treasury bonds, and worth a whopping $492 in U.S. stocks.
FIGURE 3 – Purchasing Power, 1913-2014
Source: Global Financial Data, Shiller
For those looking for a beautiful coffee table book on the topic of historical
market returns, check out my all-time favorite investing book, Triumph of the
Optimists: 101 Years of Global Investment Returns. (There are also free yearly
updates of the book from Credit Suisse here. All of the yearly updates are highly
recommended.) This fantastic book illustrates that many global asset classes in
the twentieth century produced nice gains in wealth for individuals who bought
and held those assets for generation-long holding periods. It also shows how the
assets went through regular and painful drawdowns like the Global Financial
Crisis of 2008.

Unfortunately for investors, there are only two states for your portfolio – all-time
highs and drawdowns. Drawdowns for those unfamiliar are simply the peak to
trough loss you are experiencing in an investment. So if you bought an
investment at 100 and it declines to 75, you are in a 25% drawdown. If it then
rises to 110, your drawdown is then 0 (all-time high).
For some long-term perspective, set forth below are some charts based on data
from the book Triumph of the Optimists (available through Morningstar as the
Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton module but requires a subscription). They
represent the best-, middle-, and worst-case scenarios for the main asset classes
of sixteen countries from 1900-2014. They have since updated their database to
include 23 countries with results in the Credit Suisse reference link above. All
return series are local real returns and displayed as a log graph (except the last
one). U.S. dollar based returns are near identical.
First, here are the best-, middle-, and worst-cases for returns on your cash.
Figure 4 shows that leaving cash under your mattress is a slow bleed for a
portfolio. Germany is excluded after the first series as it dominates the worst-
case scenarios (in this case, hyperinflation). Inflation is a major drag on returns.
When it gets out of control, it can completely wipe out your cash and bond
savings. So you mattress stuffers – on average you would have lost about 4% a
year by keeping your money at home.
FIGURE 4 – Cash Real Returns, 1900-2014
Best-Case: -2.2% per year
Middle: -3.9%

Worst-Case: -100%
Source: Morningstar, Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, Mike Staunton, Triumph of the
Optimists, Princeton University Press, 2002, Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns
Sourcebook 2015
Next up are real returns for short-term government bills. These instruments do
all they can just to keep up with inflation. You’re not usually going to make any
money, as Figure 5 shows, but at least they don’t lose 4% a year like the mattress
does. We also include the “World” which is the global market capitalization
weighted portfolio which weights the portfolio based on size of each country’s
stock market.
FIGURE 5 – Short-term Government Bills Real Returns, 1900-2014
Best-Case: 2.1% per year

Middle: 0.7%
Worst-Case: -3.5% (Real Worst-Case, Germany -100%)
World: 0.9%
Source: Morningstar, Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, Mike Staunton, Triumph of the
Optimists, Princeton University Press, 2002, Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns
Sourcebook 2015
In Figure 6, adding a little duration risk doubles the historical returns of bills for
our 10-year bonds, but that is still a pretty small return. You’re not going to get
rich with 1.7% real returns, and you still have to sit through a 50% drawdown, as
we will show later.

FIGURE 6 – Long-term Government Bonds Real Returns, 1900-2014
Best-Case: 3.3% per year
Middle: 1.7%
Worst-Case: -1.4% (Real Worst-Case, Germany -100%)
World: 1.9%
Source: Morningstar, Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, Mike Staunton, Triumph of the
Optimists, Princeton University Press, 2002, Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns
Sourcebook 2015
And finally, we have the real returns for stocks. Much better! Over 4% real
returns per year is far superior to returns of the bond market. While these are
great returns, realize that it would still take over 15 years to double your money!

FIGURE 7 – Stocks Real Returns, 1900-2014
Best-Case: 7.4% per year
Middle: 4.8%
Worst-Case: 1.9%
(Real Worst-Case, China, Russia -100%)
World: 5.2%
Source: Morningstar, Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, Mike Staunton, Triumph of the
Optimists, Princeton University Press, 2002, Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns
Sourcebook 2015

And in Figure 7a, the same chart is presented with a non-log y-axis. We do this
to demonstrate to readers the importance of viewing charts that have percentage
changes over long time frames with a log axis. Otherwise the chart is almost
unreadable and definitely not useful. Perhaps importantly, you can now
distinguish between unscrupulous money managers advertising their services
with the below style of chart which can be misleading, as the gains look much
more dramatic.
FIGURE 7a– Stocks Real Returns, 1900-2014, Non-log Axis
Source: Morningstar, Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, Mike Staunton, Triumph of the
Optimists, Princeton University Press, 2002, Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns
Sourcebook 2015
Let’s look at the entire series across all countries to visualize some of the best
and worst-case scenarios. It looks like a simple conservative rule of thumb may

be to expect stocks to return around 4% to 5%, bonds 1% to 2%, and bills
basically zero. Note that the United States had one of the best performing equity
and bond markets for the 20th Century.
FIGURE 8 – Asset Class Real Returns, 1900-2014
Source: Morningstar, Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, Mike Staunton, Triumph of the
Optimists, Princeton University Press 2002, Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns
Sourcebook 2015

One would think that the math above would make the decision easy – just put all
your money in stocks! While stocks outperformed the returns of bonds and bills,
stocks are not without their own risks. At least two countries had their equity
markets wiped out when the government shut down the capital markets. No
wonder people are so wary of investing in Russia and China even today.
Another risk is that stocks can go for a really long time underperforming other
asset classes, such as bonds. It is easy to look at the data and assume you can
wait out any stock market underperformance—at least until it happens to you.
In his 2011 “The Biggest Urban Legend in Finance,” Rob Arnott discusses a 30-
year underperformance of stocks vs. bonds:
“A 30-year stock market excess return of approximately zero is a huge disappointment to
the legions of “stocks at any price” long-term investors. But it’s not the first extended
drought. From 1803 to 1857, U.S. equities struggled; the stock investor would have
received a third of the ending wealth of the bond investor. Stocks managed to break even
only in 1871. Most observers would be shocked to learn there was ever a 68-year stretch of
stock market underperformance. After a 72-year bull market from 1857 through 1929,
another dry spell ensued. From 1929 through 1949, stocks failed to match bonds, the only
long-term shortfall in the Ibbotson time sample. Perhaps it was the extraordinary period of
history—The Great Depression and World War II—and the spectacular aftermath from
1950–1999, that lulled recent investors into a false sense of security regarding long-term
equity performance.”
A 68-year long stock underperformance is almost the same as a human’s current
expected lifespan in the U.S. Bonds outperformed stocks over an entire lifetime
(really, more than a lifetime, since life expectancy in the 1800s was around 40
years in the U.S.). When talking about stocks for the long run, then, it must mean
something other than a human lifetime. For a tortoise, deep sea tubeworm, or
sequoia tree perhaps? To be fair, the longer you go back in history the more
suspect the data is, so we confine our analysis below to the post 1900 period.

suspect the data is, so we confine our analysis below to the post 1900 period.
Other countries experienced large drawdowns, and even in the United States, an
investor lost about 80% from the peak in the 1929-1930s stock bear market. The
unfortunate mathematics of a 75% decline requires an investor to realize a 300%
gain just to get back to even – the equivalent of compounding at 4.8% for 30
years! Even a smaller 50% drawdown would require 15 years at that rate of
return to get back to even.
Large drawdowns are why many people choose to invest in bonds, but bonds are
risky too. While stocks typically suffer from sharper price declines, bonds often
have their value eroded by inflation. The U.S. and the U.K. have both seen real
bond drawdowns of over 60%. While that sounds painful, in many other
countries (Japan, Germany, Italy, and France), it was worse than 80%. Some
countries that faced hyperinflation resulted in a total loss, and Business Insider
has a slideshow that examines a few of the worst examples in the past 100 years.
Figure 9 shows that both stocks and bonds have had multiple large drawdowns
over the years. The first chart uses monthly data (we don’t have monthly for the
U.K.), and monthly data only increases the drawdown figure.
FIGURE 9 – Asset Class Real Drawdowns, 1900-2014

Source: Morningstar, Bloomberg, Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, Mike Staunton, Triumph of
the Optimists, Princeton University Press 2002
The same principle occurs in the U.K., but bond investors had to wait even
longer to get back to even – almost 50 years! Below is Figure 10 looking at
yearly real returns and drawdowns.
FIGURE 10 – Asset Class Real Drawdowns, 1900-2014

Source: Morningstar, Bloomberg, Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, Mike Staunton, Triumph of
the Optimists, Princeton University Press 2002
This is one of the problems with investing in just one security, country, or asset
class. Normal market returns are extreme. Individuals invested in various assets
at specific periods—U.S. stocks in the late 1920s and early 1930s, German asset
classes in the 1910s and 1940s, Russian stocks in 1917, Chinese stocks in 1949,
U.S. real estate in the mid-1950s, Japanese stocks in the 1990s, emerging
markets and commodities in the late 1990s, and nearly everything in 2008—
would reason that holding these assets was a decidedly unwise course of action.
Most individuals do not have a sufficiently long time to recover from large
drawdowns from any one risky asset class.
So what is an investor to do? The next step lies in what is called the only free
lunch in investing – diversification.

2
T H E  B E N C H M A R K  P O R T F O L I O :  6 0 / 4 0
“No strategy is so good that it can’t have a bad year or more. You’ve got to guess at worst
cases: No model will tell you that. My rule of thumb is double the worst that you have ever
seen.”
CLIFF ASNESS, CO-FOUNDER AQR CAPITAL
MANAGEMENT
The most venerable asset allocation model is the traditional 60/40 portfolio. The
portfolio simply invests 60% in stocks (S&P 500) and 40% in 10-year U.S.
government bonds. We will use this portfolio as the benchmark to compare all of
the following portfolios in this book.
The reason many people will invest in both stocks and bonds is that they are
often non-correlated, meaning, stocks often zig while bonds zag. While the
relationship isn’t constant, combining two or more non-correlated assets into a
portfolio results in a better portfolio than just either alone.
How has this portfolio performed? Let’s look at the U.S. 60/40 portfolio back to
1913, rebalanced monthly. We consider volatility to be measured by the standard
deviation of monthly returns. The Sharpe ratio is a measure of risk adjusted
returns and is calculated as: (returns
risk free rate)/volatility The risk free rate

returns, and is calculated as: (returns – risk free rate)/volatility. The risk-free rate
is simply the return of Treasury bills. A higher Sharpe ratio is better, and a good
rule of thumb is that risky asset classes have Sharpe ratios that cluster around the
0.20 to 0.30 range.
FIGURE 11 – Asset Class Real Returns, 1913-2013
Source: Global Financial Data
So it looks like you get a nice diversification benefit of investing your portfolio
in both assets. While 60/40 doesn’t quite achieve the returns of stocks, you
reduce your drawdown a bit due to the assets not being perfectly correlated.
Figure 12 shows the equity curve of the strategy.
FIGURE 12 – Asset Class Real Returns, 1913-2013

Source: Global Financial Data
One challenge for investors is how much time they spend in drawdowns. It is
emotionally challenging, largely, since we anchor to the highest value a portfolio
has attained. For example, if your account hit $100,000 last month up from
$20,000 twenty years ago, you likely think of your wealth in terms of the recent
value and not the original $20,000. If it then declines to $80,000, most will think
in terms of losing $20,000 rather than the long-term gain of $60,000. The 60/40
allocation only spends about 22% of the time at new highs, and the other 78% in
some degree of drawdown. Drawdowns are physically painful, and the
behavioral research demonstrates that people hate losing money much more than
the joy of similar gains. To be a good (read: patient) investor you need to be able
to sit through the dry spells.
So why not just allocate to the 60/40 portfolio and avoid reading the rest of this
book?

While 60/40 is a solid first step, we posit that focusing solely on U.S. stocks and
bonds is a mistake. In fact, this 60/40 approach presents a particularly difficult
challenge to investors at the end of 2014, as we detail below.
U.S. stocks have returned a meager 4.9% per year from 2000 – 2014 and,
factoring in inflation, have returned 1.90% per year, provided investors had the
ability to sit through two gut-wrenching bear markets with declines of over 45%.
According to recent DALBAR studies, many have not. 1.9% per year is a far cry
from the historical 6.47% that U.S. stocks have returned over the full period
from 1900-2014.
One of the reasons for the subpar returns is simple – valuations matter. The price
you pay influences your rate of return. Pay a below average price and you can
reasonably expect an above average return, and vice versa. Valuations started the
2000s at extreme levels. The ten-year cyclically adjusted price-to-earnings
(CAPE) ratio for U.S. stocks reached a level of 45 in December 1999, the
highest level ever recorded in the U.S., as Figure 13 shows. (For those
unfamiliar with valuation methods for stocks, we examine over 40 global stock
markets and how to use global valuation metrics in our book Global Value.) This
high starting valuation set the stage for very poor returns going forward for
investors buying stocks in the late 1990s.
Figure 13 – Ten-Year Cyclically Adjusted Price-to-Earnings Ratio (CAPE),
1881-2014

Source: Shiller
As you can see in the Figure 14, future returns are highly dependent on those
starting valuations. The current reading as of December 2014 is 27, which is
about 60% above the long-term average of around 16.5. At the current levels
over 25, future median ten-year returns have been an uninspiring 3.5% nominal
and 1.00% real since 1900. Not horrific and not quite yet in a bubble—but not
that exciting either. Once CAPE ratios rise above 30, forecasted future median
real returns are negative for the following ten years – it doesn’t make sense to
overpay for stocks!
Figure 14 – Ten-Year CAPE Ratio vs. Future Returns, 1900-2014

Source: Shiller
U.S. 10-year government bonds, on the other hand, have proven to be a
wonderful place to invest during the past 15 years. The compound return was
6.24% and a nice 3.82% after inflation. The problem here, however, is that these
wonderful recent returns come at the expense of future returns as yields have
declined from around 6% in 2000 to near all-time low levels in the U.S.,
currently around 2%.
Future bond returns are fairly easy to forecast – each future bond return is simply
the starting yield. Currently, your ten-year nominal return for buying U.S.
government bonds will be around 2.25% if held to maturity.
So investors are presented with the following opportunity set of annual returns
for the next ten years (assuming 2.25% inflation going forward, rounding to
make it simple):

U.S. Stocks: 3.50% nominal, ~1% real
U.S. Bonds: 2.25% nominal, ~0% real
Cash/T-bills: 0.00% nominal, -2% real
That leaves a 60/40 investor with a 2-3% nominal return no matter which way
you slice it, or about a 0-1% real return. Not exactly breathtaking! Many
investors expect 8% (or even 10% returns) per year when, in reality,
expectations should be ratcheted down to more reasonable levels.
Other highly respected research shops forecast similar bleak returns for U.S.
stocks and bonds. You can find more info at AQR, Bridgewater, Research
Affiliates, and GMO.
So where should investors look for returns while minimizing their risk of
overpaying? In the coming pages, we examine the benefits of expanding a
traditional 60/40 allocation into a more global allocation with an additional focus
on real assets as well.

3
A S S E T  C L A S S  B U I L D I N G  B L O C K S
“I think the single most important thing that you can do is diversify your portfolio.”
PAUL TUDOR JONES, FOUNDER TUDOR INVESTMENT
CORPORATION
The next two questions and answers will likely surprise you.
Question 1 – Quick, what is the world’s largest financial asset class? Don’t
know?
Answer: Foreign ex-U.S. bonds! This is usually surprising to most investors who
assume the answer is U.S. stocks or bonds.
FIGURE 15 – The Largest Asset Class in the World

Source: Vanguard
Question 2: How much of your global stock allocation should be in the United
States?
Answer: About half!
U.S. investors usually put around 70% of their stock allocation at home here in
the U.S. This is called the “home country bias”, and it occurs everywhere. Most
investors around the world invest most of their assets in their own markets.
Figure 16 is a chart from Vanguard that details the “home country bias” effect in
the U.S., the U.K., Australia, and Canada. The blue bars are how much investors
should own of each country according to global weightings, and the red bars are

s ou d ow o eac cou t y acco d g to g oba we g t gs, a d t e ed ba s a e
how much they actually own of their own country – way too much!
FIGURE 16 – Home Country Bias
Source: Vanguard
Figure 17 is a chart from the Credit Suisse GIRY update we mentioned earlier. It
details the U.S. as a percentage of world market capitalization (52%) in 2014.
Given this, while most of us here in the United States invest 70% of our stock
allocation in U.S. stocks, in order to be truly representative of the global
marketplace it really should only be about half. Note that the U.S. was only 15%
of world market cap back in 1899. As a share of global GDP, the U.S. is only
20% (emerging markets are 50% of global GDP, but only 13% of market
capitalization).

FIGURE 17 – Stock Market Sizes, 1899 and 2014
Source: Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, Mike Staunton, Triumph of the Optimists, Princeton
University Press 2002, Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns Sourcebook 2015

The point of the two questions at the beginning of the chapter is that we live in a
global world. There is no need to build an investment portfolio with just
exposure to U.S. stocks and bonds. Figure 18 is another chart of how market cap
weightings have changed over time. Notice the large Japanese bubble expansion
in the 1980s and the rapid contraction afterward.
FIGURE 18 – Stock Market Sizes, 1900 to 2012
Source: Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, Mike Staunton, Triumph of the Optimists, Princeton
University Press 2002, Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns Sourcebook
The key question for investors to ask, then, is, “What would our allocation look
like if we expanded the 60/40 portfolio to include foreign stocks and bonds?
Would that help improve our returns or reduce our risk?”
The Global 60-40 Portfolio
The next portfolio we will examine is the 60/40 portfolio only now we are using

The next portfolio we will examine is the 60/40 portfolio, only now we are using
global indices rather than just U.S. ones. We split the stock allocation into half
domestic and half foreign developed stocks (MSCI EAFE), and split the bond
allocation into half domestic and half foreign 10-year government bonds.
Going global in this illustration doesn’t change the end result too much, though
it does increase returns, reduce volatility, and improve the Sharpe ratio (all good
things). The global portfolio also did better during the inflationary 1973-1981
period, as Figure 19 shows.
FIGURE 19 – Various Assets and Strategies, Real Returns, 1973-2013
Source: Global Financial Data

Source: Global Financial Data
There is no reason, however for investors to focus exclusively on stocks and
bonds. Would increasing amounts of granularity with additional asset classes
help when looking at building a diversified portfolio? In this book, we are going
to examine 13 assets and their returns since 1973. They are found in Figure 20
below with a column denoting what broad category of assets they fall under.
FIGURE 20 – Asset Classes

Are there other asset classes? Of course. However, many asset classes (or sub-
asset classes) do not have sufficient histories to analyze, such as emerging
market bonds. For those unfamiliar, REITS are publicly traded real estate
investment trusts, and TIPS are U.S. Treasury inflation protected bonds.
We also exclude active approaches to investing even though we discuss some of
these “tilts” in other white papers and books like Shareholder Yield. So while an
active strategy like managed futures is one of my favorite investment strategies,
we don’t include it in the building blocks section. (I like to call trendfollowing
my “desert island” strategy if I had to pick one method to manage money for the
rest of my life. While not the topic of this book, we have written a great deal
about trend strategies on the blog as well as in the white paper “A Quantitative
Approach to Tactical Asset Allocation.”)

Figure 21 presents a chart of the asset classes we examine in the following
chapters.
FIGURE 21 – Various Assets, Real Returns, 1973-2013
Source: Global Financial Data
We didn’t label the asset classes in the chart on purpose simply to demonstrate
that while the indexes traveled different routes from start to finish, all of the
asset classes finished with positive real returns over the time period. The fact
that bonds were even close in absolute performance to the other equity-like asset
classes reflects the greater than thirty-year bull market that took yields from
double-digit levels to near 2% today. The below charts demonstrate the returns
and risk characteristics of the various asset classes.
FIGURE 22 – Asset Class Nominal Returns, 1973-2013

Source: Global Financial Data
While these are some pretty nice returns for these asset classes historically, they
suffered through some large drawdowns.
Like we discussed before, nominal returns are illusory. You can’t spend or eat
nominal returns. Below in Figure 23 are the same building blocks but with real

returns. Stocks were in the ballpark of 5-7%, bonds 0-5%, and real assets 3-5%.
(Corporate bonds share equity-like characteristics, so we characterize them as
50% stocks and 50% bonds for purposes later in the paper.)
FIGURE 23 – Asset Class Real Returns, 1973-2013

Source: Global Financial Data
If an investor were to take the data back further, or use daily data observations,
those drawdowns only get bigger. It is a sad fact that as an investor, you are
either at an all-time high with your portfolio or in a drawdown – there is no
middle ground – and the largest absolute drawdown will always be in your
future as the number can only grow larger. (Unless you went bankrupt of course
as then the amount is a total loss. Sadly, Brazil’s richest man experienced this
event when he lost over $30 billion – here is a good article on the topic with lots
of lessons for individuals as well.)
One of the biggest challenges of investing is that any asset can have a long
period of underperformance relative to other assets – or even outright negative
returns and losses. Cliff Asness, co-founder of AQR Capital Management, has a
fun piece out on his blog titled “Efficient Frontier “Theory” for the Long Run”,
where he talks about five-year periods in stocks, bonds, and commodities and
basically how anything can happen over short periods of time. (Although for
many investors, five years can feel like a lifetime.)
Using the data in Figure 24, we examine returns during two periods, inflationary
1973-1981 and falling inflation/disinflation 1982-2013. We also look at asset
returns by decade. The final line in the table is the volatility of decade returns.
While there are only five observations its helps to demonstrate the decade level
consistency.
What can we learn from these tables? All of our assets had positive real returns,
which is what you want from investing in any asset.
Real returns were much harder to come by in the inflationary 1970s. Eight out of
13 asset classes had negative real returns in the 1970s. Gold, commodities, and

emerging market stocks had the best performance. Everything was up big in the
1982-2013 timeframe, but gold and cash lagged the most as the transition from
high interest rates and inflation led to growth, lower inflation, and lower still
interest rates. The only asset classes that had positive performance in every
decade were emerging markets and TIPS, although the TIPS category is not a
completely fair comparison since they were only introduced in 1997 and
therefore this is a synthetic series that investors could not have allocated to at the
time.
FIGURE 24 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013
Source: Global Financial Data
While there are certainly hundreds of different portfolios one can construct from
our 13 assets, we are going to focus on just a handful of allocations below.

(More “lazy portfolio” ideas here.)
These allocations have been proposed by some of the most famous money
managers in the world, collectively managing hundreds of billions of dollars. We
included a few other portfolios worthy of mention in the Appendix, but excluded
them from the body of the text to keep things simple. Otherwise this book could
have easily been 300 pages and the goal is not to put you to sleep but rather let
you finish in one sitting and get on with your life.
The flow of the chapters will range from the portfolios that allocate the most to
bonds to the ones that allocate the least.
Let’s get started!

4
T H E  R I S K  P A R I T Y  A N D  A L L  S E A S O N S
P O R T F O L I O S
“I know that there are good and bad environments for all asset classes. And I know that in
one’s lifetime, there will be a ruinous environment for one of those asset classes. That’s
been true throughout history.”
RAY DALIO, FOUNDER BRIDGEWATER ASSOCIATES
“Today we can structure a portfolio that will do well in 2022, even though we can’t
possibly know what the world will look like in 2022.”
BOB PRINCE, CO-CIO BRIDGEWATER ASSOCIATES
Risk parity is a term that focuses on building a portfolio based on allocating
weights based on “risk” rather than dollar weights in the portfolio. While the
general theory of risk parity isn’t something particularly new, the term was only
coined within the past decade and became in vogue in the past few years. Risk is
defined in different ways but volatility is a simple example. As an illustration,
the 60/40 stocks and bonds portfolio doesn’t have 60% of total overall risk
weighted to stocks, rather, more like 90% since stock volatility dominates the
portfolio’s overall total volatility.

Risk parity has its roots in the modern portfolio theory of Harry Markowitz.
While introduced in the 1950s, it eventually earned him a Nobel Prize. The basic
theory suggested the concept of an efficient frontier – the allocation that offers
the highest return for any given level of risk, and vice versa. When combined
with the work of Tobin, Treynor, Sharpe, and others the theory demonstrates that
a portfolio could be leveraged or deleveraged to target desired risk and return
parameters. Many commodity trading advisors (CTAs) have also been using
risk-or volatility-level position-sizing methods since at least the 1980s.
Ray Dalio’s Bridgewater, one of the largest hedge funds in the world based on
assets under management, was likely the first to launch a true risk parity
portfolio in 1996 called All Weather. Many firms have since launched risk parity
products. While the underlying construction methods are different, the broad
theory is generally the same.
We are not going to focus too much on risk parity since Bridgewater and others
have published extensively on the topic, and you will find several links at the
end of this chapter. Three primer papers to read are “The All Weather Story,”
“The Biggest Mistake in Investing,” and “Engineering Targeted Returns and
Risks”— all of which can be found on the Bridgewater website.
Bridgewater describes the theory in their white paper “The All Weather Story”:
“All Weather grew out of Bridgewater’s effort to make sense of the world, to hold the
portfolio today that will do reasonably well 20 years from now even if no one can predict
what form of growth and inflation will prevail. When investing over the long run, all you
can have confidence in is that (1) holding assets should provide a return above cash, and
(2) asset volatility will be largely driven by how economic conditions unfold relative to
current expectations (as well as how these expectations change). That’s it. Anything else
(asset class returns, correlations, or even precise volatilities) is an attempt to predict the
future. In essence, All Weather can be sketched out on a napkin. It is as simple as holding
four different portfolios each with the same risk, each of which does well in a particular

environment: when (1) inflation rises, (2) inflation falls, (3) growth rises, and (4) growth
falls relative to expectations.”
In another piece, “Engineering Targeted Returns and Risks”, Dalio refers to the
simple building blocks he calls market betas (such as U.S. stocks or bonds):
“Betas are limited in number (that is, not many viable asset classes exist), they are typically
relatively correlated with each other, and their excess returns are relatively low compared
to their excess risks, with Sharpe ratios typically ranging from 0.2 to 0.3. However, betas
are reliable – we can expect they will outperform cash over long time horizons.”
Investors need not view any single asset class in its prepackaged form, meaning,
leveraging any single asset class, like bonds, can result in higher returns along
with volatility similar to stocks. Many asset classes come with embedded
leverage already, and adjusting to a risk level by leveraging or deleveraging
assets is neither good nor evil – it just is. (A simple example is that many
companies carry debt, so one could view stocks as leveraged already.) More
from “The All Weather Story”:
“Low-risk/low-return assets can be converted into high-risk/high-return assets. Translation:
when viewed in terms of return per unit of risk, all assets are more or less the same.
Investing in bonds, when risk-adjusted to stock-like risk, didn’t require an investor to
sacrifice return in the service of diversification. This made sense. Investors should
basically be compensated in proportion to the risk they take on: the more risk, the higher
the reward.”
Combining assets with similar volatility into a portfolio results in a total
allocation with more in low-volatility assets (like bonds) and less to high-
volatility assets (like stocks).

Many other firms now offer risk parity strategies, and you can track a risk parity
index from Salient Partners. There are a handful of risk parity mutual funds from
firms such as AQR, Putnam, and Invesco, although most are very expensive. A
risk parity ETF was filed by Global X but never launched. The theory is well
accepted and adopted by a large cadre of the investment community, but the key
question is – “has this strategy simply ridden the wave of a secular trend
downward in interest rates?” Only time will tell.
Below we examine two variations of risk parity. The first is a risk parity
portfolio we proposed back in 2012 while giving a speech in New York City that
reflects a broad risk parity style of investing (Figure 25).
FIGURE 25 – Risk Parity Portfolio

Source: Faber PPT, 2012
Why try to divine the actual risk parity allocation when we can just go straight to
the source and let Mr. Dalio construct it for us? The second allocation is the “All
Seasons” portfolio Dalio himself suggested in the recent Tony Robbins book
Master the Money Game (Figure 26).
FIGURE 26 – All Seasons Portfolio

Source: Master the Money Game, 2014
So how did these two portfolios perform? Almost identically, which isn’t
surprising due to the similar nature of the allocation.
FIGURE 27 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013


Source: Global Financial Data
In general, the theory behind risk parity makes a lot of sense with one caveat –
the biggest challenge to a risk parity portfolio now is that we are potentially near
the end of a 30-year bull market in bonds. The returns of the actual All Weather
fund are better than the allocations above since Bridgewater uses leverage
(which is essentially borrowing money to invest more thus magnifying both
gains and losses). You can find a blog post comparing the returns of All Weather
to a leveraged Global Asset Allocation portfolio in my article “Cloning the
Largest Hedge Fund in the World.”

More background reading:
Diversification and Risk Management, Balancing Betas, Counter-Point to Risk
Parity Critiques, – First Quadrant
“At Par with Risk Parity?” – Kunz, Policemen’s Fund of Chicago
“I Want to Break Free, The Hidden Risks of Risk Parity Portfolio’s – GMO
“Risk Parity – In the Spotlight after 50 Years” – NEPC
“Leverage Aversion and Risk Parity”, “Chasing Your Own Tail (Risk)” – AQR
“The Biggest Mistake in Investing”, Engineering Targeted Returns and Risks” –
Bridgewater
“Risk Parity White Paper” – Meketa
“On the Properties of Equally-Weighted Risk Contributions Portfolios” –
Maillard et al.
“Demystifying Equity Risk-Based Strategies: A Simple Alpha plus Beta
Description” – Carvalho et al.
“Risk Parity Portfolios™: The Next Generation”, “PanAgora risk parity” –
PanAgora
“The Risk Parity Approach to Asset Allocation” – Callan
“Risk Parity for the Masses” – Steiner

“Risk Parity in a Rising Rates Regime” – Salient

5
T H E  P E R M A N E N T  P O R T F O L I O
Harry Browne was an author of over 12 books, a one-time Presidential
candidate, and a financial advisor. The basic portfolio that he designed in the
1980s was balanced across four simple assets, and you can see Harry explain the
theory here:
“For the money you need to take care of you for the rest of your life, set up a simple,
balanced, diversified portfolio. I call this a “Permanent Portfolio” because once you set it
up, you never need to rearrange the investment mix— even if your outlook for the future
changes. The portfolio should assure that your wealth will survive any event — including
an event that would be devastating to any individual element within the portfolio… It isn’t
difficult or complicated to have such a portfolio this safe. You can achieve a great deal of
diversification with a surprisingly simple portfolio.”
Although the portfolio underperformed stocks, it was incredibly consistent
across all market environments with low volatility and drawdowns. This presents
a classic dilemma for investors, particularly professional advisors. What is the
trade-off for being different? Despite the incredibly consistent performance there
are many years this portfolio would have underperformed U.S. stocks or a 60/40
allocation. Can you survive those periods even if you believe this portfolio to be
superior? See Figure 28.

FIGURE 28 – Permanent Portfolio
Source: Browne
FIGURE 29 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013


Source: Global Financial Data
Next to Marc Faber’s allocation that we profile later in the book, this allocation
has the highest weighting to gold. Gold is an emotional topic for investors, and
usually they fall on one side or another with a very strong opinion for or against.
We think you should learn to become asset class agnostic and appreciate each
asset class for its unique characteristics. Gold had the highest real returns of any
asset class in the inflationary 1970s but also the worst performance from 1982

asset class in the inflationary 1970s but also the worst performance from 1982 –
2013. However, adding gold (and to a lesser extent other real assets like
commodities and TIPS) could have helped protect the portfolio during a rising
inflation environment. Gold also performs well in an environment of negative
real interest rates – that is when inflation is higher than current bond yields.
The next portfolio we look at just aims to be average, and it turns out that isn’t a
bad thing.

6
T H E  G L O B A L  M A R K E T  P O R T F O L I O
“We have a passion for keeping things simple.” – Charlie Munger, Vice-
Chairman Berkshire Hathaway
Why not just invest along the weightings of the global market cap weighted
portfolio? The main difficulty is that it is hard to determine exactly what the
exact weightings are, but a number of researchers have come pretty close with a
ballpark estimate.
A paper titled “Strategic Asset Allocation: The Global Multi-Asset Market
Portfolio 1959-2011” breaks out the broad world market portfolio.
Credit Suisse also looks at the global portfolio, and Figure 30 breaks out their
allocations.
FIGURE 30 – The Global Market Portfolio, (“GMP”)

Source: Credit Suisse, Global Wealth Databook 2014
We simplify this to the below allocation (Figure 31), labeled “GMP” for Global
Market Portfolio, to see how this portfolio performed. Note: This does not reflect
the exact global market portfolio over time since it is estimated from today’s
weightings – but it should be a close approximation. It is interesting to note that
the true global market portfolio would never rebalance – talk about a lazy
portfolio.
FIGURE 31 – The Global Market Portfolio, (“GMP”)

FIGURE 32 – Asset Class Returns 1973-2013


Source: Global Financial Data
We don’t include commodities in this portfolio since it is difficult to estimate
market composition, but we believe they provide a vital portfolio diversification
element. So what if you altered the above global market portfolio to include
commodities? In this case, we’re ballparking a reasonable number, and we add a

,
p
g
,
5% allocation each to commodities and gold, and reduce the other allocations
proportionally. We will call this portfolio the Global Asset Allocation or “GAA”
portfolio. The results were not hugely different, though risk-adjusted returns did
improve, as did the consistency.
FIGURE 32b – Asset Class Returns 1973-2013

Source: Global Financial Data

7
T H E  R O B  A R N O T T  P O R T F O L I O
Rob Arnott is the founder and chairman of Research Affiliates, a research firm
that has over $170 billion in assets managed using its strategies. He published
over 100 articles in financial journals, as well as having served as the editor of
the Financial Analysts Journal. His book The Fundamental Index: A Better Way
to Invest focuses on smart beta strategies.
Smart beta is a phrase that refers to strategies that move away from the broad
market cap portfolio. (So in U.S. stocks, think the S&P 500 versus a portfolio
sorted on dividends or perhaps equally weighted.) The market cap portfolio is
the market, and the returns of the market portfolio are the returns the population
of investors receive before fees, transaction costs, etc. However, market cap
weighting is problematic.
Market cap weighted indexes have only one variable – size – which is largely
determined by price. (While not the topic of this book, market cap indexes often
overweight expensive markets and bubbles – you can find more information in
our book Global Value.) Many smart beta strategies weight their holdings by
factors that have long shown outperformance, including value, momentum,
quality, carry, and volatility. Here is a fun interview with William Bernstein on
portfolio tilts. We are big proponents of smart beta and factor tilts applied to a

portfolio.
Below is one sample allocation from an article Mr. Arnott authored in 2008.
Another solid performer! To be fair, there is a zero chance that he would have
used market cap weighted allocations in his portfolio, but we’re trying to
compare apples to apples for now. We examine one smart beta portfolio in the
appendix.
FIGURE 33 – Arnott Portfolio 
Source: Liquid Alternatives: More than Hedge Funds, 2008

FIGURE 34 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013

Source: Global Financial Data

8
T H E  M A R C  F A B E R  P O R T F O L I O
Marc Faber is a Swiss economist and fund manager, living in Asia, who writes
the Gloom, Boom, and Doom market newsletter. And before you ask, no we’re
not directly related – although my father’s side is from Germany and France and
so there is a chance we have some shared blood somewhere.) While he often
contributes long and short investment ideas to the Barron’s Roundtable, he has
stated numerous times his rough asset allocation is 25% each in gold, stocks,
bonds and cash, and real estate. Marc probably holds some bonds and real estate
in foreign markets, but the simple portfolio will do for a general discussion.
While he doesn’t explicitly say that he would split his stocks into U.S. and
foreign, we assume that to be the case.
This was a surprise to me, but Marc’s simple allocation is one of the most
consistent we have reviewed. The portfolio is one of the few that had positive
real returns in each decade. Figure 35 displays the Marc Faber Portfolio.
FIGURE 35 – Marc Faber Portfolio 

Source: CNBC
FIGURE 36 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013


Source: Global Financial Data

9
T H E  E N D O W M E N T  P O R T F O L I O :  S W E N S E N ,  E L -
E R I A N ,  A N D  I V Y
“Because for any given level of return, if you diversify, you can generate that return with a
lower risk; or for any given level of risk, if you diversify, you can generate a higher return.
So it’s a free lunch. Diversification makes your portfolio better.”
DAVID SWENSEN, CIO YALE ENDOWMENT
We’re not going to spend too much time describing the endowment style of
investing – after all, it was the topic of our book in 2009 – The Ivy Portfolio. The
hallmarks of the endowment approach are a large allocation to equity-like assets,
a global focus, a long time horizon, and active management where it can add
value. While the endowment portfolios are much more complicated and illiquid
than our 13 asset classes can cover due mainly to private equity and hedge fund
allocations, the managers of the two largest endowments (Harvard and Yale)
have, in their books over the years, proposed allocations for individual investors.
David Swensen, CIO for the Yale endowment, mentioned an allocation
recommendation for individuals in his book Unconventional Success in 2005.
Former Harvard endowment manager (and former PIMCO co-CIO) Mohamad
El-Erian also published an allocation in his 2008 book When Markets Collide.
For some odd reason El-Erian’s allocation didn’t add up to 100%, and a few

categories like “special situations” are not directly investable in. We made some
basic assumptions but the overall portfolio targets should be nearly the same.
We proposed a more basic version in The Ivy Portfolio that was meant to
replicate the broad endowment space. While these three basic allocations are
solid performers, they underperform the actual top endowments like Harvard
and Yale by about 3-4 percentage points per annum. There are several reasons
why (private equity allocation, leverage, factor tilts, possible alpha generation
from the managers), and a number of researchers have examined the
endowments at length. One such article is by Peter Mladina titled “Yale’s
Endowment Returns: Manager Skill or Risk Exposure?” Below we examine how
these three allocations have performed over time.
FIGURE 37 – Ivy, Swensen, El-Erian Portfolios

Source: Unconventional Success, 2005, When Markets Collide, 2008, Ivy Portfolio, 2009


Source: Global Financial Data

1 0

T H E  W A R R E N  B U F F E T T  A S S E T  A L L O C A T I O N
P O R T F O L I O
Warren Buffett mentioned asset allocation instructions for his trust in his 2013
shareholder letter:
“What I advise here is essentially identical to certain instructions I’ve laid out in my will.
One bequest provides that cash will be delivered to a trustee for my wife’s benefit. . . . My
advice to the trustee could not be more simple: Put 10% of the cash in short-term
government bonds and 90% in a very low-cost S&P 500 index fund. (I suggest
Vanguard’s.) I believe the trust’s long-term results from this policy will be superior to
those attained by most investors ...”
How has that advice performed over time? You don’t need us to tell you, but
with 90% in stocks, you’re going to track the broad stock market.
FIGURE 39 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013


Source: Global Financial Data

1 1

C O M P A R I S O N  O F  T H E  S T R A T E G I E S
“I believe in the discipline of mastering the best that other people have ever figured out. I
don’t believe in just sitting there and trying to dream it up all yourself. Nobody’s that
smart.”
CHARLIE MUNGER
The funny thing about all the various iterations of our 13 asset class building
blocks is that you can basically simplify them into three broad categories: stocks,
bonds, and real assets. We selected one allocation from each chapter for a
comparison (otherwise it wouldn’t fit on one page). The criteria wasn’t that
sophisticated – we just tried to pick the most heralded allocation from each
chapter.
Once you do simplify the exposures, you can see below in Figure 40 that many
of the allocations have fairly similar broad exposures. The exceptions are 60/40
and the Buffett allocations since they place zero in real assets. Note that many of
the allocations were recommended to the public at different times over the years,
and the later recommendations possibly benefitted from knowledge of past
returns. However, as we show below, it really doesn’t matter that much!

FIGURE 40 – Asset Class Broad Allocations
Most of the allocations moved together in a similar fashion. However, the
allocations that performed the best in the inflationary 1970s then turned around
and performed the worst in the disinflationary period to follow. Also not
surprisingly, the Buffett and 60/40 allocations, with a lack of real assets,
performed the worst during the inflationary 1970s. Even with the difference in
allocations, the spread between the worst-performing allocation, the Permanent
Portfolio at 4.12%, and the best, the El-Erian Portfolio at 5.67%, was only
1.84%. That is astonishing.
If you exclude the Permanent Portfolio, all of the allocations are within one
percentage point.
FIGURE 41 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013

Source: Global Financial Data
S
Gl b l Fi
i l D t

Source: Global Financial Data
And just in case there are readers that want to see the year-by-year nominal and
real returns, here they are.
FIGURE 42a – Asset Class Nominal Returns, 1973-2013
Source: Global Financial Data

Source: Global Financial Data
FIGURE 42b – Asset Class Real Returns, 1973-2013
Source: Global Financial Data
Another way of visualizing the visualizing the benefits of a simple asset
allocation is to generate what is called a periodic table of returns – an obvious

nod to the Periodic Table of Elements. Below we construct a table of seven basic
asset classes and the generic “GAA” asset allocation to prove a simple point.
With a broad asset allocation you will never have the best returns of any asset
class, but you will also never have the worst!
FIGURE 42c – Asset Class Real Returns, 1973-2013


1 2

I M P L E M E N T A T I O N  ( E T F S ,  F E E S ,  T A X E S ,
A D V I S O R S )
“You can’t control the market, but you can control what you pay. You have to try to get
yourself on automatic pilot so your emotions don’t kill you.”
BURTON MALKIEL, AUTHOR OF A RANDOM WALK DOWN
WALL STREET
The most important principle for all investors is that they have a plan and
process for investing in any environment, regardless of how improbable or
unfathomable that may be. Are you prepared for all of the possible outcomes,
such as declines of 50-100% in any one asset? Are you prepared for currency
devaluations, but also massive rallies in stocks or bonds? Can you fathom a
world with interest rates at 0.1%? What about at 10%?
Modern portfolio theory holds that there is a tradeoff for investing in assets –
you get paid to assume risk. One of the biggest things you can do for your
portfolio is to remove your emotional decision-making. Look at the below chart
and notice when people were most excited about stocks and most depressed. The
exact wrong times! Study after study has shown how bad people are at timing
their investments. (It’s not just individuals—it happens to professionals as well.)

FIGURE 43 – AAII Sentiment Survey
Source: AAII
Thus, first you need to get your emotions in check and have a plan. Then don’t
do dumb stuff when it gets hard. Easier to say than do, but very necessary.
R E B A L A N C I N G
We said in our first book The Ivy Portfolio that rebalancing matters, as long as
you do it sometime. The timeframe isn’t all that important, and doing a yearly, or
even every few year rebalance is just fine. Yearly is just nice since it lets you
review your investments, as well as make tax optimal changes. If the accounts
are taxable, tax harvesting the losses on a consistent basis can add to your after
tax returns. Below is the global market portfolio (GMP) from earlier in the book

rebalanced monthly and never, and you can see rebalancing or not the returns are
quite similar, and differ by less than 0.50% per year. But 0.50% per year is
worth rebalancing for! The nice thing about using an allocation ETF, mutual
fund, or automated investment service is that the investment manager does the
tax harvesting and rebalancing for you.
FIGURE 44 – Rebalancing Portfolios
Source: Global Financial Data
F E E S :
Next, let’s chat fees. Below are some ballpark fees for perspective:
The average financial advisor charges 0.99 % per year. (Although the most
expensive quarter of advisors charge over 2% per year.)

The average ETF charges 0.57% per year.
The average mutual fund charges 1.26% per year.
Source: PriceMetrix , Morgan Stanley, 2013
To let people know just how important fees are, below is an example.
What if you could predict the single best performing asset allocation ahead of
time?
We took the best performing strategy, El-Erian, and compared it to the worst, the
Permanent Portfolio. (Note we are just using real absolute returns and not risk
adjusted where Permanent would rank much higher.)
What if someone was able to predict the best-performing strategy in 1973 and
then decided to implement it via the average mutual fund? We also looked at the
effect if someone decided to use a financial advisor who then invested client
assets in the average mutual fund. Predicting the best asset allocation, but
implementing it via the average mutual fund would push returns down to
roughly even with the Permanent Portfolio. If you added advisory fees on top of
that, it had the effect of transforming the BEST performing asset allocation into
lower than the WORST. Think about that for a second. Fees are far more
important than your asset allocation decision!
Now what do you spend most of your time thinking about? Probably the asset
allocation decision and not fees! This is the main point we are trying to drive
home in this book – if you are going to allocate to a buy and hold portfolio
you want to be paying as little as possible in total fees and costs.
FIGURE 45 – Asset Class Real Returns, 1973-2013

Source: Global Financial Data
There are many great advisors and brokers out there that charge reasonable fees.
And many advisors offer value-added services, such as financial and estate
planning and insurance. Vanguard estimates the value of financial advisors can
far outweigh the costs – mostly because they prevent you from doing even
dumber things that you would do on your own.
However, if you are just looking for investment management services, you can
simply buy a portfolio of ETFs, an asset allocation ETF or mutual fund, or enroll
in any number of automated investment services (also called robo-advisors).
There are a number of asset allocation ETFs that charge around and below
0.30% per year for a diversified global portfolio.
Below is a list of some automated services and their fees for a $100,000

portfolio. For comparison, here are a number of other famous investment
advisors and their fees – you may be surprised you are paying your advisor up to
and over 2% per year.
Vanguard Personal Advisor Services 0.30%
Betterment 0.15%
WealthFront 0.25%
Liftoff 0.40%
AssetBuilder 0.45%
Recall that for a $1 million portfolio, a 2% fee is $20,000 per year. Instead of it
being automatically deducted from your account, imagine literally carrying a
briefcase full of cash to your advisor each year – that may change your
perspective!
T A X E S :
“One of the most serious problems in the mutual fund industry, which is full of serious
problems, is that almost all mutual fund managers behave as if taxes don’t matter. But
taxes matter. Taxes matter a lot.”
DAVID SWENSEN
For a longer review on fees and taxes, take a look at "Rules of Prudence for
Individual Investors" by Mark Kritzman of Windham Capital. It goes to show
just how much alpha a mutual fund or hedge fund needs to generate just to
overcome their high fees and tax burden (quick summary: it’s A LOT). Another
good articles is John Bogle’s “The Arithmetic of “All-In” Investment Expenses”.
We’re not going to dwell on taxes too much, but we leave you with the simple
advice to place all the assets you can in a tax-deferred account. Further, any

taxable assets should be managed in the most tax-efficient way possible with
tax-harvesting strategies. ETFs are often a superior tax vehicle over mutual
funds or closed end funds due to their unique creation/redemption feature. The
website ETF.com has a good education center for those looking for more
information on ETFs.

1 3

S U M M A R Y
I would classify both my mother and grandmother as traditional Southern cooks.
Their style was very much of the “finger” variety. While they may have a broad
recipe to go by, the food usually was sampled with many tastings and the
adjusted to the individual’s preferences, etc. I spent a lot of time as a child in the
kitchen making chocolate chip cookies with both of them (also known as my
chunky years). That style of cooking often reminds me of asset allocation and
investing. As long as you have some flour, baking soda, sugar, eggs, butter, and
chocolate chips – the exact amount really doesn’t matter. Some people like
vanilla in the recipe, other people nuts, and some even more chocolate. But as
long as you have some of all of the main ingredients, the results are usually
similar, and delicious. (I rarely made it to the final product as I was more of a
cookie batter kid.)
Investing is similar. As long as you have some of the main ingredients –stocks,
bonds, and real assets-the exact amount really doesn’t matter all that much. Does
adding small allocations to emerging bonds (nuts), frontier markets (vanilla), or
more chocolate chips (stocks) vastly change the outcome? Not really. The only
thing that does really alter the outcome is if you go and mess with all the
ingredients while they are cooking – a sure recipe for disaster. The single biggest
take away from this book is to not ruin your allocation by paying too much in

fees.
Below is a quick summary of the findings from this book. Many of the steps
below are similar to the same suggestions we provided in our first book, The Ivy
Portfolio, back in 2009.
Any asset by itself can experience catastrophic losses.
Diversifying your portfolio by including uncorrelated assets is truly the
only free lunch.
60/40 has been a decent benchmark, but due to current valuations, it is
unlikely to deliver strong returns going forward.
At a minimum, an investor should consider moving to a global 60/40
portfolio to reflect the global market capitalization, especially right now
due to lower valuations in foreign markets.
Consider including real assets such as commodities, real estate, and TIPS in
your portfolio.
While covered more extensively in our other three books and white papers,
consider tilting the equity exposure to factors such as value and momentum.
Trendfollowing approaches work great too.
Once you have determined your asset allocation mix, or policy portfolio,
stick with it.
The exact percentage allocations don’t matter than much.
Make sure to implement the portfolio with a focus on fees and taxes.
Consider using an asset allocation ETF, advisor, or other automated
investment service in order to make it easier to stick to the portfolio and
rebalancing schedule. Yearly (or even every few years) rebalancing is just
fine. Even better, rebalance based on tax considerations.
Go live your life and don’t worry about your portfolio!

A P P E N D I X  A  –  F A Q S
Where can I find software or a website to backtest my own allocations and
strategies?
We send out a basic Excel backtester to subscribers of The Idea Farm that will
let you test all of the allocations in this book. Data will soon be updated through
2014.
Below are a few free or low-cost options you can access on the web:
Portfolio Visualizer
Alpha Architect
ETF Replay
You can also download free data sources to Excel and test on your own.
What about other asset classes?
This book is meant to describe the main asset classes that comprise the majority
of the global market portfolio. The allocations provided in this piece form the
basis for a core portfolio. However, many asset classes are perfectly reasonable
i
t ll
ti
f
k t i
l d i th
h
t llit

in an asset allocation framework to include in the core or perhaps as satellite
allocations – MLPs, infrastructure, emerging market bonds, municipal bonds,
frontier market stocks, global TIPs, or even catastrophe bonds.
What about “Smart Beta” strategies?
Smart beta is a phrase that refers to strategies that move away from the broad
market cap portfolio. (So in U.S. stocks, think the S&P 500 versus a portfolio
sorted on dividends or perhaps equally weighted.) The market cap portfolio is
the market, and the returns of the market portfolio are the returns the population
of investors receive before fees, transaction costs, etc. However, market cap
weighting is problematic.
Market cap weighted indexes have only one variable – size – which is largely
determined by price. (While not the topic of this book, market cap indexes often
overweight expensive markets and bubbles – you can find more information in
our book Global Value.) Many smart beta strategies weight their holdings by
factors that have long shown outperformance, including value, momentum,
quality, carry, and volatility.
Here is a fun interview with William Bernstein on factor tilts. We are big
proponents of smart beta and factor tilts applied to a portfolio. Indeed, it is very
difficult to beat a portfolio allocated one-third each to a) global equities with a
value and momentum tilt, b) bonds, and c) managed futures or a similar trend
strategy. We didn’t want to dive too deep into smart beta strategies in this book
since we have covered them so extensively in the past.
What about tactical approaches to asset allocation?
We firmly believe there are a number of strategies that work well in tactically

managing a portfolio. Our 2007 paper, “A Quantitative Approach to Tactical
Asset Allocation,” lays out very simple momentum and trend-following
strategies.
What about factors in sector or country rotation strategies?
There is evidence that these strategies can work as well. Our “Relative Strength
Strategies for Investing” paper outlines a very simple sector rotation
methodology based on momentum and trends. Our Global Value book looks at
rotating countries based on value.
Figure 46 is a graph that looks at country stock rotation strategies based on
various metrics. Note: You want the countries with the highest yield, worst
trailing currency returns, and worst trailing GDP growth!!
FIGURE 46 – Rotation Strategies in Developed Markets
So rce: Credit S isse

Source: Credit Suisse
Should I hedge foreign stocks?
We are actually agnostic on this topic, but once you decide on your choice to
hedge or not, you should stick with it. Currencies go through periods of under
and outperformance, but over time, real currency returns are very stable. The key
words being over time.
Should I hedge foreign bonds?
Bonds are a little different. Since sovereign bonds in general have lower
volatility than stocks, adding the additional volatility of currency returns doesn’t
make much sense and therefore hedging foreign sovereign bonds is reasonable.
A good Vanguard paper on the topic is “Global Fixed Income: Considerations
for U.S. Investors.”
FIGURE 47 – Hedging Foreign Bonds

Source: Vanguard
How do stocks and bonds perform relative to various inflation regimes?
And what about real interest rates?
Stocks and bonds perform best when inflation is below about 3%. Above 5%
inflation and returns fall off a cliff.
The opposite goes for real interest rates, stocks and bonds love rates above 3%.
While stocks hold up okay with lower real interest rates, bonds get clobbered.
FIGURE 48 – Stock and Bond Real Returns vs. Inflation and Interest Rate
Regimes


Source: Credit Suisse

A P P E N D I X  B  –  T H E  T O B I A S  P O R T F O L I O
Andrew Tobias has written twelve books, including selling over a million copies
of The Only Investment Guide You'll Ever Need.
He proposes another basic Lazy Portfolio with only three holdings, which is also
reminiscent of Bill Shultheis and Scott Burns’s three-fund portfolios. The lack of
real assets definitely hurt this portfolio in the 1970s.
Figure 49 – Andrew Tobias Portfolio

Source: The Only Investment Guide You'll Ever Need, 1978
Figure 50 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013

Source: Global Financial Data


A P P E N D I X  C  –  T H E  T A L M U D  P O R T F O L I O
“Let every man divide his money into three parts, and invest a third in land, a third in
business and a third let him keep by him in reserve.”
TALMUD
You can’t get much more basic than this.
Figure 51 – Talmud Portfolio 

Source: Talmud, 500 C.E.
FIGURE 52 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013



A P P E N D I X  D  –  T H E  7 T W E L V E  P O R T F O L I O
The 7Twelve allocation was proposed by Craig Israelsen in 2008. Craig is the
author of three books and is a principal at Target Dale Analytics.
7Twelve is one of the more consistent portfolios, having made positive real
returns in every decade.
FIGURE 53 – 7Twelve Portfolio 

Source: 7Twelve Website, 2008
Figure 54 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013


Source: Global Financial Data

A P P E N D I X  E  –  T H E  W I L L I A M  B E R N S T E I N
P O R T F O L I O
William Bernstein is a retired doctor based in Oregon and is well-known for his
writing on asset allocation with at least 10 books as well as a blog and
investment advisory.
Below is his suggested allocation. Not surprisingly, with an allocation of 75% in
stocks, the portfolio returns are very similar to the broad stock market.
FIGURE 55 – William Bernstein Portfolio 

Source: The Intelligent Asset Allocator, 2000
FIGURE 56 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013


Source: Global Financial Data

A P P E N D I X  F  –  T H E  L A R R Y  S W E D R O E
P O R T F O L I O
Larry Swedroe is one of my favorite writers and researchers. With 15 books to
his name, his focus on evidence based investing fits in well with how we view
the world. We debated about including this portfolio in the book since it requires
using a value tilt, but think it is an important example of how a simple smart beta
strategy may be beneficial to the overall portfolio.
The biggest difference between the allocation and others in this book is that he
allocates to small cap value. Small cap value stocks have outperformed broad
small caps by about four percentage points a year, which is a lot. The value
stocks have slightly more volatility and a higher drawdown as well.
FIGURE 57 – Larry Swedroe Eliminate Fat Tails Portfolio 

Source: Swedroe
Below are the portfolios returns for comparison.
Swedroe’s unusual allocations are another example of a consistent performer due
to including a mix of stocks, bonds, and real assets. We include the performance
of including small cap as well as small cap value to illustrate the improvement in
performance. The portfolio with the value tilt results in the highest Sharpe ratio
of any portfolio in the book.
FIGURE 58 – Asset Class Returns, 1973-2013


Source: Global Financial Data

D I S C L A I M E R
The views expressed in this book are the personal views of the author only and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the author’s employer.  The views
expressed reflect the current views of author as of the date hereof and the author
does not undertake to advise you of any changes in the views expressed herein.
In addition, the views expressed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of any
investment professional at the author’s employer, and may not be reflected in the
strategies and products that his employer offers. The author’s employer may
have positions (long or short) or engage in securities transactions that are not
consistent with the information and views expressed in this presentation. 
The author assumes no duty to, nor undertakes to update forward looking
statements. No representation or warranty, express or implied, is made or given
by or on behalf of the author, the author’s employer or any other person as to the
accuracy and completeness or fairness of the information contained in this
presentation and no responsibility or liability is accepted for any such
information. By accepting this book, the recipient acknowledges its
understanding and acceptance of the foregoing statement.

