Glossary for Syntax in three Dimensions (2015)
© Carola Trips
A - B - C - D - E - F - G - H - I - J - K - L - M - N - O - P - Q - R - S - T - U - V - W - X - Y – Z
A
abstract case
Abstract Case (or "Deep Case") is an abstract notion of case distinct from the morphologically
marked case (cf. "case") used in Case theory (subtheories of Generative Grammar). Abstract Case is
present even in languages which lack morphological case on noun phrases; it is usually assumed to
be congruent with morphological case when such features are present. For example in German
dative case is marked morphologically as in Ich helfe ihm ('I help him') whereas no such case
marking is found in the English sentence (but Case is still there).
academy
In previous centuries the need for an academy dealing with linguistic matters was discussed and
debated in England (on the model of the French académie française). Due to the increase in the
production of grammars in the 17th and 18th centuries and the rising number of grammarians, calls
for an academy to codify the English language by publishing an authoritative grammar and
dictionary dwindled.
acceptance
Step in the process of standardization: a selected variety of a particular language must gain
acceptance by a group of speakers/users who are capable of influencing other speakers.
actants
In valency grammar, a functional unit determined by the valency of the verb. Actants are required
by the valence of the verb and are the equivalents of arguments (in generative grammar).
1
© Carola Trips

active voice
Term used in grammatical analysis of voice, referring to a sentence, clause or verb form where from
a semantic point of view the grammatical subject is typically the actor in relation to the verb. Active
voice generally expresses the AGENT as the subject of a sentence as in The linguist reads the book
(vs. passive voice The book was read (by the linguist).).
adjunct
An optional or secondary element in the structure of a sentence or clause. It may be removed
without affecting the structural identity of the rest of the construction. The clearest cases are
adverbials, e.g. The linguist read the book yesterday where the temporal adverbial can be omitted
without affecting the grammaticality of the sentence. In generative grammar the term also refers to a
rule which places these elements in adjacent positions with the aim of specifying how these
structures fit together in sentences. So the adverbial yesterday is adjoined to the VP (this is also
called Chomsky-adjunction).
age
A relevant factor in sociolinguistic studies.
agglutinating
Agglutinating languages stick grammatical and lexical forms together, the result of which is the
concatenation of elements.
agreement
Syntactic relation between words and phrases which are compatible, in a given construction, by
virtue of inflections carried by at least one of them.
allophone
A variant of a phoneme which does not make a meaning difference, in contrast to phoneme; e.g.
aspirated [ph] in initial positions.
analogical levelling
Reduction or elimination of morphophonemic alternation within a morphological paradigm.
2
© Carola Trips

analogy
Synchronic or diachronic process by which conceptually related linguistic units are made similar or
identical in form, especially where previous phonetic change had created a variety of forms.
analytic
A form or a type of language in which separate words realise grammatical distinctions that in other
languages may be realized by inflections. For example in The front of the house the of-phrase
denotes the partitive which in a (more) synthetic language like German it is expressed by genitve
case Die Vorderseite des Hauses.
anomaly
In general terms an irregularity in language. In the analogy vs. anomaly debate Greek philosophers
discussed whether languages are regular (analogy) or whether they are irregular (anomaly). For
example the plural -s in English as in dogs is regular whereas the -en ending in oxen is irregular.
arbitrariness
The property of language by which there is in general no natural relation between the form of a
simple lexical unit and a thing etc. it is used to refer to. E.g. there is nothing in the nature of the
sounds and meanings to explain why cat is the word for a cat and not, for example, a dog or a
pencil, etc.
arguments
In Government and Binding Theory, arguments are elements (e.g. noun phrases) which are required
by verbs in order to fulfill certain syntactic functions (subject, object, etc.) in a sentence. So in the
sentence The linguist reads a book we have two arguments, the linguist functioning as the subject,
and a book functioning as the direct object. The term actually derives from predicate calculus and is
often found in discussion of semantic theory to refer to the relationship of a name or other term to
the predicate with which it combines to form a simple proposition.
argument structure
The lexical representation of argument-taking lexical items --typically verbs, but also nouns
(especially nominalizations), adjectives, and even prepositions--that specifies sufficient information
about these items' arguments to allow their syntactic realization to be determined. An argument
structure typically indicates the number of arguments a lexical item takes (e.g., the core participants
in the eventuality a verb denotes), their syntactic expression, and their semantic relation to this
lexical item (Beth Levin's definition). So the sentence The linguist reads a book contains the lexical
verb read with its core participants the linguist and a book which are syntactically expressed by a
3
© Carola Trips

DP (NP) each. Their semantic relation to the verb is such that the the linguist is the AGENT and a
book the THEME of the event of reading.
Aristotle
Greek philosopher and universal scientist who lived 384-322 BC. Wrote on many subjects
including poetry, rhetoric and linguistics.
Aristotle: portrait bust. Photograph. Britannica Academic. Web. 1 Jul. 2015.
Aspects model
Model of grammar based on Chomsky's "Aspects of Theory of Syntax" from 1965. According to
this model, grammar consists of a generative syntactic component as well as of an interpretive,
semantic and phonological component. Deep structure is generated by phrase structure rules,
subcategorization and lexical insertion. This model was the starting point of derivational generative
models.
asymmetric verb second (V2)
A type of a verb second language where the finite verb only consistently occurs in the second
position in main sentences but not in subordinate clauses. Verb second may occur in this type of
clause if the verb of the main sentence is a so-called 'bridge verb'. In German we find clauses like
Er behauptete, der Mann habe das Bild gestohlen ('he claimed that the man had stolen the painting')
where the finite verb haben occurs in the second position.
attitude
An aspect that is studied in sociolinguistics where the social meaning of the language system and
language use and the common set of conditions of linguistic and social structure are investigated.
[Back to top]
4
© Carola Trips

B
basic word order
Word order studies (=study of linear relation of words and phrases within larger units) are carried
out in terms of linearization patterns called basic word order. The term captures the fact that there
are word order preferences rather than strict word order rules in terms of the grammatical status of
the elements involved. The basic order is typically identified with the order that occurs in
stylistically neutral, independent, indicative clauses with full noun phrase participants, where the
subject is a definite human agent, the object is a definite non-human patient and the verb represents
an action, not a state or a process. The criterion for basic order often is its statistical dominance in
texts.
Otto Behaghel
German professor and germanist who lived from 1854 to 1936. He formulated Behaghel's laws,
which are still important in theme and rheme research, today.
Behaghel, Otto. Photograph. Britannica Academic. Web. 1 Jul. 2015.
behaviorism
Movement in psychology which sought to eliminate all reference to subjective concepts or
experience; the data were accordingly restricted to the observable reactions of subjects to
observable stimuli. B. F. Skinner applied these ideas to language which meant that language is
verbal behaviour learnt through operant conditioning and reinforcement.
Bilaterality
According to de Saussure one of the basic characteristics of linguistic signs. Linguistic signs consist
of a signifier (material sign, which can be realized phonetically or graphemically) and signified
(conceptual sign). Importantly, signifier and signified are inseparable.
binary parameters
In generative grammar, a variable in the rules or constraints of universal grammar, whose value is
determined for individual languages; determination and setting of the values of a particular
5
© Carola Trips

parameter implies a grammar for a specific language that is consistent with universal grammar: the
learner chooses a particular option for a specific language from within the framework of universal
grammar; these parameters are predicated upon the opposition of two units, e.g. upon the presence
or absence of certain features.
bridge verbs
Verbs which permit a complementiserless verb second complement. Often these verbs are so-called
verba dicendi (verbs of saying). In more general terms in generative grammar bridge verbs are
verbs which allow extractions from finite complements, e.g. Who do you think met Bryon? vs *Who
do you regret/whisper met Bryon? (but this aspect is not discussed in the book).
Franz Bopp
German linguist who pioneered the comparative work on Indo-European languages. He lived from
1791 to 1867.
Bopp, Franz. Engraving. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
Leonard Bloomfield
American linguist who lived from 1887 to 1949. He published the influential textbook Language
and led the development of structural linguistics in the United States during the 1930s and the
1940s.
Bloomfield, Leonard. Photograph. Yale University. Web. 1. Jul. 2015.
Karl Brugmann
A German linguist, specializing in Indo-European linguistics, who lived from 1849 to 1919. He is
best known for his contribution of two volumes about phonology and morphology in
Morphologische Untersuchungen auf dem Gebiete der indogermanischen Sprachen.
6
© Carola Trips

Brugmann, Karl. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
William Bullokar
An English printer and phonetist who lived during the 16th century. He devised a phonetic alphabet
for the English language, which consisted of 40 letters. He also authored Bref Grammar for English,
the first grammar of the English language, in 1558.
[Back to top]
C
case
(1) In traditional grammar it refers to a grammatical category of inflected words which serves to
indicate their syntactic function in a sentence and, depending on the function, involves government
a n d 
a g r e e m e n t .
(2) In generative grammar Case (with a capital c) refers to an abstract notion distinct from (1).
Abstract Case is present even in languages which lack morphological case on noun phrases. Case
theory - one of the sub-theories of Government-Binding theory - deals with the assignment of
abstract Case and its morphological realizations, restricting the distribution of lexical NPs at S-
Structure.
Case Grammar
General term for linguistic theories which employ the concept of "deep case" (semantic roles or
thematic relations) as the central means of explaining both the syntactic structure as well as the
meaning of sentences. Deep cases name the various semantic roles of the various "participants" in
the situation described by the verb.
7
© Carola Trips

Case Theory
Basic theory of Government and Binding Theory whereby certain lexical categories can assign 
case; distinctions in case theory:
(1) Case is dependent on lexical items, e.g. German verb helfen to help governs the dative case.
(2) Case is dependent on semantic roles.
(3) Case is dependent on grammatical functions of lexical items, e.g. Philip's book where Philip is 
in the genitive case; this theory is more elaborate in case languages such as German and Latin than 
in English.
circumstants → circonstant
In valency grammar: a non-essential dependent unit, not determined by the valency of the verb;
opposed to actant; e.g.: modifiers, adverbials: The goat likes the hay very much - very much is a
circonstant of the verb like (compare the difference between argument and adjunct in generative
grammar).
Cicero
Roman philosopher, politician, lawyer, orator, political theorist, consul, and constitutionalist who
lived between 106-43 BC. He immensely influenced the Latin language and subsequently further
European languages.
Cicero. Photograph. Britannica Academic. Web. 1 Jul. 2015.
classification
In general terms the process of arranging elements in classes (e.g. phonemes, morphemes, etc.). In
American structuralism it is the second step in the discovery procedures proposed by Harris.
Elements like phonemes or morphemes are classified, i.e. attributed to certain classes sharing the
same properties with regard to their distribution in the sentence.
clause
A part of a complex sentence whose structure is itself like that of a sentence; thus, in particular, one
which includes a verb and elements that can or must accompany it.
8
© Carola Trips

codification
The final stage in the process of standardisation which refers to the compilation of a systematic
statement of the rules and conventions governing the use of a language variety, typically the
standard language of a community. When a language has been codified its products include spelling
and pronunciation guides, grammars, dictionaries, style manuals and guides to correct usage.
cognate
Languages, words, etc. that have developed from a common ancestor, e.g. English is cognate with
German, likewise English beam is cognate with German Baum ('tree').
John Colet
An English churchman who lived from 1467 to 1519. He pioneered education by replacing the old
scholastic method of interpretation and held many distinguished sermons during his time.
Colet, John. Drawing. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
comparative linguistics
A major branch of linguistics in which the primary concern is to make statements comparing the
characteristics of different languages or different historical stages of a language.
competence
A term used in linguistic theory, especially in generative grammar, to refer to a speaker's knowledge
of his/her language, or more precisely, to the system of rules which they have mastered so that they
are able to produce and understand an infinite number of sentences, and to recognize grammatical
mistakes and ambiguities. It is an idealised conception of language which stands in opposition to
performance (specific utterances of speech, ability to use speech in language comprehension and
production).
complement
A term used in the analysis of grammatical function, to refer to a major constituent of sentence or
clause structure, traditionally associated with completing the action specified by the verb;
complement is therefore a very general notion, subsuming all obligatory features of the predicate
9
© Carola Trips

other than the verb, e.g. objects and adverbials.
complementiser
Also called subordinator or conjunction to describe a small group of grammatical elements like
subordinating conjunctions (e.g. that, whether, because) which indicate the specific function of
embedded sentential structures.
complex sentence
(1) Narrowly defined: a sentence that is composed of a main clause and one or more dependent 
clauses introduced by a subordinating conjunction.
(2) Broadly defined: a sentence that contains two or more clauses joined either by subordination, as 
in sense (1), or by coordinating, that is, by a co-ordinating conjunction (and, or). 
(3) In transformational grammar, a sentence that consist of a main sentence as well as one or more 
embedded constituent clauses.
compound sentence
A sentence that contains at least two main clauses. Compound sentences differ from complex
sentences in that they are asyndetic, i.e. joined without means of a conjunction, or are conjoined by
means of either co-ordinating conjunctions or sentence adverbials (e.g. thus, however). They should
not be confused with complex sentences which are connected by means of subordinating
conjunctions, relative pronouns etc.. Compound sentences can be either copulative (=co-ordinating)
when connected by and or disjunctive when connected by but or or.
concord
A term used in grammatical theory and description to refer to a relation between elements whereby
one form agrees with another in some grammatical property (case, number, gender, person, etc.). In
English, for example, a singular subject co-occurs with the third-person singular form of the verb in
the present tense, e.g. he walks (vs. they walk). The term is also used in 'negative concord' where
two negative elements occur in one sentence to express one single negation.
congruency
An alternative term for agreement or concord.
10
© Carola Trips

constituents
A basic term in grammatical analysis for a linguistic unit which is a functional component of a
larger construction. Based on a combination of intuitive and formal (e.g. distributional) criteria, a
sentence can be analysed into a series of constituents, such as subject + predicate, or NP+VP, etc.;
these units can, in turn, be analysed into further constituents (e.g. a noun phrase might consist of a
determiner and a noun).
constituency
A basic syntactic relation in the description of sentences as hierarchical structures; in a constituency
model of grammar, two elements A and B are part of the same constituent if they are both
dominated by a common element C. Constituency is determined by so-called constituency tests.
(see dependency for a different notion of structuredness).
constituent-command
In generative grammar, the relationship between an element and the other elements it is superior to
in the phrase-marker, but which it does not dominate; a constituent X is said to maximal-command
Y if the first maximal projection which dominates X also dominates Y, and X does not dominate Y,
and Y does not dominate X.
constituent negation
Constituent negation negates only a constituent in a sentence, whereas sentence negation negates
the proposition of a sentence; c.f. He had no dinner vs. He didn't have any dinner.
constructional homonymity
Chomsky's term in the 1950s for a syntactic unit to which a generative grammar, justified in the
abstraction from the meaning of sentences, assigned two or more different structures. It was then
found to correspond, in many instances, to grammatical or structural ambiguity.
coordination
A term in grammatical analysis to refer to the process or result of linking linguistic units which are
usually of equivalent syntactic status, e.g. a series of clauses, or phrases, or words; co-ordinate
clauses are illustrated in the sentence John walked and Mary ran (the marker of linkage is and).
11
© Carola Trips

corpus
Any systematic collection of speech or writing in a language or variety of a language; thus, in
particular, of large on-line collections, tagged and searchable for research purposes.
correlative
In the book the term is used for mutual relationships between a linguistic and non-linguistic
phenomenon. For example, we have five vowels because we the body has five senses.
[Back to top]
D
Martin of Dacia
Danish scholar, master of arts and theology at the University of Paris during the 13th century. He
authored Modi significandi, an influential treatise on grammar.
D-structure (deep structure)
A term from transformational grammar to describe the underlying structure of a linguistic utterance;
deep structure specifies the grammatical relations and functions of the syntactic elements, as well as
the linguistic meaning of the elements of a sentences which contain the lexemes, the information
important for the execution of transformations.
declension
Type of inflection of nouns, articles, adjectives, numerals, and pronouns that varies according to
case, gender and number; the corresponding inflectional forms of a word constitute the declensional
paradigms that are subsumed in declensional classes according to regularities and predictability or
practicability. English has largely lost its declensional system with vestiges apparent only in plural
formations, the possessive case and object pronouns.
12
© Carola Trips

deep level
A term developed by Chomsky to describe the underlying structure of a linguistic utterance; it
specifies the underlying grammatical relations and functions of the syntactic elements; in modern
versions of Chomskian grammar the concept is not used anymore.
deep structure
A central theoretical term in transformational grammar; opposed to surface structure; deep structure
(or "deep grammar") is the abstract syntactic representation of a sentence, an underlying level of
structural organization which specifies all the factors governing the way the sentence should be
interpreted; this level provides information which enables us to distinguish between the alternative
interpretations of sentences which have the same surface form (i.e. they are ambiguous); it is also a
way of relating sentences which have different surface forms but the same underlying meaning as in
the relationship between active and passive structures.
deletion
Can be used as a test for constituency following the assumption that only constituents can be
omitted.
dependency
Syntactic relation of dependence between two elements A and B, where B can occur without A, but
A cannot occur without B (e.g. dependency between adjectives and nouns in English); (cf.
constituency).
dependency grammar
A type of formal grammar, best known for the development it received in the 1950s, which
establishes types of dependencies between the elements of a construction as a means of explaining
grammatical relationships; syntactic structure is represented using dependency trees - sets of nodes
whose interconnections specify structural relations (e.g. in a clause, the verb is seen as governor,
and the dependents are noun phrases).
dependency relation
Relations between different elements of a construction as a means of explaining grammatical
relationships; see dependency grammar.
13
© Carola Trips

dependent
Unit standing in a relation of dependency; e.g. "old" is a dependent of "men" and "terribly" of
"sing" in "old men sing terribly"; a subordinate clause is a dependent clause, and so an.
dependent clause →  subordinate clause
In contrast to structurally independent main clause, a formally subordinate clause, i.e. one that is
dependent on a main verb in respect to word order, tense and mood, as well as illocution; important
aspects for classifying subordinate clauses are formal markers (introduced by a conjunction or not),
function in the sentence (subject, object, adverbial) as well as semantic considerations (temporal,
clausal, modal, or conditional clauses).
descriptive (→  description)
General sense of this term is found in linguistics, identifying one of the main aims of the subject - to
give a comprehensive, systematic, objective and precise account of the patterns and use of a specific
language or dialect, at a particular point in time; in contrast with prescriptive aims of much
traditional grammar (the aim here is to describe the facts of linguistic usage as they are, not how
they ought to be, with reference to some imagined ideal state).
descriptive adequacy
The level of descriptive adequacy is met if a theory of grammar can account for the competence of a
native speaker regarding the rules of the language.
descriptive grammar
In its broader sense, any type of non-prescriptive or non-normative description of different
linguistic varieties, which codifies regularities according to use.
diachrony
One of two main temporal dimension of linguistic investigation introduced by de Suassure, the
other being synchronic; diachronic linguistics studies languages from the point of view of their
historical development, e.g. the changes which have taken place between Old and Modern English;
an alternative term is historical linguistics.
diffusion
A term used in sociolinguistics and historical linguistics for the increased use of a language or
linguistic form throughout an area over a period of time.
14
© Carola Trips

diglossia
The case in which a community uses two distinct forms of the same language, one acquired through
education and appropriate to one range of contexts, the other acquired before formal education and
appropriate to another. Thus German-speaking Switzerland is described as a diglossic community,
where the distinct varieties are Standard German and the local forms of Swiss German.
Aelius Donatus
Roman grammarian and teacher of rhetoric who authored the Ars grammatica in the mid-4th
century AD. This work consists of the Ars minor and Ars major which found frequent use up into
the Middle Ages.
Dante (Durante Alighieri)
Italian poet of the Late Middle Ages who lived from 1265 to 1321 and is better known as Dante. He
authored the Divine Comedy and defended the use of the vernacular in literature which played an
instrumental role in establishing the national language of Italy.
Alighieri, Durante. Profile portrait, by Sandro Botticelli. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
discontinuous
Linguistic elements are discontinuous if they belong together, but do not appear next to each other
in linear order, i.e. if they are separated by another element.
discovery procedures
Methods proposed by Zelig Harris in "Methods in Structural linguistics" for describing individual
languages. They consist of two analytical steps, segmentation and classification, and can be applied
at the phonological, morphological and syntactic level (immediate constituent analysis).
15
© Carola Trips

distributionalism
The doctrine developed especially in the 1950s by Zellig Harris and by Chomsky, that the
description of a language should initially be based on evidence of distributions (=set of contexts
within sentences in which a unit or class of units can appear) alone, in abstraction form and
preceding the study of meaning.
ditransive
A verb that takes two objects is a ditransitive verb. In English the verb teach is such a verb: in the
sentence They taught us arithmetic we find two objects in the form of DPs/NPs. These sentences are
alos called double object constructions. Interestingly, this verb shows an alternative construction
with the indirect object in the form of a PP: They taught arithmetic to us.
do →  do-deletion/insertion/support
A set of rules in generative syntax which determine the use of the empty auxiliary verb do; "do-
insertion", or "do-support" inserts the verb do into a place in a structure, as part of the derivation of
a sentence.
dominance
A term in generative linguistics for one type of vertical relationship between nodes in a tree
diagram; if no nodes intervene between X and Y, one says that X directly or immediately dominates
Y; the vertical dimension of dominance should be distinguished from the horizontal notion of
precedence.
Double Base Hypothesis
Pintzuk (1991, 2002) found OV/VO word order variation in Old English and developed the idea
that Old English had a 'double base': both the OV and the VO value of the relevant parameter were
allowed which gave rise to two distinct grammars.
double modals
In standard Present-Day English, a modal cannot be followed by another modal: He can go home
vs. *He might could go home. In some varieties of English, however, a modal can follow another
modal, e.g. He might could do such a thing in Southern American English.
16
© Carola Trips

DP-Hypothesis
This hypothesis was put forward by Abney in 1987. He claims that phrases of the kind das
Mädchen ('the girl') are not NPs but DPs. They are therefore not lexical projections headed by the
noun Mädchen but functional projections headed by the determiner das. Before Abney's hypothesis
determiners had been seen as being part of a noun phrase.
[Back to top]
E
elaboration of function
Stage of language standardization; a language with a limited scope of functions acquires more and
more functions until it can be used in all areas of communication.
empiricism
Any of a range of doctrines in philosophy which hold that knowledge is derived from sense
experience; traditionally opposed to nativism.
enérgeia
According to Humboldt, language can be identified as action or effective energy which he calls
enérgeia. It is not to be surveyed in its entirety, but has to be seen as a continuously self-generating
process.
epistemic (value)
Epistemic modality is concerned with degrees of probability or possibility (knowing and believing)
and can be contrasted with deontic modality (obligation, permission, volition, intention). The
example She must have liked the book illustrates the epistemic use of must (It is probable that she
liked the book). In contrast, must in the sentence She must do her homework shows the deontic use
of the same modal (She is obliged to do her homework).
ergon
Concept of language as the product of a completed action.
17
© Carola Trips

explanatory adequacy →  levels of adequacy
A term used in generative grammar to refer to a level of achievement in the writing of grammars.
(A theory of) grammar is an adequate model of language (i) if it is able to state what combinations
of expressions do and do not give rise to grammatical sentences (observational adequacy), (ii) if it
accounts for the knowledge system underlying the intuitions of the native speaker (descriptive
adequacy) and (iii) if it explains how such knowledge is acquired (explanatory adequacy).
expletive pro-drop →  expletive
An alternative label for "dummy" elements in government-binding theory (i.e. linguistic elements
whose only function is to fill empty syntactic positions in certain syntactic structures where the
valence of the verb required that they be filled); pro-drop: a term used in government-binding
theory for a parameter which determines whether the subject of a clause can be suppressed. Old
English was a language that allowed expletive pro-drop (you could use the verb snow without a
subject) which in Present-Day English is no longer possible. You have to say It snowed yesterday.
externalised language (E-language)
A term suggested by Noam Chomsky to refer to a collection of sentences understood independently
of the properties of the mind, and in this sense contrasted with internalised language (I-language). It
subsumes the notion of language as a system of utterances or forms paired with meanings, which it
is the purpose of a grammar to describe.
extraposition
Term indicating a word order variant which is similar in form to right dislocation; sentential
elements (e.g. infinitive constructions, sentential subject, object and attribute clauses, adverbial
clauses) can be shifted rightwards to the end of the sentence, e.g. That she came made him glad vs
It made him glad that she came.
[Back to top]
F
family tree theory
The model adopted especially by Schleicher in the mid-19th century, in which historical relations
among languages are seen as like those between generations in a family tree.
18
© Carola Trips

female teacher grammarians
From 1775 onwards, a new category of grammarians, the female teacher grammarians, arose who
were, as their students, not educated along traditional lines.
Jan Firbas
A Czech linguist and a prominent representative of the Prague School of linguistics who lived from
1921-2000. He wrote over 100 papers on Functional Sentence Perspective (FSP).
Firbas, Jan. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
Ann Fisher
English author and grammarian. Her A New Grammar was published in 1745, which makes her the
earliest published female author on English grammar.
foregrounding
A term used in pragmatics and discourse analysis, to refer to relative prominence in discourse, often
involving deviance from a linguistic norm; the analogy is of a figure seen against a background
(backgrounding); the deviant or prominent feature is said to have been foregrounded; e.g. the use of
rhyme, alliteration, and metrical regularity are examples of foregrounding operating at the level of
phonology. Since foregrounding involves the dislocation of one constituent in a syntactic structure
it can be used as a test for constituency. Possible constructions in which one constituent is
foreground are cleft-sentences and pseudo-cleft-sentences in which information is reorganized in a
sentence.
fronting
In transformational grammar: referring to any transformation which transposes a constituent from
the middle or end of a string to initial position; e.g. the rule of wh-fronting places a wh-phrase (e.g.
where, which books) in initial position, transporting it from the underlying non-initial position (cf.
John walked there ⇒ John walked where ⇒ where did John walk).
19
© Carola Trips

functional phonetics
Linguistic sub-discipline which studies the phonetic aspects of speech (concrete articulatory,
acoustic and auditory characteristics of sounds) with regard to its function.
functional grammar
A linguistic theory as an alternative to the abstract, formalized view of language presented by
transformational grammar, and relying instead on a pragmatic view of language as social
interaction; the approach focuses on the rules which govern verbal interaction, seen as a form of co-
operative activity, and on the rules (of syntax, etc.) which govern the linguistic expressions that are
used as instruments of the activity.
functional sentence perspective
A model of the information structure of sentences, developed in the early 1960s by Jan Firbas and
other in the tradition of the pre-war Prague School. Parts of a sentence representing given
information are said to have the lowest degree of communicative dynamism, i.e. the amount that, in
context, they communicate to addressees is the least. These form the theme; "compare" theme.
[Back to top]
G
gender
Lexical-grammatical category, which in most languages of the world divides the nominal lexicon
into formally and/or semantically motivated groups, the number of classes varying just as the kind
of criteria for the division.
general grammar
In contrast to particular grammar, the term general grammar is a cover term for the attempts to
develop a grammar which is based on structures and principles common to all languages.
20
© Carola Trips

generative grammar
(1) Cover term for a grammatical model that is based on mentalism, combinatoriality and nativsism.
(2) Synonym for Chomsky's transformational grammar: all sentences of formal and natural
languages can be produced by the application of the rules of generative grammar.
generative semantics
Name for the counter position in response to Chomsky's transformational grammar; the proponents
of generative semantics maintain that semantic structures are generated in a form of basic rules
similar to those of predicate logic; meaning of individual lexemes is described as a syntactically
structured complex of basic semantic elements.
generative transformational grammar
The core assumptions of generative transformational grammar are: (1) There are two levels of
syntactic structure, namely surface structure and deep structure. This division explains why some
sentences have the same surface structure but different semantic interpretations or vice versa. (2)
Deep and surface structure are connected via transformations, which move elements from their
position in the deep structure into a new position in the surface structure. Chomsky claims that
native speakers know these relations and are therefore able to assign semantic interpretations
correctly.
glossematics
Theory of linguistic structure developed by Hjelmslev in the 1930s and 1940s. Glossematics is
concerned with the combination of glosses (= smallest meaning-bearing units). It developed out of
structuralism and extends the theory by assuming that language is a system of internal relations,
which can be described independently from language-external criteria.
governee
In generative grammar a governee is a constituent that is governed by a governor, i.e. it is c-
commanded by it. For example the complement (direct object) the man of the lexical verb kill is the
governee in a syntactic tree (see government).
government →  govern
A term used in grammatical analysis to refer to a process of syntactic linkage whereby one word or
word class requires a specific morphological form of another word or class. For example
prepositions in Latin govern nouns, making a certain case form obligatory.
21
© Carola Trips

Government & Binding Model
Model of grammar, a descendent of Extended Standard Theory and ultimately of classical
transformational grammar; according to this model, sentences have three main levels of structure:
D-structure, S-structure and logical form. S-structure is derived from D-structure, and logical form
from S-structure, by a single transformation, move alpha, which essentially means move anything
anywhere. Various so-called sub-theories interact with this to allow just the right structures to be
generated. The main sub-theories are X-Bar theory, theta government theory, binding theory,
bounding theory, control theory and government theory.
governor
In generative grammar a governor is a head that c-commands a constituent, the governee. For
example a lexical verb like kill governs its complement (direct object) the man in a syntactic tree
(see government).
grammar
Central term in linguistics but one which covers a wide range of phenomena being used in mass
noun and count noun senses; several types of grammar: descriptive grammar (description of a
language as found in a sample of speech or writing), theoretical grammar (goes beyond the study of
individual languages, using linguistic data as a means of developing theoretical insights into the
nature of language as such, and into the categories and processes needed for successful linguistic
analysis), distinction between synchronic and diachronic grammar, traditional grammar (an attempt
to summarize the range of attitudes and methods found in the pre-linguistic era of grammatical
study); in a restricted sense, grammar refers to a level of structural organization which can be
studies independently of phonology and semantics, and generally divided into the branches of
syntax and morphology.
grammars in competition
Hypothesis postulated by Anthony Kroch (1989) in which parameter settings compete. It is
manifested in the variation found in historical texts as the reflex of an innovative parametric setting
which competes with and eventually supplants the reflex of the older parametric setting.
grammatical theory
Systematic description of grammar from several perspectives: 
(a) grammar as the knowledge and study of a natural language 
(b) grammar as a system of structural rules 
(c) grammar as language theory, and in transformational grammar as a model representing linguistic
competence 
(d) grammar as a systematic description of formal regularities of a natural language
22
© Carola Trips

grammatical subject
The grammatical subject is distinguished from the underlying or logical subject of a sentences, e.g.
in The cat was chased by the dog, where the cat is the grammatical subject and the dog is the logical
subject.
Jacob Grimm
A German philologist, jurist, and mythologist who lived from 1785 to 1863. He is the discoverer of
Grimm's Law, but more popularly known as one of the Brothers Grimm and the editor of Grimm's
Fairy Tales.
Grimm, Jacob. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
Grimm's Law
In historical linguistics, a sound law first worked out by Jakob Grimm in 1822; it shows the regular
way in which the Germanic sound system diverged from that of Indo-European; 9 sets of
correspondences were shown, which fell into a clear phonetic pattern: voiced aspirates (aspirated
plosives and fricatives) in Indo-European became voiced plosives in Germanic; voiced plosives
became voiceless plosives; and voiceless plosives became voiceless aspirates. This explains, for
instance, why words which begin with /p/ in Latin, Greek or Sanskrit, generally have /f/ in English
(e.g. pater - father). Certain exceptions to this law were explained by later philologists; see also
Verner's Law.
group genitive
General designation for the English construction where the genitive ending is added to the last
element in a noun phrase containing post-modification or co-ordination, e.g. the University of
London's grant, Morecambe and Wise's humour.
[Back to top]
H
23
© Carola Trips

Zellig Harris
American linguist, mathematical syntactician, and methodologist of science who lived from 1909 to
1992. He is best known for his work in structural linguistics and discourse analysis and for the
discovery of transformational structure in language.
Harris. Photograph. The Online Dictionary of Language Terminology. Web. 1. Jul. 2015.
head
A term used in grammatical description to refer to the central element which is distributionally
equivalent to the phrase as a whole. Headedness also determines any relationships of concord or
government in other parts of the phrase or sentence; for instance, the head of the noun phrase a big
man is man, and it is the singular form of this item which relates to the co-occurrence of singular
verb forms, such as is, walks, etc. In phrases as the verb phrase has put, the head is put, and it is this
verb which accounts for the use of object and adverbial later in the sentence.
Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar (HPSG)
A syntactic theory which builds on the insights of generalized phrase-structure grammar,
categorical grammar and certain other approaches. A central feature is that categories incorporate
information about the categories with which they combine. The consequence of this is that very few
rules are necessary, all important syntactic and semantic processes being driven by information
contained in lexical entries. For example, a single rule provides for all lexical category and
complement structures (see also binding).
head-final
Head-final languages are represented by German, Dutch, Japanese or Korean, where the heads
appear on the right within phrases (e.g. German weil ich [VP das Buch lese].
head-initial
Head initial languages are represented by e.g. English, where the heads appear on the left within
phrases (e.g. read the book, the verb in the verb phrase is to the left of the noun phrase).
24
© Carola Trips

Head Movement Constraint
In Government and Binding Theory, the Head Movement Constraint states that heads cannot move
across the top of other heads.
head parameter
Principle assumed in generative syntax, especially in the relation to Universal Grammar, which
concerns the position of heads within phrases. Since parameters are binary in nature, head can either
occur head-finally or head-initally.
historical linguistics
Historical linguistics studies languages from the point of view of their historical development, e.g.
the changes which have taken place between Old and Modern English; an alternative term is
diachronic linguistics.
Humanists
Humanism subsumed a variety of beliefs, methods and philosophies which emphasise the human
realm. It is an education/mode of inquiry which developed and spread during the 13th and 14th
centuries. The basic principles of Humanists were Classicism (returning to the classic ages and
analysing works thereof), Realism (rejection of traditional assumptions, with the aim of an objective
analysis of experiences), and virtue.
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Prussian philosopher, government functionary, diplomat and linguist. He made important
contributions to the philosophy of language and to the theory and practice of education. The
Humboldtian education ideal was the foundation of educational systems in Germany, USA and
Japan.
Von Humboldt, Wilhelm. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 01 Jul. 2015.
[Back to top]
25
© Carola Trips

I
identity
Identity is used as a factor in sociolinguistics. It can influence speakers in selecting one linguistic
variant over another.
INFL, I (IP)
A term used in government-binding theory (at first symbolized as INFL, later as I) for a functional
category which subsumes various grammatical properties - in particular, tense, person and number.
In X-bar theory, I is like the lexical categories N, V, A and P in that it is a minimal category with
two phrasal projections, I' and I''. Like lexical heads, I can function as a governor. IP (formerly I'') is
the maximal projection of I, is usually referred to as inflection phrase.
I-language
Abbreviation for internalized language, a term suggested by Noam Chomsky to refer to a language
viewed as an element of the mind of a person who knows the language, acquired by the learner, and
used by the speaker-hearer. It is seen in contrast with E(xternalised)-language.
i-mutation
A regressive assimilation where the stem vowel of a word assimilated to a following /i/ or /j/ in pre
Old English (OE) times. This is how the irregular plural forms developed (e.g. goose-geese).
I-to-C movement
Instance of head movement where finite verbs move from the I(nfl) head to the C(omplementizer)
head.
immediate constituent analysis
This method decomposes the sentence (in a top-down fashion) into immediate constituents which
build the next segment on the next level. A sentence is divided into two maximal constituents, these
constituents are divided into two constituents, etc, until the smallest constituents occur.
26
© Carola Trips

incorporating
Polysynthetic (or incorporating) languages where syntactic relations in a sentence are expressed by
compounding lexical and gram- matical elements into long and complex words, and syntactic
functions like object or adverbial may be incorporated into the predicate.
Indo-European
Family of languages including most of those spoken in Europe, and the major languages of all but
the southern part of the Indian subcontinent.
inflectional
Inflectional or synthetic languages express grammatical relations within a word. So inflectional
endings express grammatical relations, and lexical and grammatical meanings/functions are thus
expressed in one word.
Inherent Case
Case refers to an abstract notion which is distinct from the morphologically marked case. Case
Theory is one of the sub-theories of government-binding theory which deals with the assignment of
abstract Case and its morphological realizations, restricting the distribution of lexical NPs at S-
structure; inherent Case is assigned to NPs in D-structure and must be assigned as a special property
of the lexical verb.
inner organ
In Humboldt's theory, language is an inner organ which precedes thinking and perceiving.
innere Sprachform
According to Humboldt, the semantic and grammatical structure of language embodying the
elements, patterns and rules imposed on the sounds of speech. Partly it is defined by its universality
but partly it is also defined by the Sprachform that defines each language individually. The
universal nucleus of the grammar of speech are the verb ('Nerv der ganzen Sprache') and the
pronoun due to its anaphoric character.
Interpretive Semantics
In Noam Chomsky's version of generative grammar where syntax is considered an autonomous
generative component the semantic component has a purely interpretive character in that it
interprets the syntactically motived abstract deep structures through semantic rules, i.e. gives them
27
© Carola Trips

one or more readings. The aim is to describe the competence of the ideal speaker/hearer who can
semantically interpret any sentence under any of its grammatical derivations.
intransitive
An intransitive verb requires no object (complement).
introspection
Method of self-observation.
isolating
Isolating languages do not express grammatical relations within a word. So different words are
needed for lexical and grammatical meanings/functions.
[Back to top]
J
Jespersen's Cycle
On the example of negation in English, the Danish linguist Otto Jespersen showed how the process
of grammaticalization works in a cyclical fashion.
Roman Jakobson
A Russian-American linguist and literary theorist who lived from 1896 to 1982. Jakobson's three
principal ideas in linguistics play a major role in the field to this day: linguistic typology,
markedness, and linguistic universals.
Jakobson, Roman. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2015.
28
© Carola Trips

Sir William Jones
An Anglo-Welsh philologist, puisne judge and a scholar of ancient India. He proposed the existence
of a relationship among European and Indian languages which would later be known as Indo-
European languages.
Sir William Jones. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 6 Feb. 2005.
Samuel Johnson
An English writer, poet, essayist, moralist, literary critic, biographer, editor and lexicographer who
lived from 1709 to 1784. He is perhaps best known as the subject of the most famous English
biography The Life of Samuel Johnson. His importance for Modern English is based on his work A
Dictionary of the English Language which was published in 1755. It was the most important
English dictionary until the Oxford English Dictionary was released 150 years later.
Johnson, Samuel. Painting. Wikimedia. Web. 15. Dec. 2016.
[Back to top]
L
language
According to Saussure, an umbrella term for langue (the abstract) and parole (the concrete).
language acquisition
The acquisition of language, generally the first language/mother tongue or second languages.
29
© Carola Trips

language acquisition device
Human mechanism postulated by Noam Chomsky in connection with the linguistic interpretation of
rationalism, to explain the phenomenon that children although the linguistic utterances of their
environment represent only deficient and incomplete input gain a command of the syntactic rules of
their mother tongue in a relatively short time and can produce and understand an almost unlimited
number of grammatical expressions.
language contact
A situation in which two or more languages coexist within one state and where the speakers use
different languages alternately in a specific situation. Such linguistic contacts can have a political,
historical, geographic, or cultural-historical basis.
language diversity
Throughout history, the phenomenon of language diversity has been treated very differently.
Whereas in the Christian tradition following the story of the Tower of Babel, linguistic diversity had
been seen negatively, the comparative linguists of the 19th century tried to determine language
families and aimed at systematically classifying individual languages and dialects.
language typology
The classification of languages into types, especially by sets of similarities seen as logically
connected (note that there is no geographical relation.
left-adjoined
Term used in the syntactic analysis of sentences: either an element (like an adverbial) is adjoined to
a maximal node to its left or right. For example in the sentence He successfully applied for the job
the adverbial successfully is left-adjoined to the VP in a syntactic tree.
leftward movement
Syntactic operation in which an element is moved to the left of its original position. An example of
this type of movement is V-to-I/T movement.
Lexical Functional Grammar (LFG)
A linguistic theory in which the role of the mental lexicon is essential, and grammatical functions
are only taken as primitive. The syntactic structure of sentences consist of a constituent structure (c-
structure) and a functional structure (f-structure), which represent superficial grammatical relations.
30
© Carola Trips

William Lily
An English classical grammarian and scholar who lived between the 15th and 16th century. He was
coauthor of the most widely used Latin grammar textbook in England and a pioneer of Greek
learning.
linear precedence → Linear Precedence Rule (LP rule)
A rule in generalized phrase-structure grammar in the form of X < Y specifying that X must
precede Y. Together with immediate dominance rules and various general principles, LP rules
generate phrase-markers.
linearity
One of the three major characteristics of the linguistic sign.
linguistic sign
Principal idea of de Saussure's theory. The linguistic sign has three major characteristics:
bilaterality, arbitrariness, and linearity.
locative inversion
A PP with the function of a locative adverbial can occur as the first constituent in a sentence and is
then followed by the finite verb and the subject (leading to a verb second sentence).
local operations →  Locality Principle
This Principle is part of Universal Grammar and states that that movement has to be short, i.e. not
span too much of the sentence. In a sentence like Will the manager have fired Eric? only the first
auxiliary in the sentence can move because movement is shortest (*Have the manager will fired
Eric?). Other types of movement like subject raising or wh-movement are also subject to this
principle.
logical subject
The subject of a sentence can be defined in semantically or grammatically; e.g. in There are three
students working on this project, there would be the grammatical subject, whereas three students is
considered to be the logical (or notational) subject.
31
© Carola Trips

logic
One of three subdivisions of Hellenistic philosophy besides ethics and physics.
Logical Form
Level of syntactic representation in Government and Binding theory which operates between
surface structure and semantic interpretation. Various rules operate between surface structure and
Logical Form (LF). Syntactic constraints apply to these rules, so LF is a syntactic level of
representation. Logical Form disambiguates the semantics of a sentence. At this level the scope
relationships between operators are syntactically represented by c-command relationships - an
operator has scope over a constituent X when the operator c-commands the constituent X at Logical
Form. Thus the sentence everyone1 loves someone2 can be transformed by quantifier raising to
someone2 [everyone loves-2 ], which is interpreted by semantic rules as there is an X, and for every
Y (it is true) Y loves X.
lowering
Type of syntactic movement where properties of an element are "moved" to a lower position in the
tree structure (compare Chomsky's idea of affix hopping (1957)).
Robert Lowth
A Bishop of the Church of England and Oxford Professor of Poetry who lived during the 18th
century. In 1762 he authored A Short Introduction to English Grammar one of the most influential
textbooks of English grammar.
Lowth, Robert. Engraving. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
[Back to top]
M
32
© Carola Trips

m-command
Abbreviation for maximal-command; in generative grammar, a constituent X is said to m-command
Y if the first maximal projection which dominates X also dominates Y, and X does not dominate Y,
and Y does not dominate X.
main clause
In a complex sentence, a main clause is an independent clause, i.e. it can stand on its own as a
sentence.
maintenance: →  language maintenance
In sociolinguistics, referring to the extent to which people continue to use a language once they are
part of a community in which another language has dominant position. For instance, immigrant
groups may maintain their language despite the dominance of the language of their host country.
marked →  markedness
The binary distinction between marked and unmarked linguistic forms is based on the assumption
that when there are two alternative forms, one is more natural, more frequent and more easily
acquired by the child during language acquisition than the other. Unmarked forms are therefore
default options whereas marked forms signify a departure from the neutral or expected.
Villém Mathesius
Czech linguist, literary historian and scholar of English and Czech literature. He pioneered the
theory on theme and rheme and was one of the founding fathers of the Prague School.
Mathesius, Villém. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2015.
merging
In the Minimalist Program, an operation which forms larger units out of those already constructed.
Specifically, merge is a process which combines lexical elements in the numeration with partial
trees - a basic operation, along with move, in the process of tree construction.
33
© Carola Trips

Minimalist Program (MP)
A development in generative linguistic thinking which emphasizes the aim of making statements
about language which are as simple and general as possible. All representation and derivational
processes should be as economical as possible, in terms of the number of devices proposed to
account for language phenomena (Principle of Economy). There should be no redundant elements
in the representation of a sentence structure (Principle of Full Interpretation). The four levels of
representation recognized in standard Government and Binding Theory (D-Structure, S-Structure,
logical form (LF) and phonetic form (PF)) are reduced to two: LF and PF, referred to as interface
levels.
modal(ity)
A term used in grammatical and semantic analysis to refer to contrasts of mood which are signalled
by the verb and associated categories. English has a class of modal auxiliaries among which are
may, can, shall and must. Modals have a number of properties that sets them apart from other
auxiliaries like no -s for the third person singular, no -ing or -en forms.
movement
In generative transformational grammar, movement refers to a basic kind of transformational
operation. Movement transformations have the effect of moving constituents from one part of the
phrase-marker to another (the "landing site"), as in the formation of passive sentences.
[Back to top]
N
naturalist-conventionalist debate
According to the naturalists (one proponent of which was Heraclitus), the shape of words and their
meanings are based on natural affinity, whereas the conventionalists (one proponent of which was
Democritus) claimed that this relation is based on convention and agreement. The most compelling
pieces of linguistic evidence put forward by the naturalists were the etymology of words,
onomatopoeia (e.g. cock-a-doodle-doo), and sound symbolism. The conventionalists' arguments, on
the other hand, were based on the assumption that words (vocabulary) can be changed at will (e.g. if
speakers decided to refer to the concept of table by using the word form of chair), and that this
change does not affect the efficiency of language.
34
© Carola Trips

negative concord
A construction that employs two negatives to express a single negation. It is also called double
negative or double negation. Old English was a language which showed this phenomenon.
negative concord languages
A language/variety, in which two (or more) negative expressions in a given syntactic domain
combine to express a single logical negation. (E.g. the two negations in I don't know nothing
actually express positive meaning in non-standard English).
Neogrammarians
The Neogrammarians (other names are Jungrammatiker or Young Grammarians) were a group of
predominantly German linguists working at the University of Leipzig in the last quarter of the
nineteenth century. Leading linguists of this group were Hermann Paul, Karl Brugmann, Karl
Verner and Otto Behagel. They argued against the Romantic idea that language is the key to the
world. For them language was an objective phenomenon which requires detailed, minute
description. Further, they believed that only historical linguistics could be truly scientific, that
language is orderly and rulegoverned, and that all instances of language change, which for them
were mainly sound changes, can be explained by rules.
neutralisation
Related to the difference between inherent and structural case. In languages like German dative case
of the object in an active sentence is retained in the passive sentence whereas accusative case in the
active sentence alternates with nominative case in the passive sentence. The first case has been
called neutralisation under passivisation.
nominal agreement
The term "agreement" refers to the correspondence between two or more sentence elements in
respect to their morphosyntactic categories. Nominal agreement affects elements accompanying the
noun, such as determiners, adjectival attributes, and appositions, which agree with their antecedent
in case and other categories: cf. German Sie sucht einen Jungen, ihren kleinsten Sohn. "She is
looking for a boy, her youngest son", where Jungen "boy" and Sohn "son" are both accusative
masculine.
non-agreement
Opposite of agreement mainly relating to subject-verb agreement. Non-agreement is found in
varieties of non-standard English, e.g. If you’re a staunch union member there is advantages, where
is and advantages do not show agreement.
35
© Carola Trips

non-negative concord languages
A language in which each morphologically negative expression corresponds to a logical negation.
In Standard English the sentence I don't know nothing means 'I know everything'.
notational subject
The term refers to the semantic definition of the subject: in the sentence There are three students
working on this project, three students is the logical (or notational) subject.
null subject
In generative grammar, the term null subject refers to a phonologically empty constituent, i.e. the
subject is not marked morphologically. Languages like Spanish or Italian show null subjects (Leggo
il giornale 'I read the newspaper')
null subject parameter
One of the most well investigated parameters in Generative Grammar. If the parameter has a
positive value for a specific language, the subject is not expressed morphologically.
number
A grammatical category used for the analysis of word classes displaying contrasts as singular,
plural, dual (two), trial (three), paucal (few), etc.
[Back to top]
O
observational adequacy
A term used in generative grammar to refer to a level of achievement in the writing of grammars.
The first level of adequacy is reached if the grammatical model is able to state what combinations
of expressions do and do not give rise to grammatical sentences.
36
© Carola Trips

William of Ockham
English Franciscan friar, scholastic philosopher and theologian who lived between the 13th and
14th century. He is believed to have been the center of most major intellectual and political
controversies of the 14th century. His most influential contribution is Occam's razor, a problem-
solving principle.
Ockham, William. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 1. Jul. 2015.
OV approach
Assumption that Object-Verb word order found in data actually reflects the basic word order of a
language.
[Back to top]
P
John Palsgrave
A priest of Henry VIII of England's court who lived from 1485 to 1554. He was known as a tutor
and textbook author and created the first grammar of the French language, L'esclarcissement de la
langue francoyse.
paradigmatic
A basic term in linguistics for the set of substitutional relationships a linguistic unit has with other
units in a specific context. Paradigmatic relations can be established on all levels of language, for
example on the level of the sentence a noun like dog, house etc. can replace cat in I saw the cat.
37
© Carola Trips

parameters
In Government-Binding Theory, parameters are used to specify the types of variation that a
principle of grammar manifests among different languages. It is suggested that there are no rules of
grammar in the traditional sense, but only principles which can take a slightly different form in
different languages. For example, a head parameter specifies the positions of heads within phrases
(e.g. head-first in English, head-last in Japanese). Determining the parametric values for given
languages is known as parameter-setting. The overall approach has been termed the principles and
parameters (PPT) theory of universal grammar.
parole
One of the two subdivisions of language established by de Saussure. Parole is the spoken word as
the concrete realisation of language as it is used. Instances of parole are based on the system of
langue and vary according to register, age, dialect, among other factors.
particular grammar
One of two major variants of grammar, as opposed to general grammar; particular grammar applies
the arbitrary conventions found in common use of a particular language to unchanging general
principles.
passive voice
Verbal voice contrasting with the active and in some languages the middle voice. Passive
constructions describe the action expressed by the verb semantically from the point of view of the
patient or another non-agentive semantic role. In this process the valence of the verb when used
actively is usually changed: the subject becomes a prepositional object, usually optional, and an
object, usually the direct object, becomes the subject: A neighbour saw the robber; The robber was
seen by a neighbour. The passive is usually formed by specific auxiliaries or verb affixes.
passivisation
In generative grammar, the transformation of a sentence from its active to its passive form is known
as passivisation.
Hermann Paul
German linguist and lexicographer who lived from 1846 to 1921. He was a prominent
Neogrammarian and is mostly known for his work Prinzipien der Sprachgeschichte which has been
translated to English Principles of the History of Language.
38
© Carola Trips

Paul, Hermann. Portrait. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
performance
Language is seen as a set of specific utterances produced by native-speakers, as encountered in a
corpus. It is opposed, in this sense, to the conception of language known as competence. The
utterances of performance will contain features irrelevant to the abstract rule system, such as
hesitations and unfinished structures, arising from the various psychological and social difficulties
acting upon the speaker. These features must be discounted in a grammar of the language, which
deals with the systematic process of sentence construction.
phone
A speech sound which is identified as the realization of a single phoneme.
phoneme
Smallest sound unit in a language which is meaning distinguishing; the method to find phonemes is
to find minimal pairs (=a pair of words in which everything except for one portion under
consideration is identical).
Phonetic Form
A term in Generative Grammar for the output of the phonological component of a grammar, or the
phonological component itself; also called Phonological Form. The term is given a revised status in
the Minimalist Program.
phonological attrition
A term that refers to the gradual loss of phones in specific phonological environments.
phrase marker
Term in the earliest form of transformational grammar for the structure assigned to a sentence by a
set of phrase structure rules, in advance of rules for transformations.
39
© Carola Trips

phrase structure rules
Phrase structure rules are rewrite rules for constituents of the form S ⇒ NP + VP. This rule should
be read as an instruction to replace the sentence symbol S with a noun phrase (NP) and a verb
phrase (VP). The symbol to the left of the arrow is replaced by the symbols to the right of the arrow.
Plato
A philosopher in Classical Greece during the 4th and 3rd century BC and founder of the Academy
in Athens. He is believed to be one of the most penetrating, wide-ranging, and influential authors in
the history of philosophy.
Plato. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
Plato's problem
Argument in language acquisition that the samples of language which are available to a child during
her first language acquisition are insufficient to explain the child's innate linguistic knowledge
(poverty of stimulus).
polysynthetic
In polysynthetic languages syntactic relations in a sentence are expressed by compounding lexical
and grammatical elements into long and complex words, and syntactic functions like object or
adverbial may be incorporated into the predicate.
practical grammar
A type of grammar which aims at teaching a language (pedagogical grammar). Practical grammars
first came up in medieval times to teach Latin, and during the 18th century to teach English.
Prague School
School of linguistics centered on the Prague Linguistic Circle. It is recognizable as such from the
late 1920s. Its journal, Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de Prague was published from 1929 until
the Second World War. The Prague School united structural linguists emphasising the function of
units, e.g. in phonology, the role of phonemes in distinguishing and demarcating words, and in
syntax the role of sentence structure in context. The school was important in the 1930s above all for
40
© Carola Trips

phonology, where ideas originating in this period are the source for later work especially by
Jakobson and Martinet. A functional view of the sentence, fostered by Mathesius, was to lead in the
1950s to the theory of Functional Sentence Perspective.
pre-modals
A pre-stage in the development of the English modals where they still show properties of lexical
verbs, e.g. they could still take objects.
prescriptive →  prescription
A term used by linguists to characterize any approach which attempts to lay down rules of
correctness as to how language should be used, using criteria as purity, logic, history or literary
excellence.
prestige
An aspect that is studied in sociolinguistics where the social meaning of the language system and
language use and the common set of conditions of linguistic and social structure are investigated.
primary linguistic data
A term in language acquisition (based on Generative Grammar) which refers to the language input
of the child, deriving from parents, siblings, etc.
principles
A term used in grammatical theory for broad grammatical rules applying to language structure in
general e.g. the Projection Principle or the Principle of Structure Dependency.
Projection Principle
A central Principle of Generative Grammar which projects the properties of lexical entries onto the
structure of a sentence. It states that the subcategorization requirements of lexical items must be
satisfied at all levels of representation. It is expressed in the structure of a phrase: for example a
head noun (N) heads units that are Ns, up to the level of an NP.
41
© Carola Trips

pronoun exchange
One process which clearly indicates the usage of a variety of English, as in Her said to I (meaning 'I
said to her).
[Back to top]
Q
Marcus Fabius Quintilian
A Roman rhetorician who hailed from Hispania and lived during the 1st century. He authored a
twelve-volume textbook on rhetoric named Institutio Oratoria.
[Back to top]
R
raising
In transformational grammar, a rule for deriving certain infinitive constructions by which the
subject noun phrase of an embedded sentence is "raised" into the subject or object position of the
matrix sentence in the transition from deep structure to surface structure. The rest of the sentence is
marked as "infinitive".
rationalism
17th century branch of philosophy following Renèe Descartes. The core assumption is that there is
some knowledge which humans did not acquire through interaction with the external world but
which must be built in. Chomsky developed this idea in Cartesian Linguistics and established that
in language, too, there is an innate aspect. He based this on the fact that language is an activity
specific to humans, that language ability is creative and that there is a distinction between an
internal and an external language system.
42
© Carola Trips

reanalysis
The reorganization of syntactic struture by which the surface representation remains identical, but
the hierarchical deep structure is changed.
recategorization
In the field of grammar, categorization refers to the establishment of a set of classifactory units or
properties used in the description of language, which have the same basic distribution, and which
occur as a structural unit throughout the language. In the course of language change, there may be
alterations in the category status of a unit (=recategorization). For example the English pre-modals
underwent the process of recategorization from lexical verbs to auxiliaries.
rection
Another term for government (see government).
Regularity Hypothesis
Postulated by the Neogrammarians. It says that sound change is regular and inviolable (no
exceptions), it excludes sporadic changes and is restricted to a particular speech community at a
particular time.
residual Verb Second language
In V2 languages, as the name implies, the finite verb consistently occurs as the second element in
the sentence. More precisely, it follows exactly one constituent (XP). Both English and French have
been referred to as 'residual V2' languages, since a finite verb or auxiliary may occupy C in a
restricted set of sentences like constituent questions and sentences introduced by a negative
element.
response
Part of the central notion of behavioral psychology (stimulus vs. response) according to which
human behaviour can be explained after a model of a mechanical apparatus: all forms of experience,
ideas and intentions are interpreted as the result of an interchange between observable stimuli and
the corresponding responses.
43
© Carola Trips

resumptive pronoun
In grammatical analysis the term resumptive refers to an element or structure which repeats or in
some way recapitulates the meaning of a prior element. An example for resumptive pronouns can be
observed with Mary, I know her.
rewrite rules
A rule which is interpreted as an instruction to replace one string of elements with another. Thus,
given the string a b c, a rule b ⇒ x y is an instruction to rewrite it as a x y c. At the beginning of
Generative Grammar a grammar was at first presented as a set of rewrite rules. The units it
generated were sentences, hence S as an initial symbol, or one-member string, from which rewriting
began. The first of a set of phrase structure rules, as set out for English in the earliest formulation,
had the form S ⇒ NP + VP: rewrite S as the string NP + VP. Another had the form VP ⇒ Verb +
NP: thus NP + VP could be written as NP + Verb + NP, and so on. The structures were assigned
accordingly, by rules for transformations. This formulation was effectively sidelined in the 1960s,
as problems of formalization became less central.
rheme
According to Methesius' model of Satzperspektive, known/old information is expressed by the
theme (topic, given), and what is said about the known information is expressed by the rheme (new,
comment).
rhetoric
Traditionally a discipline concerned with the effective use of language, to persuade, give pleasure,
and so on. It is distinguished from grammar in the ancient Western system of education. Rhetoric
tended, in the nature of things, to overlap with grammar, and many topics once claimed for it are
now claimed instead for sundry branches of, or on the borders of, linguistics: especially for parts of
syntax, pragmatics, stylistics, and sociolinguistics.
rightward movement
Syntactic operation in which an element in a sentence moved to the right of its original position in
the surface structure.
root sense (root modality)
The non-epistemic sense of modals, which deals with obligation, permission, ability etc. One
example would be the use of can in the sentence He can sing.
44
© Carola Trips

[Back to top]
S
S-structure
The least abstract level of syntactic structure in Government-Binding Theory. Derived by
successive modifications from the notion of surface structure in Standard Theory of
transformational grammar; effectively jettisoned, as a distinctive level of representation, in the
programme of minimalism.
Sanctius
Latinized name of Francisco Sánchez de las Brozas, whose theoretical work on Latin grammar
(Minerva: seu de causis linguae latinae) appeared in its definite form in 1587.
Edward Sapir
German-born American anthropologist and linguist, who lived between 1884 and 1939. He
formulated the classification of Indigenous languages of the Americas and had a major part in
developing the modern concept of the phoneme.
Sapir, Edward. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis
The hypothesis that language affects or even determines cognitive processes such as thought and
experience.
Satzperspektive
Mathesius introduced the model of Satzperspektive (sentence perspective) which analysed sentences
according to their communicative function. He stated that a sentence is ordered based on its
information structure: known/old in- formation is expressed by the theme (topic, given), and what is
said about the known information is expressed by the rheme (new, comment).
45
© Carola Trips

Ferdinand de Saussure
Swiss linguist and semiotician, who lived from 1857 to 1913. He is considered to be one of the
major founders of 20th-century linguistics and semiology and also contributed to other human
sciences like philosophy, psychology, sociology and anthropology.
Saussure, Ferdinand. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
August Wilhelm Schlegel
German poet, critic, and translator, living from 1767 to 1845. He is best known for his translations
of Shakespeare and also was the first professor in Sanskrit on the European continent.
Schlegel, August Wilhelm von. Photograph. Britannica Academic. Web. 1 Jul. 2015.
August Schleicher
German linguist who lived in the mid-19th century. He authored A Compendium of the
Comparative Grammar of the Indo-European Languages and invented the Stammbaumtheorie
(family-tree theory) to portray language development.
Schleicher, August. Photograph. Britannica Academic. Web. 1 Jul. 2015.
scholastic →  scholasticism
General term for the schools of philosophy in western Europe in the high Middle Ages; important in
the history of linguistics for the development of speculative grammar.
46
© Carola Trips

school of Port-Royal
A scholar in search of language universals; at this school which was a monastic community outside
Paris the empiricist grammarian Claude Lancelot and the philosopher Antoine Arnauld wrote the
work Grammaire générale et raisonnée (1660) with the aim to define the rational order underlying
language. According to these scholars language reflects three fundamental mental operations: first,
forming a concept, second, forming a judgement, and third, reasoning. They further claimed that
these three operations were found in all linguistic categories in all languages. So here mental
processes are directly related to grammar for the first time. Their work became highly popular and
influential in the following decades, and many scholars reading it identified two different
approaches to dealing with language: General grammar and particular grammar.
Schulgrammatik (school grammar, traditional grammar)
Type of grammar based on Aristotelian logic and ancient Greek and Latin grammars, often as an aid
to learning these languages and interpreting classical texts. Its general characteristics are: 
(a) classification of data into formal categories, 
(b) classification based on logical, semantic, syntactic, and extralinguistic criteria, with little 
attention paid to functional aspects of communication, 
(c) primarily a prescriptive attitude, 
(d) usually written rather than spoken language as the subject, 
(e) grammatical explanations often confusing synchronic and diachronic aspects, 
(f) rules that are not explicit or exhaustive.
segmentation
One of two steps in Harris discovery procedures; segmentation of the material through substitution,
i.e. through paradigmatic interchangeability of elements having the same function.
selection
First stage in the process of standardisation. One variety must be selected from a pool of varieties in
order to be accepted by a group of speakers.
semantic roles
Synonym for "deep case" in case grammar; usually the roles of nouns etc. in relation to a verb, e.g.
in I can feel it in my chest the semantic roles of I, it, and in my chest might (in one account) be those
of experiencer, theme, and locative.
47
© Carola Trips

semantic equivalence
Term used in sociolinguistics where variation is seen as two (or more) variants of one underlying
variable. The variants maintain semantic equivalence.
sentence negation
A construction in grammatical and semantic analysis. Sentence negation expresses the contradiction
of some or all of a sentence's meaning. In English grammar, it is expressed by the negative particle
not or n't.
sentence-medial
An auxiliary may occur in a sentence-medial position, i.e. it follows the subject and precedes the
VP.
Seven Liberal Arts
Saint Augustine (354-430) wrote a book on seven liberal arts, which consisted of seven disciplines
which were divided into two groups: the trivium comprising grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic (the
language arts), and the quadrivium comprising arithmetic, music, geometry, and astronomy
(mathematical arts).
signified
According to the analysis of de Saussure, every sign has two aspects, one of which is the material
sign, the signifier (signifié), which is realised phonetically (image acoustique) or graphemically. For
example, the signifier of 'tree' is the graphemic and phonetic representation <tree> and [tri:], and the
signified is the concept of 'tree' that a speaker has in his mind of this object.
signifier
According to the analysis of de Saussre, every sign has two concepts, one of which is the signifier,
which is the conceptual design. For example, the signifier of 'tree' is the graphemic and phonetic
representation <tree> and [tri:], and the signified is the concept of 'tree' that a speaker has in his
mind of this object.
simple sentence
A simple sentence contains only a subject and a predicate, e.g. I saw him.
48
© Carola Trips

Burrhus Frederic Skinner
American psychologist, behaviorist, author, inventor, and social philosopher. He was born in 1904
and died 1990. His views greatly influenced education and philosophy.
Skinner, B. F. Photograph. Britannica Academic. Web. 1 Jul. 2015.
Socrates
A Classical Greek philosopher who lived during the 4th century. He is believed to be one of the
founding fathers of Western philosophy and best known through the writings of his student Plato.
Socrates. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2015.
sound change
Quantitative or qualitative change in sound; historical change in the sound system of a language,
motivated either phonetically (to the trend towards simplicity in the articulatory effort),
phonologically (related to the trend towards maximal contrasts and distinctiveness of speech sounds
in communication), by language-external factors (related to social or social-psychological
motivation, i.e. trend towards maximum radius of communication, optimal individuation in
interactions with others, adaptation to norms of specific social groups, and so on) or by analogy
(trend towards simplifying acquisition and economy).
standard
In sociolinguistics, this term refers to a prestige variety of language used within a speech
community. Standard languages/dialects cut across regional differences, thereby providing a unified
means of communication, and therefore an institutionalized norm used in the mass-media, teaching,
etc. Linguistics forms or varieties which do not conform to this norm are referred to as "sub-
standard" or "non-standard".
49
© Carola Trips

Georg Stiernhielm
A Swedish poet and pioneer of linguistics, who lived from 1598 to 1672.
Stiernhielm, Georg. Portrait. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
strong inflection
A strong inflection is distinguished in Germanic from a weak inflection. A weak form in Old
English would be one normal in an expression with definite reference; a strong form elsewhere.
strong verbs
A strong verb has forms distinguished by ablaut where those of a weak verb are distinguished by a
suffix. This sing is strong (sing-sang-sung), while play is a weak verb (play-played-played).
structural Case
In Case Theory - one of the sub-theories of Government-Binding Theory - (see Case), structural
Case is assigned to NPs at S-structure.
Sturtevant's Paradox
The paradox by which sound change is regular but creates irregularity while analogical change is
irregular but creates regularity.
subject-drop
Languages in which a subject can but does not have to be realised morphologically, e.g. in Italian
you can say "lego il libro" where the finite verb "lego" contains the information 1. Person Singular
about the subject.
subject-verb-inversion
The sequence of the constituents subject and verb is syntactically reversed to verb-subject.
50
© Carola Trips

subordination
In grammatical analysis, to refer to the process or result of linking linguistic units so that they have
different syntactic status, one being dependent upon the other, and usually a constituent of the other;
subordinate is usually contrasted with superordinate. Subordinate clauses are illustrated in the
sentence "John left when the bus arrived": the subordinating conjunction is "when"; in endocentric
phrases, the term subordinate is also used to refer to the words which modify the head, e.g. in all
the very big cars, all the very big is subordinate to cars, and very is subordinate to big.
substitution
A term to refer to the process or result of replacing one item by another at a particular place in a
structure. In grammar, the structural context within which this replacement occurs is known as a
substitution frame, e.g. in the sentence The _ is angry, and the set of items which can be used
paradigmatically at a given place is known as a substitution class. So in this example all animate
nouns in the singular can fill this slot (girl, man, etc.). Substitution is used as a test for determining
syntactic constituents since we assume that only constituents of the same kind can be substituted in
a syntactic structure.
surface level
Defined by Chomsky as one aspect of the syntactic structure of a sentence. Established at a less
abstract level than deep structure, and the form of representation seen throughout all modifications
of what he later called the "Standard Theory", as determining the phonetic interpretation of
sentences.
surface structure
Central theoretical term in transformational grammar, opposed to deep structure; the surface
structure of a sentence is the final stage in the syntactic representation of a sentence, which provides
the input to the phonological component of the grammar, and which thus most closely corresponds
to the structure of the sentence we articulate and hear. Analysing a surface string of morphemes
through constituent analysis is a universal procedure which indicates many important facts about
linguistic structure; but it by no means indicates everything, e.g. it gives no explanation for the
recognition of ambiguous sentences.
symmetric verb second
Refers to languages which show Verb Second both in main sentences and subordinate clauses.
Theoretically, the verb moves to the second position in both sentence types. Modern Icelandic and
Yiddish have been classificed as symmetric Verb Second languages.
51
© Carola Trips

synchronic
One of the two main temporal dimensions of linguistic investigation that were proposed by
Ferdinand de Saussure (the other being diachronic). In synchronic linguistics, languages are studied
at one specific point in time: one describes a "state" of the language, disregarding whatever changes
might be taking place. For instance, one could do a synchronic description of the language of
Chaucer.
synchronic variation
Synchronic states are not homogeneous, rather they are heterogeneous (speech habits differ from
speaker to speaker). Synchronic variation has been seen as a prerequisite for linguistic change.
syncretism
The relation between two or more words in a paradigm that have different morphosyntactic features
but are identical in form. For instance, the distinction between past tense and a past or passive
participle is syncretized (past: walked, participle: walked).
syntactic variation
Term that refers to expressing the same in different ways syntactically. Different perspectives on
this phenomenon can be found: variationist sociolinguists assume that inherent variability is a
property of grammar, formal linguists like generativists remove variation from the core grammar
and attribute it to competition between grammars.
syntagmatic
Relation between elements that form part of the same form, sequence, construction, etc.; e.g.
between s, p and r in a form such as spring, or between a subject and a verb in constructions such as
Bill hunts. Defined by Saussure as a relation "in praesentia", i.e. between units present in the same
sequence. Opposed by him to associative; opposed later, from the 1930s onwards, to paradigmatic.
syntax
A term in linguistics to refer to the study of the rules governing the way words are combined to
form sentences in a language; the study of the interrelationships between elements of sentence
structure, and of the rules governing the arrangement of sentences in sequences.
52
© Carola Trips

synthetic
Synthetic languages are languages where grammatical relations are expressed within a word. For
example inflectional endings express grammatical relations, and lexical and grammatical
meanings/functions are thus expressed in one word.
[Back to top]
T
T(ense)
An inflectional category whose basic role is to indicate the time of an event etc. in relation to the
moment of speaking. It is therefore a category used in grammatical description of verbs, referring
primarily to the way the grammar marks the time at which the action denoted by the verb took
place.
Lucien Tesnière
French linguist who lived from 1893 to 1954. In his book Éléments de syntaxe structural, which
was published posthumously, he proposed an approach to the syntax of natural languages that
would become known as dependency grammar.
Tesnière, Lucien. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 1. Jul. 2015.
T-model
The T-Model is a model of grammar prevalent in the Principles and Parameters framework, which
has the general structure in (i):
DS 
| 
SS 
/ \ 
PF LF 
It is usually assumed that, in English, DS (D-structure) is generated by rewrite rules, or is projected
from the rules of X-bar theory, and obeys the conditions of theta-theory and the Extended
53
© Carola Trips

Projection Principle. SS (S-structure) is derived from DS by the repeated application of affect alpha
(e.g. NP-movement and Wh-movement), and must meet the demands of Case theory, and possibly
Binding Theory. LF (Logical Form) is derived from SS through the application of affect alpha (e.g
QR, Wh-raising (see Wh-in-situ)), and is regarded as the interface with the conceptual system;
possibly, LF obeys Binding Theory and is the locus of gamma-checking (gamma-marking). PF is
derived from SS and is considered the interface with the articulatory-perceptual system. Both PF
and LF are subject to the principle of Full interpretation. The division of labor among the three
syntactic levels of representation (DS, SS, LF) is subject to debate, and may vary across languages.
taxonomic structuralism →  distributionalism
Branch of American structuralism which claims that the description of a language should be based
on evidence of distributions alone, in abstract form and preceding the study of meaning.
thematic roles
In the generative Government and Binding theory (GB), semantic roles are called thematic roles (or
theta-roles for short); e.g. agent or patient.
thematic subject
Also referred to as "grammatical subject"; the subject as defined traditionally, as a specific
argument of a verb, opposed to a logical subject. E.g. in "Yesterday I was delayed by fog", the
thematic subject is "I", i.e. it is the element with which "was" agrees; but the logical subject would
be "fog" (the fog was responsible for what happened).
theme
In Mathesius' "Satzperspektive", known/old information is expressed by the theme (topic, given),
and what is said about the known information is expressed by the rheme (new, comment).
Theory of Government and Binding
A version of the theory of Universal Grammar which claims that human languages consist of
principles that are the same for any grammar and parameters that allow grammars to vary in limited
ways (s. Theory of Principles and Parameters). It refined deep and surface structure into the more
technical notions of D-structure and S-structure.
54
© Carola Trips

Theory of Principles and Parameters
Theory developed by Noam Chomsky in the 1980s which claims that natural language grammars
are not constructed out of construction-specific phrase structure and transformational rules but of
something more general. Principles state conditions on grammaticality that are not confined to a
specific construction in a specific language but are in principle applicable to all constructions in all
languages. The variations found between languages is defined by parameters which are set during
first language acquisition based on the input the child is exposed to.
Theta Criterion
A requirement in Generative Grammar that every argument must be assigned one and only one
theta role (term for semantic roles such as agent or patient, cf. case roles).
Theta Theory
One of the sub-theories of Government-Binding Theory. Its main principle is the theta-criterion,
which requires that every argument is assigned just one theta role and that every theta role is
assigned to just one argument. Its main role is to determine the positions to which NP-Movement is
possible.
transformations
A process relating representations of syntactic surface structure with that of deep structure. It is via
transformations that we derive the structure of an interrogative, such as Are they coming?, from that
of a declarative, such as They are coming.
transformational rules
A transformational rule consists of a sequence of symbols which is rewritten as another sequence,
e.g. a linguistic structure (tree structure) is transformed into another tree structure. For example, a
passive sentence is subject to transformational rules (it is built via these rules from the active
equivalent of the sentence). Transformational rules are language specific and subject to numerous
constraints.
transitive
A term that refers to a verb which takes a direct object as in the I stroked the cat.
55
© Carola Trips

transitivity
A category used in the grammatical analysis of clause/sentence constructions, with particular
reference to the verb's relationship to dependent elements of structure. The main members of this
category are transitive, referring to a verb which can take a direct object, and intransitive, where it
cannot.
Dionysisus Thrax
Greek grammarian who lived in 2nd century BC. He authored the first known work on Greek
grammar in which he gave a morphological description of the language.
Tree Adjoining Grammar
A type of formal grammar which recognizes trees as primitive elements (elementary trees),
combining these into larger structures. Elementary trees are of two kinds: initial trees, which
contain the basic phrasal elements of simple sentences, without any recursion; and auxiliary tree,
which represent recursive structures. The tag formalism makes use of the operations of substitution
(in which a root node from one tree is merged with a non-terminal node in another, to produce a
new tree) and adjunction (in which an auxiliary tree is attached to a non-terminal node in an initial
tree).
Nikolaj Trubetzkoy
Russian linguist and historian who lived from 1890 to 1938. He is considered to be the founder of
morphophonology and had a large impact on the Prague School of structural linguistics.
Trubetzkoy, Nikolaj. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
[Back to top]
U
56
© Carola Trips

Unification Grammars
(1) In its broadest sense, an umbrella term for all generative grammar models, especially those 
generative grammars that use a unification operation in their rule systems.
(2) In a narrower sense, a member of a family of newer grammatical models in which feature 
unification is used to capture the information flow in derivation. Unification grammar is based on 
the further development of linguistic features. Every linguistic unit is characterized by a feature 
structure, that is, by a number of attribute-value-pairs, whose values can be either atomic symbols 
or feature structures.
universal
Properties common to all languages (a universal grammar in this sense would thus be a grammar
valid for all languages).
Universal Grammar
Noam Chomsky's term for a set of principles and parameters seen as determined by the human
genome and as both facilitating and constraining the development of speech in any member of the
species. The subject, accordingly, of Principles and Parameters Theory posited originally in the
conviction that, if it did not exist, there would be no way in which children could learn the language
of their community.
universals
Grammatical universals are properties which are common to all human languages. The following
formal and logical typology of universals can be postulated: (a) unrestricted universals (e.g. every
language has vowels), (b) unidirectional implications between two properties (e.g. if a languge has a
dual in its number system, then it also has a plural, but not vice versa), (c) limited equivalence,
which refers to bidirectional implications between non-universal properties (e.g. if a language has a
lateral click, then it also has a dental click and vice versa), (d) statistical universals, which have the
character of quasi-universals (e.g. with very few exceptions, nasals occur in all the world's
languages), (e) statistical correlations, which refer to the relations between properties (such as, if a
certain property is present, e.g. a specification of the second person singular, then the probability of
the third person being specified is greater than if the second person is not specified).
unmarked
A term used in linguistics in various senses, to refer to a property of language which is more
neutral, common, expected or general than a corresponding property, which is said to be marked.
Unmarked values in some approaches are also often called "default" values, and can be handled by
conditions that a category must meet if it can, but need not meet if it cannot, e.g. the default value
for case might be accusative. The current use of the term in core grammar should be noted.
57
© Carola Trips

[Back to top]
V
Josef Vachek
A Czech linguist and bohemist who lived from 1909 to 1996. He was a prominent member of the
Prague linguistic circle.
Vachek, Josef. Photograph. Masaryk University. Web. 1. Jul. 2015.
Marcus Terentius Varro
Roman scholar and writer who lived during the 1st century BC. He is believed to have authored
over 600 books, amongst others De lingua latina libri XXV (On the Latin Language in 25 Books).
Varro. Photograph. Amirite. Web. 1. Jul. 2015.
V-to-I movement
Instance of head movement where verbs move from the V head to the I(nfl) head.
V-to-I-to-C movement
Instance of head movement where verbs move from the V head to the I(nfl) head to the
C(omplementizer) head.
valence/valency
The ability of a lexeme (e.g. verb, adjective, noun) to predetermine its syntactic environment in that
it places certain requirements on the surrounding constituents in reference to their grammatical
characteristics. Thus the verb "greet" or "help" require a direct object.
58
© Carola Trips

valency grammar
A valency grammar presents a model of a sentence containing a fundamental element (typically, the
verb) and a number of dependent elements (variously referred to as arguments, expressions,
complement or valents) whose number and type is determined by the valency attributed to the verb.
Thus, the semantic and syntactic roles of valents are described within a framework of dependency
relations.
valeur
De Saussure's analysis deals with the value of a sign (valeur) in the linguistic system. He stated that
language is a synchronic system of single units (signs) which have a value in this system. The value
of a sign is defined through the system, in paradigmatic and syntagmatic relations. Further, the sign
is in opposition to the other signs in the system, i.e they are defined by their differences.
variable rules
Concept developed to describe linguistic variation using statistical methods. A speaker's choice
between (at least) two linguistic (phonological, morphological, syntactic) alternatives and their
dependency on linguistic and extralinguistic environmental conditions (phonological or syntactic
context, discourse conversation, identity of the speaker with a particular social group, and so on)
can be calculated using individual statistical models as an indication of the probability of use of a
particular variable rule.
variationist sociolinguistics
In sociolinguistics, descriptive approaches that presume the systematically ordered heterogeneity of
natural languages. Such linguistic variants result from (a) spatial differences (⇒ dialect), (b) class-
specific linguistic behaviour, (c) situative factors (e.g. formal vs. informal conversational contexts),
(d) stages of language acquisition, (e) language contact, and (f) the origin and development of
pidgin and creole languages. In all cases phonological, morphological, syntactic, lexical, and
pragmatic traits of linguistic behaviour vary with regard to extralinguistic factors. Concerning the
empirical investigation and the theoretical description of linguistic variations, two recent
methodological positions can be differentiated: first, the concept of quantitatively determinable
variable rules, and second, the approach of implicational analysis. Besides the description of
linguistic variety, variational linguistics is concerned with the problems of the origin and
quantification of linguistic varieties in relation to extralinguistic factors, above all with certain
aspect of applied linguistics.
59
© Carola Trips

varieties
Generic term for a particular coherent form of language in which specific extralinguistic criteria can
be used to define it as a variety. For example, a geographically defined variety is knows as a dialect,
a variety with a social basis as a sociolect, a functional variety as jargon or a sublanguage, a
situative variety as a register.
verb raising
This term is used in two different ways here: 1. it refers to the movement of a finite lexical verb
from its base (V) position to the I position or C position (movement to the left); 2. it refers to the
movement of the lexical verb to the right (movement to the right; related to phenomena in Old
English).
verb movement
Syntactic operation where a verb moves from one head position to another. This operation is subject
to the Head Movement Constraint.
verb second
Order of elements, e.g. in main sentences in German, in which the finite verb, either lexical or
grammatical, must occur in second position: Vielleicht wei⇒t du das nicht (lit. "Perhaps you don't
know this") vs. *Vielleicht du wei⇒t das nicht
vernacular
Language native to a given community as opposed to a learned or second language. A vernacular
form is a form which belongs to the speech that is native to a community.
Karl Verner
Danish linguist who studied Oriental, Germanic and Slavic languages. He lived in the 19th century
and is best known for his formulation of Verner's Law.
Verner, Karl. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 20 Sep. 2016.
60
© Carola Trips

Verner's Law
The explanation by Karl Verner of a set of exceptions to Grimm's Law in which the Germanic
reflex of a Proto-Indo-European voiceless stop was not, as predicted, a voiceless fricative. In words
where it was, the accent in Proto-Indo-European, as attested by other languages such as Vedic, had
fallen on the preceding syllable. Where it was not, the accent had fallen elsewhere.
verse grammar
In the stage of grammar development, verse grammar developed in schools preparing students for
university (approx.. 1100-1350); these grammars consisted of a long verse of Latin grammar
dealing with parts of speech, syntax, quantity, meter, and figures of speech.
VO approach
Assumption that VO order reflects the canonical order of a (VO) language.
VP-adverb-verb-inversion
Inversion of adverb and verb, i.e. exchanging the verb and the adverb position.
VP-internal subject hypothesis
A hypothesis in Government and Binding Theory which became popular in the 1980s. It states that
in a tree structure, the subject actually originates inside the VP (and moves to Spec,IP).
[Back to top]
W
wave model
Model proposed by J. Schmidt in the 1870s in which the historical relations within Indo-European
and other families of languages are seen in terms of the intersection of individual changes, each
originating in a specific group of speakers and spreading to others with progressively weaker effect.
The image is that of the waves caused by stones dropped into different places in a pool.
61
© Carola Trips

weak verbs
A weak verb has forms derived by the addition of a suffix where those of strong verbs are
distinguished by ablaut. An example is bark-barked-barked.
[Back to top]
X
X-bar Theory
A system of grammatical analysis developed in generative linguistics as an alternative to traditional
accounts of phrase structure and lexical categories, and constraining phrase structure rules in
transformational grammar. In X-bar Theory, universal structural principles help build the
syntactically complex categories of natural languages like NP, VP, PP etc on the basis of one
structure with a maximal projection XP, with an intermediate level X' and a minimal projection X.
This structure can be applied to all lexical and functional categories (VP, PP, CP, DP, etc.).
[Back to top]
Y
Yiddish
West Germanic, historically a variety of German influenced heavily by Hebrew and spoken by
Jewish communities over a wide area of central and eastern Europe; after the massacre of Jews in
the Second World War the largest body of speakers was in the USA.
[Back to top]
Z
Zeno of Citium
Greek thinker and teacher who lived from 334 to 262 BC. He is the founder of the Stoic school of
62
© Carola Trips

philosophy which became the dominant philosophy from the Hellenistic period through to the
Roman era.
Zeno of Citium. Photograph. Wikimedia. Web. 1. Jul. 2015.
[Back to top]
63
© Carola Trips

