See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/23226971
Letter perception: From pixels to pandemonium
Article  in  Trends in Cognitive Sciences · September 2008
DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2008.06.006 · Source: PubMed
CITATIONS
178
READS
650
3 authors:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Attention and automation View project
Decision making View project
Jonathan Grainger
Aix-Marseille Université
450 PUBLICATIONS   24,324 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Arnaud Rey
CNRS & Aix-Marseille Université
84 PUBLICATIONS   1,930 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Stephane Dufau
Aix-Marseille Université
64 PUBLICATIONS   2,297 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Jonathan Grainger on 26 October 2022.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

This article appeared in a journal published by Elsevier. The attached
copy is furnished to the author for internal non-commercial research
and education use, including for instruction at the authors institution
and sharing with colleagues.
Other uses, including reproduction and distribution, or selling or
licensing copies, or posting to personal, institutional or third party
websites are prohibited.
In most cases authors are permitted to post their version of the
article (e.g. in Word or Tex form) to their personal website or
institutional repository. Authors requiring further information
regarding Elsevier’s archiving and manuscript policies are
encouraged to visit:
http://www.elsevier.com/copyright

Author's personal copy
Letter perception:
from pixels to pandemonium
Jonathan Grainger, Arnaud Rey and Ste´phane Dufau
CNRS and Aix-Marseille University, Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive, Universite´ d’Aix-Marseille I, 3 place Victor Hugo, 13331
Marseille, France
In 1959, Oliver Selfridge proposed a model of letter
perception, the Pandemonium model, in which the cen-
tral hypothesis was that letters are identiﬁed via their
component features. Although a consensus developed
around this general approachover theyears, key evidence
in its favor remained lacking. Recent research has started
to provide important evidence in favor of feature-based
letter perception, describing the nature of the features,
and the time-course of processes involved in mapping
features onto abstract letter identities. There is now hope
that future ‘pandemonium-like’ models will be able to
account for the rich empirical database on letter identiﬁ-
cation that has accumulated over the past 50 years, hence
solving one key component of the reading process.
What is the letter ‘a’?
The cognitive scientist and philosopher Douglas Hofstadter
once noted [1] that ‘The central problem of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence is the question: what is the letter a?’ What Hofstadter
was suggesting in his provocative statement is that un-
derstanding the mechanisms underlying invariant recog-
nition of the arbitrary signs that compose the Roman
alphabet (a = A 6¼ b) will be a major step towards under-
standing
the essence
of human intelligence.
Letters
represent a perfect example of the kind of symbol that
humans thrive on, and letters are sufﬁciently limited in
complexity and number toprovideahighlytractabledomain
of investigation. Letters are also the gateway to reading [2–
4], perhaps the most complex skill that humans have to
master without speciﬁc genetic predisposition. Further-
more, a letter-based strategy for reading in alphabetical
orthographies has probably developed because it is far more
economical to solveshape invariance for 26letters compared
with tens of thousands of words [3], and understanding
shape-invariant recognition is a major endeavor of current
research on visual object perception [5]. In this article we
review exciting new developments in this central topic of
cognitive science. Recent research provides converging evi-
dence in support of the classic account of letter perception
formulated by Oliver Selfridge 50 years ago (the Pandemo-
nium model), and the hope that a complete account of the
processes involved in recognizing a letter of the alphabet is
within reach.
Pandemonium in the air
The starting point of contemporary research in this ﬁeld is
Selfridge’s [6,7] seminal work, laying the foundations for a
cognitive theory of letter perception. In Pandemonium,
letter identiﬁcation is achieved by hierarchically organized
layers of feature and letter detectors. Support for such a
hierarchical organization was provided at that time by
neurophysiological studies of the cat visual cortex [8]. In
spite of this evidence, an alternative theoretical approach,
template-matching, has also been favored by cognitive
scientists. Template-matching models assume that several
shape-exemplars of a given letter are stored in memory,
and that recognition consists in ﬁnding the best match
between a target item and one of these memory traces. In
this approach, a new template is learned and stored each
time a new target stimulus differs notably from existing
templates. Simple versions of template-matching compare
descriptions of the stimulus as a set of pixel intensities
with corresponding representations in long-term memory,
but the distinction between feature-based and template-
matching approaches can be blurred by incorporating tem-
plate matchers as feature detectors in Pandemonium [9].
Nevertheless, the major drawback with template-match-
ing models, as already noted by Neisser [10], is that the
matching procedure requires prior normalization of the
stimulus (adjusting the stimulus to a prototypical position,
size and orientation), and proposals for such a process in
most cases lack psychological and neurophysiological
plausibility. Furthermore, a general consensus has devel-
oped over the years in favor of feature-based approaches.
What is the key evidence for this, and what are the
features?
Show me the features
The confusion matrix is the traditional method used to
hunt for features. In a typical experiment used to generate
a confusion matrix, isolated letters are presented in data-
limited conditions (brief exposures and/or low luminance
and/or masking) and erroneous letter reports are noted.
Error rate (e.g. reporting F when E was presented) is
hypothesized to reﬂect visual similarity driven by shared
features. An analysis of the pattern of letter confusions was
therefore expected to reveal the set of features used to
identify letters. There are >70 published studies on letter
confusability, and some have formed the basis of concrete
proposals of lists of features for letters of the Roman
alphabet, mainly consisting of lines of different orientation
and curvature [11–13].
One major drawback of standard letter confusion data is
that the method used to degrade stimuli (to generate
confusion errors) inﬂuences the nature of the confusions
Review
Corresponding author: Grainger, J. (jonathan.grainger@univ-provence.fr).
1364-6613/$ – see front matter  2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2008.06.006 Available online 27 August 2008
381

Author's personal copy
and furthermore confounds perceptual confusions with
post-perceptual guessing. In one of the ﬁrst studies to
overcome this drawback, Podgorny and Garner [14] used
a same–different matching task and showed that the
resulting discrimination-time matrix for letters correlated
well with judgments of perceptual similarity (see also Ref.
[15] for confusion matrices expressed as saccade latencies).
Furthermore, having response time (RT) as the dependent
measure avoids the problem of empty cells and provides a
ratio scale that enables the application of more powerful
metric analyses. More recently, Courrieu, Farioli and
Grainger [16] used a Go–NoGo variant of the same–differ-
ent matching task, with participants responding only when
the two letters were different. The discrimination times
were transformed into Euclidean distances by using a
‘monotonic embedding’ technique [17]. A principal com-
ponent analysis revealed 25 dimensions, many of which
were clearly interpretable as elementary visual features
(Figure 1).
A new look at features
Two recent articles open up an exciting new perspective for
research investigating feature-based letter perception. Pelli
et al. [18] measured contrast thresholds to Roman letters
presented in different fonts, in addition to letters and char-
acters from other languages. The authors expected letters to
be identiﬁed optimally, like a single feature (i.e. a spatial
frequency channel or ﬁlter in a grating experiment). This is
what
would
be
expected
from
a
template-matching
approach. To test this, Pelli et al. [18] measured efﬁciency
of letter identiﬁcation (Box 1) under varying viewing con-
ditions and found that efﬁciency was independent of
stimulus duration, eccentricity and size, but did vary across
different alphabets and fonts. The sub-optimal performance
Figure 1. Illustration of inter-letter similarities (Euclidian distances) revealed by a same–different matching experiment [16]. (a) A dendogram plot in which the height of
connecting bars reflects Euclidian distance (smaller = closer). Inter-letter similarities form clusters shown in different colors. (b) A projection of the same Euclidian distances
on a plane [44]. The original distances in high-dimensional Euclidian space are coded by the color of connecting lines. In both panels it can be seen that letters with specific
combinations of simple features group together, such as ‘vertical line’ plus ‘circle’ (b, d, g, p, q). This corresponds to the main similarity class obtained by principal
component analysis. The second similarity class, corresponding to small curvilinear shapes (a, c, e, o, s), is also visible, in addition to combinations of similarity classes
such as ‘vertical line’ plus one small feature (f, t, i, j, l).
Box 1. The psychophysics of letter perception
The visual world can be described in terms of variations in spatial
frequency, that is, changes in luminance across space [45]. Letters
have a broad spatial frequency spectrum, so what part of the
spectrum is used to identify letters? Two main techniques have been
used to answer this question – measuring identification thresholds for
bandpass filtered letters, and measuring variations in identification
thresholds as a function of the bandpass characteristics of a masking
stimulus (critical-band masking, Figure 2 in main text). The key to
both approaches involves comparison of human performance with
that of an ideal observer. Letters are better identified with high-pass
filters than with low-pass filters, but this is because more information
is available in the high-pass stimuli. Ideal observer analysis enables
information availability to be equated, hence enabling biases in
information utilization to emerge [46]. The measure of human
performance relative to the ideal observer is called efficiency.
On the one hand, several studies have reported that observers
identify octave-band wide filtered letters with almost as much
efficiency as unfiltered letters for all but extreme (very high and very
low frequency) bandpass filters [46–48]. On the other hand, critical-
band masking experiments indicate that only a single channel is used
to identify broadband (i.e. unfiltered) letters, with the centre
frequency of the channel varying as a function of letter size, font
and alphabet [21,49]. This could be because the presence of noise in
the critical-band masking procedure makes it harder to learn to use
different spatial frequency channels in the course of an experiment
[50] or because filtered stimuli force participants to use information
that they would otherwise ignore.
This line of research was extended further in the recent work of Fiset
et al. [20] applying the ‘bubbles’ technique of Gosselin and Schyns to
letter identification. The bubbles technique aims to uncover the parts of
the image that are diagnostic of the observer’s performance (i.e. correct
letter identification). The technique, therefore, not only manipulates
spatial frequency filtering, but also explores the significance of different
parts of the image. As illustrated in Figure 2 (In the main text), the image
is first band pass filtered at different channel frequencies and a random
set of ‘bubbles’ is extracted from the filtered letters. The sampled
images are summed across frequency channels to generate a
‘bubbelized’ image presented to observers. Variation in performance
is then traced back to information available in the image (coordinate of
bubble center) at each frequency band using image classification
procedures (least-squared multiple linear regression on spatial co-
ordinates and performance).
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol.12 No.10
382

Author's personal copy
of human observers was therefore taken to reﬂect feature-
based letter identiﬁcation, in which identiﬁcation of the
whole is affected by the identiﬁcation of each component
feature. What is it that changes across alphabets and fonts
that might be driving these changes in efﬁciency? Pelli et al.
[18] found one particular measure that correlated highly
with letter identiﬁcation efﬁciency. That was perimetric
complexity – the square of the length of inside and outside
perimeter, divided by ink area (for size invariance). In the
absence of independent evidence concerning the nature of
the features subtending letter identiﬁcation, perimetric
complexity provided a measure of visual complexity thought
to be proportional to the number of features.
The
second
breakthrough
has
come
from
recent
research applying Gosselin and Schyns’ [19] ‘bubbles’ tech-
nique (Box 1 and Figure 2) to explore the nature of the
critical features for letter perception. The classiﬁcation
images obtained by Fiset et al. [20] for 26 lowercase and
26 uppercase Roman letters in Arial font revealed several
important pieces of evidence. First, on average only 32% of
the printed area of uppe and 24% of lowercase letters was
used by observers to identify letters, and the greatest
proportion of useful information was apparent in the 2–4
cycles per letter frequency band, in line with estimates
from critical-band masking studies [21]. Second, the
analysis revealed that terminations were by far the most
diagnostic piece of information for letter identiﬁcation,
with intersections and horizontal lines providing further
signiﬁcant sources of information for uppercase letters. For
example, the letter W was mainly distinguished from other
letters by the presence of two terminations, one in the
upper left corner and the other in the upper right corner.
The time-course of letter perception
Standard behavioral measures of letter identiﬁcation, such
as percentage of correct responses in data-limited con-
ditions and RTs to non-degraded stimuli, all represent
the ﬁnal result of an accumulation of component processes.
However, a complete understanding of letter perception
must incorporate knowledge about how the component
processes develop through time. The masked priming
paradigm [22] has proven its utility as a tool for examining
the earliest phases of visual word recognition (see Ref. [3]
for review), and has been usefully applied with letter
stimuli to separate out the role of visual factors from
phonological and articulatory factors in letter identiﬁ-
cation and letter naming (Box 2). Masked priming can also
be combined with measures of brain activity that provide a
moment-to-moment reﬂection of on-going target proces-
sing. In a recent study this combination was used to
investigate the time-course of component processes in
letter identiﬁcation [23]. This work revealed a cascade of
Figure 2. (a) Illustration of critical-band masking. Broadband letters (top row) are combined with bandpassed noise (middle row) to form a masked letter stimulus presented
for identification. Three cycles per letter noise (middle) acts as a better mask than masks formed by either lower (left) or higher (right) spatial frequencies. (b) Illustration of
the ‘bubbles’ technique applied to letters. Letters are first bandpass filtered with a series of five octave-wide spatial frequency channels (top row). Each filtered image is then
randomly sampled (randomly selected x and y coordinates), and each sample smoothed by a Gaussian kernel with standard deviation proportional to the channel
frequency. This generates a set of ‘bubbles’ representing parts of the image (middle row), the number and size of which is determined by the channel frequency of the
filtered letter in the top row. The bubbles are then used as a spatial window that determines what is extracted from the filtered images (top row) to form the parts of the
image shown in the bottom row. The sum of these image parts forms the final bubbelized image of the letter A (right image). Adapted, with permission, from Ref. [20].
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.12 No.10
383

Author's personal copy
effects in the event-related potential (ERP) signal as a
function of (i) prime-target visual overlap (peaking at
150 ms post-target onset); (ii) whether or not primes were
the same letter as targets in the same case (180 ms post-
target) and (iii) whether or not primes were the same letter
as targets independently of case (200 ms post-target). This
constitutes important evidence in favor of a generic hier-
archical model of letter identiﬁcation in which visual fea-
tures are mapped onto abstract letter identities via a series
of increasingly invariant representations.
A comparison of ERP waveforms generated by letter and
pseudo-letter stimuli can also provide useful information
about the time-course of letter identiﬁcation. One study
found that the amplitude of the N170 component is larger
for letters than pseudo-letter (false font) stimuli [24].
Another study using pseudo-letters that were matched
to the letter stimuli in terms of component features, found
that ERP waveforms diverged as early as 145 ms post-
stimulus onset [25] (Figure 3). In this study, amplitude of
the P2 ERP component differed across the 14 letters that
were tested, but some information about individual letter
identities was already available in the waveform before the
peak of the P2. This was indicated by the fact that item-
level voltage values in this time window were found to
correlate signiﬁcantly with predicted letter identiﬁcation
latencies derived from different versions of a generic inter-
active-activation model of letter perception, comprising
feature and letter detector layers [4]. The best model
was one with excitatory feedforward and feedback connec-
tions between layers, and within-level inhibition across
letters, but no between-level (feature-letter) inhibition.
The likely neural source of this early letter-speciﬁc
brain activity is left occipital-temporal cortex [26–32]. This
ﬁts well with research locating orthographic processing
associated with printed words in a small strip of left fusi-
form gyrus called the visual word form area (VWFA, Ref.
[33]). Single letters dissociated from objects, faces, digits
and letter strings in an area situated anterior to the peak of
the VWFA [27,28,32] (Figure 3). Given their more anterior
location, neurons in this area possibly instantiate abstract
location-invariant letter detectors to be distinguished from
more location-speciﬁc letter detectors involved in proces-
sing letter strings [34,35]. Furthermore, the fact that the
letter-speciﬁc region and the VWFA fall within a more
general object processing region [29] is in line with the
neuronal recycling hypothesis of Dehaene et al. [34].
Putting the parts together
Recent evidence in favor of a generic feature-based hier-
archical approach to letter perception therefore provides
hope that a complete account of the processes involved in
identifying isolated letters is within our grasp. More soph-
isticated models, such as the one shown in Figure 4, will
probably include multiple layers of simple and complex
features converging on case-speciﬁc and possibly font-
speciﬁc letter detectors, which map in turn onto more
abstract shape-invariant letter representations [23,34,
36–38].
There are several key questions that need to be
addressed in future developments of hierarchical fea-
ture-based
models.
One
concerns
how
the
spatial
relations between the different features are coded, if at
Box 2. Masked priming with single letters
In the masked priming paradigm [22], prime stimuli are presented
briefly enough to prevent the use of conscious predictive strategies
that often contaminate standard priming effects. This paradigm is
ideally suited for investigating early perceptual processing of
familiar visual objects such as letters, without having to degrade
target stimuli, and therefore complements the psychophysical
procedures described in Box 1. In the majority of masked priming
studies of letter identification performed up to now, primes were
complete letters that varied in terms of their visual similarity with
the target (e.g. c-C versus a-A) and whether or not they were
nominally identical to the target (e.g. a-A versus c-A). The two main
tasks used in these studies were found to be differentially sensitive
to these two priming manipulations. The alphabetic decision task
(speeded classification of letters versus non-letters) was found to
be more sensitive to visual overlap than nominal overlap [51–54],
whereas the letter naming task was much more sensitive to
nominal overlap than to visual overlap [51,54,55] (Figure I). One
methodological conclusion from this research is that the letter
naming task might be overly sensitive to phonological-articulatory
factors, which are interesting in their own right, but render the task
relatively insensitive to visual factors. However, phonological
priming effects in letter naming only occur with complete
phonological overlap across primes and targets. Similar sounding
letters (P-B) do not facilitate letter naming relative to different
sounding letters (F-B) [51,55], whereas homophones of letter
targets (e.g. sea-C) facilitate letter-naming responses to the same
extent as same letter primes (c-C) [51]). The absence of priming
from similar sounding letters might be because the overlap is
practically always on the second phoneme, with mismatching
information on the initial phoneme. Masked priming studies of
word and object naming have shown that initial phoneme overlap
is the key factor driving priming effects [56–58].
Figure I. Effects of nominal identity and visual similarity in three different tasks
combined with masked priming: letter naming (NAM), alphabetic decision (ADT)
and perceptual identification (PIT). Effects of nominal identity are calculated by
comparing visually dissimilar same letter primes (a-A) and different letter primes
(b-A). Effects of visual similarity are calculated by subtracting the priming effect
of a visually similar same letter prime (c-C versus b-C) from the effect of a
visually dissimilar prime (a-A versus b-A). Net priming effects are averaged over
relevant conditions in two studies testing these conditions [51,54], and
expressed as a percentage of the combined priming effect size for each task.
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol.12 No.10
384

Author's personal copy
all (because letters could be coded as an unstructured list
of features). One inﬂuential theory of object recognition
posits a key role for structural representations – that is a
description of the object in terms of its component parts
and their positional relations (such as ‘x is left of y, y is
above z’, Ref. [39]). A promising alternative is to code for
the position of object parts by using object-centered coor-
dinates, and there is recent neurophysiological evidence
in favor of such object-centered coordinate systems [40].
This approach can be easily transposed to the domain of
letter identiﬁcation, using the features derived from
empirical investigations of letter perception, augmented
with position-in-letter information. Thus, for example,
the letter ‘W’ could be coded as: termination upper left,
termination upper right, intersection lower left, intersec-
tion upper centre, intersection lower right. It is this level
of sophistication that might enable feature-based models
to better account for patterns in the empirical data (such
as letter confusions). Finally, one might also consider
that such spatial relations are implicitly coded in hier-
Figure 4. A hierarchical model of letter perception. Shape and location invariance are gradually achieved via a hierarchy of increasingly complex neural processors.
Adapted, with permission, from Ref. [38].
Figure 3. Examples of letter-specific brain activity. ERP results from Rey et al. [25] shown as (a) scalp maps of voltage differences obtained by subtracting ERP amplitudes
generated by letter and pseudo-letter stimuli in three different time windows, and (c) grand average waveforms for letters and pseudo-letters over electrodes shown in (b).
(d) Regions of brain activation measured by fMRI, with the single letter region [28,32] indicated by red circles (left anterior fusiform), and for comparison the visual word
form area (VWFA, Ref. [33]) indicated by blue triangles. The region in white is the conjoined activation of objects and letters found by Joseph et al. [29] (left hemisphere on
the right). Reproduced, with permission, from Ref. [29].
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.12 No.10
385

Author's personal copy
archical multi-level networks such as the one depicted in
Figure 4.
Another key question is: how the kind of hierarchical
structure illustrated in Figure 4 could be learned by a
biological system? Could the arbitrary association between
lowercase ‘a’ and uppercase ‘A’ be learned without super-
vision (explicit tuition)? Polk and Farah [41] proposed a
solution to this problem based on the inﬂuence of common
contextsonHebbianlearning.Thebasicideaisthatwelearn
to associate case-speciﬁc forms of the same letter by the fact
that they commonly occur in the context of case invariant
letters (such as in ‘map’ and ‘MAP’, in which case-speciﬁc ‘a’
is surrounded bycase-invariant‘m’and ‘p’).Alternatively,or
perhaps in conjunction with this unsupervised learning,
children could learn to link ‘a’ and ‘A’ on hearing the same
letter name associated with each form. Finally, Hinton
[42,43] has recently demonstrated that a multi-layered net-
work implementing increasingly complex features can be
trained to recognize handwritten digits with high levels of
accuracy.
Conclusions and future directions
What is the letter ‘a’? This review article has shown that a
rich empirical database has accumulated over the years,
and there is hope that this will provide the necessary
constraints for ﬁnding the answer to Hofstadter’s [1] ques-
tion. A major step towards achieving this goal has been
made in recent years. Research applying psychophysical
techniques has provided convincing evidence that letters
are indeed identiﬁed via their component features, and
there is important new evidence concerning the precise
nature of these features. At the same time, research using
electrophysiological recordings has started to provide valu-
able information about the time-course of component pro-
cesses in letter identiﬁcation, and functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have begun to isolate
the brain regions involved in letter perception (as opposed
to letter strings and other visual objects – Figure 3).
The challenge now is to develop a computational model
of letter identiﬁcation that can successfully predict empiri-
cal data obtained from the wide spectrum of techniques
that have been used to investigate letter perception up to
now. Future developments of these models need to be
constrained by behavioral, electrophysiological and brain
imaging results, and should be articulated with concurrent
developments in visual object recognition and printed word
perception. It is the application of such multiple con-
straints that will guarantee success in putting the right
parts in the right place at the right time in future compu-
tational models of letter identiﬁcation.
References
1 Hofstadter, D. (1985) Metamagical Themas: Questing for the Essence of
Mind and Pattern, Basic Books
2 Pelli, D.G. et al. (2003) The remarkable inefﬁciency of word recognition.
Nature 423, 752–756
3 Grainger, J. (2008) Cracking the orthographic code: an introduction.
Lang. Cogn. Process. 23, 1–35
4 McClelland, J.L. and Rumelhart, D.E. (1981) An interactive activation
model of context effects in letter perception: Part 1. An account of basic
ﬁndings. Psychol. Rev. 88, 375–407
5 DiCarlo, J.J. and Cox, D.D. (2007) Untangling invariant object
recognition. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 333–341
6 Selfridge, O.G. (1959) Pandemonium: a paradigm for learning. In
Proceedings
of
the
Symposium
on
Mechanisation
of
Thought
Processes (Blake, D.V. and Uttley, A.M., eds), pp. 511–529, H.M.
Stationary Ofﬁce
7 Selfridge, O.G. and Neisser, U. (1960) Pattern recognition by machine.
Sci. Am. 20, 60–68
8 Hubel, D.H. and Wiesel, T.N. (1962) Receptive ﬁelds, binocular
interaction and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex.
J. Physiol. 160, 106–154
9 Larsen,
A.
and
Bundesen,
C.
(1996)
A
template-matching
pandemonium recognizes unconstrained written characters with
high accuracy. Mem. Cognit. 24, 136–143
10 Neisser, U. (1966) Cognitive Psychology, Appleton-Century-Crofts
11 Gibson, E.J. (1969) Principles of Perceptual Learning and Development,
Appleton-Century-Crofts
12 Geyer, L.H. and DeWald, C.G. (1973) Feature lists and confusion
matrices. Percept. Psychophys. 14, 471–482
13 Keren, G. and Baggen, S. (1981) Recognition models of alphanumeric
characters. Percept. Psychophys. 29, 452–466
14 Podgorny, P. and Garner, W. (1979) Reaction time as a measure of
inter- and intraobject visual similarity: Letters of the alphabet.
Percept. Psychophys. 26, 37–52
15 Jacobs, A.M. et al. (1989) Letter perception in peripheral vision: a
temporal
discrimination
matrix
using
eye
movements.
Percept.
Psychophys. 46, 95–102
16 Courrieu, P. et al. (2004) Inverse discrimination time as a perceptual
distance for alphabetic characters. Vis. Cogn. 11, 901–919
17 Courrieu, P. (2002) Straight monotonic embedding of data sets in
Euclidean spaces. Neural Netw. 15, 1185–1196
18 Pelli, D.G. et al. (2006) Feature detection and letter identiﬁcation.
Vision Res. 46, 4646–4674
19 Gosselin, F. and Schyns, P.G. (2001) Bubbles: a technique to reveal the
use of information in recognition. Vision Res. 41, 2261–2271
20 Fiset,
D.
et
al.
Features
for
uppercase
and
lowercase
letter
identiﬁcation. Psychol. Sci. (in press)
21 Solomon, J.A. and Pelli, D.G. (1994) The visual ﬁlter mediating letter
identiﬁcation. Nature 369, 395–397
22 Forster, K.I. and Davis, C. (1984) Repetition priming and frequency
attenuationinlexical access.J. Exp.Psychol. Learn. Mem.Cogn.10, 680–
698
23 Petit, J.P. et al. (2006) On the time-course of letter perception:
a masked priming ERP investigation. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 13, 674–
681
24 Wong, A.C.N. et al. (2005) An early electrophysiological response
associated with expertise in letter perception. Cognitive, Affective,
&. Behav. Neurosci. 5, 306–318
25 Rey, A. et al. (2008) Testing computational models of letter perception
with
item-level
ERPs.
Cogn.
Neuropsychol.
DOI:
10.1080/
09541440802176300
26 Flowers, D.L. et al. (2004) Attention to single letters activates left
extrastriate cortex. Neuroimage 21, 829–839
27 James, K.H. and Gauthier, I. (2006) Letter processing automatically
recruits a sensory-motor brain network. Neuropsychologia 44, 2937–
2949
28 James, K.H. et al. (2005) Letter processing in the visual system:
different activation patterns for single letters and strings. Cognitive,
Affective, &. Behav. Neurosci. 5, 306–318
29 Joseph, J.E. et al. (2006) fMRI correlates of cortical specialization and
generalization for letter processing. Neuroimage 32, 806–820
30 Longcamp, M. et al. (2003) Visual presentation of single letters activates
a premotor area involved in writing. Neuroimage 19, 1492–1500
31 Pernet, C. et al. (2005) Selective response to letter categorization
within the left fusiform gyrus. Neuroimage 28, 738–744
32 Polk, T.A. et al. (2002) Neural specialization for letter recognition.
J. Cogn. Neurosci. 14, 145–159
33 Cohen, L. et al. (2002) Language-speciﬁc tuning of visual cortex?
Functional properties of the visual word form area. Brain 125,
1054–1069
34 Dehaene, S. et al. (2005) The neural code for written words: a proposal.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 9, 335–341
35 Grainger, J. et al. (2006) Letter position information and printed word
perception: the relative-position priming constraint. J. Exp. Psychol.
Hum. Percept. Perform. 32, 865–884
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol.12 No.10
386

Author's personal copy
36 Cadieu, C. et al. (2007) A model of V4 shape selectivity and invariance.
J. Neurophysiol. 98, 1733–1750
37 Fukushima, K. (2003) Neocognitron for handwritten digit recognition.
Neurocomputing 51, 161–180
38 Riesenhuber, M. and Poggio, T. (1999) Hierarchical models of object
recognition in cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 1019–1025
39 Biederman, I. (1987) Recognition-by-components: a theory of human
image understanding. Psychol. Rev. 94, 115–147
40 Connor, C.E. et al. (2007) Transformation of shape information in the
ventral pathway. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 17, 140–147
41 Polk,
T.A.
and
Farah,
M.A.
(1997)
Simple
common
contexts
explanation for the development of abstract letter identities. Neural
Comput. 9, 1275–1287
42 Hinton, G.E. (2007) Learning multiple layers of representation. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 11, 428–434
43 Hinton,
G.E.
and
Salakhutdinov,
R.R.
(2006)
Reducing
the
dimensionality of data with neural networks. Science 313, 504–507
44 Sammon, J. (1969) A nonlinear mapping for data structure analysis.
IEEE Trans. Comput. 18, 401–409
45 Campbell, F.W. and Robson, J.G. (1968) Application of Fourier analysis
to the visibility of gratings. J. Physiol. 197, 551–566
46 Parish, D.H. and Sperling, G. (1991) Object spatial frequencies, retinal
spatial frequencies, noise, and the efﬁciency of letter discrimination.
Vision Res. 31, 1399–1415
47 Alexander, K.R. et al. (1994) Spatial-frequency characteristics of letter
identiﬁcation. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 11, 2375–2382
48 Gold, J. et al. (1999) Identiﬁcation of band-pass ﬁltered letters and
faces by human and ideal observers. Vision Res. 39, 3537–3560
49 Majaj, N.J. et al. (2002) The role of spatial frequency channels in letter
identiﬁcation. Vision Res. 42, 1165–1184
50 Sowden, P.T. and Schyns, P.G. (2006) Channel surﬁng in the visual
brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 538–545
51 Bowers, J.S. et al. (1998) Orthographic, phonological, and articulatory
contributions to masked letter and word priming. J. Exp. Psychol.
Hum. Percept. Perform. 24, 1705–1719
52 Jacobs, A.M. and Grainger, J. (1991) Automatic letter priming in an
alphabetic decision task. Percept. Psychophys. 49, 43–52
53 Jacobs, A.M. et al. (1995) The incremental priming technique: a method
for determining within-condition priming effects. Percept. Psychophys.
57, 1101–1110
54 Ziegler, J. et al. (2000) Visual and phonological codes in letter and word
recognition: evidence from incremental priming. Q. J. Exp. Psychol.
53A, 671–692
55 Arguin, M. and Bub, D. (1995) Priming and response selection
processes in letter classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation tasks. J. Exp.
Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 21, 1199–1219
56 Grainger, J. and Ferrand, L. (1996) Masked orthographic and
phonological priming in visual word recognition and naming: Cross-
task comparisons. J. Mem. Lang. 35, 623–647
57 Kinoshita, S. and Woollams, A. (2002) The masked onset priming effect
in naming: computation of phonology or speech planning. Mem. Cognit.
30, 237–245
58 Schiller, N.O. (2008) The masked onset priming effect in picture
naming. Cognition 106, 952–962
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.12 No.10
387
View publication stats

