The End of Reality
Paul C Mocombe*
West Virginia State University, The Mocombeian Foundation, Inc., Brazil
*Corresponding author: Paul C Mocombe, West Virginia State University, The Mocombeian 
Foundation, Inc., Brazil
Received: 03 March, 2021	
	
Published: 23 March, 2021
Citation: Paul C Mocombe. The End of Reality. Glob Res Archaeo Sci. 2021;1(1):1–4. DOI: 
10.53902/GRAS.2021.01.000502
Quick Response Code:
Copyright © All rights are reserved by Paul C Mocombe
Global Research in 
Archaeological Science
Review Article
Abstract
In this article, I argue that in the age of neoliberal (postindustrial) globalization human relations to the environment have been “enframed” by 
capitalist ideology leading to the end of reality and the rise of human worldviews and ethos based on overconsumption and resource exhaustion as 
the determinants of existence over and against the environment and nature. Identity politics, the reification and commodification of (serial) identity 
practices, cultures, and “all of the accoutrements of the economy of spectacle and the manufacturing of images and fetish desires,” on the one hand, 
and the continuous atomization of the human subject in (neo) liberalism on the other are mechanisms for creating surplus-value and continuing 
capitalism’s domination over the world in the era of climate change. These two dialectical practices represent two fascist attempts to perpetuate 
capitalist relations of production and accumulate surplus value amidst its deleterious effects on all life on earth due to climate change, resource 
exhaustion, and pollution. I conclude the work by calling for an antihumanist philosophy and psychology with emphasis on subsistence living and 
maintaining a balance between nature and the environment as keys to planetary and human survival in the age of climate change. 
Keywords: Ideological domination, Intersectionality, Embourgeoisement, Black underclass, Black bourgeoisie, Social class language game, Dialectic, 
Antidialectic
 1
Introduction
If the nineteenth century was marked by the death of God, the 
twentieth by the death of man and the end of history subsumed un­
der the logic of liberalism, the twenty-first century, I propose here, 
will be defined by the end of reality. By end of reality, I mean the 
destruction of our natural environment and relations to it, and the 
rise of ideologies grounded in (neo-liberal) fantasies and myths 
with no connections to the material resource framework of the 
earth, which leads to its demise and our own. In this article, I argue 
that in the age of neoliberal (postindustrial) globalization human 
relations to the environment has been “enframed” by the fantasies 
and myths of capitalist ideology as the determinant of existence 
over and against the environment and nature. Identity politics, the 
reification and commodification of (serial) identity practices, cul­
tures, and “all of the accoutrements of the economy of spectacle and 
the manufacturing of images and fetish desires,” on the one hand, 
and the continuous atomization of the human subject in (neo) lib­
eralism on the other are mechanisms for creating surplus-value and 
continuing capitalism’s domination over the world in the era of cli­
mate change. These two dialectical ideas and practices represent 

two fascist attempts to perpetuate capitalist relations of production 
and accumulate surplus value amidst its deleterious effects on all 
life on earth due to climate change, resource exhaustion, and pol­
lution. All is not lost, however. I conclude the work by calling for 
an antihumanist philosophy and psychology which decenters the 
human subject and emphasizes subsistence living and maintaining 
a balance between nature and the environment as keys to planetary 
and human survival in the age of climate change. 
Background of the Problem
Since the 1960s, identity and consciousness constitution in 
the US derives from the class divisions of the American industrial/
postindustrial capitalist social relations of production/overcon­
sumption and its ideological apparatuses (which it exports global­
ly through the IMF, World Bank, etc.), which created (and creates) 
two structurally reproduced and differentiated social class lan­
guage games, a bourgeoisie of educated professionals, owners, and 
high-level executives juxtaposed against the material conditions, 
practices, language, body, and ideology of a working and underclass 

 Stephy Publishers | http://stephypublishers.com
Volume 1 - Issue 1
 Global Research in Archaeological Science | Glob Res Archaeo Sci
 2
segregated in the ghettoes of (gentrified) cities where industrial 
work was beginning to disappear to developing countries follow­
ing the end of World War II to make room for postindustrialism.1,2 
Postcolonial, postmodern and post structural theorists have looked 
at the social relations of production of this transition, from industri­
alism to postindustrialism, and, against Marxists understanding of 
the conjuncture, attempt to offer an intersectional approach to the 
constitution of identities and consciousnesses, which emphasizes 
the different levels (vectors of oppression and privilege) of domina­
tion, class, race, gender, global location, age, and sexual identity, by 
which other communities and consciousnesses get alienated, mar­
ginalized, and constituted within the process of deindustrialization 
and globalization.3–5
This postcolonial, postmodern, and post-structural theoriz­
ing, epistemologically, dismisses the dominant ontological status 
(class) of the Protestant capitalist system/social structure by which 
the masses of others attempt to practically live out their lives for 
the theoretical assumptions of the indeterminacy of meaning and 
decentered subject of postcolonial, post-structural, and post-mod­
ern theorizing. They attempt to read back into the historical con­
stitution of other identity and community life within and by the 
dialectic of a global capitalist social structure of class inequality 
the indeterminacy of meaning and decentered subject of postco­
lonial, post-structural, and post-modern theorizing to highlight 
the variety of intersecting ways or vertices, i.e., standpoints, race, 
class, age, sexual identity, etc., individual other subjects were and 
are alienated, marginalized, and dominated. As if the intersecting 
standpoint theories they are promoting offers an alternative form 
of system and social integration by which to constitute society and 
practical consciousness against capitalist relations of production. 
It does no such thing, however. These theorists fail to realize that 
embourgeois intersectionality is a socio-political by-product of a 
postindustrial (Protestant) capitalist landscape or social structure, 
equated to or with the nature of reality as such, seeking to decen­
ter the bourgeois (white) subject and allow a diversity of bourgeois 
“other” identities to emerge (around their class positions) within 
the class division and social relations of postindustrial (Protestant) 
capitalist production so as to accumulate surplus-value. The latter, 
surplus-value, they accumulate by catering to the entertainment, 
financial, and service needs of these new and once discriminat­
ed-against identities and their constructed “fictitious” class-based 
communities who’s reified (marginalized) “cultural” contents they 
exploit for financing and surplus-value.
In essence, the sociocultural practices of the identities and “all 
of the accoutrements of the economy of spectacle and the manu­
facturing of images and fetish desires” are commodified and come 
to serve as both a form of use and exchange value for the (elite) 
“other” to accumulate surplus value: an embourgeoised elite oth­
er is atomized and accumulate surplus value (wealth, status, and 
money) from the reification and commodification of their cultural/
serial identities and practices, which they market to those similarly 
situated in order to extract surplus value for themselves and the 
corporate elites they are sponsored/financed by Harvey. This com­
modification process of the “other” as a serial community in the 
form of diversified consumerism is juxtaposed against its contra­
dictory counterpart, which dates to the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries, the continuing atomization of the individual subject in 
capitalist relations of production as laborer and consumer. 
Patriarchy, heteronormativity, etc., within the systemicity of 
the Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism, in other words, are 
not the product of individuated competing systems, which are of­
fering an alternative systemicity within which to constitute society 
and subjugate the human subject. Instead, as presently constitut­
ed, they emerge within one (mythical) system, the Protestant Eth­
ic and the spirit of capitalism, initially constituted by rich, white, 
heterosexual men, and its current manifestation or structure of the 
conjuncture, i.e., intersectionality, constituted by rich, multicultur­
al, multigendered, etc., others fighting for equality of opportunity, 
recognition, and distribution with the former, within the systemic­
ity and differentiation of (postindustrial) Protestant capitalism, so 
as to accumulate capital as an individual other through social labor, 
i.e., the commodification of culture and cultural practices (diversi­
fied consumerism). 
Theory and Method
Building on the structuration theory, phenomenological struc­
turalism, of Paul C. Mocombe,6 which posits the constitution of soci­
ety as the product of five elements or systems (mode of production, 
language, ideology, ideological apparatuses, and communicative 
discourse) that interpellate and subjectify the human actor and 
gives them their practical consciousness, which they recursively 
organize and reproduce in their daily activities as practical con­
sciousness, the argument here is that the social phenomenon of 
postcolonial, postmodern, and poststructural theorizing in the lan­
guage of intersectionality, hybridity, double consciousness, etc., i.e., 
serial identities, occur in relation to the (neoliberal) state and its 
ideological apparatuses and class divisions of postindustrial capi­
talist societies.7–24 They have their basis in the relations of produc­
tion, exploitation, and organization of the state following the failed 
diverse student revolutions of the 1960s, which gave rise to local 
formations and heterogeneity as the theoretical theme for the new 
philosophers and social scientists of the late twentieth century who 
sought equality of opportunity, recognition, and distribution for 
the diverse groups (standpoints) of the student movements within 
the class division and global social relations of capitalist produc­
tion and organization, which became triumphant with the fall of 
communism or state capitalism in Eastern Europe. Intersectional 
discourses have their basis in the fantasies and myths of globaliza­
tion, financialization, and the postindustrial relations of production 
and exploitation as organized under the hegemony of the American 
nation-state following the civil rights and hippie movements of the 
1960s, which diversified and fragmentized subjectivities and social 
movements for the philosophy of the person, individual human 
rights, and freedoms to (speak, assemble, etc.).25 These standpoint 
theories emerged amidst the continuous atomization of the human 
subject within a postindustrial capitalism that fosters identity poli­
tics for exchange value and capital accumulation via financialization 

 Stephy Publishers | http://stephypublishers.com
Volume 1 - Issue 1  
 Global Research in Archaeological Science | Glob Res Archaeo Sci
and cultural consumption: an atomized (elite) “other” gets financed 
in the form of credit by finance capital to reify and commodify their 
“othering practices”, which are promoted via advertisement and 
commercials to the reified other communities in order to accumu­
late surplus-value for both the other and finance capital.1
In other words, on the one hand, neoliberal globalization 
(1970s-to the present) under American hegemony represents the 
right-wing attempt to homogenize (converge) the nations of the 
globe into the overall market-orientation, i.e., private property, 
individual liberties, and entrepreneurial freedoms, of the capital­
ist world-system.26–45 This neoliberalization project is usually jux­
taposed, on the other hand, against the narcissistic exploration of 
self, sexuality, and identity of the left, which converges with the 
neoliberalizing process via the diversified consumerism and em­
bourgeoisement of the latter groups as they seek equality of op­
portunity, recognition, and distribution with agents of the former 
within their market logic. Hence private property, individual liber­
ties, diversified consumerism, and the entrepreneurial freedoms of 
the so-called marketplace amidst atomization become the mecha­
nisms of system and social integration for both groups despite the 
fact the logic of the marketplace is exploitative and environmentally 
hazardous.46–57
Discussion and Conclusion
In the twenty-first century, this age of neoliberal globalization, 
identity politics, and the continuous atomization of the human in­
dividual, is marked by the destruction of our natural environment 
and relations to it, and the rise of ideologies grounded in fantasies 
and myths about consumerism, identities, and individual practic­
es with no connections or relations to conserving the material re­
source framework of the earth. The latter, the natural environment, 
is overexploited, devastated, and destroyed for integration of the 
atomized elite others into the exploitative ideas and practices of the 
former, neoliberalism, identity politics, consumerism, and explora­
tion of the self.58
The “other” power elites emerge within this structure of the 
neoliberal global framework as structurally differentiated embour­
geoised “other” agents of the Protestant Ethic and the spirit of capi­
talism seeking equality of opportunity, recognition, and distribution 
with their white counterparts as either “other” right-wing conser­
vatives or “other” left-wing identitarians amidst the deleterious ef­
fects (exploitation, pollution, climate change, consumerism, etc.) of 
the (economic) humanistic values they desire whites to live up to by 
recognizing their humanism. An embourgeois elite “other” emerges 
in postindustrial capitalism, in other words, as an atomized other 
whose individual wealth and status derives from the social labor 
amassed through the commodification and marketing of their cul­
ture and cultural practices, diversified consumerism, amidst their 
clarion call to integrate within the austerity, privatization, etc., of 
the neoliberal fascist state. In the age of climate change, ecological 
devastations, resource exhaustion, and economic exploitation to 
sustain the emerging embourgeoised others and their white coun­
terparts, this is a mythical recipe for disaster. The only solution as 
I see it, is to decenter the current neoliberal capitalist social struc­
ture, institutions, and practices in favor of decentralization, subsis­
tence living, conservation, and reforestation.59–62
Acknowledgments
None.
Funding
None.
Conflicts of Interest
Author declares that there is no conflict of interest.
References
1.	 Bell Daniel. The Coming of Post–Industrial Society. New York: Basic 
Books; 1976.
2.	 Domhoff William G. Who Rules America? Power & Politics (Fourth 
Edition). Boston: McGraw Hill; 2002.
3.	 McLaren Peter. Schooling the Postmodern Body: Critical Pedagogy and 
the Politics of Enfleshment. Journal of Education. 1988;170(1):53–83.
4.	 McMichael Philip. Globalization: Myths and Realities. Rural Sociology. 
1996;61(1):274–291.
5.	 Harvey David. Seventeen Contradictions and the end of Capitalism. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2015.
6.	 Mocombe Paul, Carol Tomlin, Victoria Showunmi. Jesus and the Streets: 
The Loci of Causality for the Intra–Racial Gender Academic Achievement 
Gap in Black Urban America and the United Kingdom. Maryland: 
University Press of America; 2015.
7.	 Alexander Michelle. The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of 
Colorblindness. New York: The New Press; 2010.
8.	 Asante Molefi K.African Elements in African–American English. 
In Africanisms in American Culture, Edited by Joseph E. Holloway. 
Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press; 1990. p. 19–33.
9.	 Bourdieu Pierre. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. 
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. 1984.
10.	Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis. Schooling in Capitalist America: 
Educational Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life. New York: 
Basic Books; 1976.
11.	Braverman Harry. Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work 
in the Twentieth Century. New York: Monthly Review Press; 1998.
12.	Carter Prudence L. Black Cultural Capital, Status Positioning, and 
Schooling Conflicts for Low–Income African American Youth. Social 
Problems. 2003;40(1):136–155.
13.	Chase–Dunn, Christopher. The effects of international economic 
dependence on development and inequality: A cross–national study. 
American Sociological Review. 1975;40:720–738.
14.	Chase–Dunn, Christopher and Richard Rubinson. Toward a Structural 
Perspective on the World–System. Politics & Society. 1977;7(4):453–476.
15.	Coleman James S. ‘Social Capital’ and Schools. Education Digest. 
1988;53(8):69.
16.	Cook Philip J, Jens Ludwig. The Burden of ‘Acting White’: Do Black 
Adolescents Disparage Academic Achievement. In The Black White 
Test Score Gap, edited by Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press; 1998. p. 375–400.
17.	Downey Douglas B, James W, Ainsworth–Darnell. The Search for 
Oppositional Culture among Black Students. American Sociological 
Review. 2002;76:156–164.
 3

 Stephy Publishers | http://stephypublishers.com
Volume 1 - Issue 1
 Global Research in Archaeological Science | Glob Res Archaeo Sci
18.	Dreeben Robert, Rebecca Barr. How Schools Work. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press; 1983.
19.	Erevelles Nirmala. Educating Unruly Bodies: Critical Pedagogy, Disability 
Studies, and the Politics of Schooling. Educational Theory. 2000;50(1):25.
20.	Farkas George. Does oppositional Culture Exist in Minority and Poverty 
Peer Groups? American Sociological Review. 2002;67:148–155.
21.	Ford Donna Y, John Harris. Perceptions and Attitudes of Black Students 
Toward School, Achievement, and Other Educational Variables. Child 
Development. 1996;67:1141–1152.
22.	Fordham Signithia, John Ogbu. Black Students’ School Success: Coping 
With the Burden of ‘Acting White.’ Urban Review. 1986;18:176–206.
23.	Fordham Signithia. Racelessness as a Factor in Black Students’ Success.
Harvard Educational Review. 1988;58(1):54–84.
24.	Frazier Franklin E. The Negro Family in America. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press; 1939.
25.	Frazier Franklin E. Black Bourgeoisie: The Rise of a New Middle Class. 
New York: The Free Press; 1957.
26.	Gates Henry Louis Jr. Why are there so many Black Athletes?. The Root 
Newsletter. 2014:1–3.
27.	Genovese Eugene. Roll, Jordan, Roll. New York: Pantheon Books. 1974.
28.	Giddens Anthony. Consequences of Modernity. England: Polity Press. 
1990.
29.	Glazer Nathan, Daniel P Moynihan. Beyond the Melting Pot. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press. 1963.
30.	Gordon Edmund W. Establishing a System of Public Education in which 
all Children Achieve at High Levels and Reach their Full Potential. In The 
Covenant with Black America. Chicago: Third World Press. 2006;23–46.
31.	Greene Jay P. Testing High Stakes Tests: Can We Believe the Results of 
Accountability Tests? Manhattan Institute Civic Report No. 33. 2003.
32.	Horvat Erin M, Kristine S Lewis. Reassessing the Burden of ‘Acting 
White’: The Importance of Peer Groups in Managing Academic Success. 
Sociology of Education.2003;76:265–280.
33.	Howard Jeff, Ray Hammond. Rumors of Inferiority. New Republic. 
1985;9:18–23.
34.	Jameson Fredric. Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 1991.
35.	Jameson Fredric, Masao Miyoshi. The cultures of globalization. Durham: 
Duke University Press. 1998.
36.	Jencks Christopher, Meredith Phillips. The Black–White Test Score Gap. 
Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. 1998.
37.	Johnson VE. Comprehension of Third Person Singular /s/ in African 
American Speaking Children. Language, Speech & Hearing Services in 
Schools. 2005;36(2):116–124.
38.	Kamhi AG. Communication Development and Disorders in African 
American Children: Research, Assessment and Intervention. Baltimore, 
Maryland: Paul H. Brooks Publishing Co. 1996.
39.	Karenga Maulana. Introduction to Black Studies. California: The 
University of Sankore Press. 1993.
40.	Labov William. Language in the Inner–City: Studies in the Black English 
Vernacular. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 1972.
41.	Lee J. Racial and Ethnic Achievement Gap Trends: Reversing the Progress 
toward Equity? Educational Researcher. 2002;31(1):3–12.
42.	Marx Karl. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy (Volume 1). Translated 
from the third German edition by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling. 
New York: International Publishers. 1992.
43.	Mocombe Paul. A Labor Approach to the Development of the Self or 
Modern Personality: The Case of Public Education. Thesis Florida Atlantic 
University. Ann Arbor: UMI. 2001.
44.	Mocombe Paul. The Mocombeian Strategy: The Reason for, and Answer to 
Black Failure in Capitalist Education. Philadelphia: Xlibris. 2005.
45.	Mocombe Paul. Where Did Freire Go Wrong? Pedagogy in Globalization: 
The Grenadian Example. Race, Gender & Class. 2005;12(2):178–199.
46.	Mocombe Paul. Education in Globalization. Maryland: University Press 
of America. 2007.
47.	Mocombe Paul. The Soulless Souls of Black Folk: A Sociological 
Reconsideration of Black Consciousness as Du Boisian Double 
Consciousness. Maryland: University Press of America. 2008.
48.	Mocombe Paul, Tomlin C. The Oppositional Culture Theory. Lanham: MD: 
University Press of America. 2010.
49.	Mocombe Paul. Role Conflict and Black Underachievement. The Journal 
for Critical Education Policy Studies. 2011;9(2):165–185.
50.	Mocombe Paul. Liberal Bourgeois Protestanism: The Metaphysics of 
Globalization. Studies in Critical Social Sciences (Vol. 41). Leiden, 
Netherlands: Brill Publications. 2012.
51.	Mocombe Paul, Carol Tomlin. Language, Literacy, and Pedagogy in 
Postindustrial Societies: The Case of Black Academic Underachievement. 
Routledge Research in Education (Vol. 97). New York/London: 
Routledge. 2013.
52.	Moynihan Daniel P. The Negro Family. Washington, D.C.: Office of 
Planning and Research, US Department of Labor. 1965.
53.	Neal Derek, Armin Rick. The Prison Boom and the Lack of Black 
Progress after Smith and Welch #20283. Boston: The National Bureau 
of Economic Research. 2014.
54.	Sklair Leslie. Sociology of the Global System. Baltimore: Westview Press. 
1995.
55.	Sklair Leslie. The Transnational Capitalist Class. Cambridge: Blackwell. 
2001.
56.	Steele Shelby. The Content of Our Character: A New Vision of Race in 
America. New York: Harper Perennial. 1990.
57.	Tomlin Carol, Paul C Mocombe, Cecile Wright. Karl Marx, Ludwig 
Wittgenstein, and Black Underachievement in the United States 
and United Kingdom. Diaspora, Indigenous, and Minority Education. 
2013;7(4):214–228.
58.	Tomlin Carol, Paul C Mocombe, Cecile Wright. Postindustrial Capitalism, 
Social Class Language Games, and Black Underachievement in the United 
States and United Kingdom. Mind, Culture, and Activity. 2013;20(4):358–
371.
59.	Thompson CA, Craig HK. Variable Production of African American 
English across Oral and Literacy Contexts. Language, Speech & Hearing 
Services in Schools. 2004;35(3):269–282.
60.	Wilson William J. The Declining Significance of Race: Blacks and Changing 
American Institutions. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago 
Press. 1978.
61.	Wilson William J. The Truly Disadvantaged. Chicago and London: 
University of Chicago Press. 1987.
62.	Wilson William J. The Role of the Environment in the Black–White Test 
Score Gap. In: Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips, The Black–
White Test Score Gap, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 1998. 
p. 501–510.
4

