PAET II. GREEK ARITHMETIC.
CHAPTER III.
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
17. A distinction is drawn, and very naturally and pro-
perly drawn, by the later Greek mathematicians between dpid-
(irjTiicr) and XoyuTTiicr), by the former of which they designated
the ' science of numbers,' by the latter, the 'art of calculation1.'
An opposition between these terms occurs much earlier and is
frequently used by Plato, but though Xoyia-riKi] can hardly
mean anything but' calculation,' it is not quite clear whether
dpifffiijriKi] then bore the sense which it had undoubtedly
acquired by the time of Geminus (say B.C. 50). That it did
so, however, is rendered pretty certain by many circumstances.
It is probable, in the first place, that the Pythagoreans would
have required some variety of terms to distinguish the exercises
of schoolboys from their own researches into the genera and
species of numbers8. In Aristotle3 a distinction, analogous
to that between the kinds of arithmetic, is drawn between
yecoBaiffia, the practical art of land-surveying, and the philo-
sophical ryecofieTpia. Euclid, who is said to have been a
Platonist and who lived not long after Plato, collected a large
volume of the theory of numbers, which he calls dpifffirjTiKi]
only and in which he uses exactly the same nomenclature and
symbolism as we find in those passages where Plato draws
a philosophical illustration from arithmetic4. It may therefore
be assumed that XoyicrTucr) and dpt,0firjTiKi] covered, respec-
1 See esp. Geminus cited by Proclus, 
the needs of merchants,' with which
Comm. Eucl. (ed. Friedlein), p. 38. 
comp. Plato, Rep. 525 c.
2 Thus Aristoxenus (apud Stob. Eel. 
3 Metaph. n. 2, 26.
Phys. I. 19. c. 2 ad initium) says that 
4 Cf. Euclid vn. with Plato, Theaet.
Pythagoras first raised a'/xffjUT/TiKi;'above 
147, 148, or Hep. 546 o.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. Logisticd. 
23
tively, the same subjectmatter in Plato's time, as afterwards
and since he uses these terms casually, with no hint that they
were novel, we may infer that the distinction between them
dates from a very early time in the history of Greek science and
philosophy1.
But though the opposition of dpiOfirjTiicq and XoyioriKi] is
as clear as that of theory to practice or science to art, an
historical account of either would necessarily involve frequent
reference to the other. 
Just as many of the rules of modern
arithmetic are proved by algebra, so with the Greeks the rules
of proportion, the rules for finding a greatest common measure
and the like were discovered by and belonged to dpiOfirjTiKij,
while the discovery of prime, amicable, polygonal numbers etc.,
which are part of the subjectmatter of dpidfMjnieq, is obviously
due to induction from the operations of XOJIO-TIKIJ. It is, however,
desirable and even necessary to keep the two apart, for the
record of Greek arithmetical theory is far fuller and more exact
than that of Greek practice and, besides, the symbolism of the
former was entirely distinct from that of the latter. 
The two
departments, therefore, XoyiariKr] and dpid/^rjTiKrj, will be kept
separate in the following pages, but it is to be premised that
probably Greek logistic, or calculation, extended to more difficult
operations than can be here exhibited and that probably Greek
arithmetic, or theory of numbers, owed much more to induction
than is permitted to appear by its first and chief professors.
1 The Platonic passages may be 
contemplated absolutely. The difficulty
here mentioned. In Oorg. 451 B C dp- 
of course is to perceive what Plato
and X07. are opposed, but both are 
meant by popular dp. and philosophical
described as rixv<u, dealing with 'odd' 
X07. 
It seems to be a satisfactory ex-
and 'even,' the special aim of X07. 
planation to suppose that Plato was
being to find out quantity, both ab- 
here thinking of those rules of Xoy.
solute and relative. 
In Euthyd. 290 
which are proved deductively (popular
B c Xoy. is opposed to some philo- 
ap.) and those doctrines of &p. which
eophical use of numbers, not there 
are proved inductively (philosophical
named. But in Rep. 525 c D and 
\oy.). 
Thus the proportion 2 apples :
Phileb. 56D E, a distinction is drawn 
1 obol :: 6 apples : 3 060k is a piece
between popular ap. and Xoy. together 
of popular aptd/irjTucij; the fact that
and the philosophical species of both, 
'all the powers of 5 end in 5' (e.g. 25,
the basis of the distinction being that 
125, 625, etc.), is a piece of philo-
the former use unequal and dissimilar 
sophical Xoyicrriicij.
units, while the latter use equal units,
Published online by Cambridge University Press

24 
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
18. In a historical account of ordinary Greek calculation,
the first subject which demands attention is the customary
symbolism. This also is the subject which ought to be capable
of most satisfactory treatment, for here the record, if there is
any at all, can hardly be deceptive : and this again is the most
important subject, for a good symbolism is itself suggestive,
while a bad one stifles the ingenuity, and a nation's arithmetical
reputation may be made or marred by the written forms with
which it represents numbers.
At the time when the inquiry into the prehistoric develop-
ment of Greek logistic must perforce be abandoned, we have
found the Greeks in possession of a complete numerical nomen-
clature, with a decimal scale, and accustomed to use the fingers
or pebbles (tyr/foi,) as aids to calculation. These symbols were
no doubt at first used, and continued always to be used, in the
most primitive way, each finger or stone representing a single
unit1. 
But the progress of commerce and the increasing
adroitness of Greek merchants introduced far more complex
conventions into the use of fingers and pebbles, and though it
is probable that these improvements were really subsequent to
the invention of some sort of written symbols, yet the antiquity
of the instruments themselves and the narrow limitations of
their use render it desirable that they should be described first,
before proceeding to the history of written signs.
19. A mediaeval Greek, one Nicolaus Smyrnaeus (called
also Rhabda or Artabasda), in a work entitled eK<j>pacri'} rov
BaKTvXiKov fierpov, written probably in the 13th or 14th
century2, describes fully the finger-symbolism which was in use
in his time and probably for some fifteen hundred years before.
On this system, the operator held up his hands, so that the
1 Herod. VI. 63, 65. Arist. Problem. 
Boediger, who has been followed by
xv. 
many writers, supposed that Nicolaus
3 It is printed in Schneider's Eclog. 
Smyrnaeus was of the 7th or 8th
Phys. I. p. 477, also by N. Caussinus 
century, but Dr Gtinther (Vermischte
in his Eloquentia Sacra et Humana, 
Untersueh. zur Geseh. der Math. 1876)
Bk. ix. ch. 8, pp. 565—568 (Paris, 1636), 
has lately discovered him to be a con-
and elsewhere. 
See Boediger's article 
temporary of Manuel Moschopulus, a
in Jahresb. der Deutsch. Morgenldnd. 
much later writer.
Gesellscli. for 1845, pp. 111—129.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GRKEK CALCULATION1. Logistica. 
25
fingers were erect, the palms facing outwards. The 3rd, 4th and
5th fingers (to use the German description) might be iicTei-
vofievoi or straight, avareWofievoi' bent' or ' half-closed,' KKIVO-
fievoi or 'closed.' 
The subsequent gestures may be thus
described:
(a) 
On the left hand:
for 1, half-close the 5th finger only:
„ 2, 
„ 
the 4th and 5th fingers only:
„ 3, 
„ 
the 3rd, 4th and 5th fingers only:
„ 4, 
„ 
the 3rd and 4th fingers only:
„ 5, 
„ 
the 3rd .finger only:
„ 6, 
„ 
the 4th finger only :
„ 7, close the 5th finger only :
„ 8, 
„ the 4th and 5th fingers only:
„ 9, 
„ the 3rd, 4th and 5th fingers only.
(b) The same operations on the right hand gave the
thousands, from 1000 to 9000.
(c) 
On the left hand:
for 10, apply the tip of the forefinger to the bottom of the
thumb, so that the resulting figure resembles 8:
„ 20, the forefinger is straight and is separated by the
thumb from the remaining fingers, which are
slightly bent:
„ 30, join the tips of the forefinger and thumb :
„ 40, place the thumb behind (on the knuckle of) the
forefinger:
„ 50, place the thumb in front (on the ball) of the fore-
finger :
„ 60, place the thumb as for 50 and bend the forefinger
over it, so as to touch the ball of the thumb:
„ 70, rest the forefinger on the tip of the thumb:
„ 80, lay the thumb on the palm, bend the forefinger
close over the first joint of the thumb and
slightly bend the remaining fingers:
„ 90, close the forefinger only as completely as possible.
(d) 
The same operations on the right hand gave the
hundreds, from 100 to 900.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

2G 
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
Nicolaus himself does not give signs for numbers above
9000, but Martianus Capella, a writer of the 5th century, says
(De Nuptiis, Lib. vn. p. 244 of Grotius edn. 1599) 'nonnulli
Graeci etiam fivpia adjecisse videntur' by means, apparently, of
' quaedam brachiorum contorta saltatio' of which he does not
approve. The motions were probably the same as those de-
scribed by Bede in his tract 'De loquela per gestum digitorum1.'
Different positions of the left hand on the left breast and hip
gave the numbers from 10,000 to 90,000: the same motions
with the right hand gave the hundred thousands and the hands
folded together represented a million.
20. The finger-symbolism here described was in use, in
practically the same form, in Greece and Italy and throughout
the East certainly from the beginning of our era2, but there is
unfortunately no evidence as to where or when it was invented.
By far the oldest passage in which any reference to it may
be supposed to occur is Aristophanes, Vespae, 11. 656—664,
where Bdelycleon tells his father to do an easy sum, ov •xjrjj^ot?
aX\' d-iro %efpo?. "The income of the state," says he, "is nearly
2000 talents: the yearly payment to the 6000 dicasts is only
150 talents." "Why," answers the old man, "we don't get a
tenth of the revenue." It is clear, from this reply, that the
'easy sum' in question amounted only to dividing 2000 by 10 or
multiplying 150 by 10, an operation which does not require the
more elaborate finger-signs. Failing this passage, there is
1 Opera, Basileae, col. 171—173. 
Geseh. des Eechenunterrichts (Jena,
The material part is given by Boediger. 
1876), in New Jahrb. flir Phil. u. Pad.
The finger positions described by Bede 
15thsupplbd. p. 511, and in manyother
differ slightly, in one or two cases, 
places. A large collection of references
from those of Nicolaus Smyrnaeus, 
is given by Prof. Mayor in his note to
and both again vary slightly from 
Juvenal, Sat. x. 248. More, esp. to
those used in the East, where the 
late Jewish and Arabic writers, in
units and tens were represented {not 
Steinschneider's Bibliogr. Hebr. Vol.
always, v. the Arabic poem in Bulletino 
xxi. pp. 39, 40.
Boncompagni, 1863, i. pp. 236, 237) on 
2 The same or something like it is
the right hand and not on the left. 
still used by Persian merchants. See
The reader is referred to Eoediger's 
De Sacy in Jmirn. Asiatique, Vol. 2,
article above mentioned. Plates will 
and Tylor, Primitive Culture, I. p.
be found in Journal of Philology, Vol. 
246, n.
ii. p. 247, in Stoy's pamphlet Zur
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica. 
27
another possible reference, equally doubtful, to this system
of finger-symbolism in Plautus, Miles Gloriosus, II. 3, but the
first clear references to it occur in Plutarch and authors of his
time1. Pliny, indeed, says that there was, in his time, a statue
of Janus, erected by Numa, of which the fingers indicated 365
or 355 (the reading is doubtful, cf. also Macrobius, Conv. Sat. 1.9),
the number of days in the year, but no importance can be
attached to such a statement. All that we can allege of the
system is that it is mentioned only in later classical literature,
that it then appears to be of universal diffusion and that
it was far more persistent in the East than in the West". If we
consider that such a system can have been of no use in calcu-
lation, save as a memoria technica for some number with which
the mind of the reckoner was not immediately engaged—if, in
other words, we consider that such a system was useful to
represent numbers but not to calculate with them, then it
becomes probable that it was invented in the first instance as a
secret means of communication between merchants3 or as a
numerical gesture-language between persons who were ignorant
of one another's tongues. Phoenician and Greek commerce
would make it widely known: the later diffusion of Latin and
Greek and the larger use of writing would ensure its gradual
extinction in the West, but it would still preserve its original
utility in the motley and ignorant crowds of the Eastern bazaars.
21. In reckoning with pebbles, no doubt at first each
pebble represented one of the objects to be counted, the advan-
tage of course being that space was saved and the memory
relieved by a good coup d'ceil, for it will be conceded that it is
easier to count 100 pebbles than 100 cows or to find 10 times
1 Plut. Apophth. 174 b. Pliny, Hist. 
stood it afterwards (see ibid. p. 313).
Nat. xxxiv. s. 33. For other reff. see 
8 The Persian system mentioned by
Prof. Mayor's note on Juv. x. 249, 
De Saoy and Tylor (see note above) is
above referred to, or Dean Peacock's 
used only in secret, when for instance
article Arithmetic in Encycl. Metro- 
a dragoman wishes to have one price
politana. 
with the seller and the other with his
3 Erasmus, in his ed. of Jerome (m. 
master. See also the opening words
25 B c) published in 1516, confessed 
of Boediger's article. Another sugges-
his ignorance of the finger-symbolism 
tion as to the origin of this symbolism
referred to by the saint. He under- 
will be made below, § 25.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

28 
GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
10 in pebbles than in sacks or such other articles of commerce.
So soon as the heap contained one pebble for each object,
the calculator would begin afresh and by arranging the pebbles
in groups of 10, arrive at the total and the name of the total,
without having his attention embarrassed by petty circum-
stances1. This use of pebbles in mere counting, where each
represents a real object, would naturally precede their use
in calculations where some pebbles would represent imaginary
objects. A great number of pebbles could be dispensed with if
the operator, on completing a group of 10, laid aside a large
pebble or a white one and then began again with the pebbles of
the original group. He would soon find that there would be no
need for a variety of pebbles, if he always laid pebbles repre-
senting 10 in a separate place from those representing units.
In this way, he would arrive at a neat visible symbolism for a
high number, which would greatly facilitate operations in the
four rules of arithmetic. Such an advanced pebble-symbolism
the Egyptians and the Chinese had from a time 'whereof
the memory of man runneth not to the contrary.' It can
hardly be doubted that they invented it independently and
imparted it to the nations around. Wherever and whenever
invented or borrowed, the Greeks and Italians had it also and
used it by preference for all ordinary calculations down to the
15th century of our era. The evidence for its use, however, is
singularly late. Homer and Pindar do not allude to it, but it is
plain that it was in regular use by the 5th century B.C., though
the authorities even of that time do not state explicitly how the
calculation with pebbles was conducted2. It cannot be doubted,
1 In a London night-school I have 
would then, with the aid of pebbles,
often seen a boy, in order to multiply 
ascertain whether he had got the price
say 12 by 10, make 120 dots on his 
he bargained for. Thus the Mexicans
slate and then count these. What he 
acquired a set of numerals, used in
wanted was the name of the total and 
counting animals and things, which
he did not always get this right. With 
runs eentetl, ontetl, etc. or' one-stone,'
primitive man, I imagine, the use of 
'two-stone,' etc. Other similar examples
pebbles would not arise till numeral 
are cited in Tylor, Early Hist. p. 163.
names had partly superseded 
finger- 
a Diogenes Laertius (i. 59) ascribes
counting. If, for instance, a savage 
to Solon a saying that courtiers were
sold something for 50 cows, he would 
like the pebbles on a reckoning-board,
indicate his price by naming it, and 
for they sometimes stood for more,
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GBEEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
29
however, that the pebbles were arranged in lines, either hori-
zontal or perpendicular, and that the pebbles on the first line
represented units, those on the second tens, those on the third
hundreds and so on. How many lines there were and how
many pebbles might be placed on each there is no evidence to
show. It may be added that fractions in the form of 'sub-
multiples ' would not present any difficulty when the system of
local values for the pebbles was once introduced. If for instance
a line were appropriated to pebbles of the value of T^, it would
be as easy to discern that 12 pebbles on that line are equal in
value to 1 on the units line, as to perceive that 10 pebbles on
the unit line may be replaced by 1 on the tens line. But since
a great many lines devoted to fractions would have been incon-
venient, probably a few lines only were devoted to certain
selected fractions, and all other fractions were reduced as nearly
as possible to terms of these.
22. The surface on which such lines were drawn, or the
frame on which strings or wires were stretched, for the purpose
of pebble-reckoning, was called by the Greeks a/3a!j or dftdiciov.
This name seems to point to the common Semitic word abaq
meaning ' sand,' and it is said that a board strewn with sand,
on which lines might be drawn with a stick, was and still is a
common instrument for calculation in the East. It is the more
desirable also that some Oriental origin for the afia% should
be found because, in late Greek writers, we find a general
tradition that Pythagoras, who certainly studied out of
Greece, was the inventor or introducer of the instrument. It
cannot, however, be considered that the Semitic origin of
afiat; is rendered at all probable by such considerations. The
sometimes for less. 
This, if genuine 
ed as they wrote from right to left, the
(butof. Polyb. v. 26,13), is the first and 
Greeks from.left to right. 
It may be
also one of the most explicit references 
that the abacus with the Greeks was
to the pebble-symbolism. 
If this be 
not so old as writing, for the Greeks
doubted, then the earliest authentic 
did not originally write from left to
reference is probably a fragment of 
right, but either from right to left or
Epicharmus (ed. Ahrens, 94, 8): then fiovaTpofyrfiiv. They may have counted
Aeschylus (Agam. 570), then perhaps from right to left, but can hardly have
Herodotus (n. 36), who says that, in 
counted f)ov<rTpo<j>ij86i>.
pebble-reckoning, the Egyptians count-
Published online by Cambridge University Press

30 
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logislicct.
word itself in the sense of 'reckoning-table' is not used for
certain in any writer before Polybius (d/3d/ciov in V. 26, 13)
who belongs only to the 2nd century B. c. It is, however, used
in the sense of plain 'board' in many different connexions1.
Assuming it to be true, also, that the Semites did generally use
a sanded board for their calculations2, it does not appear that this
was called abaq, and the step from Semitic abaq 'sand' to Greek
a/3ai; a 'board' remains practically as wide as before. Lastly,
the tradition which connects the a/3af with Pythagoras as well
as that which connects him with a Semitic people, is so late and
belongs to so imaginative authors3 that no reliance can be
placed upon it. Of course, a few lines drawn with a stick
in the dust and a handful of stones were as efficient an
instrument for calculation as was needed and must always have
been used by Greeks upon occasion. Such an impromptu
ledger would indeed frequently be preferable to a more
elaborate device, since it could be adapted to different fractions,
different monetary scales etc., while a permanent machine
would probably be restricted to one scale and a few selected
fractions. But whether such a scheme of lines drawn on the
ground could ever in Greek have been called a/3a^ there is
no evidence to show.
23. It must be admitted, also, that hardly anything is
known of the normal Greek a/3a£, using that word in the sense
of a reckoning-board with permanent lines drawn on it and
possibly permanent balls or pebbles attached to it. Three types
1 The word seems first to occur in 
2,18, 48. Tusc. 5, 23, 64, and other
the sense of 'trencher' in Cratinus, 
quotations collected by Friedlein,
KXeo/S. 2 (cit. Poll. x. 105). Hesychius 
Zahlz. § 76, pp. 52, 3. 
See also
says it was a synonym for /liierpa Oantar, Vorl. pp. 109—111. It seems
'trough.' 
Pollux also cites Afiaxtov to me not unlikely that a(3a{ was a
from Lysias, without stating its mean- 
childish name for the hoard on which
ing. It is oddly accented. 
the alphabet was written and from
s The evidence adduced by Cantor, 
which the children read their firJTa
Math. Beitrdge, p. 141, is not satis- 
o\0a (3a, /3ijra eT pe, etc. (Athenaeus,
factory on this point, but the fact is 
x. 453). "AjSa£ would be the 'ABC
hardly worth disputing. 
A sanded 
board,' the termination being chosen
board was certainly used by Greek 
by analogy from irfoof.
geometers, but is nowhere attributed 
3 Iamblichus, for instance, and the
to arithmeticians. Of. Cic. Nat. Deor. pseudo-Boethius, cited post.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
31
at least of such a machine are well known. One of these is the
Russian tschotw, in which each wire carries 10 balls1. Some
advance is shown in the Chinese suan-pan*, where the whole
field of the frame is divided by a transverse string: each wire
on that part of it which is below this string carries 5 balls:
and on the part which is above 2 balls, each of which is worth
5 of those below. On both these machines, apparently, it is
possible and usual to remove balls from one wire to another
as the case may require. But the third type is the Koman
abacus, which, at any rate in its highest development, was
closed, so that balls or buttons could not be removed from the
wire or groove in which they were originally placed. A few
specimens of this sort, constructed with grooves in which
buttons (claviculi) slide, are still preserved. One of them which
is figured in Daremberg's Bictionnaire des AntiquitSs {s.v. abacus)
and is in the Kircher Museum at Rome, may be roughly
represented thus:
il
C 
X 
I 
O 
S
C)
()
C)
()
()
()o
()()()<)
()
()
()
C)
()
()
()
() 
$
() 
()
Leaving out of consideration, for a moment, the two grooves on
the extreme right, it will be seen that the remaining 7 contain
buttons representing units, tens, etc. up to millions. The lower
1 The balls are differently coloured,
some of the 10 being white and some
black. 
The instrument was intro-
duced into the schools of Eastern
France after the great Eussian cam-
paign. 
It is common enough in
Pestalozzian schools. 
See further
Cantor, Math. Beitr. pp. 129, 130.
2 Suan = reckon : p'huan = board.
Goschkewitsch, an authority quoted by
Hankel, Zur Gesch. der Math. p. 54,
says that "the practised Chinese
reckoner plays with the fingers of the
right hand on the suan pan as on a
musical instrument and grasps whole
numerical chords."
Published online by Cambridge University Press

32 
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
grooves contain 4 buttons each, the higher 1 each, which
represents 5 of the same value as those in the lower corre-
sponding groove. The letters indicating the values of the
buttons are obscure above C, but are plain enough on another
specimen, which once belonged to one Welser, in whose works
published at Nuremberg in 1682 there was given a drawing of
his abacus (pp. 442 and 819) \ The sign 0 which distinguishes
the penultimate groove on the right, stands for uncia, and as
there are 12 unciae to the as, here the lower portion of the
groove has 5 buttons for 5 unciae, the upper 1 button for
6 unciae. The signs appended to the last groove on the right
are S for semuncia (^jth of an as): 3 for sicilicus (-^th of an- as):
and Zlox sextula (^nd of an as). It is not, however, very clear
why there should be 4 buttons in this groove or what was
the value of each and how, if of different values, they were
distinguished from each other. Welser's abacus, which in other
respects is exactly similar to this, had three separate grooves
for these fractions, the first containing 1 button for the
semuncia (-^th): the second 1 button for the sicilicus (-j^th):
the third 2 buttons, each representing a sextula (^nd). These
grooves therefore together (and no doubt the last groove of the
Kircher abacus) represent {fths of a n uncia*. Both abaci are
capable of representing all whole numbers from 1 to 9,999,999
and the duodecimal fractions of the as in common use. Since
such an abacus could seldom represent more than one number
at a time, it is probable that, in calculating with it, the larger
of the two numbers to be dealt with would be represented on
the table. The smaller would be mentally added or subtracted
1 Beproduced by Friedlein in .Zaf«c/w. 
2 This statement, which is taken
fur Math. u. Physik. Vol. ix. 1864. 
from Friedlein, seems unlikely. On
Plate 5. See also p. 299. A desorip- 
the analogy of all the preceding grooves,
tion of this abacus is given also in 
we should expect the table to conclude
Friedlein's Zahlzeichen, p. 22, § 32. 
with fjths of the uncia, and not ffths.
A figure of it is given in Darem- 
It will do so if the last two buttons be
berg, Diet, des Ant. s.v. arithmetica. taken to represent, not sextulae, but
M. Euelle, the writer of the article, 
dimidiae sextulae, the ordinary sign of
says that 4 Roman abaci (which he 
which is easily to be confused with
names) are known, but it does not 
that of the sextula. See Friedlein,
appear that they are all now in exis- 
Zahlz. Plate to § 48.
tence.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
33
as the case may be, and the buttons would be successively
altered so as to represent the sum or remainder. Multiplica-
tion can only have been performed by repeated additions, and
division by repeated subtractions \
24. It will be seen that the types of abacus now known
are not very diverse from one another, and there is no cause to
be greatly distressed by our ignorance of what the Greek dfiai;
was. A certain table, however, which may be an aftai;, was
discovered in 1846 in the island of Salamis and this, which can
be partly explained by reference to the Roman instruments,
must serve to assure us that there cannot have been any great
superiority in the Greek a/3a£ at any time. This " Salaminian
table" may be figured thus8:
XPHPA
"ax
PHCTX
-a
x
>
T
o
X
X
•g
~a
t>
T
O
H
X
1 Unless indeed the abacus is used
merely as a memoria technica. Thus
the Chinese, in dividing, first represent
the dividend, then, breaking it up as
the remainders successively are ob-
tained, place, on the wires from time to
time vacated, balls to represent the suc-
cessive ciphers of the quotient. The
actual division is done in the mind by
G. G. M.
use of the multiplication-table. Thus
Goschkewitsch (cited by Hankel uti
sup.) says many modes of division
have been proposed for the Eussian
tschotu, but they all involve the use of
a seoond board or of a board and
paper.
2 There is a drawing of it in Da-
remberg s.v. Abacus: also in Revue
3
Published online by Cambridge University Press

34 
GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
It is made of marble and is very large, being about 5 ft.
(1*5 metres) long by 2^- ft. ('75 metre) wide. The letters upon
the margin are easily explained. \- is the customary Attic sign
for a drachma. The letters which, in the table, stand on the left
of this sign are II for 5 (ririvTe), A for 10 (Sitca), P for 50, H for
100 (exaTov), [* for 500 and X for 1000 (%tW) in the ordinary
Attic style. To these are added, in one row, the signs p> for
5000 and T for rakavrov or 6000 drachmae. The signs which
stand to the right of |- in the table are the fractions of the
drachma, viz. | for ^th (obol), C for T^th (| obol), J1 for ^jth
(rerapTtj/jLoplov of the obol) and X for ^aXwous (£th of the
obol, ^th of the drachma). The last three fractions, it will be
observed, when added together make fths of an obol, which is
the real unit of the table. On the principle of a Roman abacus,
this scale would be thus distributed:
But it will be seen that the lines of the Salaminian table do
not fall in with this arrangement. Here we have 11 lines, with 10
intervals, in one place: and 5 lines, with 4 intervals, in another.
If the table be really an a/Saf, the simplest explanation is that
ArcMoteg, 1846, p. 296, where a very
minute description of the stone is
given by M. Bangabe. Another Greek
dbax is also figured on the Darius-vase
at Naples. The numerals on it are
of the same kind as those on the
Salaminian table and it is held by the
reckoner so that the columns are
perpendicular to his body. But it is
too small and roughly drawn to furnish
important information.
1 Tera/rrrmoplov is Bockh's expla-
nation: M. Vincent proposed rpvn\-
fioplov.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
35
the 10 spaces at one part of the board contained stones repre-
senting values from a talent to an obol, in the order TFXF'HF1
A Phi: and the 5 spaces at the other part of the board contained:
stones representing values from an obol to a chalcus, in the
order |, C, T, X. The transverse line would serve to distinguish
two sums which were to be added together or subtracted one
from the other: or again, as in the Roman system, the numbers
compounded with p might have been placed above this line.
The crosses on the line are merely aids to the eye in keeping
the various rows distinct. Operations with fractions of the obol
would be separately conducted at the lower end of the table.
The table also being very large, perhaps two people would work
at it at once, or because it was heavy, it might be desirable to
use it from either side and therefore a table of customary values
would be repeated in various parts of the table. The received
explanation, however, of the use of the table is different from
this. The well-known archaeologist, M. Vincent1, considered
that the table served two purposes: that it was an a/Saf, and
also a scoring board for a game something like tric-trac or back-
gammon. When it was used as an a^d%, fractions of the
drachma were calculated at the end of the table on the 4 spaces
there reserved: sums from the drachma to the talent were
calculated on five of the other ten spaces, and the remaining
five were used for calculations from one talent to 10,000 talents.
It is an objection to this theory that a Greek merchant or tax-
gatherer can seldom have had occasion to calculate above a few
talents, since the whole revenue of Athens in her prime was not
2000 talents2. But the suggestion which M. Vincent adopts
from M. Kangabe"3, that the Salaminian table was also a scoring-
board for some kind of irerTeLa is extremely attractive. Pollux,
who vaguely describes two kinds of this game (ix. 97), says that
each player had 5 lines and 5 counters, and that the middle
line was 'sacred' (lepa ypafifir/). M. Rangabe' therefore sug-
1 Revue ArchSol. 1846, p. 401 sqq. 
he must have spent 10 talents in
2 See, however, Theophrastus, Char. 
charity.
VI. (ed. Jebb), where the boastful man 
3 Ibid. p. 295 sqq.
reckons, on just such an abacus, that
3—2
Published online by Cambridge University Press

36 
GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
gested that the lines marked with a cross on the table are really
the Upal ypafifiao, and that two players sitting opposite to one
another, would play at some kind of. baekgamnion, each player
confining his counters to his own side of the transverse line.
The counters were moved according to throws with dice, as in
backgammon. Anyone, who is acquainted with the latter
game, will be able to suggest two or three very good forms of it
which might be played on this table and in which the lines
marked with a cross should be truly iepai, either because no
'blot' might be left there or because they should be an asylum
where no solitary wanderer could be ' taken up.' The 5 lines
at the opposite end of the table would serve for some less
elaborate verrela or for a third player or might, in some way,
have been used to determine the values of the throws.
25. It will be seen, from the preceding observations, that our
knowledge of the abacus of antiquity is derived entirely from
Roman sources, and that the mode in which it was used must
be inferred simply from the appearance of extant instruments
and the practice of modern nations. It would seem, however,
that the use of the abacus was combined with the more
advanced finger-symbolism above described. Thus the Emperor
Frederick the Second (Imp. A.D. 1210—1250) in a treatise on
the art of hawking1, says that the hands must, on various
occasions, be held in certain positions, such as abacistae use for
representing certain numbers in accordance with Bede's or
Nicolaus' instructions. Now since only one number could, as a
rule, be represented at a time on the abacus, a calculator who
was operating with two high numbers, would require a memoria
technica of both, and it would be very convenient to represent
one on the abacus, the other on the hands. It is indeed
1 Reliqua Libr. Frederici II. (ed. 
that after mastering the apices (i.e.
Schneider I. p. 102) quoted by Eoe- 
the numerical signs used with the
diger: "Eeplioet indicem ad extremi- 
abacus) the pupil must learn 'com-
tatem pollicia et erit modus secundum 
putum per figuram manuum secun-
quem abacistae tenent septuaginta cum 
dum magistrorum abbaci usum anti-
manu," with more directions of the 
quitus sapientissime inventam.' He
same kind. Thus also Leonardo of 
then gives the scheme after Bede.
Pisa (about A.D. 1200) in his Liber 
Vide Friedlein, Zahh.-p. 56.
Abbaci (ed. Bonoompagni p. 5)
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
37
possible, considering the lateness of all allusions to this finger-
symbolism, that it was originally invented as a companion to the
abacus.
26. A few words only remain to be added on this branch
of Greek practical arithmetic. Western abacistae had intro-
duced, certainly by the 10th century, a considerable improve-
ment in the use of their instrument, which consisted in discarding
pebbles and substituting for them the Roman numeral signs or
the letters of the alphabet in order, so that thenceforth 525, for
instance, was represented by V. II. V. or EBE in the last three
columns of the abacus1. At the end of the first book of the
Geometria, attributed to Boethius (who died A.r>. 524) the
author states (Friedlein's ed. pp. 395—397) that Pythagoreans
used with the abacus certain nine signs which he calls apices of
which he gives the forms. (The names are added apparently
by a later hand.) The forms are obviously the parents of our
own so-called Arabic numerals (except 0, which is not mentioned
in Boethius)2, and some of the names are also pure or nearly
pure Arabic: the forms are also practically identical with the
Gobar-numerals used by the Arabs of N. Africa in the 9th
century, which again are admittedly of Indian origin. Upon
these facts an endless controversy has arisen among historians,
the questions in dispute being whether Pythagoras or any
Pythagoreans might not have procured these signs from India
and used them secretly for their quasi-theosophical arithmetic3:
whether the later Alexandrians might not have obtained the
1 Gerbert (ob. 1003) sometimes uses 
See Hankel, Zur Gesck. der Math, pp.
the Roman numerals, but generally 
317—323.
the apices. Boethius or rather a pseudo- 
8 It is doubtful whether the cipher
Boethius (Friedlein's ed. pp. 426—429) 
was at first used by the Western Arabs
of a much later date mentions the use 
among the. Gobar-signs. It was intfo-
of the alphabet (cf. Priedlein Zahlz. 
duced to Europeans first apparently in
pp. 54, 55, §§ 78—80). It will be ob- 
the book Liber Algorismi, a translation
served that with an abacus on which 
of the work of Mohammed ben Musa
numbers were represented by signs in 
Alkharisml, made in the 12th century,
appropriate columns, the four rules 
Gobar or gubdr means 'dust.'
of arithmetic could be performed pre- 
3 This was Cantor's opinion, Math.
cisely as we perform them. Addition, 
Beitrage, p. 221 sqq.., but in Vorle-
subtraction and multiplication were 
sungen, p. 610 and elsewhere he follows
BO in fact. Division, however, was not. 
Woepcke (see next note).
Published online by Cambridge University Press

38 
GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
signs from India or elsewhere and given them to the Italians on
the one hand, the Arabs on the other1: and lastly whether the
passage in Boethius is not a forgery2. It is sufficient here to
repeat, what is admitted by all parties that there is no evidence
in any Greek author that these apices were known to the Greeks :
that there is also no evidence whatever that the Greeks ever
used any written numerical signs with the abacus: that the
MSS. of Boethius containipg the apices are certainly not older
than the 11th century: that no trace of such signs is to be
found elsewhere in any European writer before the end of the
10th century or thereabouts: that the Indian signs, from which
the apices are derived, seem to be not older than the 2nd or 3rd
century: that the Arabs themselves did not obtain the Indian
arithmetic and Indian numerals till the time of Alkharizmi
(cir. A. D. 800) and that Arabian mathematics did not begin to
pass from Spain to other European countries till about the
time of Gerbert (ob. A.D. 1003). 
The mere statement of these
facts is surely sufficient to assure any reader that the connexion
of the Greeks with the apices, if not absurd, is purely con-
jectural and need not be discussed at length in a short history
of Greek mathematics*. If it were admitted that the Greeks
knew of the apices at all, there would still be no reason what-
ever to think that they ever used them in calculation.
27. The apices, it must be remembered, were used only
with the abacus. 
No writer, even of the middle ages, ever in
the course of his text exhibits a number in these symbols. If
he purposes to illustrate the method of division, he states his
example with Eoman numerals, then draws an abacus and
1 Woepcke (Journal Asiatique, 1863, 
later and on the same side is Weissen-
i. p. 54 sqq.) suggests that the later 
born, in Zeitschr. Math. Phys. xxiv.
Alexandrians got these signs from 
(1879), Hist. Lit. Abth. Supplement-
India: Theod. Henri Martin (Annali 
heft, published also in Teubner's Ab-
di matem. Rome 1863, p. 350 sqq.) 
handlungen zur Gesch. der Math. Part
suggests that they got them partly 
n. 1879. This latter writer rejects the
from Egyptian, partly from Semitic 
whole Geometria, not merely the arith-
souroes. 
metical passages at the end of Bk. i.
2 This is Friedlein's opinion, main- 
and Bk. II.
tained in many articles. The most 
3 Another brief discussion of the
convenient reference ia to Zahlz. pp. 
apices question is given by Hankel,
15—19, 23—26, 51—54, 66, 67. Still 
pp. 323—328.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEEEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
39
inserts in it the necessary numbers with apices. Hence, closely
as apices upon an abacus resemble, and serve all the purposes of
our modern numerals, there is still a great gulf between the
two. The cipher is yet to be invented before the abacus can be
discarded. 
It follows again, from the same fact, that whatever
be thought of the Greek acquaintance with apices, there can be
no doubt at all that these were never entitled to be described
as ordinary Greek characters for the numerals. They were not,
and could not have been, used in inscriptions or other writings.
It remains to consider, in this place, what characters were used
in such documents.
28. It has been suggested above that probably, when the
use of the fingers in counting was first discovered, it required,
as in S. Africa at the present day, two 'men to count the higher
tens, three to count the higher hundreds and so on. 
A single
man, in counting say 40 or 60, would be apt to forget how
many times he had counted his fingers through and would take
an assistant to record them. But he would soon find that he
could count high numbers by himself, if he kept some visible
record, to which he could afterwards return, of each group of 10.
Suppose, for instance, that each time he had counted through
both hands, he pressed them on the ground, so as to leave an
imprint of his fingers. He would thus have a written record, in
groups of 10 perpendicular strokes1. 
Any other marks would,
of course, serve his purpose, but it is a curious fact that in all
1 In order clearly to represent the 
repeat this process till he had exhaust-
arithmetical resources of primitive 
ed the pebbles. The imprints of his
man, I may as well state here what fingers would then show nineteen hands
I conceive to be a very early method 
and one finger over, or 9 men + 1 hand
of counting. Suppose a man, who 
+1 finger. This he would call 'ring
has names for his fingers and knows finger-men and right-thumb' or by
that all human beings have the same 
some such name. The pebbles, the
number of fingers, desires to count fingers and the written marks are used
by himself 96 cows or other large 
concurrently, but in time as his nomen-
unmanageable objects. I suppose he 
clature became settled and his memory
would first take a pebble for each cow 
improved, he would omit first one,
and seat himself before the heap of 
then two of the three symbols, and
pebbles. He would then take a pebble 
would finally dispense with them all
for each finger up to 10, then press 
and trust to his nomenclature alone,
his fingers on the ground : and would
Published online by Cambridge University Press

40 
GEEEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
the most ancient specimens of any sort of writing, the units at
least are represented, not by dots or crosses or any other marks,
but by perpendicular strokes only. 
This want of variety
suggests that such strokes represent the fingers. The invention
of separate symbols for 10 and 100 would follow at a far later
time. The oldest known writings of the Egyptians and
Phoenicians have such signs, but have no intermediate signs
(e.g. for 50 or 500). They repeat the unit-strokes up to 9: they
repeat the signs for 10 and 100 up to 9 times1. 
The ancient
Greeks, according to Iamblichus2, did the same. It is probable
enough that such was the case, since an arithmetical written
symbolism may well suggest itself long before any other kind of
writing; but on the other hand, as some kind of writing is
necessary to explain to us the purport of arithmetical symbols,
and as the oldest Greek writings are of very late date and of the
most advanced art, we can hardly expect to find evidence in
support of Iamblichus' statement. .
29. It goes without saying that, in a very large proportion
of Greek inscriptions, the names of such numbers as occur are
written in full. The oldest known compendious numerical
symbols are those which used to be called Herodianic signs.
The attention of modern students was first called to them by
one Herodianus, a Byzantine grammarian of the 3rd century,
who, in a passage printed by Stephanus in the Appendix
Olossariorum to his Thesaurus, declared that he had frequently
seen these signs in Solonic laws and other ancient documents,
coins and inscriptions. While Greek epigraphy was an unknown
science, this statement excited little interest, but it has since
been abundantly confirmed by the enormous mass of inscriptions
which the industry of scholars has, of late years, collected. In
this sort of numerals, a stroke I repeated not more than four
times, is the unit-sign par excellence and the other symbols are
1 See Pihan, Exposi des Signes de 
(See Franz, Epigr. Graeca, p. 347.
Numeration, etc. pp. 25—41, 162— 
Bockh, C. I. G. no. 2919, Vol. u. p,
168. 
584.) Such forgeries were, of course,
2 In Nicom. Arithm. ed. Tennulius, 
not unusual when a city wished to
p. 80. An inscription from Tralles has 
produce a documentary title to some
e-reos 1111111 but Bockh suspects this to 
ancient privilege.
be a forgery of late imperial times.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica. 
41
merely initial letters of numeral names. P (Trevre) stands for
5: A (Sixa) for 10: H (eicaTov) for 100: X (XtW) for 1000 :
M (jivploi) for 10,000, and there are further compendia P, P etc.
for 50, 500 etc. as may be seen on the Salaminian table figured
above. From the frequency with which these signs occur in
Athenian inscriptions, they are now generally called Attic. As
a matter of fact, no others are used in any known Attic in-
scription of any date B.C.1 But they are by no means exclu-
sively Attic. They were used for instance in Boeotia, at first in
the forms of the local alphabet (thus M, fi, \, I~HE, HE, PI, >, I)
and afterwards, down to a late date, in the Attic forms2. It is
probable, in fact, that these numerals were once universally
used in Greece but at present there is not enough evidence on
this point. They were at any rate known and used outside
Attica long after the alphabet came to be used for numerical
purposes, A great number of papyrus-rolls preserved at Hercu-
laneum, state on the title-page, after the name of the author,
the number of books in his work, given in alphabetic numerals,
and the number of lines in Attic numerals: e.g. 'Eiriicovpov irepl
(pvaecos IE (dpi6.) XXXHH. We might in the same way use
Roman numerals for the one division, Arabic for the other.
One author, who is presented with such a title page in these
rolls, is a certain rhetorician called Philodemus, of Cicero's time.
The papyri therefore cannot be older than 40 or 50 B.C. and
may be much later3.
1 In other words, no others occur in 
mental evidence, therefore, as to the
Vols. i. and n. of the Corpus Inscr. 
early numeral signs, is very scanty.
A tticarum. 
The Herodianic signs are found, beside
2 See Franz, Epigr. Graeca, App. n. 
Boeotia, in Arcadia with local pecu-
ch. 1, p. 348, Bockh, C. I. G. Vol. i. 
liarities (Le Bas and Foucart, Inss. de
no. 1569 (p. 740 sqq.) and no. 1570 
Peloponn. no. 341e): in Erythrae near
(p. 750 sqq.) The latter inscription 
Halicarnassus about 250 B.C. (Eayet
Bockh dates about 70 or 100 B. O. A 
in Bevue ArcMol. 1877, Vol. 33, p. 107
large majority of Greek Inss. (inclu- 
sqq.): and in Rhodes about B. C. 180
ding all the oldest) do not contain 
(Brit. Mus. Inss.), cf. Curtius in Bur-
numerals at all. Inss. from places 
sian's Jahresb. for 1878.
outside Attioa are very seldom older 
3 See Ritschl, Die Alexandrinischen
than the 2nd century B. C. and are 
Bibliotheken, pp. 99, 100, 123 note.
mostly of imperial times. The monu-
Published online by Cambridge University Press

42 
GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
30. But at some time which cannot now be certainly
determined, the Greeks adopted the practice of using the letters
of the alphabet in order as their numeral symbols, and this
style ultimately superseded the Attic in Attica itself and be-
came universal among Greek speaking peoples. The alphabet,
however, as used for numbers, was not the same as that used
for literary purposes, but contained some additions. 
The
following table will show clearly enough what the numerical
alphabet was:
a',/3',y',S',e' = l,2,3, 4,5.
*r = 6.
^ ' , 0 ' , *' = 7,8,9,10.
(ia',i/3' 
t0'=11, 12 
19.)
K, V, /*', v, f, o', TT' = 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80.
(jca, K/3', Xa, X/3' etc. = 21, 22, 31, 32 etc.)
* Q = 90.
p, (T',T, v, <£', x, f , 
«' = 100, 200, 300 
800.
* ">) = 900.
{put, p«/3'etc. = 111, 122 etc.)
,a, fi, ty, /S, ,e etc. = 1000, 2000, 3000 etc.
P 
v
Mv or M, M,.M etc. = 10,000, 20,000, 30,000 etc.
It will be seen that an alphabet of 27 letters' (including 3
strange letters, the so-called eirto-tjfia s", Q, and ~>\) represents
all the numbers from 1 to 999 and that numbers under this
limit are marked with an acute accent, placed immediately
behind the last letter. At 1000, the alphabet recommences,
but a stroke is now placed before the letter and usually, but
not always, somewhat below it. For 10,000 Mi>, or M, the
initial of fivptoi was generally used, and the coefficient of the
myriad, to use an algebraical expression, was usually written
over (but sometimes before or behind)2 this M. Sometimes
1 The 24 letters, exclusive of the M- 
MSS. again the myriads are sometimes
a-qina, are those of the Ionic alphabet, 
represented by a, ft, f etc. hundreds of
introduced formally at Athens in 403 
thousands {/tupid/cis /wptoi) by A, fi, y
B. o. It was in use in Asia as early as 
etc. Vide, for authorities, Hultsch,
470 B.C. 
Metrologicorum Scriptorum Belliquiae,
2 If the coefficient was written first, Vol. I. pp. 172, 173. Bitschl, Die
M was often omitted and a dot sub- 
Alex. Bibl. p. 120. Nicomachus (ed.
stituted (e.g. p.fiTfL$ = 29,342). 
In 
Hoche) Introd. p. x. Friedlein Zaklz.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
43
also {e.g. in MSS. of Geminus) /, ,/e, ,\ etc. are used for 10,000
20,000, 30,000 etc. in the ordinary sequence of the alphabet.
Thus the number 29,342, would be written fA.firpP' or ,K0.T/i/3'.
But in a high number, since the digits were always arranged in
the same order, from the highest multiple of 10 on the left to
the units on the right, the strokes or accents which distinguish
thousands and units were often omitted and a stroke drawn
over the whole number. The left-hand letter would then have
a local value (e.g. 0T/40 = 9349)\ The symbolism for fractions
will be mentioned later.
31. It has been commonly assumed, since the use of the
alphabet for numerals was undoubtedly a Semitic practice and
since the Greek alphabet was undoubtedly derived from Semitic
sources, that therefore the Greeks derived from the Semites the
numerical use of the alphabet with the alphabet itself2. And
this theory derives further colour from the fact that the Greek
numerical alphabet contains three Semitic letters which were,
within historical times, discarded from the literary alphabet.
Yet this evidence is in all probability wholly illusory. The
Greek alphabet was derived from the Phoenicians but the
Phoenicians never used the alphabet for numerical purposes at
all3. The Jews and Arabs did, but the earliest documentary-
evidence for the practice, even among them, is not older than
141—137 B. c. when dates, given in alphabetic numerals, appear
on shekels of Simon Maccabaeus4. The Greek evidence goes a
good deal further back than this.
pp. 9—11, §§ 12—17. Nesselmann, 
Madden, Coins of the Jews, p. 67.
Algebra der Oriechen, pp. 74—79. 
Also Dr Euting's letter quoted by
1 Cf. for instance C. I. A. Vol. in. 
Hankel, Zur Gesch. der Math. p. 34.
nos. 60 and 77. 
It was Hankel who first proclaimed
2 See for instance Nesselmann, Alg. 
the relevancy of these facts to the
der Griechen, pp. 74—79. 
Cantor, 
history of the Greek numerals. But
Math. Beitrdge, pp. 115—118. Vorles. Ewald and Nordheimer had, long be-
pp. 101—107. Friedlein, Zdhlz. p. 9, 
fore, stated that the Hebrew numerals
§ 12, etc. 
were used "after the Greek fashion"
3 The ordinary forms of Phoenician 
and that they do not appear till a late
numerals are upright strokes for units: 
time. 
Hankel abides by the common
a horizontal stroke for 10: fy for 20, 
opinion that the Greek numerical
and l<l for 100. 
alphabet dates from the 5th century
4 See Schroder Phb'nikische Sprache. B.C.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

44 
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
Against these facts it may be urged (1) that the Jewish
practice of Gematria, adopted by the later Kabbalists, is said
by them to be very early, and is perhaps as old as the 7th
century B. c. This was a curious system of Biblical interpre-
tation, whereby two words were treated as interchangeable, if
their letters, considered as numerals amount, when added
together, to the same sum \ 
And again (2) both the Hebrew
and the Greek literary alphabets are too short for a good
arithmetical symbolism and both are supplemented up to the
same limit (the 27th letter in each standing for 900). But as
to (1), it must be observed that the supposed antiquity of
gematria depends solely on a merely conjectural and improbable
comment on Zechariah xii. 102. There is in fact no clear
instance of gematria before Philo or Christian writers strongly
under Philonic influence (e. g. Eev. xiii. 18 ; Ep. Barn. c. 9)3.
The practice belongs to Hellenistic Jews; its name is Greek
and it is closely connected with Alexandria, where, we shall see,
alphabetic numerals are first found. And as to (2), it seems
more likely that the Jews took the idea of alphabetic numerals
from the Greeks than vice versa. The Greeks could, by hook
or by crook, furnish the necessary 27 alphabetic symbols. The
Jews could not. Their alphabet is only 22 letters, and the
numbers, 500 to 900, must be represented by the digraphs
pft ID etc. compounded of 100-400, 200-400, etc.4 There is in
1 See Cantor, Varies, i. pp. 87, 
3 Cf. Siegfried's Philo, p. 330.
104—5, quoting Lenormant, La Magie 
4 The later Hebrew alphabet has
chez Us Chaldeens p. 24. Also Dr 
fivefinal forms ~\, D> J. f\, Y (cf. Greek
Ginsburg's monograph, Kabbalah p. 
a and s), which are sometimes used to
49 and the same writer's article Kab- 
represent the numbers 500—900. But
balah in Ency. Brit. 9th ed. Vol. XIII. 
this cannot be an ancient practice.
The Gematria is employed in Eev. xiii. 
The square Hebrew characters, which
18, where 666, the number of the beast, 
alone have finals, did not come into
is the sum of the Hebrew letters in 
use till the 1st or 2nd century B. O. ,
Nerun Kesar. 
So in Gen. xviii. 2 
and these five finals were not definitely
'Lol three men' is by gematria found fixed for many centuries afterwards,
equivalent to ' These are Michael, 
Vide the Table of alphabets in Madden
Gabriel and Raphael.' 
Gematria is 
'Coins of the Jews' or Dr Euting's,
by metathesis from ypafn/Mrela. 
appended to TSickeB.'a Outlines of Hebrew
s Hitzig, Die xu. kleinen Propheten, 
Gram. 1877.
p. 378 sqq. cited by Cantor Vorl. p. 87.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GBEEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
45
fact no evidence against, and a good deal for, the supposition
that the Jews derived alphabetic numerals from the Greeks.
The contrary belief is perhaps only a relic of the old superstition
which counted it profane to question the priority of the Hebrews
in all arts.
32. But the date at which the Greeks adopted the alpha-
betic numerals is not easily to be determined. The alphabet
was indeed, at an early date, used quasi numerically but not in
the manner now under discussion. The tickets of the ten panels
of Athenian jurymen {heliastae) were marked with the letters of
the alphabet from a to K, r being omitted1. So also the books
of Homer, as divided by Zenodotus (flor. c. B. c. 280) were
numbered by the 24 letters of the ordinary Ionic alphabet,
r and P being omitted: and the works of Aristotle were also
at some ancient time divided into books, numbered on the same
principle2. It seems unlikely that the regular numerical alpha-
bet (with r, P, ^) was in common use at the time when these
divisions were made. Secondly, in the numerical alphabet r is
undoubtedly the digamma and this and P occur at their proper
(i.e. original) places in the alphabet. But the evidence at
present forthcoming shows that there never was, in any Greek
country, a literary alphabet which contained both r and P along
with both tjr and a. One or other of the first had dropped out
before one or other of the second had been introduced3: The
last numeral ~*i, whether it represents the Phoenician shin41 or
tsade", occurs in either case out of its place and is clearly
resumed into the alphabet for numerical purposes only. These
facts surely raise a presumption that the numerical alphabet
was settled not casually and by local custom, but deliberately
1 Schol. to Aristophanes Pint. 277. 
s See the charts appended to Kirch-
Hicks, Greek Hist. Inss. no. 119, p. 
hofi Zur Gesch. des Griech. Alphabets
202. Franz, Epigr. Or. p. 349. 
3rd ed. and pp. 157—160 of the text.
2 This appears from Alexander Aph- 
Such transcripts as that in Hicks Gr.
rodisiensis, who (in Metaph. 9, 81, b. 
Inss. no. 63, p. 117 sqq. are mis-
25) quotes from f' run NIKO,U. a series 
leading. 
The original of this (see
of definitions which belong to the 
Mhein. Museum, 1871 p. 39 sqq.) con-
sixth book. The Aristotelian books so 
tains neither r\ nor w.
numbered are the Ethics, Politics and 
4 The Greek crav. Herod. I. 139.
Topics. 
Franz, Epigr. Graeca, p. 19.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

46 
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
and by some man of learning1. Further, since no antiquarian
could of his own motion persuade a people to revive, and to
revive in their right places, letters which they had long since
discarded, it is probable that this particular antiquarian was
supported by some paramount political authority. It is plain
also that this authority did not reside at Athens or near
thereto, for the Athenians and Boeotians continued to use the
Herodianic signs for two or three centuries at least after the
alphabetic numerals appear elsewhere. It may be conceded,
indeed, that public inscriptions would be the last place in which
the new numerals would appear, but it is incredible that the old
signs should have been retained by mere custom so long if the
new had meanwhile been in common use. Lastly, it must be
mentioned that the alphabetic numerals were a fatal mistake and
hopelessly confined such nascent arithmetical faculty as the
Greeks may have possessed. The Herodianic signs were clumsy
but they did not conceal those analogies which ought to be
obvious to the tiro in arithmetic. An Athenian boy who had
been taught that III multiplied by III amounted to Pill I would
very soon have learnt that AAA multiplied by AAA would
amount to PHHHH and he might have guessed that, if PI
added to P amounts to Al, then PA added to P would amount
to HA. And these are really the severest difficulties which can
occur with Herodianic signs. But, with alphabetic signs,
7' X 7' = & is no clue to \' x V<= ~?) or r + e = ia to f' + v = pt,'.
Such signs as these are no assistance to calculation and involve
in themselves, a most annoying tax on the memory. Their
advantage lies in their brevity alone, and it is to be suspected
1 It should be mentioned here that 
on any inscription earlier than the
we know of no fluctuation in the value 
13th or 14th century. Similar acci-
of the Greek letters. P for instance 
dents may have affected the record in
might occasionally have its Semitic 
many other particulars, but we must
value 100, instead of 90, or 2 might 
of course use the record as we find it.
occasionally (9 or S" being omitted) 
As it stands, it points to Alexandria
represent 100, instead of P. But 
as the place where the numerical alpha-
there is no known case in which any 
bet was invented and there never was
such doubt arises. It is, no doubt, 
any reason to doubt this,
only an accident that ^ does not occur,
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica. 
47
that they were invented first for some purpose to which brevity
was essential or desirable.
33. It curiously confirms all the inferences which have here
been made, to find that the earliest evidence of these alphabetic
numerals is found on coins of Ptolemy II. (Philadelphus)
assigned to 266 B. c. The lateness of this date accounts for
the later persistence of Herodianic signs. Alexandria, if any-
where, was the place where an antiquarian might have formed
the numerical alphabet, and a king have published it, with
effect. 
Coins are precisely the documents on which it is
desirable to state numbers as concisely as possible1. Other
evidence begins also soon after the date of these coins and
in the same place. The oldest Graeco-Egyptian papyrus, which
is ascribed to 257 B. c.2, contains the numerals K& (= 29), and
after this alphabetic numerals are common enough on Ptolemaic
coins and papyri3. They do not occur, however, on stone-
inscriptions, as might be expected, till somewhat later. The
earliest instance is probably one of uncertain place (though
certainly from the Levant) ascribed to about 180 B. C.4 or
another of Halicarnassus5 of about the same date. 
A
Khodian inscription of the same time still uses the He-
rodianic signs6 but soon afterwards, say from 150 B.C. the
alphabetic numerals are used invariably on all Asiatic-Greek
monuments7.
The cumulative evidence is surely very strong that the
1 It will be remembered that the 
6 In British Museum, not yet pub-
earliest Jewish evidence is found on 
lished.
coins. 
7 In the Asiatic inscription no. 6819,
3 Now at Leyden, no. 379. 
See 
above cited, and many more, the
Eobiou, quoting Lepsius, in Acad. des 
numbers are arranged in their alpha-
Tnscr. Suj. div. 1878, Vol. 9. 
betic order, e.g. IJK, f/r. The coins of
3 The K on some coins of Ptolemy 
Ptolemy Philadelphus above-cited were
I. (Soter) and the double signs AA, 
struck at Tyre. These two facts may
BB etc. on those of Arsinoe Phila- 
perhaps suggest some Semitic influence
delphi are of doubtful signification. 
in the use of alphabetic numerals, but
4 C. I. G. Vol. iv. pt. xxxix. no. 
I cannot attach any weight to them.
6819. No. 6804 was clearly not written 
The practice of writing numerals in
at the dates which it mentions. 
their alphabetic order survivedin Mace-
' C. I. G. Vol. II. no. 2655. Franz, 
donia and N. Greece till the 2nd cent.
Epigr. Gr. p. 349. 
See C. I. G. n. nos. 1965, 1970, 1971.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

48 
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
alphabetic numerals were first employed in Alexandria early
in the 3rd century B. c. It remains to be added that two of the
foremost Greek mathematicians were during this century very
much interested in the further abbreviation of Greek numerals.
Archimedes (B C. 287—212) and Apollonius of Perga (flor.
temp. Ptol. Euergetes B.C. 247—222) both suggested new
modes of stating extremely high numbers, the former in his
i/ra/i/itTT;?, the latter probably in his COKVTOKIOV. These will
be described later on but are mentioned here to show that
probably arithmetical symbolism was one of the Alexandrian
subjects of inquiry at precisely the time when the new symbol-
ism first appears on Alexandrian records.
34. But it is time to return to the alphabetic numerals as used
in calculation. Fractions (Xe7rra) do not appear on inscriptions
but are represented in MSS. in various ways. The most common
methods are either to write the denominator over the numerator
or to write the numerator with one accent and the denominator
Ka 
—Ka.'
twice with two accents each time (e.g. i% or tf or i% Ka" Ka").
Submultiples, or fractions of which the numerator is unity, are
"the most common. With these, the numerator is omitted, and
"the denominator is written above the line or is written once
with two accents, (e. g. ^ or X/3" = ^ ) \ Some special signs are
found, viz. signs similar to L, C and 8 for J and w" for |.
Brugsch gives, on the authority of Greek papyri2,, the signs | for
addition, ^? for subtraction, and /—> for a total. Another com-
mon compendium is the form X for ekctTTCov and its inflexions3.
1 For some more minute details see 
were alone permissible in Greek arith-
Nesselmann, Alg. der Gr. pp. 112—115. 
metio. 
See Cantor Vorl. pp. 107, 174,
Hultsch, Metrol. Scriptt. I. pp. 172— 
405. Hankel, p. 62, and Hultsoh, Ice.
175. Friedlein Zahlz. pp. 13—14. 
cit.
It is to be remembered that though 
2 Numerorum Demoticorwin Doctrina,
fractions with high numerators occur 
1849, p. 31. See plate i. appended
in Greek writers, yet they represented 
to Friedlein Zahlz. and reff. there
only the ratio between the numerator 
given.
and denominator. In calculation, they 
3 In Heron's Dioptra (ed. Vincent
were reduced, as among the Egyptians, 
p. 173) and the scholia to the Vati-
to a series with unity for numerator 
can Pappus (ed. Hultsch, Vol. in. p.
and these two conceptions of a fraction, 
128). Nesselmann, Alg. Gr. p. 305 and
as a ratio and as a portion of the unit, 
n. 17.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica. 
49
It remains to be mentioned only that the Greeks had no cipher.
The o which Delambre found in the Almagest is a contraction
of ovSev, and occurs only in the measurements of angles,
which happen to contain no degrees or no minutes \ 
It stands
therefore always alone and is not used as a digit of a high
number. The stroke which Ottfried Miiller found on an Athenian
inscription, and which Bockh thought to be a cipher, is clearly
explained by Cantor2 as the iota, the alphabetical symbol
for 10.
35. Of calculation with these alphabetic numerals very
little mention is made in any Greek literature. It would seem
from the technical names for additio'n and subtraction (viz.
crvvTiOevcu and dcpaipelv, vwe^aipeiv) and from some passages
of classical authors that these operations were generally per-
formed on the afia%3. Multiplication, also, was, if possible,
performed by addition*, but it cannot be doubted that an
expert reckoner would master a multiplication-table and have
the alphabetic signs at his finger-ends. For such a person, for
a mathematician, that is, who was competent to read Archimedes,
Eutocius, a commentator of the 6th century after Christ, performs
a great number of multiplications with alphabetical numerals5.
The date of the writer and the work to which they are appended
alike show that these are masterpieces of Greek arithmetic.
A specimen or two, with modern signs added for mpre convenient
explanation, may be here inserted :
1 Astronorfiie Ancienne, I. p. 547, 
3 Cf. Theophrastus Char. (ed. Jebb)
II. pp. 14 and 15. Theqn in l}is com- 
iv. n. 10 and xm. n. 2.
mentary says nothing of thia o which 
4 Lucian, 'Ep/wn/wt, 48. Friedlein,
indeed may be only the introduction 
ZaMz. p. 75.
of late transcribers who knew the 
6 Torelli's ed. of Archimedes (Oxford,
Arabic signs (v. Nesselmann, Alg. Gr. 
1792), Circuli Dimensio, p. 208 sqq.
p. 13S, and note 25. Frjedlein, ZaMz. 
The forms as they stand in MSS. are
p- 82). 
given p. 216. See alsp Nesselmann,
2 See Math. Beitr. p. 121 sqq. and 
Alg. Gr. pp. 116—118. Hankel, p.
plate 28. Hultsch, Scriptt. Metrpl. 
56. Friedlein, Zahlz. p. 76, where
Graeci, Praef., pp. v. vi., Friesdlein, 
many misprints in Nesselmann are
Zahls, p. 74. 
corrected.
G. G. M.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

50 
GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
7%e 
265
- i 
265
M
40000,
12000,
1000,
12000,
3600,
300,
1000
300
25
ta T ice
i 
70225.
M aice
The mode of proceeding is apparent on the face of this example.
Each digit of the multiplier, beginning with the highest, is
applied successively to each digit of the multiplicand beginning
with the highest. Examples of multiplication, where fractions
are involved, are also given by Eutocius. One of them is as
followsl:
T^LB' 
3013 | I
'm * * 
8013 * *
M /
V
M
yfrv
V
pX
xe
5 Fi
78'
6
aL
: B'
V
&-
xS'
v'
is-'
9000000,
30000,
9000,
1500,
750,
390002,
130,
39,
6*.
Q1
1500,
5,
ii, i
i
i.
750.
2i.
TV
9082689
M J3
Multiplications are given also by Heron of Alexandria (flor. B.C.
100) and are conducted in precisely the same way as those of
Eutocius3. In other words, for 700 years after the introduction
1 In this specimen, the letter L re- 
id' rat XeTrrd TpiaKoa-rdrpiTa icy- iSv 6
presents the Greek sign for \. See 
iro\vir\a<na.(r/j.os yiverai OUTWS' iS' t5'
above, p. 48. 
/><?S"'- iced iS" rd KJ 'Ky" \y" TK§! \y" \y"
2 It -will lie observed here tnat 
K.T.X. In modern figures, the problem
Eutocius treats 13 as a single digit. 
is 14§| x 14f|.
He knewthe multiplication table for 13. 
It is worked out as follows:
3 Geometria, ed. Hultsch, 36and 83, 
14x14 = 196 : 14xl|=\V : J|xl4 =
pp. 81 and 110. They are printed 
VVandffx f|( = V/ -A)=if+ A-A-
also by Friedlein, Zahlz. pp. 76, 77. 
The sum (o/toO) is
The second of them begins: ^oca'Ses 
216 +
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica. 
51
of the alphabetic numerals, no improvement was made in the
style of Greek calculation. And if such were the performances
of professional calculators, it may be conceived that those of the
unlearned were yet more clumsy. Thus Hank el * quotes from
a work written as late as 944 A.D., some multiplications in which
the writer finds by addition that 5 times 400 is 2000 and that
5 times 9 are 45 ! It can hardly be doubted that some Greek
compiled a multiplication table and that children at school were
practised in the use of it, as Roman children were, but no trace
of such a table survives nor is any clear mention of it made
in any Greek writer.
36. No example of simple division nor any rules for
division are found in Greek arithmetical literature. 
The
operation must have been performed by subtracting the
divisor or some easily ascertained multiple of the divisor from
the dividend and repeating this process with the successive
remainders. The several quotients were then added together2.
But the Greeks had no name for a quotient and did not conceive
the result of a division as we do. To a Greek 5 was not the
quotient of Qf-. The operation did not discover the fact that
5 times 7 is 35 but that a seventh part of 35 contains 5, and so
generally in Greek a division sum is not stated in the form
"Divide a by b," but in the form "Find the 6th part of a."
This is the sort of nomenclature which would na'turally be
expected among a people. who were constantly compelled to
resort to the afiaf; with its concrete symbols.
But though there is no instance of a simple division, there
is more than one of what, in our schools, is called ' compound'
division, where the dividend and the divisor both consist of a
1 p. 55, citing Be argumentis lunae, 
2 The process with whole numbers
wrongly attributed to Bede. (Patro- 
may be inferred from that with frac-
logia, ed. Migne, Vol. 90, p. 702.) On 
tions. Heron (Geometria, ed. Hultsch,
p. 56 Hankel gives a division from the 
12. 4, p. 56) divides 25 by 13, finds a
same book. To divide 6152 by 15, 
quotient 1 + i + j + rr + rs 
a n^ 
a ^ s
multiples of 15 are first tried in order 
these terms together to 1J$. Obviously
up to 6000. The remainder is 152. 
the intermediate stages were ^ | = | |
Then 15, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150. Re- 
=h + U = h + H etc. See Friedlein,
mainder 2. The answer is 400 + 10 
Zdhlz. p. 79.
and 2 over.
4—2
Published online by Cambridge University Press

52 
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
whole number with fractions. 
These occur in Theon's com-
mentary on Ptolemy's peydXTj a-vvra^K (the Almagest). 
Here
for astronomical purposes it is frequently necessary to conduct
operations with degrees and the sexagesimal fractions, minutes,
seconds etc. (^irpwra e^Kocna, Bevrepa e^rj/coa-Tci, etc.)1. 
The
rules for such operations are easy to perceive, if it be re-
membered that degrees are the units, minutes ^yths and seconds
•j^^ths of the unit. 
Hence Theon rightly premises that where
a dividend consists of degrees, minutes, seconds, etc., division by
degrees produces a quotient of the same denomination as the
dividend : division by minutes produces a quotient of the next
higher denomination to the dividend: division by seconds a
quotient of two denominations higher than the dividend etc.
And in multiplication, of course, the denominations are similarly
lowered. 
There is no occasion here to give a specimen of
Theon's multiplication, for it follows precisely the same lines as
that of Eutocius, exhibited above, p. 50. But it is desirable to
show his method of division, since no other specimen of the
process is procurable. He divides a<f>ie K" ie" (i.e. 1515° 20'15")
by A-7 ij3" t" (i.e. 25° 12' 10") in the following manner2:
1 The Latin for these was partes 
336, 351. Hankel, p. 65. Friedlein,
minutae, partes minutae secundae. The 
Zalilz. pp. 81—82. Nesselmann, Alg.
sexagesimal system is beyond question 
der Griech. pp. 139—147. 
Theon's
of Babylonian origin. In Greek ma- 
Commentary (ed. Halma) pp. 110—119.
thematieal literature, the circle is 
185—6. A summary of Hypsicles' book
divided into 360 parts {rfi^fmra or 
is given by Delambre, Astron. Anc. I.
/junpat) first in the 'kva.ipopi.Kfc of Hyp- 
See also post §§ 55, 140.
sides (cir. B.O. 180). The division of 
2 Theon does not himself give a
the diameter into 120 parts with sexa- 
scheme of a division, as he does of a
gesimal fractions appears first in Pto- 
multiplication. He merely describes
lemy (cir. A.D. 140), but was probably 
the process. 
The scheme in the text
introduced by Hipparchus (cir. B.o. 130). 
with modern figures is from Delambre,
This trigonometrical reckoning was 
Astron. Anc. n. p. 25. A translation
never used save by astronomers. See 
of Theon's words is given by Nessel-
Cantor, Vorles. pp. 70, 76, 274, 311, 
mann, p. 142.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
53
25° 12' 10"J1515° 20' 15" (60° 7' 33"
25" x 60° = 1500°
Eemr. 15° = 900'
920' 
(bringing down 20' from dividend.)
12' x 60° = 720'
Remr. 
200'
10" x 60° = 10'
Remr. 
190'
25° x 7' = 175'
Remr. 
15' = 900"
915" 
(bringing down 15".)
12'x 7'=- 84"
Remr. 
831"
10" x 7' = 
1" 10'"
Remr. 
829" 50'"
25° x 33" = 825"
Remr. 
" 4" 50'" = 290"'
12' x 33" 
= 396'"
The quotient therefore 60" 7' 33" is a little too high, but he e
Theon leaves it. 
The length and timidity of the operation
sufficiently show with what difficulty it was performed1.
37. 
There is another operation, the Extraction of a square
root, which—though indeed no specimen of it with ordinary
numbers occurs in any Greek writer,—was so frequently per-
formed, and at such an early date, by Greek arithmeticians
that some mention of it must be made in this place. Archi-
medes in his Circuit Dimensio2 gives a great number of
approximate square-roots. 
He states, for instance, that J^jj1- is
1 There is extant a meagre tract on 
etc. Halle, 1879. See also the preface,
Multiplication and Division with Sexa- 
pp. XII. xvi. of Hultsch's in. Vol. of
gesimal Fractions, attributed either to 
Pappus.
Pappus or to Diophantus. It was edited 
2 Prop. in. pp. 206—208 (ed. Torelli).
by C. Henry, Opusculum de Multiplic. 
The whole work is given post § 126.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

54
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
greater than ^3 whicli is greater than fff: so also
,7349,450 > 591| and 71,373,94311 > 1172£ and
N/5,472,132TV> 2339|\
He does not, however, give any clue to the mode by which he
obtained these approximations. 
Nor does his commentator
Eutocius, but the latter states that the rule for finding an
approximate square-root (OTTW? Bel avv€jyv<; rrjv Buvafj,ivt)v
ifkevpav evpetv) was given by Heron in his Metrica, by
Pappus, Theon and several other commentators on Ptolemy.
Only one of the works, to which Eutocius here alludes, is now
extant. Theon, in his commentary on the Almagest, gives the
rule, and an explanation of the rule, and some examples, of
extracting a square-root with sexagesimal fractions. 
It is clear
that Archimedes did not use Theon's method, and no other is
1 The approximations might still be
improved. 591f, 1172f, and 2339J are
nearer to, and also smaller than, the
roots of the numbers in question. Other
roots which Archimedes gives, are too
large. Nesselmarm, Alg. Gr. p. 108—
110. From the fact that Archimedes
gives both too small and too large ap-
proximations, it has been supposed
that he used continued fractions, but
(apart from the difficulty of suggesting
a Greek symbolism for these) it is ob-
jected to this theory that Archimedes'
approximations are not so close as
those which continued fractions would
produce. Many other modes, by which
he might have found his values for Js,
have been suggested. The simplest
(De Lagny's) is as follows. Archime-
des selected fractions such that the
square of the numerator is nearly 3
times the square of the denominator.
He would in this way find two series:
h h If, U, Uh W all > -v/3: and
h a, a, m, in, an au < J3.
Both these series are constructed on the
same principle, each numerator being
twice the preceding numerator + thrice
the preceding denominator, and each
denominator being twice the preceding
denominator + the preceding numera-
tor. This is closely similar to the pro-
cedure of Diophantus. Archimedes,
however, takes the 6th term of the
first series and only the 4th of the
second. It is therefore essential to this,
as to every other explanation of the
same kind, that Archimedes be supposed
to have been less careful with one ap-
proximation than with the other. (For
more theories and criticisms thereon
see Heiberg, Quaestiones Archimedeae,
1879, pp. 60—66.) As it is unlikely
that Archimedes, if he had a scientific
method, would have failed to use it
rigorously, some writers (e.g. Nessel-
mann, loc. cit. and Friedlein, p. 81) are
of opinion tHat he found his approjy-
mations only by repeated trial: others
however (e.g. Cantor, Vorl. pp. 272—4,
and Heiberg sup. cit.) believe that he
had a method which we cannot dis-
cover.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
55
forthcoming in any Greek writer. It would seem also, from
Theon's language, that his method was by no means old or
familiar, and we must conclude, therefore, in default of evidence,
that the earlier Greeks found square-roots by experiment only.
The process would certainly take a long time, but we have no
reason to suppose that the Greeks were unwilling to spend a
long time on a simple arithmetical problem. They may, of
course (without going so far as Theon's method), have derived
many useful hints from geometry: e. g. the square-root of a
number is twice that of one quarter of the number: or 4 times
that of Y1^ or 9 times that of -£j, etc., and in this way, they may
easily have reduced the number to be experimented on down to
some reasonable limit. 
It is useless, however, to expend
conjecture on a subject on which there is not a particle of
evidence.
38. Theon's method of extracting a square-root may be best
explained by a paraphrase of his own words. 
"I ought to
mention " he says " how we extract the approximate root of a
quadratic which has only an irrational root. We learn the
process from Euclid II. 4, where it is stated: ' If a straight line
be divided at any point, the square of the whole line is equal to
the squares of both the segments together with twice the
rectangle contained by the segments.' 
So, with a number
like 144, which has a rational a 
I 
g
root, as the line a/3, we take a 
7
lesser square, say 100, of which the root is 10, as ay. We
multiply 10 by 2, because there are two rectangles, and divide
44 by 20. The remainder 4 is the square of /3y, which must be
2. Let us now try the number 4500, of which the root is
67° 4' 55". Take a square afiyS, containing 4500 degrees
{fiolpai). The nearest square number is 4489, of which the
side (root) is 67°. Take a?? = 67°, and aefyj the square of arj.
The remaining gnomon /3£8 contains 11°, or 660'. Now divide
660' by 2OLT), i.e. 134. The quotient is 4'. Take ed, yic = 4',
and complete the rectangles 6£, £«. Both these rectangles
contain 536' (268' each). 
There remain 124', = 7440". From
this we must subtract the square f\, 
containing 16". 
The
remaining gnomon /8\8 contains 7424". Divide this by 2a«
Published online by Cambridge University Press

56 
GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
(= 134° 8'). The quotient is 55". The remainder is 46" 40'",
which is the square Xj, of which the side is nearly enough 55"."
4'
55"
67"
4489
268'
3688" 40'"
4'
268'
16"
55"
40'"
3688"
X
/S 
y
So in general Theon concludes " when we seek a square-root, we
take first the root of the nearest square-number. We then
double this and divide with it the remainder reduced to minutes
and subtract the square of the quotient, then we reduce the
remainder to seconds and divide by twice the degrees and
minutes (of the whole quotient). We thus obtain nearly the
root of the quadratic1." 
In this procedure, with its continual
references to a geometrical figure, we have a conspicuous
instance of the fact, stated at the beginning of thi3 chapter, that
Greek Xoyio-Tucr/ must often have sought its rules in the
discoveries of the scientific dptd/j,r]TiK^. No doubt it was so in
many other cases. It is hardly to be believed that while
philosophers were aware of the modes of finding a Greatest
Common Measure and a Least Common Multiple and well
versed in the treatment of series and proportions-, the common
people should have been unable to adapt these results of
api0fj.r)Tc/crj to the needs of their own daily calculation. The
meagre records of Greek logistic, however, contain no mention
1 Theon gives another example, also 
as the result. The procedure is ex-
with a figure. In this case he finds the 
actly the same as in the preceding
square root of 2° 28' and finds 1° 34' 15" 
example.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
57
of any of these subjects. The theoretical treatment of them is
alone known and this belongs to dpiOfiririKr] the subject of the
next chapter.
39. Before closing this account of XoyiariKi], it remains to
add a few facts, isolated here either because they did not have,
or do not seem to have had, any real influence on the methods
of Greek calculation or because the original report of them is so
meagre or doubtful or disconnected that it would have caused
unnecessary disturbance to have mentioned them before.
It has been statedj already (sup. p. 48), that in the 3rd
century B.C. the abbreviation of the Greek arithmetical symbolism
attracted the attention of (inter alios) Archimedes and Apol-
lonius. This remark, however, though it has been often made
with less reserve, seems to some writers to convey a suggestio
falsi, inasmuch as abbreviation of the symbolism was not the
ostensible object of the works in which Archimedes and
Apollonius proposed their improvements in arithmetical nomen-
clature. It is, therefore, desirable that some fuller account of
these works should be given than could be conveniently
inserted elsewhere.
In a pamphlet entitled if'ayci/uTj??1 (in Latin trans.
arenarius 'the sand-reckoner') addressed to Gelon, king of
Syracuse, Archimedes begins by saying that some people think
the sand cannot be counted, while others maintain that, if it
can, still no arithmetical expression can be found for the
number. " Now I will endeavour " he goes on " to show you,
by geometrical proofs which you can follow, that the numbers
which have been named by us (? me) and are included in my
letter2 addressed to Zeuxippus, are sufficient to exceed not only
the number of a sand-heap as large as the whole earth but of
one which is as large as the universe. You understand, of
1 Torelli's Archimedes, pp. 319 sqq. 
rary of Plato and at least 100 years
It is printed also, in Heiberg's Quaes- earlier than Archimedes.
tiones Archimedeae. It is probable that 
2 It appears from c. i. sec. 7 that this
Archytas of Tarentum, whom Horace 
letter was entitled apxod. It is clear
(Od. i. 28. 1) calls 'numero carentis 
that it was concerned only with the*
arenae mensorera,' had been busied 
nomenclature which Archimedes is now
with the same problem as that of the 
about to introduce again (cf. also c. iii.
Archytas was a contempo- 
sec. 1) and not with any special problem.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

58 
GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
course, that most astronomers mean by 'the universe' the
sphere of which the centre is the centre of the earth and the
radius is a line drawn from the centre of the earth to the centre
of the sun." (But Archimedes himself would be willing to sup-
pose the universe a sphere as large as that of the fixed stars,
according to Aristarchus of Samos1.) Assume the perimeter of
the earth to be 3,000,000 stadia2, and in all the following cases
take extreme measurements. The diameter of the earth is larger
than that of the moon, and that of the sun is larger than that of
the earth. The diameter of the sun is 30 times8 that of the
moon and is larger than the side of a chiliagon inscribed in a great
circle of the sphere of the universe4. (This is proved geometri-
cally.) It follows from these measurements that the diameter
of the universe is less than 10,000 times that of the earth5 and
is less than 10,000,000,000 stadia6.
Now suppose that 10,000 grains of sand not < 1 poppy-seed,
and the breadth of a poppy-seed not < ^th of a finger-breadth.
Further, using the ordinary nomenclature, we have numbers up
to a myriad myriads (100,000,000). Let these be called the
first order (-n-pooroi, dpiOfiol) and let a myriad myriads be the
1 It is at this point that Archimedes 
3 Eudoxus, he saye, made it 9 times,
mentions the theory of Aristarchus of 
Pheidias the son of Acupater 12 times
Samos (advanced in his iirodia-eis) that 
and Aristarchus between 18 and 20
the earth goes round the sun and that 
times larger than that of the moon,
the orbit of the earth is comparatively 
4 Aristarchus, he says, made it y^tti
a mere spot at the centre of the sphere 
of the zodiacal circle, but his instru-
of the fixed stars. Archimedes does not 
ments cannot have been .able to make
Beem to have understood this language 
so nice a measurement. Archimedes
and certainly did not adopt this theory, 
goes on to describe his own apparatus,
See Heiberg's note, op. cit. p. 202. A 
by which he found that the diameter of
treatise of Aristarchus De distantia 
,, 
. , , 
90° 
, 90° ,.
, 
_. . 
„ 
_ ... , 
the sun is between —r and ,-j-r (i.e.
lunae et sohs is extant. See Wallis 
200 
164
Works Vol. in. and Delambre Astron. 
27'0" and 32'56"). See Delambre Astr.
Anc. i. ch. v. and ix. 
Anc. i. c. ix.
2 'Though some,'adds Archimedes, 
6 Following the rule that the dia-
'take it at only 200,000 stadia. I will 
meter of a circle is less than \ of the
take it at 10 times the approved size.' 
perimeter of any inscribed regular poly-
He refers to Eratosthenes, who calcu- 
gon, above a hexagon,
lated the circumference to be 252,000 
6 Following the rule that the circum-
stadia. Delambre i. ch. 7. A stadium, ference of a circle is more than 3 times
was nearly 200 yards. 
its diameter.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica, 
59
unit of the second order (Sevrepoi dpi&fiol) and let us reckon
units, tens, etc. of the second order up to a myriad myriads:
and let a myriad myriads of the second order be the unit of
the third order {rpiroi dpiOfiot,) and so on ad lib. If numbers
be arranged in a geometrical series of which 1 is the first term
and 10 is the radix, the first eight terms of such a series
(10°—107) will belong to the first order: the next eight to the
second order and so on. 
Thus, the terms from 1 to 10 millions
may be called the first octad: 108 to 1015 may be called the
second octad and so on1. Using these numbers, and following
the rule that spheres are to one another in the triplicate ratio of
their diameters, Archimedes ultimately finds that the number
of grains of sand which the sphere of the universe would hold is
less than a thousand myriads or ten millions of the 8th octad.
This number would be expressed in our notation by 1063 or 1
with 63 ciphers annexed.
40. Now though this work is ostensibly devoted to a
fanciful subject and though it is full of references to recondite
discoveries in astronomy, geometry and dpidfii)Tiicii, yet it is
plain that it contains matter which might have had, and
perhaps was intended to have, an important bearing on the
1 At this point Archimedes incidental- 
the text a further nomenclature which
ly adds that it will be convenient (x/»i<"- 
Archimedes suggests. There may be n
/JLOV) to observe the following fact. 
In 
octads of the first period, of which the
any geometrical series beginning with 
last number will be lO8""1. This num-
1, if any two terms be multiplied, the 
ber, 108"-1, will then begin the first
product will be a term as far from the 
octad of the second period and so on.
greater of the two multiplied as the 
See Heiberg op. cit. p. 59. Nesselmann
lesser was from unity, and as far from 
pp. 122—125.
unity as the sum of the distance of both 
It may be mentioned here also that
the multiplied terms, less 1. E.g. in 
the Greeks always began a geometrical
the geometrical series a, b, c, d, <?,/, g, 
series from 1, though they could give
h, i, k, I, where a is unity, dxh = l, and 
no reason for the practice. They did
I is as many terms (less 1) from a as d 
not know that 1=»°. Theon Smyr-
and h together. It will be seen that 
naeus (ed. Hiller, p. 24) says explicitly
Archimedes is referring to the fact 
that "1 is not a number, but is the
which we express by saying that 
beginning of number," and this was the
o«xo"=«"**. 
He does not again 
common Greek notion, though incon-
refer to this fact, and does not other- 
sistent with their practice. See Cantor
wise, as some say, anticipate the method 
Vorles. pp. 134, 368. Aristotle Metaph.
of logarithms. I have omitted from 
xm. 8, etc.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

60 
GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
Greek symbolism, which belongs to ~Xo<yi<rTi/a]. This matter
also had previously been published, without any practical appli-
cation, in the lost 'Ap%al, addressed to Zeuxippus. It deals
indeed, as we know it, entirely with nomenclature and not a
word is said of symbolism. But it is pretty clear (see especially
the last note) that Archimedes' procedure was to write down
the powers of 10 in order from 1 as far as necessary, then to
divide the series into groups of 8 terms each and, when it was
necessary to multiply two terms together, merely to add the
numbers of their places in the series and so find at a glance
their product and the name of the product. It can hardly be
doubted that in writing down the powers of 10, in order to
bring them within a manageable space, he employed a symbol-
ism \ 
He would have required a symbolism of only 10 signs.
Thus if a, /8, y, 8, e, §"> V, 0> *> ^ were his symbols for numbers
from 1 to 10, then
his first octad might be, a, X", X*3—X9,
„ second 
„ 
„ 
Xa'—Xr,
„ third 
„ 
„ 
Xa"—Xs".
On this principle, such a number as 1,957,362 would be written
Xf/cXeeXs97X?7X'3£Xa/3. This symbolism, of course, is more cumbrous
than ours but it is far shorter than the Herodianic and far more
convenient than the common Greek alphabetic signs. If adopted,
it would have immensely simplified procedure in the four
rules of arithmetic;—would have brought it in fact nearly to
the perfection of the Indian method. Yet, whatever symbolism
Archimedes himself used (if any), it is quite certain either that
he did not publish it or that it never obtained any vogue.
No allusion to it occurs in the ^afiiilrr]^ or in any other
Greek mathematical work. But a good many reasons may be
suggested why a new symbolism would, in Archimedes' time,
have been singularly inopportune. The alphabetic numerals
1 To take only the second oetad, the 
suggested in the text is not intrin-
last term of this is 1015 or a thousand 
sically improbable. 
Compare the Mo,
million millions. 
This, in Greek, is 
M/3, etc. of Apollonius to be presently
X'X'aKis fivplai fivptdles /ivpidSwv. 
The 
mentioned, and compare the proposi-
force of language, even Greek, will 
tion quoted from Iambliehus below
not go much further. 
The symbolism 
§ 63,
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
61
had in all probability been lately introduced at Alexandria.
The professors of dpid/xijTiKi] did not require a new symbolism,
since geometrical figures were sufficient for the problems which
they dealt with. Thirdly, the efficacy of Archimedes' symbols
would at first appear principally in calculations with very high
numbers and there was then hardly anybody, save Archimedes
himself, who was interested in calculations with such numbers.
41. That it is not at all far-fetched to suppose that
Archimedes had in mind, when he invented, his new nomen-
clature, the improvement of customary methods of calculation,
will be apparent if we consider the similar work of Apollonius.
At the end of his commentary on the Girculi Dimensia,
Eutocius says that he had done his best to explain the
numbers used by Archimedes, but that Apollonius, using other
numbers, had in his 'SIKVTOKPOV 1 obtained a closer approxima-
ClTfMlTYlTPI'f'TlPf1
tion to the arithmetical value of the ratio —v. 
.
diameter
He then mentions some other persons who had maliciously
criticised Archimedes and adds ' They use multiplications
and divisions of myriads, which it is not easy to follow
unless one has been through a course of Magnus' Arith-
metic2' ; and concludes by recommending Ptolemy's method
with sexagesimal fractions. The passage is so vaguely worded
that it is impossible to feel sure whether the 'HKVTOKIOV, or
' Aid to Delivery,' of Apollonius has any connexion whatever
with the multiplications of myriads mentioned afterwards. The
book itself is lost and its name does not occur elsewhere. At
any rate, Apollonius did invent a system of multiplication
connected with a nomenclature in which myriads played a
large part. Some account of both is to be gathered from the
fragmentary 2nd Book of Pappus, but unfortunately the first
half of the book is lost and with it the name of Apollonius' work
and much precise information have doubtless disappeared.
1 The first ed. had 'HKVTO^OOV. The 
Zalilz. p. 78, thinks it was a 'ready-
emendation was originally Halley's 
reckoner' or multiplication-table only.
(pref. to his ed. of Apollonius) and was 
2 This work is not elsewhere mention-
subsequently found to be correct by 
ed. It is tantalising to think what it
reference to two Paris MSS. Friedlein, 
may have contained.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

62 
GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica.
Apollonius, taking, like Archimedes, a geometrical pro-
gression of the powers of 10 from 1 to 10", divided them into
groups of 4 terms, tetrads and not octads. The first tetrad
(1—1000) he called fiovaSei: the 2nd (10,000—ten millions)
fj.vpia.8es aTrXal: the 3rd. fivpidSes BnrXat etc. The first
number of each tetrad is the unit of that tetrad, and the
higher tetrads are (at least in Pappus) distinguished by the
signs Ma, M/3, My etc. Thus the number 5,601,052,800,000
or, according to the Greek division, 5,6010,5280,0000 is written
by Pappus My. e ical M/3. ,rt ical Ma. f
The fragment of Pappus contains examples, selected by that
writer, illustrative of Props. XIV.—XXV. in the original work
of Apollonius. The examples are of the following kind:
Prop. XIV. Let there be given several numbers, each less
than 100 but divisible by 10. It is required to find their
product without multiplying them. 
Let the numbers be
50, 50, 50, 40,40, 30. The pythrnenes of these are 5, 5, 5, 4, 4, 3,
which, multiplied together, produce 6000. There are also 6 tens,
which, divided by 4, give quotient 1 and remainder 2. The
product of these tens is therefore 100 of the fivpidSes aifkal.
This, multiplied by 6000, produces 60 of the [ivpiaSe? hnrXai.
This is the product of the numbers proposed.
The other examples are all of this sort (the numbers
in each case being varied1) and all are designed to illustrate
a new rule, viz. that in multiplying numbers together, the
coefficients of the powers of 10 only need be multiplied. These
coefficients are called irv0fieve<; or fundamental numbers. Thus
1 The concluding part of Apollonius' 
all the numerals contained in the line
book is given (though not in Ap.'s 
'AprtfuSos 
Kkelre Kpiros i^o%ov ivvia
words) by Pappus (n. 25). The last 
Kovpai.
prop, was "Let two or more numbers 
The product is fivpi&des
be given, each less than 1000 but divi- 
TT\CU pcpS"' SubeKavkal T&I
sible by 100: and other numbers each 
Sol, or
less than 100 but divisible by 10: and 
i96.1000013+368.1000012+4800.10000n.
finally other numbers less than 10. It 
Pappus then tries his own skill on
is required to find their product." After 
another line:
performing this, Apollonius returned 
Mijj'U' a«5e 0ect Ay/ify-epos ay\a.oK&pwov
to the problem which he had originally 
which seems carefully chosen to avoid
Bet himself, viz. to multiply together 
high numbers.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
63
8 is the Trvdfir/v of 80: 5 of 500: 7 of 7000 etc. In multiplying
80 by 600, it is necessary only to multiply 8 by 6. The product
of the powers of 10 may be discovered by reference to the
geometrical progression of tetrads. It is evident that Ihis
latter part of the rule is borrowed from the discovery of
Archimedes mentioned above. We have here, in fact, the
suggestion of the •^a/i/ttT'v?, with only an easy alteration (hardly
an. improvement) of the nomenclature, put into actual practice.
Yet still there is no reference to an abbreviated symbolism.
In many places1 Pappus says that Apollonius used ypafifial,
which made his solutions far more readily intelligible: but
these ypa/ifial were beyond question straight lines. They were
used presumably to represent the terms in the progression of
tetrads and also to represent other numbers and the 7rv0/u,eve$
of these, but they can hardly have served any higher purpose
than merely to prevent mistake. It must have been a certain
convenience to distinguish the pythmenes in this way: e.g.
K 
/3 
a 
j3 etc.
where a, /3,7 etc. are pythmenes not only of tens (1, K, A etc.), but
of hundreds (p, <r, r etc.)2. In spite, however, of the absence of
evidence, it is difficult to believe that Apollonius wrote his
book without using some special symbolism and it is still more
marvellous if, having written the book, he did not see that
it could not become popular without an accompanying symbol-
ism. His symbolism, however, if he had any, was not published
or never attracted attention, and thus he, as well as Archimedes,
lost the chance of giving to the world once for' all its numeral
signs. That honour was reserved, by the irony of fate, for
a nameless Indian of an unknown time, and we know not whom
to thank for an invention which has been as important as any
to the general progress of intelligence.
1 E.g. 11. 6. 5: 8. 28: 18. 10. 
of the numbers. Thus it does not ap-
(Hultsch's Ed.) 
pear that y is the irvOufy of X or r, but
2 The Tvff/ihes of tens and hundreds, 
it is easy to see that rpels is the TvOfify
though absolutely concealed by the 
of TptaKoyra
symbols, were discernible in the names
Published online by Cambridge University Press

64 
GREEK CALCULATION. 
Logistica.
42. Another arithmetical symbolism is also attributed to the
Greeks. It was first mentioned by Noviomagus (De Numeris,
Cologne, 1539. Lib. I. c. 15) who said it was used by ' Chaldaei
et astrologi1.' It consisted of a curious set of signs (somewhat
resembling railway-signals) in which the value of the symbol is
determined, as it were, by the position of an arm attached to a
post. Thus '— is 1: |— is 10: —"is 100 and —, is 1000 : -1— is
2 : -I— is 20: —•- is 200 and —p is 2000. 
Z_ is 3: ^ is 4 :
=— is 5 : rz_ is 6 : c_ is 7: -£• is 8 and •— is 9. All these
signs, when reversed, represent ten times higher values, as with
those for 1 and 2 above exhibited. The ' post' was often drawn
upright: f, V, Is etc. and several 'arms' might be attached
to one post. Thus £ = 5543: h'< = 2454 : 1 = 3970 etc. It
cannot be said that this is a first-rate symbolism: but it is
compact in form and it preserves also, to the eye, the analogies
which are the greatest aids to calculation. It is impossible to
say what is the origin of these signs, or where or at what date
they came into use. Friedlein thinks they may be really
Chaldaean and have belonged to the mediaeval art of horoscopya,
which Noviomagus professed.
43. Calculation seems to have been regularly taught in
Greek schools as early as there were any schools at all3. It
became also a favourite subject of the Sophists, among whom
the polymath, Hippias of Elis, was its most famous professor*.
Socrates himself seems to have had a limited liking for it.
According to Xenophon5, he told his pupils to learn \o<yi<T/j,ov<>,
but to beware of the idle pursuit of this as of other branches of
learning: so far as was useful (or beneficial, wcpeXifiov) he was
always willing to forward them. As we have just previously
1 Nesselmann (pp. 83—84) took them 
Joh. Paludanus Noviomagus. The MS.
from Heilbronner's Historia Matheseos 
of Geminus, which Heilbronner saw,
(pub. 1742). Heilbronner said he got 
remains undiscovered,
them from Geminus and Hostus, a 
2 Friedlein, Zahlz. pp. 12,13.
German antiquary of the 16th cent. 
3 See the Excursus on Education in
Cantor (Math. Beitr. pp. 166—167) 
Becker's Charicles.
found the passage in Hostus, who refers 
4 Cf. Plato Protagor. 318 E. 
Hipp.
to Noviomagus. Friedlein finally un- 
Win. 367—368.
earthed the passage of Johannes Novio- 
6 Memor. rv. 7. 8. For geometry, see
magus who says he had the signs from 
iv. 7. 2.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK CALCULATION. Logistica. 
65
been informed, by the same authority, that Socrates thought
there was no need for more geometry than would enable a man
to measure or parcel out a field, it may be presumed that he
preferred the practical art of logistic to the theories of dpidfirj-
Titcr). Plato, however, was not of the same mind. His dislike
of the sophists extended to the subjects which they taught and
he is, on many occasions, as was seen at the beginning of this
chapter, careful to distinguish the vulgar logistic from the
philosophical arithmetic. But calculation cannot be discarded
by the philosopher any more than by the merchant: so Plato,
in his ideal constitution (Legg. 819 B), directs that free boys
shall be taught calculation, a " purely childish" art, by pleasant
sports, with apples, garlands etc. It makes men " more useful to
themselves and wide-awake." Contemptuous language of this
sort, used by the most influential of Greek thinkers, set the
fashion to too many generations of mathematicians. Euclid is
said to have been a Platonist: he certainly never meddled with
logistic. His successors, with few exceptions, were affected by
the same prejudice. 
The contributions of Archimedes and
Apollonius to the art of calculation have been already men-
tioned. Hipparchus calculated a table of sines (so to say)
and thus probably introduced the art of reckoning with sexa-
gesimal fractions for astronomical purposes. The brilliant and
above all things practical Heron of Alexandria seems, in his
MeTjOt/m, to have offered some improvements in Greek calcu-
lation. A long era of Neo-Platonism and Neo-Pythagorism
followed, but to this time belonged probably the Apollodorus,
whom Diogenes Laertius (vm. 12) mentions, and Philo of
Gadara and the Magnus whom Eutocius praises. Nothing of
these writers now survives, and it is very unlikely, judging
from the calculations of Theon and Eutocius himself, that they
produced any stir in their own day. Logistic was practically
abandoned as hopeless after Apollonius' time. 'Api0fj.r)Tiicr]
became the hobby of the more ingenious spirits and to this
science belongs the last brilliant achievement of Greek mathe-
matics, the invention of algebra.
G. G. M.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

