CHAPTER VI.
GHEEK GEOMETRY TO EITCLID. (a) Preliminary.
81. 
AN elaborate history of Greek geometry before Euclid
was written by Eudemus1, the pupil of Aristotle, who lived
about 330 B.C. The book itself is lost but is very frequently
cited by later historians and scholiasts, and it may be suspected
also that many notices, not directly ascribed to it, were taken
from its pages. Proclus, the scholiast to Euclid, who knew the
work of Eudemus well, gives a short sketch of the early history
of geometry, which seems unquestionably to be founded on the
older book. The whole passage, which proceeds from a com-
petent critic, and which determines approximately many dates
of which we should otherwise be quite ignorant, may be here
inserted verbatim by way of prologue. It will be cited here-
after as " the Eudemian summary." It runs as follows8:
" Geometry is said by many to have been invented among
the Egyptians, its origin being due to the measurement of plots
of land. This was necessary there because of the rising of the
1 Diog. Laert. v. c. 2, n. 13 (ed. 
(Leipzig, 1873) pp. 64 sqq. This work
Huebner, i. pp. 347, 348), attributes to 
will be cited in future simply as 'Pro-
Theophrastus, another pupil of Aris- 
clus.' Of the Eudemian summary,
totle, contemporary with Eudemus, a 
the original Greek is printed also by
history of geometry in 4 books, of 
Bretschneider (pp. 27—31), with a
astronomy in 6, and of arithmetic in 1 
(not very exact) German translation,
book. Bretschneider (p. 27) is not in- 
A pretty close paraphrase is given by
clined to the general opinion that 
Prof, de Morgan in art. Eucleides of
Diogenes has here confused Theo- 
Smith's Die. of G. and B. Biography,
phrastus with Eudemus. 
and another by Dr Allman in Her-
2 Procli Diadochi Comm. in primum 
matliena (Dublin), no. v. for 1877, p.
Eucl. Elem. liirum, ed. Friecllein 
160 sqq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
135
Nile, which obliterated the boundaries appertaining to separate
owners. Nor is it marvellous that the discovery of this and
the other sciences should have arisen from such an occasion,
since everything which moves in development will advance from
the imperfect to the perfect. From mere sense-perception to
calculation, and from this to reasoning, is a natural transition1.
Just as among the Phoenicians, through commerce and ex-
change, an accurate knowledge of numbers was originated, so
also among the Egyptians geometry was invented for the reason
above stated.
Thales first went to Egypt, and thence introduced this study
into Greece. He discovered much himself, and suggested to his
successors the sources of much more: some questions he at-
tacked in their general form, others empirically2. After him
Mamercus3, the brother of the poet Stesichorus, is mentioned as
having taken up the prevalent zeal for geometry: and Hippias
of Elis relates that he obtained some fame as a geometer.
But next Pythagoras changed the study of geometry into the
form of a liberal education, for he examined its principles to
the bottom and investigated its theorems in an immaterial and
intellectual manner. It was he who discovered the subject of
irrational quantities and the composition of the cosmical
figures4. After him Anaxagoras of Clazomenae touched upon
1 The text (ed. Friedlein) is en-eiSrj 
ledge,' which is even less permissible.
irav TO ii> ytviaei 
<f>epbnevov tbro rod 
Proolus, it should be remembered, was
dreXouselsro rtXeiov Trp6ei<nv. &wo ala 6-q- 
a neo-Platonist and addicted to hazy
ffews ovv els\oyur fxbv KOL awbTovrov fal phraseology.
vovv 17|aerd/3o(ris7^OITOav ek^TMS. Both 
2 Prof, de Morgan translates "at-
sentences are extremely obscure. The 
tempting some in a general manner
second, I should think, represents a 
(KaBoKmiirepov), and some in a percep-
chapter of Eudemus, in which the 
tive or sensible manner (aladrjTLKa-
history of geometry was exhibited near- 
Ttpcv)." Dr Allman gives " in a more
ly as I have shown it in preceding 
intuitional or sensible manner" for
pages. A pupil of Aristotle might well 
the last word.
have adopted the evolutionary hypo- 
3 So Friedlein, other edd. have Ame-
thesis here suggested. On the other 
ristus or Mamertinus.
hand, \oyur/j.bs does not necessarily 
4 That is, the five regular solids, the
mean 'arithmetical calculation' and 
tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, eicosa-
voOs ought not to mean 'reasoning.' 
hedron, and dodecahedron, which were
Dr Allman translates the first by 
supposed by the Pythagoreans to be
'reflection,' the second by 'know- 
the primary forms of the matter of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

136 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
many departments of geometry, as did (Enopides of Chios, who
was a little younger than Anaxagoras. Plato mentions them
both in his 'Bivals,' as having won fame in mathematics1.
Hippocrates of Chios, next, who discovered the quadrature of
the lune, and Theodoras of Cyrene became distinguished
geometers, indeed Hippocrates was the first who is recorded
to have written ' Elements.' Plato, who followed him, caused
mathematics in general, and geometry in particular, to make
groat advances, by reason of his well-known zeal for the study,
for he filled his writings with mathematical discourses, and on
every occasion exhibited the remarkable connexion between
mathematics and philosophy. To this time belong also Leodamas
the Thasian and Archytas of Tarentum and Theaetetus of
Athens, by whom mathematical inquiries were greatly extended,
and improved into a more scientific system. Younger than
Leodamas were; Neocleides and bis pupil Leon, who added
much to the work of their predecessors: for Leon wrote an
'Elements' more carefully designed,,both in the number and the
utility of its proofs, and he invented also a diorismus (or test
for determining) when the proposed problem is possible and when
impossible. Eudoxus of CnLdus, a little later than Leon and a
student of the. Platonic school, first increased the number of
general theorems, added to, the three proportions three more,
and raised to a considerable quantity the learning, begun by
Plato, on the subject of the (golden) section2, to which he
applied the analytical method. Amyclas of Heraclea, one of
Plato's companions, and Menaechmus,. a pupil of Eudoxus and
a contemporary of Plato, and also. Deinostratus, the brother of
Menaechmus, made the whole of geometry yet more perfect.
Theudius of Magnesia made himself distinguished as well in
other branches of philosophy as also in mathematics ; composed
a very good book of ' Elements,' and made more general pro-
positions which were confined to particular cases3. Cyziceuus
which the universe is made. Timaeus 
* Amatores, c. 1, 132 A.
(in Plato Tim. 53 c) says that fire con- 
2 The cutting of a line in extreme
sists of tetrahedrons, air of octahe- 
and mean ratio.
drons, earth of cubes, water of eioosa- 
3 7roX\a TW opiKun
hedrons, and the dodecahedron is the 
tirol-qam/.
shape of the universe.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
137
of Athens also about the same time became famous in other
branches of mathematics, but especially in geometry. All these
consorted together in the Academy and conducted their investi-
gations in common. Hermotimus of Colophon pursued further
the lines opened up by Eudoxus and Theaetetus, and discovered
many propositions of the ' Elements' and composed some on
Loci. Philippus of Mende, a pupil of Plato and incited by him
to mathematics, carried on his inquiries according to Plato's
suggestions «and proposed to himself such problems as, he
thought, bore upon the Platonic philosophy."
" Those who have written the history of geometry," Proclus
continues, " have thus far carried the development of this
science. Not much later than these is Euclid, who wrote the
' Elements,' arranged much of Eudoxus' work, completed much
of Theaetetus's, and brought to irrefragable proof propositions
which had been less strictly proved by his predecessors."
82. To this extract should be added another, which supplies
a very valuable criticism on the style of the early Greek
geometers. Eutocius, at the beginning of his commentary on
the Conies of Apollonius (p. 9, Halley's edn.), quotes from
Geminus,_an excellent mathematician of the first century B.C.,
the following remarks1:
" The ancients, defining a cone as the revolution of a right-
angled triangle about one of the sides containing the right
angle, naturally supposed also that all cones are right and there
is only one kind of section in each—in the right-angled cone
the section which we now call a parabola, in the obtuse-angled
a hyperbola, and in the acute-angled an ellipse. You will find
the sections so named among the ancients. Hence just as they
considered the theorem of the two right angles for each kind of
triangle, the equilateral first, then the isosceles, and lastly
the scalene, whereas the later writers stated the theorem in a
general form as follows, 'In every triangle the three interior
angles are equal to two right angles2,' so also with the conic
1 The Greek is given also by Bret- 
"The proposition that the terms of a
Schneider, pp. 13, 14. 
proportion may be taken alternando,
s Compare with this Aristotle, who 
was formerly proved separately for
says (Anal. Post. I. 5, p. 71, A. 17) 
numbers, lines, volumes, times, though
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

138 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
sections, they regarded the so-called ' section of a right-angled
cone' in the right-angled cone only, supposed to be cut by a plane
perpendicular to one side of the cone: and similarly the sections of
the obtuse-angled and acute-angled cones they exhibited only in
such cones respectively, applying to all cones cutting planes per-
pendicular to one side of the cone 
But afterwards Apollonius
of Perga discovered the general theorem that in every cone,
whether right or scalene, all the sections may be obtained
according to the different directions in which the cutting plane
meets the cone." "This," adds Eutocius, "is what Geminus
says in the 6th Book of his General View of Mathematics
(fiaOrifidroiv Oewpta)." The two extracts here quoted are our
main clues to the history of geometry before Euclid. The first
gives us the names of the leading geometers, the order of their
appearance and a brief statement of their services. The second
is valuable in enabling us to guess at the style in which a
particular proposition would probably be treated at a given
date. The sources from which further details may be obtained
are generally very late in date and very meagre in information.
They often ascribe the same proposition to different persons or
different modes of proving the same proposition to the same
person, or are silent altogether about modes of proof. The early
history of Greek geometry must, therefore, be reconstructed
largely by inference, and it is obvious that to this process the
Eudemian summary and the authoritative statement of Geminus
are of the greatest assistance.
(b) Thales and the Ionic School.
83. Thales, the acknowledged founder of Greek mathe-
matics and philosophy, was born about B.C. 640 at Miletus,
the chief city of the Ionian coast, and died at the same place
it might have been proved for all of 
Hankel, pp. 114, 115. This is the
them at once: but because these things 
passage cited above (p. 105 n.) as
are not called by one name and differ 
evidence that Aristotle knew the mathe-
in kind, they were treated separately. 
matical value of the alphabetical sym-
But now it is proved generally" etc. 
bols which he introduced.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
139
about B.C. 542l. He was apparently of Phoenician descent4 but
probably not, as Diogenes relates, of Phoenician parentage, for
the names of his parents, Examius and Cleobuline, are good
enough Greek. Many authorities concur in stating that he
was, in early life at least, engaged in commerce, for which he
seems to have had great aptitude3. Aristotle illustrates this by
a tale that one winter, when the stars promised an abundant
crop of olives, Thales at once secured by contract all the oil-
presses, and made, in the following autumn, a large profit by
lending these necessary implements. It may be that he went to
Egypt for mercantile purposes, and there learnt in his leisure
the mathematical and other knowledge which he subsequently
introduced among the Greeks. According to Plutarch, he was
somewhat advanced in years (irpecrfivTepos;) when he returned
to Miletus. According to other authorities4 he was old, or had
given up an active share in political life, when he took to those
philosophical inquiries for which he is now remembered. At
any rate the striking achievement which made his fame in his
own day did not occur till his later years. He announced
beforehand a solar eclipse, which in fact took place at least in
the year predicted. It happened on May 28th, 585 B.C. during
a great pitched battle between the Medes and the Lydians6.
1 The main facts of his life are given 
this trick, Thales loaded it one time
by Diogenes Laertius (i. 1. nn. 1, 3, 6, 
with rags and sponges.
10, Huebner's ed. pp. 14, 16, 17, 24), 
4 Plut. De plac. philos. i. c. 3.
who cites Apollodorus, as authority for 
Themistius, Oral. xxvu. p. 317. Diog.
the birth of Thales in the 35th Olym- 
L. i. c. 1, n. 2. Huebner's ed. p.
piad, and Socrates, for his death in 
14.
the 58th. 
6 Herod. I. c. 74. Clem. Alex. Strom.
2 Herod, i. c. 170. 
i. o. 14 (ed. Potter, p. 354). 
The
3 Plutarch, Vita Solonis, c. 2, Aris- 
latter quotes Eudemus as his author-
totle, Pol. i. c. 11, p. 1259 a. Plutarch 
ity. The fact that Thales predicted
(De Soil. Animal, p. 45 of Beiske's 
the eclipse is well attested, but we do
edition) says that Thales used mules 
not know with what exactitude he
to carry his salt to market; one of 
specified the time of its occurrence,
them, having slipped in fording a 
He may have learnt, from Egyptian
stream, found its load considerably 
or Chaldasan registers, that a solar
lightened by the melting of the salt 
eclipse occurs at intervals of 18 years
and afterwards several times fell in 
11 days. See Bretschneider, pp. 51,
the water purposely. To cure it of 
52.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

140 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
The circumstance gave additional Sclat to the prophecy, and it
was no doubt owing to this that, in the archonship of Damasias
(B.C. 585—583 B.C.), Thales was added to the list of Wise Men1.
" Thales apparently," says Plutarch2, " was the only one of these
whose wisdom stepped, in speculation, beyond the limits of
practical utility: the rest acquired the name of wisdom in
politics." It appears, nevertheless, that Thales possessed quite
as much political shrewdness and knowledge of the world and
had the same gift of epigrammatic counsel as his compeers
among the famous Seven3.
84. The well-known theory of Thales on the structure of
the universe and the astronomical observations, to which he
seems to have been chiefly devoted, do not fall within the
scope of this history4. For the present purpose, it is necessary
only to record that five geometrical theorems are expressly
attributed to Thales and also two practical applications of
geometry. The theorems are as follows5:
(1) The circle is bisected by its diameter.
(2) The angles at the base of an isosceles triangle are
equal. (Euc. i. 5, part 1.)
1 Diog. L. i. 1, n. 1, quoting Deme- 
and (5). The theorem (4) is attributed
trius Phalereus. 
to Thales by inference from a passage
8 Vit. Solonis, c. 3. 
of Diogenes Laertius (i. o. 1, n. 3) who
3 See, for instance, Herod, i. o. 170, 
says that Pamphila (temp. Nero) re-
and Diog. Laert. 
lates that Thales was the first person
4 On the astronomy of Thales, see 
" to inscribe a right-angled triangle in a
the authorities collected byBretschn. 
circle," and that he sacrificed an ox on
pp. 47—49. The most copious of these 
performing this " problem." The same
is Plutarch, De plac. philos. n. cc. 12, 
achievement was attributed by others
24, 28, in. cc. 10, 11. The chief ex- 
to Pythagoras. Dr Allman (v. p. 170)
tracts from Thales'astronomical teach- 
has the excellent note: "It may be
ing are: (1) that the year is 365 days : 
noticed that this remarkable property
(2) that the intervals between the equi- 
of the circle, with which, in fact, ab-
noxes are not equal: (3) that Ursa stract geometry was inaugurated,
Minor was a better guide for mariners 
struck the imagination of Dante:
than Ursa major: (4) that the moon is 
• 0 se del mezzo cerchio far si puote
illuminated by the sun: (5) that the 
Triangol si, ch' un retto non avesse'."
earth is spherical. 
The lines (Paradiso, c. xm. 101—2)
5 Of these (1) (2) (3) and (5) rest on 
are part of a description of the know-
the authority of Proclus (Comm. in 
ledge which Solomon did not choose
Eucl. I. ed. Friedlein, pp. 157, 250, 
from God.
290, 65), who cites Eudemus for (3)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
141
(3) If two straight Iine3 cut one another, the opposite
angles are equal. (Euc. I. 15.)
(4) The angle in a semicircle is a right angle. (Euc. in.
31, part 1.)
(5) A triangle is determined if its base and base-angles be
given (practically Euc. I. 26).
Of these the first and third are probably cases in "which
Thales relied on intuition, or as the Eudemian summary has it,
attacked the question empirically {aladrjTiKtoTepov), for, accord-
ing to Proclus (p. 299), Euclid first thought (3) "worthy of
proof," and he does not think (1) worthy of it at all, but leaves
it to be inferred from definitions 17 and 18 to Book I. The
language of Proclus also (p. 250) seems to hint that Thales
proved the proposition (2), our old friend, the Ports Asivorum,
by taking two equal isosceles triangles and applying them to one
another as in Euc. I. 4, another case of experiment. But the
two remaining theorems are obviously incapable of such treat-
ment, and must have been supported either by deduction or at
least by very wide induction. The last of them (Euc. I. 26) is
attributed to Thales by Eudemus (Proclus, p. 65), apparently on
the ground that Thales invented a mode of discovering the
distance of a ship at sea, in which the proposition was used.
In the application of this process, probably the given base was
a tower of known altitude, and one of the given base-angles was
the right angle which the tower forms with the shore. The
other given angle was obtained by the observer who looked at
the ship from the top of the tower1. It is hardly credible that,
in order to ascertain the distance of the ship, the observer should
have thought it necessary to reproduce and measure on land, in
the horizontal plane, the enormous triangle which he constructed
in imagination in a perpendicular plane over the sea. Such an
undertaking would have been so inconvenient and wearisome
as to deprive Thales' discovery of its practical value. It is
therefore probable that Thales knew another geometrical pro-
position: viz. 'that the sides of equiangular triangles are
proportional.' 
(Euc. vi. 4.) And here no doubt we have the
1 Cantor, p. 122.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

142 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
real import of those Egyptian calculations of seqt, which Ahmes
introduces as exercises in arithmetic. The seqt, or ratio, be-
tween the distance of the ship and the height of the watch-
tower is the same as that between the corresponding sides of
any small but similar triangle. The discovery, therefore, attri-
buted to Thales is probably of Egyptian origin, for it is difficult
to see what other use the Egyptians could have made of their
seqt, when found. It may nevertheless be true that the pro-
position, Euc. VI. 4, was not known, as now stated, either to
the Egyptians or to Thales. It would have been sufficient for
their purposes to know, inductively, that the seqts of equi-
angular triangles were the same. The other practical application
of geometry, attributed to Thales, depends upon the same
proposition, but is described in two forms, the one very simple,
the other more difficult. According to Pliny and Diogenes
Laertius1 (who quotes Hieronymus of Rhodes, a pupil of
Aristotle, as his authority), Thales ascertained the height of
pyramids and similar edifices by measuring their shadows at
that hour of the day when a man's shadow is of the same length
as himself. Plutarch2, however, puts into the mouth of Niloxenus
a different account of the process. " Placing your staff at the
extremity of the shadow of the pyramid," says he to Thales,
" you made, by the impact of the sun's rays, two triangles, and
so showed that the pyramid was to the staff as its shadow to the
staff's shadow." This is obviously only another calculation of
seqt, though the proportion, as stated by Plutarch, is probably
not exactly in its original form. There is no reason, now that
Ahmes's book is well-known, to deny that Thales was acquainted
with the simple process here attributed to him. It was, however,
justifiable in Bretschneider, who knew Ahmes only from a brief
abstract8, which contained no mention of the seqt calculations, to
question Plutarch's accuracy and to suppose that he was attri-
buting to Thales the improved methods of his own day.
85. To infer from the knowledge which is expressly
1 Pliny, H. N. xxxvi. 17. Diog. L. 
3 Dr Birch in Lepsius' Zeitsclirifl,
i. c. 1, n. 3. 
referred to supra, p. 16 n.
2 Sept. Sap. Conv. 2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
143
attributed to Thales what other geometrical knowledge he
must have had is a peculiarly fascinating inquiry. It has been
already suggested that he knew, in some form, the theorem
Eucl. vi. 4. To this Dr Allman adds also two other inferences.
If, he argues, Thales knew that the angle in a semicircle is a
right angle, he must have known also that 'the interior angles
of a triangle are equal to two right angles' (Euclid I. 32, pt. 2).
He infers this, not from the fact that Euclid uses the proposition
I. 32, in the proof of in. 31, pt. I,1 but in another way.
Thales knew that the angle in a semicircle is a right angle: if he
had then joined the apex of the triangle containing that right
angle with the centre of the circle, he would have obtained two
isosceles triangles, in which, as he also knew, the angles at the
base are equal. Hence, he could not have failed to see that the
interior angles of a right-angled triangle were equal to two
right angles, and since any triangle may be divided into two
right angled triangles, the same proposition is true of
every triangle. It is justifiable, no doubt, to ascribe so much
intelligence to Thales, but it is another matter to attribute to
him a particular piece of knowledge and a particular method of
proof: on the same plan, Thales might be held to have known
the first six books of Euclid. It will be remembered that
Gemi'nus, in the extract quoted above, attributes to " the
ancients" (pi TraXatoi) the knowledge of the proposition that
the interior angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles. It
may be conceded that he alludes here to Thales among others,
but it is also to be borne in mind that he says that this proposi-
tion was separately proved for the different classes of triangles.
Hence Dr Allman suggests, as an alternative, that the theorem
was arrived at from inspection of Egyptian floors paved with
tiles of the form of equilateral triangles, or squares, or hexagons2.
1 There would be two objections at 
thagoreans. Cantor, however (p. 120),
least to such an inference, viz. that 
is inclined to attribute to Thales
Euclid i. 32 contains two propositions, 
Euclid's proof (or something very like
of which only the first, which is not 
it) of in. 31.
the prop, in question, is used in in. 
2 Proclus, p. 305, attributes to the
31: and also that Euclid i. 32 is said 
Pythagoreans the theorem that only
by Proclus (p. 379) to have been 
three regular polygons, the equilateral
proved almost as it stands by the Vy- 
triangle, the square and the hexagon,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

144 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
If, for instance, Thales observed that six equilateral triangles
could be placed round a common vertex, he would also notice
that six equal angles make up four right angles, and therefore
the angles of each equilateral triangle are equal to two right-
angles. Hankel (pp. 95, 96) suggests a similar theory, which
is adopted also by Cantor (pp. 120—121), with the addition
that the scalene triangle was divided into two right-angled
triangles, each of which was considered as half a rectangle. It
seems needless to dwell further on this proposition.
86. 
Dr Alltnan, however, makes a second inference of a far
bolder character. He converts the theorem that the angle in a
semicircle is a right angle into a theorem that, if on a given
straight line as base, there be described any number of triangles
each having a right angle at the vertex, then the locus of their
vertices is the circumference of a circle described on the given
base as diameter, and attributes to Thales, therefore, the
conception of geometrical loci. If Thales proved the first
theorem empirically, by constructing a great number of right-
angled triangles on the same base, no doubt the notion of a
locus may have occurred to him: but what becomes then of
that deductive, that essentially Greek character which Thales is
always said to have imparted to Egyptian geometry V There
will not be left a single theorem, attributed to Thales, which
he is not likely to have discovered by inspection or inductively.
He may, no doubt, have arrived at any theorem in two ways, at
first inductively or by inspection, and later also by a formal
deductive process, but there is no available evidence on this
matter. If he used deduction only for this particular theorem,
he would probably not have conceived a locus. If he used
induction only, he might have conceived a locus, but there
would have been no great merit in the conception.
Of speculation in this style there is no end, and there is
hardly a single Greek geometer who is not the subject of it. A
can be placed about a point so as to 
fill 
1 The Eudemian summary expressly
a space, but Dr Allman (p. 169 note) 
says that 
Thales "attacked some
supposes, no doubt rightly, that the 
questions in their general form" (KCLOO-
Egyptians habitually used these figures XiKwrepov).
for tiles.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
145
mathematician, writing for mathematicians, is perhaps entitled,
and may even be required, to fill up with his own opinions the
gaps in his evidence. But his theories, however ingenious, are
necessarily of such a kind that even a non-mathematical reader
can see that they are, for the most part, imaginary, and a
mathematician will think he can make better for himself. A
history, like this, of which the utility will no doubt vary as
the brevity, had best omit long and inconclusive discussions.
Suffice it then to say, of Thales, that he certainly introduced geo-
metry to the Greeks, that he probably improved upon Egyptian
geometry by teaching more particularly of lines than of areas,
and by giving deductive instead of inductive proofs, and
that at any rate he formed a school which derived from him its
subjects and methods of inquiry, its belief in the stability of
natural laws, its tradition of the beauty and utility of the
intellectual life1.
87. The Eudemian summary names, immediately after
Thales, Mamercus, the brother of the poet Stesichorus, as
one of the founders of Greek geometry. Nothing more is known
of this person, and his name itself is exceedingly doubtful.
Stesichorus lived in Sicily, and died about 560 B.C. Mamercus
nevertheless may have been a pupil of Thales, for it is difficult
to imagine how he could have learnt any geometry in Sicily
at that time. 
However this may be, Thales undoubtedly
had some pupils (e.g. Mandryatus of Priene2) whom the
Eudemian summary does not mention. 
Another pupil of
Thales, Anaximander of Miletus, became very famous. He
was born about 611 B.C., and died about 545 B.C.3. He also,
like Thales, devoted himself mainly to physical speculations
and to astronomy. It has been already mentioned that he first
introduced the gnomon and the polos or sundial into Greece4.
1 Thales apparently composed some 
3 Diog. Laert. n. o. 1.
astronomical treatise in verse, but the 
4 The gnomon was an upright staff
authorities on his writings are con- 
placed in the centre of three concentric
flicting. See Bretschneider § 39, pp. 
circles, so that at the summer solstice
54, 55. 
its shadow at noon justreaohed the inner
2 Apuleius, Florida, iv. n. 18, ed. 
circle, at the equinoxes the middle, at
Hildebr. p. 88, ed. Delphin. p. 817. 
the winter solstice the outer, Ai'ter-
Bretschneider, pp. 53, 56. 
wards in places, of which the meridian
G. G. M. 
10
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

146 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
Simplicius also relates (in Ar. de Coelo, ed. Brandis, p. 497 a),
on the authority of Eudemus, that Anaximander ascertained
the relative sizes and distances of the planets: and Diogenes
states that he first constructed terrestrial and celestial globes1.
These facts favour a presumption that Anaximander also was
greatly interested in geometry, and Suidas, in particular, attri-
butes to him a work entitled virorinraicn'; rr)<; ryecofieTpid?,
which would seem to mean ' a collection of figures illustrative of
geometry.' Pliny (H. N. II. c. 76) as was mentioned above
(p. 67 n.), attributes the introduction of the gnomon to the
younger philosopher, Anaximenes, who lived B.C. 570—499, and
there may be some confusion between him and Anaximander.
Nothing is known of any geometrical work by Anaximenes, and
the same might be said of the more famous Anaxagoras of
Clazomenae2, (B. c. 500—428) were it not that the Eudemian
summary expressly mentions him as a geometer; that Plutarch
(de exilio, c. 17), relates that when in prison he wrote a treatise
on quadrature of the circle, and that Vitruvius (vii. praef.),
ascribes to him a work on perspective.
88. We may add finally to the Ionic school, with which he
seems to have had most affinity, (Enopides of Chios, a
contemporary perhaps of Anaxagoras, or according to the
Eudemian summary, a little later. Of him Diodorus, as quoted
above (p. 131), relates that he studied in Egypt. He was certainly
devoted chiefly to astronomy; and .ZElian (Var. Hist. x. 7),
says that he invented a "great year" of 59 years, that is, a
period at the end of which, according to his observations, the
lunar and solar years would exactly coincide8. He was however
interested in geometry, and Proclus* attributes to him the
was known, the circles were omitted 
made about the same time the first
and three spots, marked on the me- 
map.
ridian line, were substituted. 
The 
2 Anaxagoras lived, in his later years,
polos can hardly have been similar 
with Pericles at Athens.
to our sundials, but was probably a 
3 Censorinus c. 18, says that a
staff placed in the centre of six con- 
"great year" of this length was attri-
centric circles, such that every two 
buted also to Philolaus, the Pythago-
hours the shadow of the staff passed 
rean. See the note to iElian in Gro-
from one circle to the next. Bret- 
novius' ed. n. p. 655.
Schneider, p. 60. Cantor, p. 92. 
4 Ed. Friedlein, pp. 283 and 333.
1 His fellow-townsman, Hecataeus, 
Eudemus is cited in the latter passage.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
147
solution of two problems, 'To draw a straight line perpendicular
to a given straight line of unlimited length, from a given point
without it' (Euclid I. 12.) and 'At a given point in a given
straight line to make a rectilineal angle equal to a given
rectilineal angle' (Euclid I. 23). On the first of these, Proclus'
note is curious and worth quoting. He says, " (Enopides first
invented this problem, thinking it useful for astronomy. He
calls the perpendicular (tcddero?) in the antique manner a
'gnomon,' because the gnomon is at right angles (77/30? opOds)
to the horizon, and the line drawn is at right angles to the
given line, differing in plane only [ry a-^eaei), but not in
principle (Kara TO inroKeifJ-evov)."
It is plain enough from these scanty facts and from their
scantiness, that the Ionic school did not, in nearly two hundred
years, do anything like what might have been expected for
the advancement of geometry. It introduced the study, kept it
alive, and by working at astronomy, opened up a vast field of
research, to which geometry soon became essential. The
progress of geometry itself, however, was due mainly to the
Pythagoreans in Italy.
(c.) The Pythagoreans.
89. Pythagoras, the son of Mnesarchus, was born in Samos,
probably about 580 B.C. The date of his birth, however, and
the other facts of his biography are the subject of disputes,
which, owing to the nature of the evidence, can never be satis-
factorily settled. The following summary statement perhaps
excludes most of the very doubtful matter. Pythagoras was
at first the pupil of Pherecydes of Syros1, but afterwards visited
Thales2, and was by him incited to study in Egypt, particularly
at Memphis or Diospolis (Thebes). 
In pursuance of this
1 Pherecydes is said (Suidas, s. v. 
dopted. See Bitter and Preller, Hist.
Pliny H. N". vn. 56) to have been the 
Philos. c. 11. § 92.
first writer of prose. He is also said 
2 Iambliohus (Vita Pyth. c. 2) is the
to have introduced the doctrine of 
authority for this statement, which is
metempsychosis, which Pythagoras a- 
not intrinsically improbable.
10—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

148 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
advice, Pythagoras went to Egypt and stayed there a long time,
perhaps 22 years. He may subsequently have visited Babylon1.
He returned ultimately to Samos and attempted to found a
school there, hut without success. For this reason or because
of some political disturbance he emigrated to Croton in S.
Italy2. The colonies in Magna Graecia, of which Sybaris was
the chief, were at this time more wealthy and important than
the mother country, and a very considerable commerce was
carried on between them and the Ionian coast. Pythagoras,
therefore, did not arrive at Croton among a strange and uncouth
people, and was able soon to gain a leading position among his
fellow townsmen. Among the noblest and best of these he
formed a brotherhood, the members of which were united by
common philosophical beliefs and pursuits. They were, however,
bound by oath not to divulge the tenets and discoveries of
their school, and it is due to this fact that the historian of
philosophy is now obliged to speak of 'the Pythagoreans' as a
body and is unable to identify the author of any particular
portion of their creed. This Masonic society3, so to say, soon
spread into other cities of Magna Graecia, and as it was capable
of taking united action on political questions, especially on the
side of the aristocrats, from whom its members were chiefly
drawn, it became the object of popular suspicion and hatred4.
Ultimately, the Pythagoreans of Croton, their leader with
them, were attacked by the plebeian party: Pythagoras fled
first to Tarentum and then to Metapontum, and was there
murdered in another popular outbreak about 500 B.C.
90. It has been already stated that, by writers of other
schools, Pythagorean doctrines are generally attributed to "the
Pythagoreans" and not to Pythagoras himself. 
On the other
hand, the Pythagoreans were wont to attribute all their tenets
to their master. 
AVTO? e<f>a, ipse dixit, was the formula which
secured acceptance for any doctrine however remote it may
1 Strabo, xiv. i. 16. 
searchers' or'mathematicians' and the
2 Diog. Laert. vm. 3. Cicero, De 
'listeners.' 
The former apparently
Hep. II. 15. 
were communists. 
Iamblich. V. P.
3 It contained two orders, the /xaBri- 81; Porph. V. P. 37.
and the aKovana.ri.Kol, the 're- 
4 Polybius, Hist. n. 29.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO ETTCLID. 
149
have been from the teaching of Pythagoras .himself. Further,
the teaching of the school seems, to have been traditional and
founded on no text-books, until the wide dispersion of its
members made it desirable that some record should be secured.
Philolaus, a contemporary of Plato, is generally credited with the
first publication of a detailed Pythagorean philosophy1. His
work is lost, save a few very brief fragments (not undoubted)
preserved by Stobaeus and similar compilers. In default of
this, we are compelled to rely on incidental remarks or mere
allusions of the earlier Greek writers, or else on histories
obviously uncritical of a very late date. Now these are pre-
cisely the kind of authorities who would naturally omit to
mention discoveries of Pythagoras and his school in geometry.
Aristotle, for instance, had no occasion to discuss geometrical
details to which he did not, though the Pythagoreans did,
attach any profound significance. To lamblichus, on the other
hand, geometry was not in itself interesting, or, if it was, the
geometry of his day had so far outstripped the Pythagorean
that the latter would have seemed childish by comparison.
Hence it is that, though the evidence is abundant that
Pythagoras really made geometry the Greek science par ex-
cellence, yet very few particular inventions can be attributed to
him or his immediate followers.
91. It has been already stated (see above pp. 67—72) how
it was that Pythagoras came to attach so much importance to
geometry, and how closely he connected it with arithmetic. It
will be remembered also that the geometry of Ahmes is ex-
hibited only as leading to arithmetical problems, and we may
suppose therefore that Pythagoras was profoundly influenced by
his Egyptian teaching. We shall also be prepared to find that
the Pythagorean geometry, like the Egyptian, is concerned,
more than that of Thales, with the relations of areas and
volumes, and is not largely concerned with those relations of
lines which do not admit of, or do not readily suggest, arith-
1 Lucian, Pro Lapsu in Salut. c. 5, 
avrov). Diog. Laert. vin. 15, says
mentions that Pythagoras had not 
"before Philolaus it was impossible
thought fit to leave any authoritative 
to learn any Pythagorean dogma."
writings {/j.rjdet> 
tdiov KaTaXnretv TUP
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

150 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
metical expression. This being premised, it remains only to
set out in order such doctrines, of geometrical interest, and such
special discoveries in geometry as are attributed to Pythagoras
or the Pythagoreans.
According to Aristotle1 "the Pythagoreans first applied them-
selves to mathematics, a science which they improved; and pene-
trated with it, they fancied that the principles of mathematics
were the principles of all things." Proclus2 says expressly that
the specialised meaning of 'mathematics' (jiadijfiara) was first
used by the Pythagoreans. The Eudemian summary says that
Pythagoras changed the study of geometry into the form of a
liberal education, for he examined its principles to the bottom,
and investigated its theorems in an immaterial and intellectual
manner (ai5\ws ical voepcos;). Diogenes Laertius3 states, on the
authority of Favorinus, that Pythagoras "used definitions, on
account of the mathematical matter of his subject." 
This
perhaps was the first step towards that systematization of
geometry which Eudemus ascribes to him. The following
details are also preserved4:
(1) The Pythagoreans define a point (arifielov) as "unity
having position." (Proclus, ed. Friedlein, p. 95.)
(2) They considered a point as analogous to the monad, a
line to the duad, a superficies to the triad, and a body to the
tetrad. (Ib. p. 97.)
(3) They showed that the plane about a point is completely
filled by six equilateral triangles, four squares or three regular
hexagons. (Ib. p. 305.)
(4) They first, according to Eudemus, proved generally
that the interior angles of a triangle are equal to two right-
angles. (Ib. p. 379.)6
1 Metaph. i. 5, 985. 
parallel to BC. 
Then the alternate
2 Friedlein's ed. p. 45.
3 vin. 25. 
A
4 All the following quotations are in
Bretsohneider, pp. 67—91. They are
more neatly arranged by Dr Allman.
5 The Pythagorean proof, according
to Eudemus, is as follows. Let ABG 
B 
C
be a triangle. Through A draw DE 
angles (al ecaXXdJ) are equal, DAB to
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
151
(5) They also, according to Eudemus, invented the problems
concerning the application of areas, including the cases of defect
(eWeiyfrii) and excess (inrepfioXtf) as in Eucl. VI. 28, 29. (Ib.
p. 419, Comm. on Eucl. I. 441. See above p. 84 re.)
(6) Pythagoras sacrificed an ox on solving the problem
how to construct a figure equal to one and similar to another
given figure. (Euclid u. 14, vi. 25)2.
(7) Pythagoras, according to Eudemus, discovered the con-
struction of the regular solids3. (Proclus, p. 65).
(8) The triple inteswoven triangle, the
pentagram-star, (TO rpbifKovv Tplr/mvov, TO St'
dXkr'jXav, TO 7revTdypa/j,fiov) was used as a
badge or symbol of recognition by the Pythago-
reans, and was called by them Health (vyieia).
(Lucian, Pro Lapsu, c. 5, Schol. in Ar. Nub. 611)4.
(9) Pythagoras discovered the theorem of the three squares,
Euclid I. 47. 
(Proclus, p. 426)5.
ABC, EAC to AOB. Add the angle
BAG. Then the three angles DAB,
BAG, GAE, that is, DAB, BAE, that
is, two right angles are equal to the
three angles of the triangle. The re-
dundant explanation in the last sen-
tence is curious. The text is given by
Bretschneider, p. 78.
1 This passage will, for the sake of
some other matter contained in it, be
quoted later on. The statement is con-
firmed by Plutarch (Non posse suav.
vivi sec. Epicur. c. 11), who says, " Py-
thagoras, according to Apollodorus,
sacrificed an ox on completing the
figure...either for the proposition con-
cerning the hypotenuse, that its square
is equal to those of the sides contain-
ing the right angle, or else the pro-
blem about application of an area."
The texts have 7rep2 rod xwpiov r^s irapa-
/So\?js, for which Bretschneider (p. 79,
n.) proposes, evidently rightly, irepl
T7)s rod X^P'OK TrapafioXfjs. 
The text is
sometimes translated "on the area of
the parabola," which involves a gross
anachronism.
2 Plutarch, Quaest. Conv. vin. 2,
c. i.
3 According to Iamblichus (Vita
Pyth. c. 18, s. 88) Hippasus was
drowned for divulging the knowledge
of "the sphere with the twelve penta-
gons" (i.e. the inscribed ordinate dode-
cahedron) " for he took the glory as
discoverer, whereas everything belong-
ed to Him (thai Si iravra inelvov) for so
they call Pythagoras."
4 See Chasles, p. 477, sqq. This
Pythagoraefigura was used through the
middle ages, and was regarded even by
Paracelsus as a symbol of health. It is
the drudenfuss of Goethe's Faust, sc. iii.
6 The oldest authority for this is
Vitruvius, ix. pref. 5, 6, 7. It is
attested also by Plutarch (supra, n. 1).
Diog. L. vin, 11.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

152 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
(10) Pythagoras used to say that of all solids the sphere
was the most beautiful; of all plane figures, the circle. (Diog.
Laert. vin. 19.)
(11) The Pythagoreans are said to have solved the quadra-
ture of the circle. (Iamblichus quoted by Simplicius in Ar. Phys.
185, a, 16. Ed. Brandis, p. 327, b.)
(12) The Pythagoreans, as has been already stated {supra
p. 70) were largely occupied with the study of proportion,
doubtless not in arithmetic only but in geometry1.
(13) From the Pythagorean use of 'gnomon' as a desig-
nation of those numbers, which, when added to a square
number, make a square total, it is evident that the Pythagoreans
were accustomed to consider and use the gnomon in geometry8.
92. It will be seen at once that all this knowledge can by
no means be attributed to Pythagoras himself or to his earliest
successors. There must have been, notwithstanding the en-
thusiasm and ability of the school, a slow progress from em-
pirical to reasoned solutions, from the diffuse treatment of
special cases to the concise treatment of one general case. But
we are hopelessly in the dark as to whea and how this progress
was effected. 
It is probable, indeed, that much of it was not
effected inside the Pythagorean school at all, but that later writers
ascribe to the Pythagoreans theorems which they first proved for
one special case but which some Academic geometer afterwards
proved generally. A Pythagorean, for instance, may very well
have solved Eucl. II. 14, without going so far as VI. 25. Some
statements also,in themselves beyond doubt,maylead to veryplau-
sible but erroneous inferences. For instance, if Pythagoras was
1 Proolus (ed. Friedlein, p. 43) says 
Schneider p. 89, § 71, conclusively
that Eratosthenes regarded proportion 
shews that Montucla (i. p. 117) is
as 'the bond of mathematics,' and says 
wrong in attributing to the Pythagor-
elsewhere that the 5th Book of Euclid 
eans any investigations in isoperi-
is common to geometry, arithmetic, 
metry. What Diogenes Laertius (vm.
music and, in a word, to all mathe- 
e. 1. n. 19) says is stated above (10).
matics. See Knoche, Untersuch. iiber He does not say that Pythagoras taught
die Schol. des Proklus zu Eucl. Elem, 
that the circle is the greatest among
Herford, 1865, p. 10. 
figures 
of equal periphery, and the
2 It should be mentioned before 
sphere among solids of equal super-
leaving this enumeration, that Bret- 
ficies.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
153
acquainted (as no doubt he was) with the regular solids, he was
acquainted also with the regular pentagon. This fact, together
with the form of the pentagram and together with the directions
as to dividing figures into triangles which Plato puts into
the mouth of the Pythagorean Timaeus1, suggests that Pytha-
goras constructed the regular pentagon in the manner of
Euclid IV. 11. But Euclid iv. 11 is founded on IV. 10, which
is founded on II. 11, and the Eudetnian summary, the most
authoritative of all our historical accounts of ancient geometry,
says that Plato invented the learning on the subject of cutting
a line in extreme and mean ratio. It can hardly, therefore,
serve any useful purpose to criticise minutely a whole body of
geometrical teaching much of which is not properly authen-
ticated, and which, if it be correctly ascribed to the Pythagorean
school, must belong to very different dates2. It is sufficient to
say, generally, that the Pythagoreans seem at a very early time
to have been masters of most of the geometry contained in the
first two books of Euclid, and that they knew some propositions
of the 5th and 6th books. To them also is probably due the
introduction of definitions of some kind and the use of orderly
deductive proofs in geometry. 
Further, just as Aristoxenus
tells us that they raised arithmetic above the needs of mer-
chants, so the Eudemian summary tells us that they made
geometry 'a liberal education'; and other writers record as one
of their proverbial maxims, "A figure and a stride: not a figure
and sixpence gained8".
93. There are, however, two portions of the Pythagorean
geometry which have provoked interesting comments. One
is the construction of the five regular solids, the other is the
Pythagorean theorem, Euclid I. 47.
Timaeus, in the dialogue of Plato above cited, explains that
every rectilineal figure is made up of triangles, and that every
1 Tim. c. 20, 107. See next par. 
school, "first found the cube"!
2 A very curious instance of the 
3 <rxo.ua KOX 0S./ia, dXV oi axwa- KO.1
distracting nature of the evidence a- 
rpuiftoXov. Proclus, ed Friedlein, p.
bout the Pythagoreans is furnished by 
84. Iamblichus, Adhort. ad Philos.
Diogenes Laertius (VIII. 83), who says 
Symb. xxxvi. c. 21, quoted by Dr
that Archytas, one of the last of the 
Allman, v. p. 206.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

154 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
triangle may be divided into two right-angled triangles, either
isosceles or scalene. 
"Of such scalene triangles the most
beautiful is that out of the doubling of which an equilateral
arises, or in which the square of the greater perpendicular is
three times that of the less, or in which the less is half the
hypotenuse. But two or four right-angled isosceles triangles,
properly put together, form the square : two or six of the most
beautiful scalene right-angled triangles form the equilateral
triangle, and out of these two figures arise the solids which
correspond with the four elements of the real world, the tetra-
hedron, octahedron, icosahedron and the cube1." Of these solids,
the tetrahedron, octahedron and cube must have been familiar to
a traveller who had lived in Egypt; on the construction of the
other two, Dr Allman has the following remarks: "In the
formation of the tetrahedron, three, and in that of the octa-
hedron, four, equal equilateral triangles had been placed with a
common vertex and adjacent sides coincident, and it was known
too that if six such triangles were placed round a common
vertex with their adjacent sides coincident, they woxild lie in a
plane, and that, therefore, no solid could be formed in that
manner from them. It remained then to try whether five such
equilateral triangles could be placed at a common vertex in like
manner: on trial it would be found that they could be so
placed and that their bases would form a regular pentagon.
The existence of a regular pentagon would thus be known (sic).
It was also known from the formation of the cube that three
squares could be placed in a similar way with a common vertex;
and that, further, if three equal and regular hexagons were
placed round a point as common vertex with adjacent sides
coincident, they would form a plane. It remained then only to
try whether three equal regular pentagons could be placed with
a common vertex and in a similar way: this on trial would be
found possible and would lead to the construction of the regular
dodecahedron which was the regular solid last arrived at." It
should be added that there is no reason to suppose that the
Pythagoreans knew that there are, in fact, no other regular
solids save these.
1 The dodecahedron represented the universe itself.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
155
94. The famous proposition, Euclid I. 47, has always been
known as the theorem of Pythagoras. It will be remembered
that the converse of this (Eucl. I. 48) was known to the
Egyptians and to other nations, at a very early date, in the case
in which the sides of the triangle are to one another as 3:4:5,
and that Pythagoras extended it to cases in which the sides are
to one another as 2n + 1 : 2ti2 + 2n : 2n2 + 2n + V. 
The first
proposition also may have been known to the Egyptians in the
particular case where the right-angled triangle is isosceles. It
would of course be at once suggested by a floor paved with
tiles in the form of isosceles right-angled
triangles. But the general proof is at-
tributed to Pythagoras; and Proclussays
expressly (p. 426) that the form of
Euclid I. 47 (as well as Euclid vi. 31)
is due to Euclid himself. Hence Bret-
schneider (p. 82), after Camerer2, proposes
as a possible restoration of the original
proof, the following. If a straight line
be divided into any two parts a and b, then the square on the
whole line is equal to a? + b2 with the two complementary
rectangles ab. Draw the diagonals c of these rectangles, and
dispose the four triangles so formed about the square in the
0 
\
I2
a*
a
manner shown in the second figure. There is thus left, in the
middle of the square, a figure e2 which is obviously equal to
a2 + V. Upon this Hankel (p. 98) remarks that "it has no
specifically Greek colouring, and reminds us rather of the
1 See above p. 71. 
2 Euclidis Elem. i. p. Ui, ana refit, there given.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

156
GREEK GEOMETEY TO EUCLID.
Indian style1." 
This criticism will serve to introduce an
Indian proof of the same theorem, taken from the Vija-ganita
('Eoot-calculations') of Bhaskara, who was born A. D. 11142.
Here a square is constructed on the
hypotenuse and the original triangle
repeated four times, is disposed round
it as in Bretschneider's proof. 
The
square left in the middle is that of the
difference between the two perpendicu-
lars. Bhaskara merely draws the figure
and adds 'Look!' without thinking it
necessary to add that if A2 = 4 {
+ (cs - cj\ then h*=c*+c*.
A proof of precisely the same kind is given, two hundred years
earlier, by the Arab Abu '1 Wafa (A.D. 940—998), who trans-
lated Diophantus3. It would seem also that the Chinese had
a similar proof. 
The passage on which this presumption is
founded occurs in a book called the Tcheou pei* or 'signal in a
circle,' of which the first part, containing the passage, is
attributed to 1100 B.C. It may not be so early as this, but
it certainly existed and was the subject of a commentary in the
2nd century after Christ. Here, apparently, the same figure
as Bhaskara's is drawn and is named 'the Rope figure,' as
though it were intended to ex-
plain the practice of some Chinese
Harpedonaptes. Another proof
given by Bhaskara, in the same
place, is also worth quoting. A
perpendicular is drawn from the
vertex to the hypotenuse, dividing the triangle into two
1 Dr Allman (p. 193) adopts this
criticism, but accepts Bretschneider's
proof and attributes it to trie Egyptians.
See, however, the passage from the
Meno, cited below p. 174.
2 Colebrooke, Algebra etc. of Brah-
megupta and Bhaskara, 1817, p. 220—
222, § 146. Hankel, p. 209. Cantor
p. 557.
3 See Cantor, pp. 637, 639, quoting
Woepcke in Journal Asiat. 1855, pp.
346, 350—351 (Feb. and March).
4 Cantor, pp. 579—581, quoting E.
Biot in Journ. Asiat. pp. 593—639, for
June 1841. Cantor's restoration of
the figure is founded, conjecturally, on
Biot's description of it, which is by no
means clear.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.. 
157
others similar to it. Then in the figure (if h be the original
hypotenuse) 
fX = -1 and •=- = — , whence it follows that
h (hl + h^j = A2 = c* + c2
3. Hankel remarks that this proof was
revived in the West by Wallis1.
95. It is not to be supposed that when the Pythagorean
brother-hood was for political reasons broken up, the Pythagorean
philosophy disappeared also. On the contrary, the school con-
tinued to flourish for at least two centuries more. Tarentum
seems to have been its head-quarters, but it seems also to have
sent out occasional missionary expeditions into Greece. Its
habit of secrecy prevents the possibility of naming its earliest
leaders. 
The most celebrated of its earliest disciples was
Epicharmus, the founder in Sicily of Greek comedy (cir. B.C. 480).
Considerably later Philolaus wrote his book, and thus the
Pythagorean doctrines became accessible to the public. Two
other disciples, Archippus and Lysis, are also reported to have
written text-books of their philosophy, and by the time of
Plato the Pythagorean teaching seems to have been well
known. Simmias of Thebes, the companion of Socrates, says
in Plato's Phaedo (61 D) that he had himself heard Philolaus in
Thebes. Most of the Sophists also, who introduced geometry
into Athens, came from Sicily and it is said of some of them
and may be presumed of others that they acquired their
knowledge of the science from Pythagorean sources. So also,
no doubt, did Plato himself, who bought a copy of Philolaus,
and who, in Sicily, studied with Archytas and Timaeus of
Locri2. This Archytas was a mathematician of great celebrity.
The Eudemian summary mentions him without attributing to
him any particular discovery, but a good deal is known of him
from other sources3. He was a leading politician and chief of
the Pythagorean school in Tarentum. According to Diogenes
1 De Sect. Aug. c. vi. in Wallis Op. 
note in Todhunter's Euclid.
Math. (1693), Vol. n. Hankel, p. 209. 
2 Cic. De Rep. i. 10, 16.
Cantor, p. 557. A collection of proofs 
3 See the authorities collected in
of Euclid I. 47 was made by J. J. 
Bitter and Preller, Hist. Philos. c. n.
Hofmann. 
Der Pythagorische Lehr- 
sec. 100, n. d. Cantor, p. 203.
satz. Mainz (2nd ed.) 1821. See the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

158 
GREEK GEOMETRY. TO EUCLID.
Laertius (VIII. 83) he first applied geometry to mechanics and
handled the latter subject methodically, and used mechanical
contrivances in the construction of geometrical figures. A very
ingenious solution of the problem 'to double a cube' is attribu-
ted to him1 and will be cited below (pp. 181,182). He also is said
to have defined the three chief kinds of proportion. Horace in a
well-known ode (r. 28) describes him as maris ac terrae nu-
meroque carentis arenae mensor, from which it might be inferred
that he attempted some of the problems which Archimedes
treats in his Arenarius. Gellius (x. 12) ascribes to Archytas
also the invention of a mechanical dove2.
From this it will be seen that the later Pythagoreans were
worthily maintaining the traditions which they had received
from their master. But in the meantime the Persian Wars had
made Athens by far the wealthiest and most brilliant city of
Greece. To her resorted, from all parts, those men who had
something to teach and were not too proud to make a living by
teaching it. Among such there were no Pythagoreans, and thus
it is that the history of geometry must leave Italy and the Pytha-
gorean school for Athens and the Sophists and the Academy.
96. Two schools of Greek philosophy, founded early in the
5th century B.C. remain yet to bs mentioned. 
In Sicily
Xenophanes of Colophon had formed a school which after-
wards made its head-quarters at Elea in Italy. Here Parme-
nides, his pupil Zeno and Melissus of Samos instituted their
famous inquiries into the inconceivable. They denied the in-
finite divisibility of time and space and illustrated their position
by such paradoxes as that concerning Achilles and the tortoise3,
1 Eutocius, Comm. in Archim. de 
Arehytas the invention of the pulley
Sph. et Cyl. and Diog. L. loc. cit. 
and screw, but I have seen no authority
The method of Archytas contains the 
for this statement,
first example of a curve of double cur- 
3 It will be remembered that Zeno
vature. 
maintained that Achilles could never
2 Poggendorff, Gesch. der Physik, p. 
overtake a tortoise, if the tortoise had
12, compares this with the automatic 
any start. For, supposing the tortoise
eagle made by Eegiomontanus in 1489 
to take 100 yards start and Achilles to
to greet the Emperor Maximilian I. on 
run 10 times as fast as the tortoise,
his entry into Nuremberg. Young, in 
when the former has covered the 100
his lectures (xx. p. 182) ascribes to 
yards, the tortoise has run 10 yards,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
159
the heap of corn etc. The doubt and difficulty into which their
arguments led the early mathematicians were, no doubt, the
cause of the banishment of infinity from Greek mathematical
terms and conceptions1. Both Parmenides and Zeno came to
Athens at a Panathenaic festival about 450 B.C. and were
heard by the youthful Socrates.
Somewhat later Leucippus of Miletus, a disciple of Zeno,
founded the Atomistic school, of which, before Epicurus,
Democritus, who lived at Abdera in Thrace, became the most
famous professor. Democritus at least was a very ardent and
successful geometer. His boast that he was the equal of the
Egyptian harpedonaptae has been already cited from Clemens
Alexandrinus. Diogenes Laertius2 says that he was a pupil of
Anaxagoras as well as of Leucippus, that he was an admirer of
the Pythagoreans and intimate with Philolaus, and that he
wrote mathematical works on geometry, on numbers, on per-
spective (dKTivo<Ypa<f>i7])s, another in two books on incommen-
surable lines and (?) solids (irepl aXoycov ypa/Afidov /ecu vaaraiv /3),
and another 'on the difference of the gnomon or the contact of
the circle and sphere' [irepl Bia^oprj? yvobfiovo*; rj Trepl "ifravcrio';
KVKKOV Kal a-(f>aiprj<i). It is impossible to say what these titles
mean. It appears also from Plutarch4, that Democritus was
interested in the cone and raised a question, of the Eleatic kind,
as to the infinitesimal gradations in its slope. The life of
Democritus is generally said to fall between 460 and 370 B.C.
Now though the history of geometry, after about 450 B.C.,
can be traced with any definiteness only at Athens, yet it is
plain that the progress of the science was due to contributions
from many other places. 
Throughout Hellas, in Ionia, in
Sicily, Italy, at Athens, at Abdera far away in Thrace, there
were men who were working earnestly at the formation of rules
for exact thinking or at the exemplification of such rules in
and when Achilles has covered this, 
3 Comp. Vitruvius Arch. vn. praef.
the tortoise is a yard ahead and so on. 
4 De Comm. Not. adv. Stoic. 39, § 3.
Coleridge's answer to this paradox is dis- 
Allman in Hermathena. vn. p. 208.
cussed by Mr S. Hodgson in Mind, xix. 
The question was whether, if a cone
(July, 1880). 
be cut by a plane parallel and infinitely
1 See esp. Hankel, p. 115 sqq. 
near to its base, the conic section so
2 Diog. L. ix. 7, 47. 
exposed was equal to the base or not.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1G0 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
geometry. It is sufficient only to remark the birthplaces of the
philosophers and teachers of this time to see how close an
intellectual communion was maintained between the most
widely separated cities.
(d.) The Sophists.
97. It was in the Second Persian War, and at the battle
of Salamis in particular (B.C. 480), that Athens discovered her
vocation to be a maritime power, and that Hellas perceived that
a strong fleet was the best protection against any future in-
vasion. For this reason, a joint fleet was during many years
kept up by Athens and the islands and cities of the Archipelago,
but as Persia showed no sign of moving and the islands found
the fleet a serious burden on their resources, a league was
formed on the terms that the islands should pay tribute to
Athens and Athens should find the ships. It soon followed
that the tribute was rigorously exacted but the fleet was not
maintained: 
Immense sums were poured yearly into the
Athenian treasury and were spent by Pericles in the adornment
of Athens. In the meantime also Athens was become a great
commercial city with a large carrying trade, and petty wars in
various parts of the Levant filled her streets and markets with
captive slaves. Thus she became the richest and most beautiful
city in the world. Her citizens were, for the most part, well-
to-do and enjoyed an unexampled amount of leisure. The
constitution of Athens, moreover, compelled every man to be
more or less a politician, and opened a splendid career to any
citizen who could but once make a successful speech in the
ecclesia. Litigation was rife and actions were conducted always
by the parties in person. 
Hence there arose, among the
wealthy and ambitious youth, a strong desire to cultivate
rhetoric and any other branches of knowledge which could
conduce to correct reasoning or successful disputation, The
demand was met by the necessary supply. Corax and Tisias
in Sicily, had laid the foundations of the rhetorical art and
from Sicily and elsewhere there came to Athens a multitude of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
161
teachers, calling themselves and called by others, "Sophists."
Their business was to teach, for pay, rhetoric principally, but
some of them added also geometry, astronomy, philosophy as
necessary ingredients of a liberal education. The most famous
of them were Protagoras of Abdera, Hippias of Elis, Polus of
Agrigentum, Gorgias of Leontini, Prodicus of Ceos, Licymnius
of Sicily, Alcidamas of Elaea in Aeolis, Theodorus of Byzantium,
Thrasymachus of Ghalcedon, Hippocrates of Chios. Physicists
of the old school, Anaxagoras, Diogenes of Apollonia in Crete,
Diagoras of Melos, came also but were persecuted by charges of
impiety and driven away. Of the whole army of Sophists, two
only seem to have been Athenians born, namely Antiphon and
Meton, the astronomer1 who introduced the Metonic cycle which
the Church still uses. The dates of these teachers cannot be
more precisely determined than this, that they were all teaching
in Athens between 440 and 400 B.C. 
A few of them, as
has been said, were geometers, but the merits of these (as of
the rest) have been greatly obscured by Plato's well-known
hostility to their class. Hence perhaps it is that Proclus, an
ardent Platonist, in his Eudemian summary, names only
Hippocrates as a good geometer.
98. By the Pythagoreans, it will be remembered, the
geometry of the circle was practically neglected. This part of
the science was revived in the Athenian schools, which occupied
themselves chiefly with three famous problems (1) Quadrature
of the circle (2) Trisection of an angle (3) Duplication of the
Cube. It was mainly through a thousand attempts to solve
these problems that new propositions and new processes were
discovered and geometry made daily progress. It is not sur-
prising that the first two of the three should have invited
attention. Quadrature of the circle was a problem almost as
old as geometry itself, and the Pythagoreans, who were so busy
with symmetrical divisions of all kinds, would have been led
1 I add him here because Aris- 
cycle is said to have been adopted
tophanes (Birds, 992—1020) seems to 
from B.C. 432. The year, according
treat him as a sophist. He is there 
to it, is stated by Ptolemy to have
introduced carrying a machine for 
been 365J days + 7Vth of a day- 
T h i s
Rqnaring the circle. 
The Metonic 
is more than half an hour too long.
G. G. M. 
1 1
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

162 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
naturally enough to trisection. But the duplication-problem is
not so easily accounted for. Eratosthenes, in a letter1 de-
scribing the solutions of this problem, addressed to Ptolemy III,
(Euergetes), says that an old tragic poet had represented King
Minos as wishing to erect a tomb for his son Glaucus: but
being dissatisfied with the dimensions (100 feet each way)
proposed by his architect, the King exclaims: "The enclosure is
too small for a royal tomb: double it, but fail not in the cubical
form3." 
A little further on, Eratosthenes says that the
Delians, who were suffering under a pestilence, were ordered by
the oracle to double a certain cubical altar and, being in
a difficulty, consulted Plato on the matter. 
Both these
statements, perhaps, contain a minute portion of truth.
The problem was certainly called 'the Delian,' and it may have
originated in an architectural difficulty. But for this evidence,
one would have been inclined to say, with Bretschneider, that
the problem was suggested in the investigation of incommen-
surables. It was at least well known in Athens before Plato's
time3.
99. 
Hippias of Elis is mentioned intheEudemian summary
as authority for the geometrical performances of the brother of
Stesichorus, but is not named as the author of any original
work himself. A certain Hippias, however, who can hardly be
1 Quoted by Eutooius in Archimed. 
Phys. printed, from the Aldine edition
De Sph. et Cyl. Torelli's ed. p. 144. 
(1526), with many corrections, by Bret-
Bretschneider, p. 97, suggests that the 
echneider, pp. 100 sqq. On the dupli-
duplication-problem is due merely to 
cation-problem, Eutocius in Archimed.
this: the Pythagoreans had found that 
De Sph. et Gyl. Bk II. is most copious,
the diagonal of a square is the side of 
but very little is said by any ancient
a square twice as large as that of 
writer about trisection. The modern
which it is the diagonal, and they 
commentators (Bretschneider, pp. 94
wished to find a similar law for the 
—134. Hankel, pp. 115—127, 150—
cube. 
156. Allman in Hermathena vn. pp.
2 Valckenaer (Diatribe de Jragm. 
180—228. Cantor, Vorhs. pp. 172—
Eurip. p. 203), suggests that the lines 
176, 180—182, 194—201, etc.) present
are from the Polyidus of Euripides 
an embarras de richesses. I shall in
and ran 
the main follow Cantor, whose arrange-
fuKp6v y ?\efos pacrAiicoB a-qKov T&<j>ov 
ment, though it does not offer the
SfirXcurws ?<JTW, TOV KV^OV Si //Ji a(f>dKji. 
«ame opportunities for brilliant and
3 On the Greek circle-squarers the 
comprehensive criticism as Allman's
chief authority is Simplicius in Ar. 
or Hankel's, is better suited to my plan.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
163
anybody else than Hippias of Elis1, is mentioned elsewhere by
Proclus and the mathematical learning of this sophist is directly
attested by Plato himself2. It is true that he is mentioned by
Plato with a certain sarcasm. Protagoras, for instance, in his
long and eloquent plea for his own teaching, is made to say
"The others injure the young: for they drag them back against
their will into arts which they would fain avoid, teaching them
arithmetic and astronomy and geometry and music (and here
he glanced at Hippias), but he who comes to me shall learn only
that for which he comes." Hippias evidently was the polymath
of his time and had high notions of a liberal curriculum.
Proclus mentions him twice3. In the first passage, he says that
Nicomedes had solved the trisection problem by means of the
conchoid curve, which he himself invented: that others had
used for the same purpose the mixed curve called the quadratrix
of Hippias and Nicomedes and that others divided an angle
in any given proportion by using the spirals of Archimedes.
In the second passage, he says that mathematicians have
described the properties of various curves, Apollonius of the
conic sections, Nicomedes of the conchoids, Hippias of the
quadratrix (rerpaymvi^ovaa) and Perseus of the spirals.
Pappus4, however, says that the quadrature of the circle was
effected by Dinostratus, Nicomedes and other later geometers
by means of a line which, from this use, was called the quad-
ratrix. Here Hippias is ignored. Now Dinostratus belongs to
the end of the 4th century B.C. and Nicomedes seems to be a
century later. Cantor, therefore, proposes6 to reconcile the
statements of Proclus and Pappus by supposing that Hippias,
i.e. Hippias of Elis, invented a curve which was found useful
for both the quadrature- and the trisection-problems, and that
this curve was, by Dinostratus or Nicomedes or later, called
1 Allman (vu. p. 220) and Hankel 
3 Ed, Friedlein, pp. 272, 356.
(p. 151) deny this. Bretschneider 
* iv. c. xxx. ed Hultsch, p. 251.
(p. 94) and Cantor (p. 165) affirm it. 
So also Simplioius loc. cit. quoting
The latter shows, by many instances, 
Iambliohus, names Nicomedes only in
that Proclus was always careful to dis- 
connexion with the quadratix. Bret-
tinguish writers of the same name. 
Schneider, p. 108.
2 Hippias Maj. 285, CD. Hippias 
* p. 167.
Minor, 367, 368. Protagoras, 318 E,
11—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

164 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
the quadmtrix, rerpaycovl^ova-a. Originally, it may have been
intended only for the trisection.
The construction of the quadratrix is thus described by
Pappus (loc. cit.). 
"In the square 
a 
y
aftyB, from a as centre with a/3 as
radius, describe a quarter of a circle
y8eS. 
The straight line a/3 moves
evenly about its end a so that the
other end /3 moves in a given .time
along the whole arc /3e8. The line
/3y moves evenly in the same time, 
» 
0 
y 
8
remaining always parallel to itself from the position /3y to the
position aS. The locus of intersection of this straight line
with the moving radius a/3 in the curve /3f)7, which is the
quadratrix." The property of this curve consists in this, that
any straight line a£e drawn to the circumference of the circle,
makes the ratio of the quadrant to the arc e8 equal to the ratio
of the straight lines /3a : £#. And since the straight line /3a
can be divided into any number of parts, in any given ratio to
one another, so also can the quadrant or the arc eS, and the
trisection or any other section of an angle is performed. The
quadrature of the circle is given by this curve, since the straight
line which is equal to the quadrant /3eS is a third proportional
to at), ijS1.
100. Theodorus of Cyrene, whom the Eudemian summary
names with praise, is known to us only as the mathematical
teacher of Plato2. Iamblichus says he was a Pythagorean and
Plato introduces, in the Theaetetus, his discovery in effect that the
square roots of numbers between 3 and 17 (except 4, 9, 16)
are irrational. He does not seem to have visited Athens.
101. Hippocrates of Chios, who is mentioned with
Theodorus in the summary, was one of the greatest geometers
of antiquity. Like Thales, he began life as a merchant but lost
his property either by piracy or through the chicanery of the
i Pappus, iv. 26. Bretschneider, p. 
= Diog. Laert. n. 104. IamMichus
96. Hankel, p. 131. Cantor, p. 168, 
Vita Pyth. 267. Plato, Theaet. 1471>-
213, (sub Dinostratus).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
165
Byzantine custom house \ 
He came to Athens to prosecute the
offenders, employed his leisure in attending lectures2 and ulti-
mately himself became a teacher of geometry. Aristotle says he
had a talent for the science but was in other respects slow and
stupid (/3/V.af Koi afypwv). The Greeks, however, would natur-
ally call any man a fool who was cheated of his property and
Aristotle seems to have no other evidence for his criticism of
Hippocrates. He may, of course, have been right. There are
still extant mathematicians who are singularly deficient in
ability for any studies but their own.
The most celebrated achievement of Hippocrates was
that 'squaring of the lune' which the Eudemian summary
attributes to him. He was, however, ardently engaged on both
the quadrature and the duplication-problems and added enor-
mously, in the course of his researches, to the geometry of the
circle. 
He wrote also the first textbook of 'Elements,' a
sufficient service in itself to the cause of the science.
The first step3 in Hippocrates' attempts at quadrature was
the squaring of a particular lune as follows. On a given straight
line AB, he described a semi-circle, and inscribed in this an
isosceles triangle AFB. 
On the
equal sides of this triangle he de-
scribed two other semicircles. Now
in the right-angled triangle AFB,
AB2 = AP + TB2, and (since circles
or semicircles are to one another as the squares of their
diameters)4 the semicircle AFB is equal to both the smaller
1 Aristotle, Eth. Eudem. vn. 14.
Joh. Philoponus in Ar. Phys. ed.
Brandia, p. 327.
a Iambliohus {Be Philos. Pyth. lib.
in., Villoison, Anecdota Gr. n. p. 216)
says that Hippocrates and Theodoras
divulged the Pythagorean geometry.
Fabricius, Bibl. Gr. I. p. 505 (Ham-
burg. 1718), referring to this passage of
Iamblichus, says wrongly that Hippo-
crates and Theodorus were expelled
from the Pythagorean school for making
money by teaching geometry. See All-
man, Herm. vn. pp. 188, 189.
3 Simplicius in Bretsehneider, pp.
102—103. Vieta (Opera, p. 386), quotes
these two proofs of Hippoerates from
Simplicius, and Montucla follows Vieta
(Bretschn. pp. 122, 123).
4 This proposition (Euclid in, 2)
is expressly attributed to Hippocrates
by Eudemus "in the second book of hia
History of Geometry," as quoted by
Simplicius shortly afterwards (Bret-
schn. p. 110 top). The proposition as
stated by Hippocrates seems to have
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

166
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
semicircles on AF, FB or is double of either of them. But the
semicircle AFB is also double of the quadrant AFA, which,
therefore, is equal to the semicircle on AF. Take away from
both the common part and it is seen that the triangle AFA
is equal to the lune (ii/r)vi<rico<}) which lies outside the semicircle
AFB.
The next step1 was as follows. In a semicircle he inscribed
half of a regular hexagon, and on
the three sides of this as diameters
he described the semicircles THE,
E@Z, ZKA. 
Then, since the
sides FE, EZ, ZA are equal to
the radius FA of the large semi-
circle and the semicircle on a radius is a quarter of that on a
diameter of the same circle, it follows that each of the three
smaller semicircles is a quarter of the large one. It follows that
the three smaller semicircles together with that on the radius
FA is equal to the larger semicircle. Deduct the common
parts. Then the external lunes, together with the semi-circle
on FA, are equal to the trapezium FEZA. But the lune
has been shown, in the first step, to be equal to a rectilineal
figure. Deduct therefore from FEZA the three rectilineal
figures equal to the three external lunes, and the remainder is
a rectilineal figure equal to the semicircle on FA, and twice
this rectilineal figure is equal to the circle on FA and thus the
circle is squared.
The fallacy2 here lies, as Simplicius rightly points out, in
teen (see Bretschneider, p. 120, n, 1),
that "similar circles are to one an-
other as the squares of their diameters,"
from which it would appear that he
was not quite sure that all circles are
similar to one another,
1 Simplic. in Bretschn, pp, 103, 104.
2 ipevSoypcuprma, in Simplicius, i. e, a
false delineation, a fallacy founded on
a faulty diagram. The errors of Hip.
pocrates, Antiphon and Bryson, in
their attempts to square the circle are
referred to and contrasted with one an-
other by Aristotle, Soph. Elench. pp. 171
6. 172: Phys. 185, a. and also (as well
as by Simplicius) by the commenta-
tors Themistius and Joh, Philoponus
(Sehol. in Ar, ed. Brandis, p_. 827 b.
33, 211 6. 19, 30, 41, 212 a. 16).
Bretschneider (p, 122) thinks that Hip-
pocrates was too good a geometer
to make the mistake here attributed to
him and supposes that, in his second
step, he merely said "If the lune on
the side of a hexagon can be squared,
so can the circle."
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
167
assuming that the lunes in the second step are the same as
those in the first step, which they are not. The first step
squares the lune formed on the side of an inscribed square in a
circle: the second step deals with lunes formed on the sides of
an inscribed hexagon. Hippocrates seems to have felt this
difficulty, for he proceeded to examine other lunes which might
lead to a quadrature of the circle. Simplicius quotes from
Eudemus, with some additions of his own, these further
attempts. It appears that Hippocrates made some important
additions to his proposition that circles are to one another as
the squares of their diameters. He proved1 that similar seg-
ments of a circle are to one another as the squares of their
chords (/Satret?); that similar segments contain equal angles,
and that in a segment less than a semicircle the angle is
obtuse, in a segment greater than a semicircle the angle is
acute2. Using these propositions he squared a lune of which
the exterior arc is greater than a semicircle3 and again a lune
of which the exterior arc is less than a semicircle*. Lastly, he
squared a lune and a circle together in the following manner".
Describe two circles about a common centre K, and let the
square on the diameter of the exterior circle be six times the
square on that of the interior. Inscribe in the inner circle
a hexagon ABFAEZ and draw the radii KA, KB, KF and
1 Bretschneider, p. 110. Allman, 
on its greater side he described a seg-
Herm. m. p. 197. Hippocrates de- 
ment of a circle similar to those of
fined similar segments as those which 
which the three equal sides are the
contained the same quotum of their 
chords. The exterior arc of the lune so
respective circles, e.g. a semicircle is 
obtained is greater than a semicircle,
similar to a semicircle, a quadrant to 
4 Bretschneider, pp. 114—119, fig.
a quadrant. 
9. Allman, vn. pp. 199—201 (with
a He uses also the props. Euclid n. 
additions and corrections to Bret-
12 and 13, but it does not appear that 
Schneider). The proof and even the
he invented these. 
construction are too long and eompli-
8 Bretschneider, pp. Ill, 112, fig. 8. 
cated to be given here. The propo-
Allman, vn. pp. 198, 199. This luna is 
sition is remarkable as involving the
obtained by the following construction. 
consideration of a pentagon with a re-
Hippocrates draws a trapezium having 
entrant angle. This is described how-
three equal sides and the fourth such 
ever as" "a rectilineal figure composed
that the square on it is three times the 
of three triangles."
square on any other side. About this 
5 Bretschneider, pp. 119—121, fig.
trapezium he described a circle, and 
10. Allman, vn. pp. 201, 202.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

168
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
produce them to meet the circumference of the outer circle in
H, ©, I and join H0, 01, HI.
Then it is evident that H@, 01
are sides of a hexagon inscribed
in the outer circle. On HI de-
scribe a segment similar to that
cut off by H0. Then since the
square on HI is three times the
square on H©, the side of the
hexagon1, and the square on
H© is six times the square
on AB, it is evident that the
segment on HI must be equal to the sum of the segments of
the outer circle on H@, ©I, together with those cut off in the
inner circle by all the sides of the hexagon. If we add to both
equals the part of the triangle H©I lying over the segment HI,
then the triangle H©I is equal to the lune H©I together with
the segments of the inner circle cut off by the sides of the
hexagon: and if we add to both equals the hexagon itself, the
triangle together with the hexagon is equal to the lune H@I
together with the interior circle.
These demonstrations, though they do not lead to quadrature
of the circle, must have greatly stimulated the study of that
problem, since they indisputably prove that some curvilinear
figures are capable of quadrature2. They are given here almost
verbally as they are reported by Simplicius who found them
in Eudemus who must have had them from Hippocrates' own
1 The proof of this is inserted hy
Simplicius. Join IM. Then the square
of the diameter HM is equal to the
squares of HI, IM, and is also equal to
four times the square of IM or any
other side of the hexagon.
2 These performances of Hippocrates
are very neatly described by Hankel,
(p. 127) after Bretschneider. He says
that Hippocrates squared "lunes which
are contained by two arcs standing on
the same chord, the central angles of
the arcs being to one another as 1 : 2
or 1 : 3 or 2 : 3. To these surprising
discoveries he attached great hopes
and shewed that if in the same way
certain other lunes could be squared,
the quadrature of the circle would also
be solved." He adds in a note from
Clausen (Crelle's Jaurn. xxi. p. 375):
" It is interesting that the lunes squared
by Hippocrates are in fact the only
ones whose area can be constructed in
the elementary manner, with the aid
only of ruler and compasses."
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
169
work. They are interesting, apart from their intrinsic ability,
as being the oldest specimens of reasoned geometrical proofs in
existence. They appear to be in part taken verbally from
Hippocrates, for the matter is rather confused and full of
repetitions and the diction is in places archaic, witness such ex-
pressions as "the line on which AB is marked," "the point on
which K stands" (rj i<f> ov AB, TO it}> ov K). From this it seems
that letters, for the purpose of describing a geometrical figure,
were of recent introduction1. It is to be observed also that
Hippocrates does not, like Euclid, omit I from the geometrical
alphabet. Another fact of great interest, if Simplicius is really
citing Hippocrates, is this, that we have here the first use of
the word Bvvafii<; in the sense of 'square,' from which the
Latin translation potentia and the English 'power' have passed
into algebraical nomenclature2.
102. Beside the quadrature of the circle, Hippocrates was
busy also with the duplication-problem. He observed that in
the proportion a : x :: x :y::y: 
2a, since #2= ay and y* = lax
and x* = d?y\ then x* = 2a3x and of = 2a8. Consequently, the
problem of doubling a cube may be reduced to finding two
mean proportionals between one straight line and another twice
as long. 
The problem thus ceases to be one of solid and
becomes one of plane geometry3. 
The same ill-luck however
attended Hippocrates with this problem as with the other. He
merely, as Eratosthenes in his letter above-quoted remarks,
exchanged one difficulty for another. Nevertheless the dupli-
cation-problem was afterwards treated always in the form in
which Hippocrates stated it and thus stereometry, as Plato
complains4, went entirely out of fashion.
103. In connexion with this recasting of the duplication-
problem, Proclus (loc. cit.) ascribes to Hippocrates the invention
of a.Traya>yr), or geometrical reduction, which he defines as a
1 Cantor, p. 177, surmising that 
of. Aristotle, An. Priora, p. 69 a.
letters were used with diagrams in the 
2 See supra, p. 78 n.
Pythagorean schools, points out that the 
3 Proolus, ed. Friedlein, p. 212. E-
letters byiea (Health) seem to have 
ratosthenes in Eutooius uti sup. (ed.
been placed on the vertices of the 
Torelli, p. 144).
pentagram. For the Greek expressions 
4 See, for instance, Bep. vn. 528 E.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

170 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
transition from one problem or theorem to another, which being
solved or proved, the thing proposed necessarily follows1. The
reductio ad absurdum* is a particular and the commonest kind
of aira'/wyrj, in which the substituted contrary theorem is
disproved by analysis. The introduction of the analytical
method of proof is attributed to Plato but it must have been
constantly resorted to before3. The proposition Euclid xn. 2,
which is attributed to Hippocrates by Eudemus may therefore
have been proved as it stands by Hippocrates. This style of
proof was regularly used by the Greek geometers in their
" method of exhaustion," i.e. the method of exhausting, by
means of inscribed and circumscribed polygons, the area of a
curvilinear figure.
104. The process of exhaustion was introduced, for the pur-
poses of the quadrature-problem, about the time of Hippocrates,
by Antiphon and Bryson, Antiphon, a sophist who is said to
have often had disputes with Socrates4, inscribed in a circle a
square: on the sides of this he constructed in the segments
isosceles triangles, on the sides of these other isosceles triangles
and so on, exhausting the circle: or, according to Themistius,
he began with an equilateral triangle, on the sides of which he
constructed isosceles triangles and so on, Bryson of Heraclea,
a Pythagorean of the same time, attacked the quadrature of
the circle by inscribing a polygon and circumscribing another5.
He then assumed that the circle was an arithmetical mean
between the inscribed and the circumscribed polygons. Of
these two methods, the latter was more consonant with the
1 In Aristotle, Anal. Prior, n. p. 69 a. 
crates. 
See Bretsohneider, § 89, p.
c. 25 (27) dTrtrywp; is a syllogistic proof 
114, n. Eankel, p. 149.
which involves a probable assumption. 
* Diog. Laert. II. 46. Bretschneider,
The example chosen is as follows; 
p. 101 (quoting Simplicity uti supra),
A is capable of quadrature: Earecti- 
and p. 125 (quoting Themistius in
lineal figure: Z a circle. A11E is A, but 
Ar. Physica, ed. Brandis, p. 327).
that Z is E is one step short of cer- 
« Bretschneider. p. 126 (quoting Joh.
tainty, since we know only that a circle 
Philoponus in Ar. Anal. Pott. ed.
with a lune is equal to a teetilineal 
Brandis, p. 211), and p. 127 (quoting
figure. 
Alex. Aphrod. in A r. Soph. Elench. ed.
2 dwayayrj els Mvarov. 
Brandis, 306 b).
3 There are signs of it in Hippo-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETEY TO EUCLID. 
171
ancient, the former with modern notions. Upon Antiphon,
Simplicius remarks, and quotes Eudemus to the same effect,
that the inscribed polygon will never coincide with the circum-
ference of the circle, else a geometrical principle would be set
aside which lays down that magnitudes are divisible ad in-
finitum1. Antiphon, indeed, would seem to be the sole ex-
ception to the rule that the ancients never considered a circle
as a polygon with an infinite number of sides. "This principle"
says Chasles8, not adverting to Antiphon "has never appeared
in their writings : it would not have suited the rigour of their
demonstrations. It was the moderns3 who introduced it into
geometry and simplified thereby the ancient demonstrations.
This happy idea was the passage from the method of exhaustion
to the infinitesimal method."
105. It being admitted that Antiphon and Bryson in-
troduced the practice of exhaustion and that Hippocrates shows
signs of using analysis in geometry, the question arises whether
he did in fact prove Euclid xii. 2. as it stands. If he did, then
he invented that rigorous mode of proof, called "the method of
exhaustion," which is generally attributed to Eudoxus. 
This
method may be considered as contained in two propositions*,
as follows.
(1) If A and B be two magnitudes of the same kind, of
which A is the greater, and there be taken from A more than
its half (or any other fraction) and from the remainder more
than its half (or any other fraction) and so on, the ultimate
remainder will be less than B. (This is the prop. Eucl. x. 1.
now prefixed as a Lemma to the 12th Book.)
(2) Let there be two magnitudes P and Q, both of the
same kind and let a succession of magnitudes Xv X2, X3 etc.
1 Bretsckneider, p. 102. This is the 
s Kepler (in his Nova Stereometria
proposition which Zeno denied and 
Doliorum) and Descartes. Of. Hallam,
which Aristotle is always supporting. 
Hist, of Lit. Pt. in. c. 8, sees. 9, 14.
See especially his treatise irepl ar&iiur 
* See De Morgan's article ' Geometry
ypanii&v, shewing that there are no in- 
of the Greeks' in the Penny Cyclop,
divisible lines, and compare Hankel, 
Cantor, pp. 233, 234, Hankel, pp.
pp. 117—120. 
122—124.
a Aper$u, p. 16.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

172 
GUEEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
be each nearer and nearer to P, so that any one Xr, shall differ
from P less than half as much as its predecessor differed. Let
Yv F2, Y3 etc. be a succession of magnitudes similarly related
to Q, and let the ratios Xl : Yt, Xa: F2, etc. be all the same
with each other and the same as A : B. Then P : Q :: A : B.
(Suppose Xv X2 etc. all less than P and Ylt Y2 etc. less than Q.)
Now if -4 : B is not P : Q, then .4 is to B as P is to some other
quantity 8, greater or less than Q. Take S less than Q. Then
by the hypothesis and prop. i. we can find one of the series
Yv F2 (say Yo) which is nearer to Q than 8 is, and is therefore
greater than 8. Then, since Xn : Yn :: A : B :: P : 8, it follows
that Xn : P :: Yn : A But Xu is less than P, therefore Yn is
less than 8. But Yj, is also greater than 8, which is absurd.
In like manner, it may be proved that, if S be taken greater
than Q, then the proportion A : B :: P : 8 is an absurdity.
Therefore A : B:: P : Q. (Vide Euclid xil. 2.)
106. The discussion of the question whether Hippocrates
or Eudoxus was the author of this method proceeds on
the following lines. The opening lemma was the mathe-
maticians' evasion of the difficulty which Zeno had found in
infinite division. They avoided the expression "infinitely small
magnitudes" by substituting for it "magnitudes as small as we
please." Now Archimedes1 says that this lemma (in a different
form) was used by "former geometers" for the theorem Eucl.
xn. 2. Eudemus attributes this theorem to Hippocrates and
there is in fact no other way of proving it save by the method
of exhaustion, which Euclid adopts. Dr Allman2 replies that
Archimedes mentions this theorem not with particular emphasis
but along with three others, two of which were beyond question
proved by Eudoxus", who is said also to be the author of the
theory of proportion contained in Euclid v. He does not,
however, suggest any proof of the theorem which Hippocrates
might possibly have arrived at without using the lemma.
Here Cantor4 is more satisfactory, for he points out that the
Egyptians had long ago adopted a fixed arithmetical ratio
1 Pref. to Quadr. Parab. (Torelli's 
» Archim. Pref. to Sph. et Cyl.
ed. p. 18). Hankel, p. 120 sqq. 
Torelli's ed. p. 64.
2 Hermathena vn. pp. 222—223. 
4 p. 178.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
173
between a circle and the square of its diameter and Hippocrates
may have known this through the Pythagoreans. It is probable,
moreover, as will be seen presently, that Plato first raised ana-
lysis to the dignity of a legitimate geometrical method. The
evidence, therefore, inclines to the opinion that the method of
exhaustion is to be ascribed not to Hippocrates, but to Eudoxus,
who lived nearly a century later, but we know, in truth, so little
about the Greek geometry of the period that no man is entitled
to hold this opinion very confidently.
(e.) The Academy.
107. Plato was born of wealthy and distinguished paren-
tage, at Athens in 429 B.C. the year of the great plague. He
was a pupil of Socrates, who was executed 399 B.C., but he did
not derive from this teacher his enthusiasm for mathematics,
since Socrates was of opinion that it was no use learning more
geometry or astronomy than would suffice for daily wants, such
as to measure a field or tell the time of day1. But Plato, after
the death of Socrates, went away from Athens and consorted in
many places with Pythagoreans who no doubt indoctrinated him
with a passion for their favourite science. He went certainly
to Egypt, also to Cyrene where he studied with Theodoras, and
lastly to Magna Graecia and Sicily (in B.C. 389) where he became
a close friend of Archytas and Timseus of Locri. He returned
to Athens and formed about himself a school of students who
heard his discourses in the grove of the Academia, a suburban
gymnasium. He died, at the age of 81, in 348 B.C.
The physical philosophy of Plato, being partly founded on
the Pythagorean, is partly, like the latter, an attempt to find in
arithmetic and geometry the key to the universe. He held
that God was a great geometer2 and therefore made a know-
ledge of geometry an indispensable preliminary to the study of
philosophy. It is said that he inscribed over his porch "Let
1 Xenophon, Memorab. iv. 7. Diog. 
does not occur in any extant work of
Laert. n. 32. 
Plato's, but he does say {Rep. 527 B)
2 According to Plutarch, Quaest. 
that geometry, rightly treated, is the
Conv. VIII. 2, Hwt IlXdrwc (\cye rttv 
knowledge of the eternal.
Oebv del yeoi^erpetv; The expression
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

174
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
none that is ignorant of geometry enter my doors"1 and Xeno-
crates also, who after Speusippus succeeded to the professorial
chair, so to say, of the Academy, is reported to have turned
away an applicant for admission who knew no geometry, saying
"Depart, for thou hast not the grip of philosophy."8 
But
it was not really with a view to physical speculation that Plato
thus glorified geometry. He was interested, no doubt, in the
inanimate world but he was interested far more in man. The
nature and laws of thought and the rules of conduct were his
especial subject, and he valued geometry mainly as a means of
education in right seeing and thinking and in the conception of
imaginary processes. Hence it was that, as the Eudemian
summary says, "he filled his writings with mathematical dis-
courses, and exhibited on every occasion the remarkable con-
nexion between mathematics and philosophy." This statement
may be illustrated by two interesting passages in the Meno, a
dialogue on Virtue which Socrates is supposed to hold with
Meno, a pupil of the sophist Gorgias. In the first of these
passages3, Socrates has just suggested that the knowledge
which we seem to have by intuition, is really recollected from
a former state of existence, that in fact "our birth is but a
sleep and a forgetting." 
In illus-
tration of this theory, he calls up
one of Meno's slaves and draws
before him, by several steps, the
accompanying figure, a square of
4 feet. The boy apprehends the
steps perfectly well and correctly
answers Socrates' questions*, until
at length Socrates, having induced
him to say that the square obliquely
placed is double of the square of 2 feet with which the diagram
1 jxr]Sels iyewnirpriTO! elalra pov TTJV
oriyt)*. 
Tzetzes. Chil. vm. 972.
2 iropeiov, \o(34s yd.p oix lxeLS 
T ? '
</>i.\o<ro<t>las. Diog. Laert. iv. 10.
3 Meno, 82 B—85 B.
* The conversation begins as follows.
Socr. 'Tell me, boy, do you recognise
this for a square?' Boy, 'Yes.' 
Socr.
'Is not it a sqnare that has all these
four lines equals?' Boy, 'Of course.'
Socr. 'Andthese cross-lines equal too.'
Boy, 'Yes,' etc. etc
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
175
was commenced, elicits the incorrect answer that the side of the
oblique square is twice 2 feet. Upon this Socrates retraces his
steps and, by judicious questions, leads the boy on to say that the
side of the oblique square is more than 2 and less than 4 and
yet is not 3 feet 
Here it is obvious that Plato is interested
not in the Pythagorean theorem or incommensurable lines, but
in the chain of reasoning. Similarly, a little later in the
dialogue1 Meno asks Socrates whether virtue may be imparted
by teaching. To this Socrates replies "Let me argue this upon
hypothesis. A geometer, if he were asked 'Can this area (i.e.
the square of 2 feet) be inscribed in this circle2?' might say 'I
don't know, but I think I can suggest a useful hypothesis. If
this area is such that, when applied to the given diameter, it is
deficient (eWetVet) by an area equal to itself, then one con-
sequence follows, but if this be impossible, then another8.' So
in the case of virtue, we must assume virtue to be or not to be
(ex hypothesi) one of some class of goods etc." Here also it is
the logical procedure and not the problem which is intended to
be observed. The reader therefore is prepared to find, as the
fact is, that Plato was rather a maker of mathematicians than
himself distinguished for original discoveries and that his con-
tributions to geometry are rather improvements in its method
than additions to its matter. 
It was he who turned the
instinctive logic of the earlier geometers into a method to be
used consciously and without misgiving4. With him, apparently,
begin those careful definitions of geometrical terms, that distinct
1 Mem, 86 D—87 A. 
A square of 2 ft. applied to a line of
2 Socratea may, early in the dialogue 
4 ft. is deficient by a square of 2 ft.
(73 E), have drawn a circle on the 
(gee gUpra p. 84 n.) This explanation
ground. 
seems to be Benecke's (Veber die Geom.
8 The text of this passage (which is 
Hypoth. in Plato's Menon, 1867). Han-
absurdly translated by Jowett) is ex- 
kel (p. 134 n.) says that the text is
tremely obscure, but it seems certainly 
unnecessarily difficult for describing
to refer to the previous figure. A 
s 0 simple a fact, but I am inclined to
square of 2 ft. is there shown to be 
think that Plato was fond of 'showing
equal to an isosceles right-angled tri- 
off' his mathematics. 
The famous
angle of which the base is 4 ft. If the 
'Nuptial number' in Rep. 546 B.C. is
diameter of the given circle is 4 ft. 
an instance in point.
a triangle equal to the given square of 
* See a brilliant chapter of Hankel,
2 feet can certainly be inscribed in it. 
pp. 127—150.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

176 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
statement of postulates and axioms, .which Euclid has adopted.
The Pythagorean so-called definitions, such as "A point is
unity in position," are not explanations of terms but statements
of a philosophical theory. But the Academics, as bepame the
pupils of Socrates, desired explicit determination of the mean-
ings of words. Thus Aristotle1 says that Plato objected to
calling a point a 'geometrical fiction' (Boyfia), and defined it
as 'the beginning of a straight line' or 'an indivisible line.'
Aristotle gives also as definitions customary in his time the
following: 'the point, the line, the surface are respectively the
boundaries of the line, the surface and the solid:' 'a line is
length without breadth:' 'a straight line is one of which the
middle point covers both ends' (the eye being placed at either
end of the line): the surface arises from 'the broad and the
narrow:' 'a solid is that which has three dimensions2.' So
also Aristotle refers to 'mathematical axioms' and often quotes
one of them, viz. 'If equals be taken from equals the remain-
ders are equal3.' Although probably not all of these definitions
and axioms are due to Plato himself, yet one great invention in
geometrical methods is expressly attributed to him. 
Both
Proclus (ed. Friedlein p. 211) and Diogenes Laertius (ill. 24)
state that Plato invented the method of proof by analysis4. It
is not, indeed, to be supposed from this that analysis was new
to Greek geometers for Hippocrates uses it, as was above-stated,
and most of the early geometers probably were led, by the
contemplation of constructions, to the invention of theorems,
and were thus using analysis without knowing it. But Plato
may very well have introduced analysis as a legitimate method
1 Metaphys. I. 9. 992, a. 20. 
(with the addition y TUV TOIOVTWV d:\Xa
2 The passages here quoted are in 
'or any such axioms'). Hankel, p.
order Aristotle, Top. vi. 141 b. 19, 
136 nn.
143 b. 12, 148 6. 29, Metaphys. i. 9, 
i Both state also that he "gave it
932 a. 12: Top. vi. 5, 142 6. 24, obs. 
to Leodamas of Thasos, which pro-
Aristotle calls a point tmyiiii, the later 
bably means that Plato orally described
word being aiuiaon: and a surface iirt- 
the method to Leodamas and the latter
weSor, later iirc<paveia, the former word 
wrote or lectured upon it, describing it
being later appropriated to 'plane.' 
as Plato's but giving his own geo-
3 Metaphys. iv. 3, 1005 a. 20, xi. 4, 
metrical illustrations.
10C1 b. 17: An. Post. i. 11, 77 a. 31
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
177
in geometry to be consciously employed, may have given rules
for its conduct and pointed out under what conditions it was
satisfactory or not so.
108. The oldest definition of Analysis as opposed to
Synthesis is that appended to Euclid xin. 5. It was possibly
framed by Eudoxus \ It states that " Analysis is the obtaining
of the thing sought by assuming it and so reasoning up to an
admitted truth : synthesis is the obtaining of the thing sought
by reasoning up to the inference and proof of it." In other
words, the synthetic proof proceeds by shewing that certain
admitted truths involve the proposed new truth: the analytic
proof proceeds by shewing that the proposed new truth involves
certain admitted truths. 
An analytic proof begins by an
assumption, upon which a synthetic reasoning is founded. The
Greeks distinguished theoretic from problematic analysis. A
theoretic analysis is of the following kind. To prove that A is
B, assume first that A is B. If so, then, since B is G and C is
D and D is E, therefore A is E. If this be a known falsity2, A
is not B. But if this be a known truth and all the inter-
mediate propositions be convertible, then the reverse process,
A is E, E is D, D is C, G is B, therefore A is B, constitutes a
synthetic proof of the original theorem. Problematic analysis
is applied in cases where it is proposed to construct a figure
which shall satisfy a given condition. Hence the process con-
sists in constructing a figure which is assumed to satisfy the
given condition. The problem is then converted into some
theorem which is involved in the condition and which is proved
synthetically, and the steps of this synthetic proof taken
1 Bretsohneider, p. 168. Pappus 
consequences jusqu'a ce quel'on recon-
(Math. Coll. VII. ed. Hultsch, p. 635) has 
naisse comme vraie la chose cherch^e.
Euclid's definition. 
Chasles (p. 5), 
Au contraire la synthese se definit:
takes a definition from Vieta, Isagoge 
Partir d'une chose donniie pour arriver
in ArtemAnalyticen,adinit. "Ilesten 
de consequences en consequences a
mathematiques une mgthode pour la 
trouver une chose cherchee." See also
recherche de la verite que Platon passe 
a note in Todhunter's Euclid. App.
pouravoirinventee,queTheonanommee 
§§ 35 sqq.
analyse et qu'il definit ainsi: Eegarder 
2 Thus the reductio ad absurdum is a
la chose cherchSe comme si elle etait 
kind of theoretic analysis. This is the
dojinee et marcher de consequences en 
only analysis which Euclid admits.
G. G. M. 
12
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

178 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
backwards are a synthetic solution of the problem. Suppose
there is only one condition : e.g. To describe a triangle having
each of the angles at the base double of the third angle. Draw
an isosceles triangle ABC and assume that
the base angles are each double of the ver-
tical angle. An addition must be made to the
figure. Bisect the angle A GB by the straight
line GD. There thus arises a theorem that
AB is cut, at D, in extreme and mean ratio,
and that BG—AD, from which a synthesis
(Eucl. iv. 10) is obtained. (It will be seen
that the whole aim of problematic analysis is -B 
^
to find a synthetic solution of the problem, and therefore the
ancient geometers never omitted to add the synthetic solution
so found.) If there are more conditions than one, the procedure
is just the same. A figure is drawn which is assumed to
satisfy all the conditions, but the subsequent analysis is directed
to shewing what each condition, in turn, involves.
A very good authentic example of this more complicated
analysis is given by Hankel (p. 143) from Pappus1. The pro-
blem is: "Given the position of a circle ABC and of two
points D, E, outside it, it is required to draw from D, E the
straight lines DB, EB cutting the circle in B and produced to
A, G, so that AG shall be parallel to DE." 
The analysis is
as follows. "Let the figure be drawn
and also the tangent FA. 
Then,
since AG is parallel to DE, the angle
at C is equal to the angle GDE. It
is also equal to the angle FAE (Euclid
III. 32). Therefore the angle FAE
is equal to the angle GDE, and the ^- 
g— „
points ABDF lie on the circum-
ference of a circle, and the rectangle AE, EB is equal to
the rectangle FE, ED. But the rectangle AE, EB is given",
because it is equal to the square of the tangent; therefore
1 Coll. Math. VII. prop. 105. 
theorems Btated in an abridged form,
3 SeSofUvov, datum, in Eaolid's sense. 
e. g. Prop. 92 (95 in Simson's ed.) is
Euclid's Data are a collection 
of 
"If a straight line be drawn from a
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
179
the rectangle FE, ED is given, and since ED is given, so also
is FE, both in length and in position. And since FA is a
tangent to the given circle and F is given, so also A is given.
And since A is given, so also is AE and the point B." Then
follows the synthesis. "Join ED and produce it to F, so that the
rectangle ED, EF is equal to the square of the tangent. From
F draw the tangent FA and join AE" etc. The reader will
see that here the analysis is directed to two facts involved in
the conditions, the condition that AE cuts the circle in B,
involves the fact that the rectangle AE. EB, wherever A may
be, is equal to a certain square which can be found. The con-
dition that AC must be parallel to ED, involves the further
fact that the rectangle AE , EB is equal to the rectangle under
ED and EF, where F is that point in which ED produced
meets the tangent at A. 
The addition of a synthetic solution
is made ex majori cautela, lest a condition should not have been
examined in the analysis or lest a proposition reached in the
analysis should not be convertible (e.g. all A may be B, but not
all B need be A). Further, the problem may be under some
conditions impossible, and this fact is likely to be overlooked in
the analysis. Hence, to the synthetic solution, the Greeks
appended, if necessary, a diorismus (determinatio) or statement
of the conditions in which the given problem is or is not
soluble. The Eudemian summary ascribes the invention of the
diorismus to Leon the Platonist, but it is observable that the
passage above quoted from the Meno (p. 175) contains a partial
diorismus which is undoubtedly Plato's. It is probable therefore
that the whole systematization of analysis is due to Plato.
"The conjunction of philosophical and mathematical pro-
ductivity" says Hankel, "such as we find, beside Plato, only
in Pythagoras, Descartes and Leibnitz, has always borne the
finest fruits for mathematics. To the first we owe scientific
mathematics in general. Plato discovered the analytic method,
given point without a circle given in 
sense of the word "given" is deter-
position, the rectangle contained by 
mined by Def. i. " Spaces, lines, and
the segments betwixt the point and the 
angles are said to be given in magni-
circnmference of the circle is given." 
tude when equals to them can be
This is an abridgement of in. 36. One 
found."
12—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

180
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
through which mathematics were raised above the standpoint
of the Elements; Descartes created analytical geometry; our own
celebrated countryman (Leibnitz) the infinitesimal calculus—
and these are the four greatest steps in the development of
mathematics." It must be admitted, however, that the intro-
duction of analysis is just the sort of service which might be
ascribed, by a vague exaggeration, to a philosopher who certainly
had a great influence on mathematics but left no mathematical
work.
109. The one respectable solution which is attributed to
Plato seems to have been obtained through analysis in the first
instance. It will be remembered that Hippocrates had recast
the duplication-problem into one of plane geometry, to find
two mean proportionals to two straight lines. Let a, b be the
given straight lines, x and y the mean proportionals, so that
a:x::x:y::y:b. 
Take CA=a: CX=x: 
GY=y: 
CB = b
B
C
and place these lines in a right-angled cross about the common
extremity C. Then the triangles AGX, XCY and YGB are
similar, and the angles AXY, XYB 
are both right-angles
(Euclid VI. 8 and Cor.). Hence a synthetic solution would
be obtained if a straight line XY could be so placed between
two arms of the cross that the perpendiculars to it at the points
X and Y would pass through A and B respectively. For this
purpose Plato1 is said to have invented a little apparatus con-
sisting of" a rectangular frame, one side of which would slide up
1 Eutooius in Torelli, p. 135. Han-
kel, pp. 154, 155. Bretschneider, pp.
141—143. Cantor, p. 195.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
181
and down so as to diminish or enlarge the rectangle at pleasure.
On the other hand, Plutarch relates1 that Plato blamed Archytas
and Eudoxus and Menaechmus for using such instruments for
the purpose of solving the duplication-problem, and said that
the good of geometry was spoilt and destroyed thereby, for it
was reduced again to the world of sense and prevented from
soaring among the unseen and incorporeal figures. Elsewhere"
Plutarch repeats the same story, and adds that, owing to this
remonstrance of Plato, mechanics were wholly dissociated from
geometry and reduced to a mere department of strategy. These
statements of Plutarch are much more likely to be true than
the other, which rests on the authority of Eutocius, and it may
be said therefore that to Plato we owe the strict limitation
of geometrical instruments to the ruler and compasses. It
will be remembered also that Plato deplored the decay of
stereometry, and we shall find this department of geometry
reopened with great zeal by Plato's immediate pupils. In
short, however we discount the evidence, it is plain that Plato
was almost as important as Pythagoras himself to the advance
of Greek geometry.
110. It is desirable for two or three reasons to insert here
the solution of the duplication-problem which is attributed to
the Pythagorean Archytas. It could hardly be given before,
because it solves the problem in that form in which Hippocrates
recast it. Further, it is the kind of solution which Plato blames
and it involves some stereometrical considerations, which Plato
is thought to have revived. It will serve also to remind us
that, side by side with the Athenian mathematical school, there
was still the older Pythagorean at Tarentum, to which Plato
was probably under very great obligations. The solution of
Archytas is reported by Eutocius3 from Eudemus. It is as
1 Quaest. Conv. vm. 9, 2, o. 1. Bret- 
gests an analysis by which Archytas
Schneider, p. 143. 
may have been led to his solution. The
2 Vita Mareelli, e. 14, § 5. 
figure 
on the next page is awkward
3 In Torelli, p. 143. The form given 
and defective, for MI and KA' should
in the text is Cantor's (p. 196), but is 
be joined, but it serves its purpose
only very slightly abridged from the 
sufficiently well and is a little better
original. The latter gives the synthe- 
than Cantor's.
sis only. Bretschneider, p. 152, sug-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

182
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
follows. Let AA, AB be the two straight lines, between which
two mean proportionals are required, and of these let AA be
the greater. Describe a semicircle on AA as diameter, and let
AB be a chord of this semicircle. Describe on AA, in the per-
pendicular plane, another semicircle which can be moved round
from A towards B, the extremity of the diameter A remaining
fixed. 
This revolving semicircle will describe a curve on a
half-cylinder supposed to stand on ABA. Draw the tangent at
A and produce AB to meet it in II. The triangle AAII turning
about AA as axis, produces a cone, which penetrated the half-
cylinder and cuts the curve thereon in the point K. This point
K being on the half-cylinder, the line KI drawn from it perpen-
dicular to the plane of the semicircle ABA meets the circum-
ference of that semicircle in I. While ATI is describing this
cone, the point B moves through a circle, BMZ, which is per-
pendicular to the circle ABAZ of which ABA is half. Since AKA'
is perpendicular to the same plane, the line M© (which is the
line of section of BMZ and AKA') is also perpendicular to it,
and is likewise perpendicular to the line BZ, which is the line of
section of the plane BMZ with the plane ABAZ. Then since
BMZ is a semicircle and BZ its diameter, M©2 = B© . ©Z. But
B© . ©Z = A© . ©I (BZ and AI being two chords cutting one
another in ©). Therefore M©2 = A© . ©I. Therefore the angle
AMI is a right angle and is equal to AKA' (which is an angle in
a semicircle), and therefore MI is parallel to KA'. Therefore the
triangles A'AK, IAM, KAI are similar to one another, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GBEEK GEOMETBY TO EUCLID. 
183
AM:AI::AI:AK::AK:A'A. 
Take AM = AB=a, and A'A
= AA = b, and we then get two middle proportionals between a
and b. It will be seen that this solution uses Euclid III. 18 and
35, and XI. 19, and discloses also very clear notions on the origin
of cylinders and cones, the section of a surface by a surface and
the curves thence arising. It must be remembered however that
Archytas probably used a mechanical apparatus in the solution
{supra, pp. 158, 181).
111. It was said above that Plato made many mathema-
ticians, and the observation is fully borne out by the discoveries
which are attributed to his immediate pupils. Of Leodamas
of Thasos, for whom Plato invented the method of analysis,
nothing more is known, save what the Eudemian summary says
of him, viz. that he and Archytas and Theaetetus greatly
extended mathematical inquiries, and improved them into a
more scientific system. This Theaetetus is the same who gives
a name to one of Plato's dialogues and who was chiefly occupied
with the study of incommensurables. Suidas (s. v.) attributes
to him a treatise on the five regular solids, but to what effect
this treatise was is not known. Of Neocleides and his pupil
Leon also, we know no more than the Eudemian summary tells
us, in which the only important fact is that Leon wrote an
improved ' Elements' and treated particularly of diorismus.
112. But Eudoxus, who is mentioned next, was one of
the most brilliant mathematicians of antiquity. He was born
about B. c. 408 in Cnidus, was a pupil of Archytas, and sub-
sequently, for a few months, of Plato. He then went to Egypt
(with Plato, according to Strabo), thence to Cyzicus, where
he founded a school, and came from Cyzicus with his pupils
to Athens, where he met Plato again not on very friendly
terms. He returned finally to Cnidus and died there at the
age of 53 (B. C. 355).1 He is described by Diogenes Laertius
as astronomer, physician and legislator, as well as geometer.
In the first capacity he is said by Aristotle2 to have made
a kind of orrery, and various discoveries are attributed to
1 Diogenes Laert. vm. 86—90. Bret- 
2 Metaphys. vn. o. 8. See Sohia-
sohneider, pp. 163—164. 
Cantor, pp. 
parelli (trans. Horn) in Suppl. 
to
205, 206. 
Zeitschr. Math. Phys. vol. xxn.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

184 
GREEK GEOMh/TRY TO EUCLID.
him. He wrote also a work on practical astronomy, <$>cuv6fieva,
on which the extant poem of Aratus is founded1. The
Eudemian summary states that he added three kinds of
proportion to those introduced by Pythagoras, and increased
by the analytical method the learning, begun by Plato, on the
subject of the section. This must mean the so-called ' Golden
Section,' the cutting of a line in extreme and mean ratio2,
and the Eudemian summary is very well explained by supposing
that Eudoxus was in fact the author of the first five propositions
of Euclid XIII., which deals with the regular solids (see below
p. 197n). A scholiast on Euclid, thought to be Proclus3, says
further that Eudoxus invented practically the whole of
Euclid's Fifth 
Book. 
Beside this work in proportion,
Archimedes expressly says (in the passages above cited upon
which the method of exhaustion is attributed to Hippocrates)
that Eudoxus proved by means of the Lemma, Euclid x. (xn),
1, the propositions that every pyramid is a third of a prism on
the same base and with the same altitude (Euclid xn. 7. Cor. i.),
and that every cone is the third part of a cylinder on the same
base and with the same altitude (Eucl. xn. 10). 
It is on the
strength of this perfectly clear evidence that Eudoxus is
supposed to have invented the method of exhaustion. Lastly,
Eudoxus is reported4 to have invented a curve which he
called iTnroiriSrj, or 'horse-fetter,' and which resembled those
hobbles which Xenophon describes as used in the riding-school.
They were of the form
Proclus calls this curve a ' spiral,' and has some interesting
remarks on its origin6. The word crrreipa means a so-called
1 Aratus is criticised by Hipparchus, 
3 Knoche, Untersuch. iiber Schol. des
•who preserves some of the original 
Proclus, pp. 10—13.
statements of Eudoxus. 
These are 
4 Simplicius, in Ar. Be Coelo, ed.
criticised, as usual, with the utmost 
Brandis, p. 500, 10.
contempt by Delambre. 
Astron. An- 
5 Cantor pp. 209, 210, quoting Schia-
cienne, Vol. i. p. 107. 
parelli, uti sup. section v. Proclus, ed
2 The possible meanings are dis- 
Friedlein, pp. 112, 119, 127, 128. He-
cussed by Bretschneider, pp. 167—168. 
ron Alexandrinus, ed. Hultsch, p. 27,
Cantor, p. 208. 
def. 98.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK- GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
185
' tore,' a ring-shaped solid of revolution which is produced
by the revolution of a circle'about a straight line which lies
in the same plane with but does not cut the circle1. If this
solid be cut by a plane, there arises a "spiral" line, which
niay assume three forms, according as the cutting plane is
more or less near the axis. If it is further from the axis than
the centre of the circle, we get an oval2: if nearer, we get a
curve "narrower in the middle and broader at the ends; but if
the plane is still nearer to the axis, so that it
touches the tore at an inner point, which is in
fact the double-point of the curve, we get the
<7r7ro7reS^." Eudoxus somehow used this curve f 
j
in his description of planetary motions, but 
' 
"
nothing more is known of his treatment of it.
Eutocius, however, in the passage so often quoted
on the duplication-problem, says that Eudoxus used certain
curves (ica/nrvXai ypaftfial) for his solution of this problem, but
he disdains to give this solution, because it had nothing to do
with these curves after all and contained an absurd mistake in
proportion. Eratosthenes, however, whose letter on the subject
Eutocius has himself previously quoted, mentions Eudoxus in
the same breath with Archytas, and calls him, in an epigram
appended to the letter, " godlike." The probability, therefore,
is that Eutocius was himself mistaken.
113. Amyclas of Heraclea, a Platonist, is unknown save
from the Eudemian summary, but Menaechmus, " a pupil of
Eudoxus and a contemporary of Plato," is well known to fame.
It was he who invented the geometry of the conic sections',
which, after him, were sometimes called "the Menaechmian
triads." Democritus, indeed, had cut a cone by a plane parallel to
the base (supra, p. 159n.) but it was Menaechmus who took three
kinds of right cones, the "right-angled," "acute-angled" and
" obtuse-angled" (as Geminus describes them in the passage
1 An anchor ring is the common ex- 
3 See the often-quoted letter of Era-
ample of this solid. 
tosthenes in Eutocius, ed. Torelli, p.
2 Proclus (p. 112) describes this as 
146, and Proclus, ed. Friedlein, p. Ill,
a " irapa/xq/ojs, broad in the middle 
(citing Geminus as well as Erato*
and narrow at the ends." 
sthenes).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

186
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
quoted above, p. 137) and cutting these by planes at right-angles
to one of their sides, exposed the parabola, ellipse and
hyperbola1, which he called the section of the right-angled,
acute-angled and obtuse-angled cone respectively. He seems,
however, not to have regarded these curves always in the cone
itself, but to have used some mechanical apparatus for drawing
them*. How far he proceeded in the geometry of conies can be
guessed only from two very neat solutions of the duplication
problem, which are attributed to him by Eutocius8. Menaech-
mus observed that if a : x :: a; : y :: y : b, then ay = a?, y% = bx.
If through the point 0 there be described two parabolas, one
1 These names were invented not by
Menaechmus tut by Apollonius of
Perga, a century later. That Menaech-
mus used the names " section of right-
angled cone " etc. is attested by Pappus,
VII. (ed. Hultsch), p. 672.
3 Compare Eratosthenes again in
Eutoeius, ed. Torelli, p. 144, and the
reproach of Plato against Menaechmus.
Eutocius (a little earlier) says that his
own master, Isodorus of Miletus, had
invented a compass (SIO/STPTJS) for draw-
ing parabolas. Bretschneider (p. 170),
says that a modern geometer would
suppose that the notion of loci pre-
ceded the conic sections, but that in
fact the ancients always regarded
conies in the cone itself: the foci of
the ellipse and hyperbola are only just
mentioned by Apollonius and charac-
terised by two of their simplest pro-
perties: the focus of the parabola is
not mentioned at all. But Mr Taylor
(Ancient and Modern Conies, pp. xxxi
—XXXIII. and XLIII.) suggests that the
conic sections may have been discover-
ed as plane loci in investigations of the
duplication problem. In support of
this he urges that Menaechmus used a
machine for drawing conies, that in
his solutions of the duplication pro-
blem he uses only the parabola and
hyperbola, and that the ellipse, the
most obvious of the sections, is treated
last by Apollonius. He admits, how-
ever, that the conception of a conic as
a plane locus was immediately lost.
3 Archimed. ed. Torelli, p. 141. Bret-
schneider, pp. 159—161. Cantor, pp.
198, 199. Hankel, p. 155. Eutocius
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEEEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
187
with parameter a and axis AG, the other with parameter b and
axis BG, they will cut one another in a point P of which the
co-ordinates GX, CFare the desired mean proportionals, x and y.
Secondly, since xy = ab, the same point P may be found as
the point of section between one of these parabolas and a
hyperbola, of which OX and GY are asymptotes, subject to the
condition that the rectangle contained by the straight lines
drawn from any point on the hyperbola parallel to one
asymptote and meeting the other, shall be equal to ab. The
learning of Menaechmus, indicated by these solutions, is very
considerable, and it is not surprising to find that before
the century was out Aristaeus "the elder"1 (about B.C. 320)
wrote an " Elements of Conic Sections" in five books, which,
according to Pappus, Euclid highly approved1. Menaechmus is
said to have been the teacher of Alexander the Great, who
asked him whether he could not make his instructions some-
what shorter. To this Menaechmus replied in the famous
words, " There is no royal road to geometry2." The brother of
Menaechmus, Dinostratus, was also a great geometer. It was
he who as stated above (p. 163) used the quadratrix of Hippias
for the solution both of the trisection and the duplication
problems. Nothing more than this, however, is known of him,
gives both analysis and synthesis. The 
x^^ol). 
Hankel, p. 152. Cantor, p.
form in the text is Hankel's, and con- 
214, quoting Pappus uti sup. pp. 662,
tains of course (as indeed does that 
672. Pappus seems to say that Aris-
of Eutocius) technical terms which 
taeus wrote two books, one on Conies,
Menaechmus knew nothing of. 
It 
the other on Solid Loci. 
Cantor (loc.
gives the solutions also in a different 
cit.) suggests that the second was a
order from Eutocius. 
series of solutions in which the conic
1 Pappus VII. Praef. (ed. Hultsch), 
sections were used. Viviani restored it
pp. 672, 676. 
This Aristaeus wrote 
conjecturally (pub. 1701). Chasles, p.
also on the regular solids. Cantor, p. 
In. Cantor (p. 197) says that the word
212. 
Curves of all kinds were at this 
riiros first occurs, in its geometrical
time called T6TOI &e|o5»co£ or "running 
sense, in Eutocius'" report of Archytas
loci." 
The straight line and circle 
on duplication, but this is erroneous,
were called "plane loci" (rbvoi. M- 
The word T6TOS there means only
ireSoi) the conio sections "solid loci" 
"place."
(aTepeo!) and all other curves beside 
3 Bretschneider, pp. 162—163. Sto-
these were called "linear loci" (ypa/j.- 
baeus Florileg. ed. Meineke, iv. p.
fuKol) or, from the manner of their 
205. The same story, however, is told
construction, "mechanical loci" (MI?- 
of Euclid and King Ptolemy.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

188 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
save what the Eudemian summary relates, viz. that he and
Menaechmus and Amyclas " made the whole of geometry yet
more perfect." After these names the same catalogue gives
others, for which also it is the sole authority. Theudius of
Magnesia wrote yet another and further improved ' Elements':
he and Cyzicenus of Athens were Platonists, like Amyclas.
Hermotimus of Colophon added yet more to the Elements and
wrote on Loci. Philippus of Mende, another Platonist, tried to
find in geometry illustrations of the Academic philosophy.
This name finally brings the history of geometry down to the
time of Eudemus1 himself, and with it the Eudemian summary
closes. The next great name in Greek geometry is Euclid
but with him the scene is shifted and mathematics desert
Athens for Alexandria.
114. The Athenian school, however, should not be left,
without a word on that great philosopher who, for nearly 2000
years, was in all subjects "the master of those who know."
Aristotle (B.C. 384—322) was not, any more than Plato, a
professed mathematician, but, like Plato, he was learned in the
mathematics of his day and was above all things interested in
correct reasoning on every subject. The man who systematized
deductive logic must be admitted to have performed a great
service to geometry. But Aristotle's benefits are not confined
to this. 
He is the author or the improver of many of the most
difficult geometrical definitions {vide supra, p. Vjlann). One of
these, which has not yet been quoted, may be here given. He
defined continuity as follows. 
" A thing is continuous (crwe;£e?)
when of any two successive parts the limits, at which they
touch, are one and the same, and are, as the word implies, held
together2." Hence, he said in answer to Zeno, motion is not, like
counting, a discrete operation, a series of jerks: the moved
thing does not stop at the stages which the calculator chooses to
make. The interest which Aristotle took in these inquiries
accounts for the fact that the sole extant Greek work in which,
1 Eudemus was a native of Ehodes, 
petent historian of geometry,
but a pupil of Aristotle. 
Proolus says 
2 Phys. in. c. 3. 227, a. 10. 
Insec.
he wrote irepi yavias, 'on the angle,' so 
Lin. 969, a. 30.
it may be inferred that he was a com-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
189
before Archimedes, geometry is applied to mechanics is at-
tributed to him. The passage in the Physics which contains
a hint of the principle of virtual velocity has been cited above
(p. lOon)1. The Mechanica, which is perhaps not Aristotle's,
though certainly of his time, is a series of 35 questions, mostly
on the performances of various levers2. The explanation here
given of the lever is founded on the observation that, in a
revolving circle, the circumference moves faster than the parts
near the centre: the power, therefore, at the end of a lever
overcomes the weight by its superior velocity. This explan-
ation leads to the correct inference (Qu. 3) that if two weights
keep a lever in equilibrium, they are to one another in the
inverse proportion of the arms of the lever. Nearly all the
questions are answered by reference to one or other of these facts.
The book contains many errors but is worth noticing as evidence
that, about this time, questions were asked which ultimately
lead to a correct theory of mechanics.
115. There remains still to be mentioned another writer,
who lived about 330 B.C. and whose works, still unpublished,
are the oldest of extant Greek mathematical treatises. This is
Autolycus of Pitane in iEolis, an astronomer of whom nothing
is known save that he wrote two elementary works on the
apparent motion of the sun and stars3. 
The first (in 12
1 Too much stress should not be laid 
easier to extract teeth with the forceps
on this passage, for Aristotle goes on 
than with the fingers?' (Q. 21). 'Why
immediately to say that if A moves B 
in rising from a seat do we lean the
a "distance T in time A, it does not 
body forward at an acute angle with the
. „ 
., , A ... 
„ 
,. , 
thigh?' (Q. 30). ' Why does a missile,
follow that •=• will move B a distance 
H. 
± ,, ,r, 
•> ,™
2 
once thrown, ever stop?' (Q.33). 'Why
r . .. 
.. 
. A 
, 
do objects in a whirlpool move towards
-r in the same time, for rr may not be 
f
2 
'
2 
the centre? 
(Q. 36).
able to move B at all. A hundred men 
3 An account of both is given by
may drag a ship a hundred yards, but 
Delambre. Hist. Astron. i. c. n. pp.
it does not follow that one man can 
19—48. They exist in 3 MSS. at Ox-
drag it one yard. 
ford, but are published only in a Latin
2 The questions are of great variety, 
translation by Auria (Rome, 1587.
both in subject and in merit: e.g. 
1588). Delambre used Dasypodius'
' Why are carriages with large wheels 
Sphaerieae Doctrinae Propositions
easier to move than those with small?' 
(Strasburg, 1572), which contains only
(Q. 11). 'Why are pebbles on the sea- 
the enunciations of Autolycus.
shore round?' (Q. 15) 'Why is it
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

190 
GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID.
propositions) is called " on the moving sphere " (trepl K(,vov/j,evt]<;
o-<f>alpa<;). The sphere is supposed to revolve uniformly and to
be divided by a great circle (not called the " horizon " but drawn
obliquely to the axis) so that half of the sphere is always invisible.
The propositions which are of an excessively simple character,
relate to the appearance, disappearance and reappearance, of
various points on the sphere. The same subject is dealt with
more particularly in the other work, " On Risings and Settings "
(•7rept e-irirokwv ical Bvcrecov), which is in two books, the first of
13, the second of 18 props. Here Autolycus premises that
the rising or setting of any star is invisible unless the sun be at
least 15° (measured on the ecliptic) below the horizon1. The
propositions, which are very obscurely worded, consist mostly of
deductions from this fact as to the time both of the night and
of the year at which or during which a particular star will be
visible. The results are of the most general character, to the
effect that after a given phenomenon certain others will happen
at certain times or in a certain order2.
116. A brief summary may here be added of the progress
of Greek geometry up to 300 B.C., the date at which the
Alexandrian school may be taken to arise, and which begins the
most brilliant century in the history of Greek mathematics.
It will be remembered that Thales about 580 B.C. introduced
the Egyptian geometry into Ionia: Pythagoras about 530 B. c.
introduced it into Magna Graecia. In these places, the extreme
Eastern and Western limits of Hellas, mathematical schools
survived for nearly 200 years, but the Ionian was by far the
less meritorious of the two. This school seems to have been
concerned chiefly with the geometry of angles, the Pythagorean
chiefly with the geometry of areas and the theory of proportion.
To the former we owe much of Euclid's 1st Book, to the latter,
no doubt, the 2nd, and the foundations of the 4th, 5th, and 6th,
1 Autolycus divides the ecliptic not 
supposed to be observed from Thebes in
into degrees but into 12 parts (dwdexa- 
360 B.C. He also, in his usual scorn-
Tij/iipiai) of 30° each. 
ful manner, reduces the whole book
a Delambre proves many of the pro- 
io a few trigonometrical formulae,
positions for Arcturus and Aldebaran
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK GEOMETRY TO EUCLID. 
191
Books. Before these schools were extinct, the Sophists about
450 B.C. introduced geometry to Athens; and here, under the
stimulus of three insoluble problems, arises the geometry of the
circle and other curves (with Hippias and Hippocrates); still
later the geometry of conies in particular, and of loci, stereometry,
mechanics and astronomy. But it is not to be supposed that
during this time any department of geometry was the peculiar
study of any place. Intercommunication was so frequent and
rapid that the Pythagoreans of Italy and Sicily and the
Atomists of Abdera, no doubt, were acquainted soon with the
last geometrical discovery of Athens, and vice versa. The syste-
matization of geometrical methods and the orderly arrangement
of elementary text-books, since Hippocrates wrote the first, had
specially occupied the attention of the Platonic school. Thus it
was that the substance of nearly all the geometry of Euclid's
elements was known before Euclid's time, the forms of geo-
metrical proof were settled, and the arrangement of at least large
fragments of geometry was practically determined. To collect
these fragments and connect them where necessary, and to
embellish the proofs, was the chief work which was left for 6
Jjs, the writer of the Elements par excellence.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

