CHAPTER IV.
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica.
44. 
THE history of dpid/iijTiicri, or the scientific study of
numbers in the abstract, begins in Greece with Pythagoras
(dr. B.C. 530), whose example determined for many centuries its
symbolism, its nomenclature and the limits of its subject-matter.
How Pythagoras came to be interested in such inquiries is not at
all clear. It cannot be doubted that he lived a considerable
time in Egypt1: it is said also, though on far inferior authority,
that he visited Babylon. In the first country, he would at
least have found calculation brought to a very considerable
development, far superior to that which he can have known
among his own people : he would have also found a rudimentary
geometry, such as was entirely unknown to the Western Greeks.
At Babylon, if he ever went there, he might have learnt a
strange notation (the sexagesimal) in arithmetic and a great
number of astronomical observations, recorded with such numeri-
cal precision as was possible at that time8. But Pythagoras
1 It is asserted by Isocrates, Laud. 
2 Both these statements may be
Busir. c. 11.28, p. 227, and Callimaohus 
illustrated by one example. One Baby-
ap. Diod. Excerpt. Vatic, vn—S. 35. 
Ionian document contains a statement
It is implied in Herod, n. 81, 123, 
of what portions of the moon's face are
Aristotle Metaph. i. 1. These are the 
successively illuminated in the first
most ancient authorities. The Egyp- fifteen days of the month. These are
tian origin of Greek geometry is at- 
stated as 5, 10, 20, 40, 1. 20, 1. 36,
tested in many more passages, to be 
1. 52 etc. where 1. 20, 1. 36, 1. 52 etc.
cited below. The visit to Babylon is 
stand for 80, 96, 112 etc. parts out of
first mentioned Strabo xiv. 1. 16. 
240 into which the moon was divided.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OP NUMBEKS. Arithmetica. 
67
was not the first to be initiated into this foreign learning, for
the Asiatic Greeks had certainly, before his time, acquired a
good deal of Chaldaean astronomy and had even improved upon
Egyptian geometry1. Nor was the bent of his mind altogether
singular in his time. Among the Greeks everywhere, a new
speculative spirit was abroad and they were burning to discover
some principle of homogeneity in the universe. Some funda-
mental unity was surely to be discerned either in the matter
or the structure of things. The Ionic philosophers chose the
former field: Pythagoras took the latter. But the difficulty is
to determine whether mathematical studies led him to a philo-
sophy of structure or vice versa. The evidence seems to favour
the former view. The geometry which he had learnt in Egypt
was merely practical. It dealt mainly with such problems
as how to find the area of given plane figures, the volume
of given solids: its highest flight was to find roughly the ratio
between the diameter and the circumference of a circle. Its data
generally, its discoveries always, were numerical expressions.
Given the number of a certain straight line, it could find the
number of a certain curve: given the numbers of two or three
straight lines it could find the numbers of a superficies or a solid.
It was natural to nascent philosophy to draw, by false analogies
and the use of a brief and deceptive vocabulary*, enormous con-
clusions from a very few observed facts: and it is not surpris-
ing if Pythagoras, having learnt in Egypt that number was
essential to the exact description of forms and of the relations
of forms, concluded that number was the cause of form and
See Hincks in Trans, Royal Irish Acad. 
butes the introduction of the gnomon
Polite Lit. XXII. 6, p, 406 sqq. Cantor, 
to Anaximenes: Suidas to Anaxjmander
Varies, pp. 72—76. 
(sub HOC).
1 Thus Thales had invented some 
2 Primitive men, on seeing a new
propositions in scientific geometry. He 
thing, look out especially for some
had also predicted an eclipse and is 
resemblance in it to a known thing, so
said by many different authorities to 
that they may call both by the same
have had njueh astronomical know- 
name. This developes a habit of press-
ledge. Herodotus (JI. 109) says express- 
ing small and partial analogies. It
ly that the knowledge of the polos and 
also causes many meanings to be at-
gnomon (on these sundials see below, 
tached to the same word. Hasty and
p. 145 n.) came to the Greeks from 
confused theories are the inevitable
Babylon. Pliny (Hist. Nat. n. 76) attri- 
result.
5—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

68 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica.
so of every other quality. Number, he inferred, is quantity
and quantity is form and form is quality1.
The genesis of the Pythagorean philosophy here suggested
has strong historical warrant. It is certain that the Egyptian
geometry was such as I have described it: the empirical
knowledge of the land-surveyor, not the generalised deductions
of the mathematician. If not certain, it is at least undeniable
that Pythagoras lived in Egypt and there learnt such geometry
as was known. It is certain that Pythagoras considered number
to be the basis of creation2: that he looked to arithmetic for
his definitions of all abstract terms and his explanation of all
natural laws : but that his arithmetical inquiries went hand in
hand with geometrical and that he tried always to find
arithmetical formulae for geometrical facts and vice versa3.
45. But the details of his doctrines are now hopelessly lost.
For a hundred years they remained the secrets of his school in
Italy and when at last a Pythagorean philosophy was published4,
it was far more elaborate than the teaching of its founder.
Even the tenets of this later school come to us only by hearsay.
Of Pythagoreans we know something from Plato and Aristotle
1 It was Pythagoras who discovered 
Vide Cantor, Varies, p. 152. Nessel-
that the 5th and the octave of a note 
mann, p. 214 n. Hankel, p. 105 sqq.
could be produced on the same string 
2 Some such vague term must neces-
by stopping at f and J of its length 
sarily be chosen. Aristotle (Metaph. i.
respectively. Harmony therefore de- 
5} says that the Pythagoreans held that
pends on a numerical proportion. It 
number was the apx^i Kal ois v\r) rois
was this discovery, according to Han- 
ovai Kal ws irddr] re Kal ££eis. It is not
kel, which led Pythagoras to his phi- 
possible to extract from these words a
losophy of number. It is probable at 
definite theory of the functions of num-
least that the name harmonical propor- 
ber in the cosmogony: it seems to be
tion was due to it, since 
'everything by turns.'
l : J : : ( l - | ) : ( i - 4 ) . 
3 See Diog. Laert. vm. 12 and 14.
Iamblichus says that this proportion 
In the second passage Pythagoras is
was called vrevavrla originally and that 
said, on the authority of Aristoxenus,
Archytas and Hippasus first called it 
to have introduced weights and mea-
harmonic. Nicomachus gives another 
sures into Greece,
reason for the name: viz. that a cube, 
4 By Philolaus. See Diog. Laert.
being of 3 equal dimensions, was the 
vm. 15. 85. The silence of Pythagoras
pattern aptiovla: and having 12 edges, 
was proverbial. On this and the facts
8 corners, 6 faces, it gave its name to 
stated in the text cf. Bitter and Preller,
harmonic proportion, since 
Hist. Phil. §§ 96, 97, 102—128.
12 : 6:: 12-8 : 8-6.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
69
and the historians of philosophy, but hardly anything remains
which is attributed, by any writer of respectable authority, to
Pythagoras himself1. He is probably responsible for some of the
fantastic metaphysics of his followers. Aristotle expressly says
that he referred the virtues to numbers and perhaps he agreed
with Philolaus that 5 is the cause of colour, 6 of cold, 7 of mind
and health and light, 8 of love and friendship and invention.
Plutarch says that he held that the earth was the product of
the cube, fire of the pyramid, air of the octahedron, water of the
eicosahedron, and the sphere of the universe of the dodecahedron2.
But doctrines of this kind, though they imply an interest in
mathematics, are not themselves contributions to mathematical
knowledge and do not require to be discussed in this place.
For our present purpose, it is sufficient only to consider what
advances in arithmetic are due to Pythagoras or his school,
without speculating on the mode or order in which they were
obtained or their place in the Pythagorean philosophy.
The following discoveries, at any rate, with the accompanying
nomenclature, are as old as Plato's time. All numbers were
classified as odd or even (aprioi or Trepicro-oi). Of these the odd
numbers were gnomons (yvw/jiove';) and the sum of the series of
gnomons from 1 to 2n +1 was a square (T€Tpdya>vo<;)s. 
The
root of a square number was called its side (7r\evpa). Some com-
pound numbers have no square roots. These latter were oblongs
(erepo/MrJKei,^ or rirpoiJ,r)iceu<s)i. 
Products of two numbers were
plane (eVtVeSot), of three solid (aTepeoi)5. A number multiplied
twice into itself was a cube (KL/3O?)6. 
Some more classifications
1 Porphyrius, a Syrian, late in the 
TOS or a:\070s), but this is not certain.
3rd century after Christ, and Iambli- 
Plato calls it a Siva/us.
chusboth wrote a 'life of Pythagoras.' 
6 Cf. Aristotle on Plato in Pol. v.
2 See Bitter and Preller, pp. 72, 79, 
12. 8.
§§ 116, 117, 127. 
6 Plato, Rep. vm. p. 246. The same
3 Aristotle, Phys. in. 4. The gnomon 
passage invites one or two other little
is properly a carpenter's instrument, 
remarks. dpiO/iis OTTO in later Greek
a T square with only one arm. The 
writers means 'the square of : i.pi$/ins
name was afterwards used in other 
1)71-6 means'the product of.' dwdcrTaffis
senses. 
once in Plato (Timaeus 43 D) means the
4 See Plato Theaet. 147D—148 B. A 
'interval' between the terms of an
surd was probably at this early time 
arithmetical progression. aS^ins may
called inexpressible or irrational (dppri- 
(like ai>&, Rep. vn. 528 B) mean ' mul-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

70 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica.
are given by authorities of less antiquity. 
Any number of
the form —^— 
was called triangular 
(rplycovos). 
Perfect
(reXeiot) numbers are those which are equal to the sum of all
their possible factors (e.g. 28 = 1 + 2 + 4 + 7 + 14): for similar
reasons numbers are excessive (inrepriXeioi,) or defective (iXXi-
irels;)1. Amicable ((f>l\ioi) numbers are those of which each is the
sum of the factors of the other (e.g. 220 = 1 + 2 + 4 + 71 +142 :
284 = 1 + 2 + 4 + 5 + 10 + 11 + 20 + 22 + 44 + 55 + 110)a.
Beside this work in classification of single numbers, numbers
were treated in groups comprised either in a series (etcdecris or
dvaXoyia awe^r/si) or a proportion (avaXoyta). 
Each number
of such a series or proportion was called a term (6po<;). The
mean terms of a proportion were called /xetrorijTe?3. 
Three
kinds of proportion, the arithmetical, geometrical and harmonical
were certainly known4. 
To these Iamblichus6 adds a fourth,
the musical, which, he says, Pythagoras introduced from Babylon.
It is composed between two numbers and their arithmetical
and harmonical means, thus a : —=— :: 
=•: b (e.g. 6 :9 :: 8 :12).
2t 
a + 0
Plato knew that there was only one expressible geometrical
mean between two square numbers, two between two cubes6.
It is a familiar fact that the geometrical proposition, Euclid 1.47,
is ascribed to Pythagoras. It follows that a right-angled triangle
may be always constructed by taking sides which are to one an-
tiplioation.' For other terms see Jour- 
p. 94. This quotation (with one or two
nal of Philology, xn. p. 92. 
more) I take from Cantor, Tori. p. 140
1 Theon Smyrnaeus (ed. Hiller) pp. 
sqq. The statement in the text might
31, 45. 
be easily confirmed from other sources.
8 Iamblichus in Nicom. Ar. (ed. Ten- 
See for instance Simplicius on Ar. de
nulius) pp. 47, 48. 
Anima 409, b. 23. Dr Allman doubts
8 It will have been observed that 
(Hermathena v. p. 204) whether these
much of our modern nomenclature (e.g. 
proportions were first applied to num-
'square,"oube,"surd,"term,' 'mean') 
ber, but see Ar. An. Post. I. 5. 74,
is taken from the Latin translation of 
and Hankel p. 114.
the Greek expressions. 
B In Nicom. Ar. (ed. Tennulius) pp.
4 Philolaus in Nicomachus Introd. 
141—2, 168.
Ar. (ed. Hoche) p. 135, Archytas in 
6 Timaeus, 32 B. Nicomachus, Introd.
Porphyrius, ad Ptol. Harm, cited by 
Ar. n. c. 24.
Gruppe, Die Fragm. des Archytas, etc.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
71
other in the ratios 3 : 4 : 5 , and to these numbers therefore
great importance was attached in Pythagorean philosophy1. To
Pythagoras himself is ascribed a mode of finding other numbers
which would serve the same purpose. He took as one side an
odd number (2« + 1): half the square of this minus 1 is the other
side (2ft2 + In): this last number plus 1 is the hypotenuse
(2n2 + 2n + 1). He began, it will be noticed, with an odd number.
Plato2 invented another mode, beginning with an even number
(2n): the square of half this plus 1 is the hypotenuse (n2+ 1):
the same square ?ninus 1 is the other side (n2— 1).
46. A few more details expressly alleged by, or inferred from
hints of, later authors might be added to the foregoing but it is
impossible to frame with them a continuous history even of the
most meagre character. We cannot say precisely what Pythagoras
knew or discovered, and what additions to his knowledge were
successively made by Philolaus or Archytas or Plato or other
inquirers who are known to have been interested in the
philosophy of numbers8.
Proclus says4 that the Pythagoreans were concerned only
with the questions ' how many' (TO iroaov) and ' how great'
{rb iryXiKov) that is, with number and magnitude. 
Number
absolute was the field of arithmetic: number applied of music:
stationary magnitude of geometry, magnitude in motion of
1 This rule was known to the Egyp- 
Nesselmann, pp. 152—3. These are
tians, the Chinese and perhaps the 
provided for by the first lemma to
Babylonians at a very remote antiquity, 
Euclid, x. 29. Infra, p. 81 n.
v. Cantor, Vorles. pp. 56, 92,153—4. The 
3 Plutarch, Quaest. Gonv. vm. 9.
discovery is expressly attributed to Py- 
11—13, says that Xenocrates, the pupil
thagoras (Vitruvius, ix. 2). Cantor 
of Plato, discovered that the number of
{Vorles. p. 153 sqq.) is of opinion that 
possible syllables wasl,002,000,000,000.
Pythagoras knew this empirical rule 
This looks like a problem in eombina-
for constructing right-angled triangles 
tions, but the theory of combinations
before he discovered Eucl. I. 47. 
does not appear in any Greek mathe-
2 Proclus (ed. Friedlein), p. 428. It 
matician, and the number seems too
will be noticed that both the Pythago- 
round to have been scientifically ob-
rean and Platonic methods apply only 
tained. (Cantor, Vorles. pp. 215, 220.)
to cases in which the hypotenuse differs 
4 Ed. Friedlein, pp. 35, 36. For
from one side by 1 or 2. They would 
the distinction between number and
not discover such an eligible group of 
magnitude compare Aristotle, An. Post.
side-numbers as 29 : 21 : 20. See 
i. 7 and 10, and Cat. c. 6.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

72 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica.
spheric or astronomy1. But they did not so strictly dissociate
discrete from continuous quantity. An arithmetical fact had
its analogue in geometry and vice versa; a musical fact had
its analogue in astronomy and vice versa. Pythagorean arith-
metic and geometry should therefore be treated together, but
there is so little known of either, that it seemed unadvisable,
for this purpose only, to alter the plan of this book. The his-
tory of Greek geometry is so much fuller and more important
and proceeds by so much more regular stages than that of
arithmetic, that it deserves to be kept distinct.
The facts above stated are sufficient to show that, from the
first, Greek dpi6fi7)Ti/cr) was closely connected with geometry
and that it borrowed, from the latter science, its symbolism
and nomenclature. It had not yet wholly discarded the abacus*,
but its aim was entirely different from that of the ordinary
calculator and it was natural that the philosopher who sought
in numbers to find the plan on which the Creator worked,
should begin to regard with contempt the merchant who wanted
only to know how many sardines, at 10 for an obol, he could
buy for a talent.
47. Whensoever and by whomsoever invented, most3 of the
known propositions of dpidfLqTiicr) were collected together, not
much later than 300 B, c. by Euclid in his Elements. Only
the seventh, eighth and ninth books are specially devoted to
numbers, but it cannot be doubted that the second and the
tenth, though they profess to be geometrical and to deal with
1 These four soienoesbeoame, through 
celebrated by Martianus Capella (oir.
the Pythagorean influence of Alexan- 
A.D. 400). The same seven branches of
dria, the quadrivium of early mediae- 
education are discussed by Cassiodorus
valism. The subjects of this fourfold 
(born about A.D. 468), De Artibus ac
eduoation are mentioned in the familiar 
DUciplinis Liberalium Litterarum.
line "Mus canit: Ar numerat: Ge pon- 
2 E.g. Plato, Legg. 737E, 738A saya
derat: Ast colit astra." To this, how- 
that 5040 has 59 divisors including all
ever, another trivium Rhetoric, Dialec- 
the numbers from 1 to 10. A fact of
tic and Grammar, were added (" Gram 
this sort must have been discovered em-
loquitur: Dia vera docet: Bhet verba 
pirically by means of the abaciis.
colorat") and these seven are the god- 
3 Archimedes uses one or two propo-
desses of science and art who attend at 
sitions which are not in the Elements.
the nuptials of Philology and Mercury
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
AHthmetica. 
73
magnitudes, are intended also to be applicable to numbers.
The first 8 propositions of the second book, for instance, are for
geometrical purposes proved by inspection. No one can doubt
them who looks at the figures. But as arithmetical propositions
they are not self-evident if stated with any arithmetical symbol-
ism. In such a form, the first 10 propositions (the 9th and 10th
are not treated in the same way as the first 8) are as follows':
(1) ab + ac + ad+ 
= a(b + c+d + 
).
(2) (a + by=(a + b)a + (a + b)b.
(3) (a + b) a = ab + a".
(4) (a + by = a> + b*
(5) m =(«-i
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
The eleventh proposition2 is the geometrical way of solving
the quadratic equation a(a — b) = b2 and the fourteenth solves
the quadratic a2 = be. From this statement, in algebraical
form, of the chief contents of the 2nd Book, it will at once
be seen what an advantage Greek mathematicians found in a
geometrical symbolism. These propositions are all true for in-
commensurable, as well as commensurable, magnitudes, irrational
as well as rational, numbers. But in numbers the Greeks had
no symbolism at all for surds. They knew that surds existed,
1 It will be observed that Theon's 
structing a regular pentagon. Euclid's
method of finding a square root, cited 
solution of the quadratic would be in
above, is founded on Eucl. n. 4. So 
algebraical form,
also Diophantus (infra, p. 104) uses
Euclid II. as an arithmetical book.
8 This is the famous problem of ' the
golden section,' which is used again in 
(Cantor, Vorles. pp. 226, 227.)
Euclid iv. 10 for the purpose of con-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

74 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
that there was no exact numerical equivalent, for instance, for
the root of 2; but they knew also that the diagonal of a
square: side :: »J2 : 1 \ 
Hence lines, which were merely con-
venient symbols for other numbers', became the indispensable
symbols for surds. Thus, Euclid's 10th book, which deals with
incommensurables, is in form purely geometrical, though its con-
tents are of purely arithmetical utility: and every arithmetical
proposition, in the proof or application of which a surd might
possibly occur, was necessarily exhibited in a geometrical form.
It is not, therefore, surprising that a linear symbolism became
habitual to the Greek mathematicians and that their attention
was wholly diverted from the customary arithmetical signs of
the unlearned.
48. It is in the 7th book of the Elements3 that Euclid
first turns to the consideration of numbers only.
It begins with 21 definitions which serve for the 7th 8th and
9th books. The most important of these are the following :
(1) Unity (jiovds) is that by virtue of which everything
is called ' one' (ev XeyeTai)4.
(3) and (4) A less number, which is a measure of a
1 This fact, according to an old seho- 
none are necessary. In the 7th book
liast (said to be Proclus) on the 10th 
according to our MSS. numbers are
book of Euclid, remained for a long 
generally represented by dots (in Pey-
time the profoundest secret of the Py* 
rard's edition by lines), in the 8th book
thagorean school. The man who di- 
particular numbers are given by way of
vulged it was drowned. 
See Cantor, 
illustration: in the 9th book both dots
Vorles. pp. 155, 156, quoting Knoche, 
and particular numbers occur. Euclid
Untersuch. iiber die Schol. des Proklus 
probably used lines only, except where
etc., Herford, 1865, pp. 17—28, esp. 
a number was to be represented as od J
p. 23. 
or even, in which case perhaps he used
2 The use of lines of course avoided 
dots. At any rate, he does not, any
the necessity of calculation. 
A rect- 
more than in the geometrical books,
angle represented a product: its side a 
use division, and his treatment of the
quotient. 
Thus, for instance, Euclid 
propositions is purely synthetic, as
(x. 21), wishing to show that a rational 
elsewhere.
number divided by a rational gave a 
The arithmetical books of Euclid are
rational quotient, states that 'if a ratio- 
included in Williamson's translation,
nal rectangle be constructed on a ra- 
Oxford 1781—1788.
tional line, its side is also rational.' 
4 In the 2nd definition ftovds means
3 In the 7th 8th and 9th books, no 
'the unit.1 'Number' is there denned
geometrical figures are given, as indeed 
as 'TO IK fj.ovd.Sai> nvymliievov 
T\i)dos.'
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OP NUMBERS. 
Arithmdioa. 
75
greater, is a /^/JO? (part) of it: but if not a measure, it is
(parts) of the other1.
(6) and (7) 'Odd' and 'even' numbers (vepuraoiand Uprioi).
(11) 'Prime'numbers (•n-paro^ 6 povdSi fiovov fietpovjievcx;)-
(12) Numbers 'prime to one another' (Trpwrot irpbs
d
(13) Composite numbers (crvvderoi).
(16) Products of two numbers are 'plane' (i-n-trreSot) and
each factor is a ' side' (irXevpa).
(17) Products of three numbers (irXevpal) are 'solid'
(arepeoL).
(18) ' Square' numbers (reTpaycoi/o? 6 lo-aic<,<; t'tro?).
(19) 'Cubes' («v/3o? 6 Itrdieis I'cro? tcra/ct?).
(20) Numbers are 'proportional' (dvaXoyop elai) when
the 1st is the same multiple, part or parts of the 2nd as the 3rd
of the 4th.
(21) Plane and solid numbers are 'similar' when their
sides are proportional.
(22) A 'perfect' (rekeios;) number is that which is the
sum of all its factors (fj-eprj).
It will be seen that this nomenclature is purely Pythagorean.
The class of' prime' (irpdoToi) numbers is not indeed mentioned
by any earlier writer now known, but it can hardly be doubted
that they were defined by the Pythagoreans, as a sub-class of
odd numbers. The book deals with the following matters :
Prop. I. If of two given unequal numbers the less be
subtracted from the greater as often as possible and the
remainder from the less and the next remainder from the pre-
ceding remainder and so on, and no remainder is a measure of
the preceding remainder until 1 is reached, the two given
numbers are prime to one another. 
This (which is proved by
reductio ad absurdum) leads to
Propp. II., ill. 
To find the greatest common measure of two
or more numbers. 
(The procedure is identical with ours.)
Propp. IV.—xxil. These deal with submultiples and fractions
p
p 
i a r l v 
iptfuos 
iprffiov, 
o i\dff- 
T h i s 
w o r d 
fi.(p-ij 
i s 
t h e 
p l u r a l 
o f 
l
p
,
GUV 
TOU 
jueifovos, Srav KaTa/ierpri 
TOV 
and is a very inconvenient expression.
Sk, 6Vae /*?) KaTa/xerp^.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

76 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
and apply to numbers the doctrines of proportion which had been
previously proved for magnitudes in the 5th book \
Propp. xxur.—xxx. Of numbers prime to one another.
E. g. xxix. If two numbers are prime to one another, all their
powers are prime to one another.
Propp. xxxi.—xxxiv. Of prime numbers in composition.
E. g. xxxiv. Every number is prime or is divisible by a prime.
Propp. xxxv.—XLI. Miscellanea: e. g. xxxv. To find the
lowest numbers which are in the same ratio with any given
numbers, xxxvi. To find the L. c. M. of two, and XXXVIII. of
three, numbers, XLI. To find the lowest number which is
divisible into given parts.
49. The 8th book deals, in the first half, chiefly with
numbers in continued proportion (dpiOjiol e!jfj<i dvaXoyov) e.g.
in. If any numbers are in a continued proportion and are the
least which have the same ratio to one another^ the extreme terms
will be prime to one another. VII. If the 1st term is a divisor
of the last, so is it of the 2nd. But a few other propositions are
inserted, e. g. v. Plane numbers are to one another in the ratio
which is compounded of their sides, xi. There is one mean
proportional between two squares and XII. two between two
cubes. The last half of the book (Propp. xiv. to xxvn.) is
entirely devoted to the mutual relations of squares, cubes and
plane numbers, e. g. xxn. If three numbers are in continued
proportion and the first is a square, so is the third, xxiii. If
four numbers are in continued proportion, and the first is a
cube so is the fourth.
50. The 9th book continues the same subject for a few
propositions: e.g. in. If a cube be multiplied by itself the
product is a cube. Then follow (vm.—XV.) some more pro-
positions on numbers in continued proportion, or geometrical
series: e.g. IX. If in a series, commencing from unity, the 2nd
term is a square, so are the following terms. And if the 2nd
1 E.g. iv. Every number is either 
and conversely.
a ptpos or ntjrq of every higher number. 
2 i. e. are the least which can form a
v. vi. If A is the same^osfor^ifpi^of 
continued proportion of the same num-
B asCofD, ^ + Cis the same of B + D. 
hex of terms, bearing the same ratio to
xix. If A :B:: C:D, then AD = BC 
one another, as in the given case.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Ariihmetica. 
77
term is a cube, the following terms are cubes. A few propositions
on prime numbers (xvi.—xx.) are then given of which the
most important is xx. The number of primes is greater than
any given number. 
The discussion of odd and even numbers
is then introduced (xxi.—xxxiv.), the propositions being of such
a character as xxiv. 
If an even number be subtracted from
an even number, the remainder is even. 
Then suddenly,
appears the following proposition, xxxv. "If any numbers be
in continued proportion, and the first term be deducted from
the 2nd and also from the last, the remainder of the 2nd will be
to the 1st as the remainder of the last to the sum of all the
preceding terms V 
Stated in another form, this proposition is:
If a, ar, ar1, ars... arn be a geometrical series, then
ar — a : a :: (arn — a) : a + ar + ar2... + ar"'1.
It is an easy step further to conclude that
, 
... 
a (arn — a)
a + ar+ a,r... + ar 
— —
ai— a
and thus to sum the series, but Euclid does not take this step.
The proposition, as it stands, is apparently introduced solely for
the purpose of proving the next (xxxvi.), the last in the book.
This is, in effect, that in a geometrical series of the powers
of 2 from 1 onwards, the sum of the first n terms (if a prime
number) multiplied by the n.th term is a perfect number2. 
In
the proof3, which is too long to be here inserted, the sum of n
terms is assumed to be known by simple addition.
1 Euclid takes only four numbers. His proof, put shortly, is as follows:
Let a :py::py. 
S::S : ef. 
Take 79 = £0 = a, Jvt=/3y, fX = 8.
Then £8 :f/c:: f/c:fX ::fX:fe. Dividendo f0: 8K :: f/c: KX:: fX:Xe
and componendo f# : 8K:: f0 + fK + fX:: 8K + K\ + \C. 
By sub-
" 
stitution (taking the terms backwards) €0: a + fiy + S :: fi-q: a.
* 
i.e. ef— a : a + py + d :: £ 7 - 0 : a. Q. E. J>.
2 'E&v 6,irb fwvddos OTTOGOIOVV apiBjxol e^7js IKTZQUGIV tv TTJ biTXaaiovi 
avaXoyiq.
K.T.X.
3 A short proof is easy:
1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + ... + 2M = 2n+1 - 1 = p.
2njp is a perfect number if
which is obviously the case.
From this also it ia evident that the proposition is untrue unless p is a prime
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

78 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica.
Such was the dpid^riKrj of rational numbers known in
Euclid's time. Not all of it was of Euclid's invention, but
it contains much the importance of which the later Greek
arithmeticians did not perceive and which, neglected by them,
was only in modern times resumed into consideration and
made the elementary foundation of a scientific theory of
numbers.
51. The 10th book treats of irrational magnitudes and
treats them geometrically through a symbolism of irrational lines.
Definitions occur at intervals throughout the book. 
It
starts with the following:
1, 2. Magnitudes are commensurable (ervfifierpa) when they
are measurable by one and the same measure: contra, incom-
mensurable (da-VfifieTpa).
3, 4. Straight lines are commensurable in square (Swa/iet
avfi/xerpoi) when their squares may be measured by the same
unit of space (^wpiov): contra, Svvd/iei, davfi/Merpoi1.
5. Hence, to any given straight line, there are an infinite
number. Nesselmann (Alg. Or. p. 164 n.)> after remarking that it is not
very easy to know whether a high number is prime or not, quotes from Fermat
(Varia Opp. Math. Toulouse 1679, p. 177) the following rule. Write down the
powers of 2 minus 1 each and above them the corresponding exponents of the
powers: thus
. . . 
. 
, 
If the exponent is not prime, neither is the
' 
power minws 1. If the exponent n is prime, the
C' 
power minus 1 is divisible only by numbers of the
form 2mn 4-1. These can easily be tried. Fermat gives no proofs for his rule,
and his accuracy is not above suspicion. 
(Jevons, Elem. Logic, p. 222.)
1 As Euclid does not define the word 
to show how Siva/us acquired this
Siva/us (whence potentia, 'power') it 
mathematical sense. If the passage
may be desirable here to give some 
Eudemi Fragm. (ed. Spengel) pp. 128—
account of it. The word SivcurSai means 
129 is really quoted from Hippocrates
to be the square root of (Plato, Theaet. 
of Chios, this is the earliest which con-
148 A is probably the earliest instance); 
tains the technical diya/us, Alexander
hence Siva/us, as a rule, means the 
Aphrodisiensis (ed. Bonitz, 1847, p.
square; but sometimes (Plato loc. cit.) 
56) says that tvvaii&ni was the hypote-
means a square root or rather a surd, 
nuse, Swacrevducvcu the sides of aright-
i.e. a square root which cannot be 
angled triangle. These words, in this
otherwise described. Afoa/Ms is a more 
connexion, probably mean 'equalling'
general term than rerpdyams, whioh 
and 'equalled.' If these names are
is used only when a square figure is 
ancient, perhaps the technical use of
contemplated. There is no evidence 
diva/us grew out of them.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
79
number of straight lines commensurable or incommensurable,
some both in length and in their squares, some in square only.
Let this given straight line be called prjTtj, 'rational.' Then
6. 7, prjToi, rational straight lines, are commensurable with
it in length and square or in square only: lines incommen-
surable with it in length and square or in square, are called
aXoyoc1.
8, 9. The square of the prjTij is also 'rational' and so is
every square which is commensurable with it.
10, 11. Squares incommensurable with that of the prjrjj
are ahoyoi: so also are the sides of such squares. If a recti-
lineal figure be irrational, the sides of the square which is
of equal area with it are also irrational.
The book begins with 21 propositions on incommensurables
generally. Of these the most important are:
I. If two unequal magnitudes be given and from the
greater more than half be subtracted and from the remainder
more than half and so on with successive remainders, the final
remainder will be less than the less of the two given magnitudes.
So also, if only halves be deducted. This proposition, that
a magnitude less than any given magnitude can be found, is the
basis of the method of Exhaustion of which so much and so
brilliant use is made in Greek geometry2.
11. If of two given unequal magnitudes the less be deducted
from the greater as often as possible and the remainder from
the less and the next remainder from the preceding remainder
and so on, and no remainder is a measure of the preceding, the
two magnitudes are incommensurable. (Compare vn. 1.)
ill. IV. To find the O. c. M. of commensurable magnitudes.
1 It will be observed that EuoKd's 
serves the same purpose as what we
nomenclature differs from the modern. 
call 'the standard unit' of length or
We call irrational all that he calls in- 
space.
commensurable: but with him a : tjb 
2 It is curious that Euclid does not
is rational, because a2: 6 is rational. 
add the further proposition that'if two
On the other hand, a Jb or any other 
given magnitudes are incommensura-
multiple of an incommensurable, is 
ble, there can be found a third, com-
with Euclid irrational, because ajb 
mensurable with one of the given and
and the rest are rectangles already and 
differing as little as we please from the
cannot be squared. The prfr-q of Euclid 
other.' See Cantor, Vorles. p. 230.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

80 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Ariifimetica.
V.—IX. Commensurable magnitudes are to one another as
numbers to numbers: and their squares as square numbers.
Contra, of incommensurables and conversely.
XI. If four magnitudes1 are in proportion and the 1st is
commensurable (or incommensurable) with the 2nd so is the
3rd with the 4th. Here follow various propositions on com-
mensurables and incommensurables in proportion, on the sum of
two commensurables or incommensurables etc.
xxi. If a rational rectangle be constructed on a rational
line, the side of the rectangle is also rational (i.e. a rational
number divided by a rational gives a rational quotient). To
this is appended a Lemma, proving that the line or number,
whose square is irrational, is also irrational (a fact which was
provided for in the definitions). This lemma, which introduces,
so to say, the consideration of the expression vVafr, leads to the
discussion of the medial line (fiecrrj) in the 2nd part of the book.
The definition of fiiarf is given in Prop. xxn. viz. The
rectangle contained by rational lines commensurable only in
square (i. e. a*Jb or *Ja\/b) is irrational and the side of the square
which is equal to this rectangle is also irrational and may be
called fiicrr) (i.e. vaV5, or else v Va&, where, if numbers be con-
templated either a or b must not be square). The following
propositions XXIII.—xxxv. deal with /ie'crat or medials only.
They are of the following kind:
xxiv. Medials may be commensurable with one another in
length and square or in square only.
XXV. Given two medials commensurable in length (e.g.
mHJab and n^Jab), the rectangle contained by them, (mnjab)
is medial.
xxvi. Given two medials, commensurable only in square
(e. g. Ja*Jb and Jojb), the rectangle contained by them (Jacb)
1 Thia proposition is numbered x. in 
side of the square which is equal to
Gregory's edition (Oxon. 1703) the 10th 
this rectangle, is a mean proportional
and 11th exchanging places. 
(ulay ivdXoyoy) to AB, BI\ The name
2 The reason for the name is given 
'medial' is used in the text, as more
in the same place. If AB, Br are the 
convenient.
sides of an irrational rectangle, the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
81
is either rational or medial (i.e. according as aob is square
or not).
Upon these two propositions follow several problems1, to
find medials, commensurable in line or in square, whose rect-
angle or square is of a given character: e. g. 
XXXIII. To find
two medials commensurable only in square, such that their
rectangle is medial and that the square of the gi-eater exceeds
the square of the less, by the square of a line either (a) com-
mensurable or (5) incommensurable with the former. Two
similar problems on lines incommensurable in square conclude
the second part. All these lines are intended ultimately to form
part of binomial expressions (cf. infra, p. 83, n. 2).
At the xxxviith proposition, some editor has introduced a
new heading, viz. 'Ap%r) TWV /card avvOeaiv itjdScDv and again at
Prop. LXXIV. 'Apxv ™" /car d<f>aipe<nv efaStuj/. These hexads
are six groups, of six propositions each, on irrational binomials.
There is thus a set of 36 propositions (xxxvii.—LXXII.) on bi-
nomials "formed by addition" and another of 36 exactly corre-
sponding propositions (LXXIV.—cix.) on those "formed by sub-
traction." The enunciation of Prop, xxxvii. runs: ' If two
rational lines, commensurable only in square, are added together,
the sum is irrational and may be called a biterminal' («c
BIJO ovofidreov). The difference of two such lines is, in Prop.
LXXIV., called apotome. The biterminals are \/a + *Jb, and
a + ti/b: the apotomae are «/a — Jb, a — Jb and \/a — b : but
altogether, twelve kinds of irrational binomials are distinguished.
Of these twelve, six are formed by addition and are described
and named in the first hexad: the other six are the corres-
ponding binomials formed by subtraction and are described and
named in the seventh hexad. The third hexad describes six
1 To Prop. xxix. two lemmas are 
represent a square number, if AB and
appended, the first of which is ' To find BO are both square or similar rect-
two square numbers, such that their 
angular numbers. 
AC is assumed to
sum is a square number.' 
This is 
be even.
solved with the help of Eucl. n. 6. 
The 
numbers which 
follow 
are
By that proposition, in the line 
those of Gregory's edition. 
Nessel-
£ 
j) 
C 
B 
mann, who used the Basle edition,
1 
1 
1 
(pub. 1537, 1546, 1558) cites xxxn. for
AB . BG + CD2=BD*. 
AB . BC will 
XXXIII. etc., the 30th proposition in that
G. G. M. 
6
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

82 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
kinds of biterminals, the ninth six kinds of apotomae, and these
are shown, in the following hexads, to be the squares of the
binomials of addition and subtraction first defined.
These few remarks being premised, to show the structure and
style of the remainder of the book, the effect of the whole may
best be given in the words of a most competent critic, as follows.
"Euclid investigates," says Prof. De Morgan1, "every possible
variety of lines which can be represented by *J{*Ja + */b), a and
b representing two commensurable lines. He divides lines which
can be represented by this formula into 25 species and he
succeeds in detecting every possible species. He shows that
every individual of every species is incommensurable with all
the individuals of every other species2; and also that no line of
any species can belong to that species in two different ways or
for two different sets of values of a and 63. He shows how to
form other classes of incommensurables in number how many
soever, no one of which can contain an individual line which is
commensurable with an individual of any other class4, and (?) he
demonstrates the incommensurability of a square and its diago-
nal6. This book has a completeness which none of the others
(not even the fifth) can boast of: and we could almost suspect
that Euclid, having arranged his materials in his own mind, and
having completely elaborated the 10th book, wrote the preceding
books after it, and did not live to revise them thoroughly."
edition being divided into two parts, 
the second hexads (Props. 43—48 and
which are treated by Gregory as two 
80—85). They are devoted to proving,
separate propositions. 
by separate cases, that "every binomial
1 Article Eucleides in Smith's Diet. 
irrational line can be divided into
of Gr. and Bom. Biography. 
its terms only in one point:" i.e. that
2 This sentence gives the effect of 
s/a + \/bca.waot=\/x + s/y, unless a=a;
the sixth hexads (Props. 67—71 and 
and b = y. Nesselmann, p. 177.
104—108) which, however, contain 
4 This sentence gives the effect of
only 5 propositions each. 
They are 
Prop. 116. Nesselmann, p. 182.
devoted to proving, by separate cases, 
6 This refers to Prop. 117, which is
that "every line, commensurable in 
clearly not Euclid's, as we have it.
length with a binomial irrational line, 
The enunciation, for instance, begins
is an irrational line of the same 
" Let it be proposed to prove" etc. and
species." Nesselmann, p. 179. 
two proofs are given.
3 This sentence gives the effect of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Ariihrnetica. 
83
52. "The preceding enumeration," says the same writer
in another place1, "points to one of the most remarkable
pages in the history of geometry. The question immediately
arises, had Euclid any substitute for algebra ? If not, how
did he contrive to pick out, from among an infinite number
of orders of incommensurable lines, the whole, and no more
than the whole, of those which were necessary to a com-
plete discussion of all lines represented by */ (»Ja + *Jb), with-
out one omission or one redundancy? He had the power of
selection, for he himself has shown how to construct an infinite
variety of other species, and an algebraist could easily point out
many more ways of adding to the subject, which could not have
been beyond Euclid. If it be said that a particular class
of geometrical questions, involving the preceding formula and
that one only, pointed out the various cases, it may be answered
that no such completeness appears in the 13th book, in which
Euclid applies his theory of incommensurables. It is there
proved that each of the segments of a line divided in extreme
and mean ratio is an apotome'—that the side of an equilateral
pentagon inscribed in a circle is, relatively to the radius,
the irrational line called a lesser line3, as is also the side of
an icosahedron inscribed in a sphere—and that the side of
a dodecahedron is an apotome'. The apotome then and the lesser
1 In the English (also in the Penny) 
us the old mathematician in his high-
Cyclopedia, Art. "Irrational Quantity." 
est glory."
A most complete summary of the con- 
2 See Prop, LXXVII. compared with XL.
tents of Euclid's 10th book is here 
If two lines, incommensurable in square
given, followed by the remarks quoted 
and such that the sum of their squares
in the text. The book was evidently 
is rational but their rectangle is me-
a favourite with De Morgan. Nessel- 
dial, are combined, their sum and their
mann, p. 184, after remarking on the 
difference are both irrational. The
unsuggestiveness of the linear sym- 
former is called y ixel&v, the latter v
bolism, says "Abstract thought alone 
iXdrrav. Two such lines are found
has extracted from these lines their 
earlier in Prop, xxxiv. They are re-
hidden secrets, which our formulae, 
presented algebraically by
almost unasked, declare. Indeed I
think it is not too much to say that
this book, almost useless in its geo-
metrical form and therefore little
esteemed, is the very one which shows
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

84 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Ariihmetica.
line are the only ones applied 
The most conspicuous pro-
positions of elementary geometry which are applied in the
10th book are the 27th, 28th and 29th of the 6th book,
of which it may be useful to give the algebraical significance \
The first of these (the 27th) amounts to showing that 2% — a?
has its greatest value when x = \, and contains a limitation
necessary to the conditions of the two which follow. The 28th
is a solution of the equation ax — a? = b, upon a condition
derived from the preceding proposition, namely, that ^ a? shall
exceed b. It might appear more correct to say that the solution
of this equation is one particular case of the proposition, namely,
where the given parallelogram is a square: but nevertheless the
assertion applies equally to all cases. Euclid however did not
detect the two solutions of the question: though if the diagonal
of a parallelogram in his construction be produced to meet the
production of a line which it does not cut, the second solution
may be readily obtained. This is a strong presumption against
his having anything like algebra; since it is almost impossible
to imagine that the propositions of the 10th book, deduced
from any algebra, however imperfect, could have been put
together without the discovery of the second root. The re-
1 Cantor, Vorles. p. 228, gives practi- 
be not greater than that which can be
cally the same algebraical equivalents, 
applied to half the line, so that the
which, he says, first appeared in Mat- 
defects of the given rectilineal figure
thiesen, Grundziige der antik. u. mod. 
and of that which is applied to half the
Algebra etc. 1878. He does not seem to 
line be similar.
have heard of De Morgan. As these pro- 
xxix. To a given straight line to
positions are not usually printed, the 
apply a parallelogram equal to a given
enunciations may be here subjoined: 
rectilineal figure, and excessive by a
XXVII. 
Of all parallelograms applied 
parallelogram which is similar to a
to the same straight line and defective 
given parallelogram,
by parallelograms similar and similarly 
X) 
E
situate to that which is described on 
/ 
~l 
~~7
half the line, the greatest is that which 
/ 
/ 
/
is applied to half the line, and is similar 
i- 
L 
/
to its defect. 
A
B
C
xxvm. 
To a given straight line to 
In the figure AD if applied to the
apply a parallelogram equal to a given 
line AC is defective {iWeirei). 
AE
rectilineal figure and having its defect 
if applied to the line AB is excessive
similar to a given parallelogram: pro- 
(u7re/>/3(£\\*i). 
See also Simson's note
vided that the given rectilineal figure on these Propositions.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
85
maining proposition (the 29th) is equivalent to a solution
of ax + x* = b: but the case of x* — ax = b is wanting, which is
another argument against Euclid having known any algebraical
reasoning."
53. It must be added, before quitting this book, that
Euclid nowhere alludes to any familiar example of an incom-
mensurable. 
Some editor (whose language and style of proof
differ noticeably from Euclid's) has added, at the end of the
book, Prop, cxvil. proving that 'the diagonal of a square is
incommensurable with the side1.' Prof. De Morgan in one
place2 suggests that Euclid's interest in incommensurables
was perhaps due to a suspicion that the circumference of a
circle was incommensurable with the diameter. 
In another
place3, he suggests that Euclid had discussed some known
examples of incommensurables in his lost work on Fallacies
(7repl ylrevBaplwv), which, he thinks, was intended to be pre-
fatory to the Elements. Both suggestions, of course, are purely
conjectural. 
Hardly anything is known of the Greek theory
of incommensurables before Euclid's time. Their discovery is
expressly attributed to Pythagoras4, but for a long time, the
sole known fact was that the diagonal of a square : the side ::
»/2 : 1. To this, according to Plato5, Theodorus of Cyrene
added the fact that sides of squares represented by ^/3, A/5 etc.,
up to A/17 were irrational. Theaetetus, a pupil of Theodorus,
made the generalization that the side of any square, represented
by a surd, was incommensurable with the linear unit. At a later
date, perhaps, he improved this into- the form of Euclid x. 9:
Two magnitudes, whose squares are (or are not) to one another
1 The proof is as follows. ' Suppose 
is attributed to Plato,
the diagonal: side ::p : q, p and q being 
3 Art. Eucleides in Smith's Die. of
whole numbers prime to one another. 
Biogr.
Then p* = 2q2. p" and p are, therefore, 
3 Art.'Irrational Quantity'in Penny
even numbers. It follows that q, which 
Cyclop.
is prime to p, must be odd. But p, 
4 See supra p. 74 n.
being even, =2r. Therefore (2i-)2 = 2gra 
» Theaetetus, pp. 147 D—148 B. In
and q must be even. Which is absurd.' 
this passage, the young Theaetetus says
This proof is twice referred to by Aris- 
he made the same generalization for
totle (An. Prior, l. c. 23. 41, a 26, and 
cube roots as for square roots. Cube
c. 44. 55, a 37). It may be very old, 
roots are not mentioned anywhere in
yet the methoS of reductio ad absurdum 
Euclid.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

86 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica.
as a square number to a square number, are commensurable (or
incommensurable) and conversely1. Democritus is said2 to have
written a treatise irepl ypafifiwv dXoyav KOX vaa-Twv, but no
trace of it remains nor does any clue exist to the meaning of
vaa-Twv. It cannot be doubted that Euclid's work contains at
least all that was known of the theory of incommensurables
before his time, and as Euclid left it, so it remained, untouched,
down to the 15 th century, when Lucas Pacioli de Burgo
resumed the study3.
54. After the death of Euclid, the astonishing successes of
geometry in the hands of Archimedes and Apollonius and the
growing interest of astronomy seem to have attracted all atten-
tion to those sciences4, and, so far as we know, no substantive
work on the theory of numbers was produced for nearly four
centuries. Some small additions, however, were made en
passant to the theory of rational numbers by various mathema-
ticians. 
Thus, some theory of combinations was perhaps in-
vented. The problem, attributed to Xenocrates by Plutarch,
has been mentioned above (p. 71 n.), and Plutarch in the same
passage6 states, without more, that Chrysippus (B. C. 282—209)
found that the number of possible combinations of 10 axioms
was over a million: but that Hipparchus showed that the
axioms, if affirmed, admitted of 101,049, and, if denied, of
1 The scholiast to Euclid x., said to 
study e.g. of Bachet, Fermat, Pell,
beProclus(ed.Knoche,sMp.cit.p. 74n.), 
Frenicle. 
The differential 
calculus
expressly attributes Euclid x. 9 and 10 
followed and occupied all attention till
to Theaetetus. See Hankel, pp. 100— 
Euler brought back the Diophantic
103. 
analysis, which- was in fashion with
2 Diog. Laertius ix. 47. 
Lagrange, Legendre, Gauss, Jacobi and
3 Nesselmann, p. 183. 
their contemporaries.
4 Nesselmann, p. 187, gives many 
6 Quaest. Cone. vm. 9,11—13. Also
instances of the changes of fashion in 
De Stoicorum Repugn, xxix. 3 and 5,
mathematics. From the time of Ni- 
(Reiske's ed. Vol. x. p. 330). Cantor
comachus (A.D. 100) the theory of num- 
Varies, pp. 215, 220. (The first num-
bers became the Greek fashion. When 
ber attributed to Hipparchus is quoted
Leonardo Bonacci (A.D. 1292) brought 
as 103,049 in De Stoic. Rep. where also
the Arabian algebra into Europe, this 
he is said to be 'one of the arithme-
also became the fashion for 400 years. 
ticians'.) 
The Quaestiones Convivales
When Diophantus became known (Xy- 
are also known as Symposiacon and
lander 1571, Bachet 1621) indetermin- 
Disputationes Convivales.
ate equations became the favourite
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEEEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
87
310,952, combinations. 
Such results, however, may have been
obtained empirically, and certainly no theory of combinations
appears in any extant mathematical writer.
55. Eratosthenes the famous librarian of Alexandria (B.C.
275—194) invented a mode of distinguishing prime numbers,
which was called, after him, ' the sieve' (tcoa/uvov, cribrum) of
Eratosthenes. All composite numbers are ' sifted' out in the fol-
lowing manner1. The odd numbers are set out in order from 3
to as high a number as possible. Then every 3rd number from 3
is a multiple of 3 and may be rejected : every 5th number from
5 is a multiple of 5 and may be rejected : every 7th number from
7 is a multiple of 7 and may be rejected, and so on. The
numbers ultimately retained are prime. Hypsicles (circa
B.C. 180), the author of the 14th and 15th books added to
Euclid's elements, made some contributions to the theory of
arithmetical progression, which Euclid entirely neglects. The
first three propositions of his dvacf>opi>e6<; (a little work on the
'risings of the stars,' dvcKpopat,)2 are to the following effect.
(1) In an arithmetical series of 2« terms, the sum of the last
n terms exceeds the sum of the first n by a multiple of n2:
(2) in such a series of 2w +1 terms, the sum of the series is the
number of terms multiplied by the middle term: (3) in such a
series of 2n terms, the sum is half the number of terms
multiplied by the two middle terms. Some more general
formula for the summation of arithmetical series perhaps led to
the following definitions, most of which are entirely unknown
to, or neglected by, Euclid3. " If as many numbers as you
please be set out at equal intervals from 1, and the interval is
1, their sum is a triangular number: if the interval is 2, a
square: if 3, a pentagonal: and generally the number of
angles is greater by 2 than the interval." This statement is
quoted from ' Hypsicles ev opa>' by Diophantus"; but whether
1 Nicomachus, Introd. Ar. ed. Hoche, 
clid, is said to have written a work on
p. 29 sqq., and Iamblichus' Commen- 
polygonal numbers. See Cantor Varies.
tary (ed. Tennulius) pp. 41, 42. 
p. 143, quoting Westermann's Bi6-
2 Described by Delaxabre Astron. Anc. 
ypa<j>oi, p. 446.
i. and Cantor Vorles. p. 312. 
4 Prop. 8 of the treatise on Polygonal
3 Philippus Opuntius, a pupil of So- 
Numbers. Nesselmann, p. 466. Cantor
crates and Plato, and earlier than Eu- 
Vorl. p. 312.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

88 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
O/309 (' the term') was the name of a book, or opo<; here means
only the 'definition' of polygonal numbers, cannot now be
ascertained. This extension of polygonal numbers (however
originated) became a very favourite subject of later arithme-
ticians, to be presently mentioned.
Hipparchus (dr. B.C. 150) is said, by Arabian authorities, to
have written on the solution of Quadratic Equations1. Heron,
the ingenious mechanician and land-surveyor (B.C. 100), evi-
dently knew some algebraical processes which were strange to
Euclid, but he was not an arithmetician proper2, and the more
particular account of his work may be left for the history of
geometry. From this time dpi6/j,t]TtKi] may be said to dis-
appear at least from history for two centuries.
56. It was revived by Nicomachus, a native of Gerasa,
probably a town in Judaea, The date at which he lived may be
determined roughly by the two facts, that he himself quotes one
Thrasyllus8, who seems to have been the astrologer, friend of
the Emperor Tiberius, and that his work was translated into
Latin by Apuleius of Madaura, in- the time of the Antonines.
He may be taken, therefore, to have flourished about 100 A.D.
He is said to have been a Pythagorean and to have written a
work on arithmetical theosophy, but the curious farrago,
entitled OeoKoyovixeva rrji dpiOfirjriicr}?, is not his, for here
Anatolius is cited, the Bishop of Laodicea (A.D. 270) who wrote
a commentary on Nicomachus4. Two treatises of Nicomachus
are extant, the Enchiridion Harmonices in two books, and the
Introductio Arithmetica 
(elcra<ywyr/ dpidfj-tjTiici]) also in two
1 Cantor Varies, p. 313, quoting 
Cassiodorus de Arithmet. p. 555.
Woepoke's ed. of 'L'Algebre d'Omar 
* All the facts about Nicomachus are
Alkhayy&mV Paris 1851, Pref. xi 
collected, and the errors corrected, by
and Journal Asiat, v. (5th Series) 
Nesselmann (pp. 188—191) who alleges
pp. 251—253. 
also that none of the mathematical
2 For a specimen of his skill, see 
historians (including Montuda) can
below, p. 106. 
have read Nicomachus at all. Nessel-
3 In the Enchiridion Harmonices I. 
mann seems to have used an edition of
p. 24 (ed. Meibomius, 1652). In the 
the Introductio published by Ast in
same work, n. p. 36, Ptolemy is cited, 
1817. Quite recently an edition has
but this is clearly an interpolation, for 
been published in the Teubner series
it would be inconsistent with the trans- 
(ed. Hoche) with a good preface,
lation by Apuleius, which is attested by
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
89
books. It is with the latter only that We are here concerned.
It was an extremely famous book in its day, and earned for its
author a distinction similar to that so long enjoyed in England
by Mr Cocker. Thus Lucian, wishing to compliment a calcu-
lator, says "You reckon like Nicomachus of Gerasa1." The
number of commentaries on the Introductio also sufficiently
attests its importance. Beside the translation of Apuleius and
the notes of Anatolius, mentioned above, we know of a com-
mentary by Iamblichus2, another (not extant) by Heronas3, a
translation (extant) by Boethius, commentaries (extant in MS.)
by Asclepius Trallianus and Johannes Pbjloponus and another
(not extant) by Proclus: extracts in Arabic by Thabit-ibn-
Corra (A.B. 836—901) and a commentary by Camerarius of the
16th century4. Nicomachus in fact inaugurates the final era of
Greek mathematics. From his time onwards, dpidfiTjn/ci] is the
favourite study, and geometry is neglected in its turn.
57. After a philosophical introduction, the first book of
Nicomachus proceeds (c. 8—10) to the classification of numbers,
as even and odd (dprioc and TrepirTol)5. Even numbers are
apridicLs; dpriot (2"), dprioTripiTTOc {2 (2m + 1)}, and irepicra-dp-
TIOI (2TC+1 (2m.+ 1)} i.e. they are either powers of 2 or 2 multi-
plied by an odd number or 2 multiplied by an even number,
which is itself a multiple of an odd number6. 
Odd numbers (c.
11—13) as either 'prime and uncompounded' (irpanoi, ical davv-
deroi), 'compounded' (BevTepoi teal a-vvOeroi) or 'compounded
but prime to one another.' The habit of dividing numbers into
1 Philopatris, 12. 
how far the Greeks still were from the
2 Ed. Tennulius (very badly as 
conception of 0 as a number.
Nesselmann shows) at Arnheim, 1667. 
6 This is an improvement on Euclid's
The commentary of Iambliehus forms 
definitions to Book vn. There dprtajai
the 4th part of his treatise on the Py- 
a/mosistheproductoftwoevennumbers,
thagorean philosophy. 
dpTidjas jrepiffcro's of an even multiplied
3 Mentioned by Eutocius (ad Archi- 
by an odd number. Hence in ix. 34 he
med. de Sphaera et Cyl. n.). 
has to confess that 'numbers which are
4 See Nesselmann, pp. 220—223. 
not powers of 2 and which, when
6 Nicomachus begins by saying that 
divided by 2, give an even quotient,
every number is the half of the sum of 
are both aprioKis apnoi and apnaias
the preceding and succeeding numbers. 
irepiaaol.' Nicomachus, as usual, gives
1, however, has no predecessor and is 
a table for finding his three species,
half of 2 only. From this it is evident
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

90 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Ariihmetica.
3 groups (e'187)) has here led Nicomachus into great confusion of
thought. 
His second class contains all the third: his second
and third classes might very well contain even numbers, and
lastly his third class defines numbers by their relation to others,
whereas in c. 17 he says he has hitherto been considering
numbers in themselves. 
Chapters 14—16 contain the de-
finitions of perfect, excessive and defective numbers (reXetoi,
VTreprekeioi, iWiireii). 
Nicomachus then proceeds to the classi-
fication of the relations in which numbers stand to other
numbers. 
Of inequality between two numbers, 5 kinds may be
distinguished (c. 18—23). These are
1. When the greater divided by the less, gives a whole
number as quotient. 
The greater is then called 7roXX.a7rA.acrK)?,
a ' multiple,' the less v7ro7roXXa7rXao-to?, ' a submultiple.'
2. 
When the greater : the less :: m + 1 : m. 
The
greater is eiriftopioi (superparticularis), 
the less VTre7rifi6pios
(subsuperparticularis). 
Thus f is iirlrpiTos, § iiriTerapTos etc.
f is VTreTrlrpLTO?, | vire-wtreTapTO<s etc. But f is specially
named tJ/uoXw?1.
3. 
Greater : less :: 2m + n:m 
+ n. 
The greater is eVt-
fieprj<i (superpartiens), the less inreTrifieprjs (subsuperpartiens).
As a general rule, the fractions here contemplated are of the
form 
T, and in the nomenclature the denominator is not
m + 1
mentioned. 
Thus
1 + |- is eTTiSifiepiji;, superbipartiens,
1 + f is e-mTpifjuepr]*;, supertripartiens, etc.
But Nicomachus himself does not always use this nomenclature
and was evidently equal to finding names for a fraction of the
form 
. Thus 1 + § is eVtS/iyj/.TO?, 1 + f 
is eVtT/st-
1 Here Nicomachus refers to a 
in a lower row is iroWairXcio-tos of the
table of 10 rows, divided into 10 
corresponding number in the 1st row:
columns. The first horizontal row con- 
the numbers in successive rows (except
tains the numbers 1 to 10: the second 
the 1st and 2nd) are related, so that
these numbers multiplied by 2: the 
the lower rows are twi/topioi of the next
third, multiplied by 3, etc. up to 10 
higher, the higher are vireinfi6pioi. of the
times. It is, in fact, the earliest known 
next lower. This tatle is referred to
multiplication table. Every number 
also in the succeeding chapters.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
ArithmetlCCC. 
91
and in the same way, 1 + § etc. might have been
called e7r(Tpt7T6/U.7rTo?, etc.
4. Greater : less :: mn + 1 : n. The greater is TroXka-
TrTuicrieTrifiopios, the less V7ro7ro\Xcnr\acrie'7ri/j,6pto$.
2J is St,TrXaaie^>rjfj,iavi, duplex sesquialter.
2J is SiTrXacnewbTpiTos, duplex sesquitertius.
3£ is TpnrXao-ieTTiTeTapTos, triplex sesquiquartus, etc.
5. Greater : less :: p (m + 1) + m : m + 1, where p is more
than 1. The nomenclature, so far as regards the whole
number, is the same as in class 4, and as regards the fraction,
the same as in class 3 (e.g. SnfXacrieTrt&ifiepTjs = 2§ etc.). An-
other table is here appended, showing how to find numbers
which shall be to one another in the foregoing ratios. There
is, in fact, little of mathematical value in the 1st book of
Nicomachus, but it is of some historical interest to observe how
complicated the Greek treatment of fractions still remained.
It should be remembered also that the nomenclature of Nico-
machus was translated into Latin, and became habitual in
Western Europe down to the introduction of the Arabian
arithmetic.
58. The 2nd book begins with another table, showing how
to find series of eTrifioptoi, and various comments on this table1.
In c. 6, Nicomachus turns to the theory of polygonal numbers.
These he describes (c. 8—11) in precisely the same manner as
that which is attributed to Hypsicles by Diophantus (supra
p. 87), save that in Nicomachus the terms of the arithmetical
1 The table is thus constructed. 
The first numbers of the rows form a
Write out a geometrical series begin- 
geometrical series of which the radix
ning from 1. Take the sum of each 
is 4 (chaps. 3 and 4). Legendre, in the
pair of successive terms and set these 
preface to his Theorie des Nombres, says
sums in a row below the 2nd and sue- 
that this science becomes a sort of
ceeding terms of the 1st, and continue 
passion with those who take it up:
this process ad lib. E.g. 
whereupon De Morgan remarks that
1 3 
9 27 
81 etc. 
this is probably because the curious eha-
4 12 36 108 etc. 
racter of the conclusions is not lessened
16 48 144 etc. 
by the demonstration. 
The explana-
64 192 etc. 
tion is peculiarly appropriate to Nico-
Here each column is a geometrical 
machean dpifffj.T)Tucfi, with its unsug-
series of which the radix is eirirpiros. 
gestive symbolism.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

92 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
series by which the polygonal numbers are found are all called
gnomons. This word therefore, which in Euclid means the
difference between one square and the next, means in Nico-
machus the difference between any polygonal number and the
next of the same order. Then follow (c. 12) some analogies
between arithmetical and geometrical facts: e.g. as every
square can be divided by a diagonal into two triangles, so every
square number is the sum of two triangular: every square
number plus a triangular makes a pentagonal etc. Then, as
usual, a table is given of the polygonal numbers of each order,
with remarks thereon. Chaps. 13—17 deal with solid numbers.
The sum of a series of polygonal numbers from 1 upwards is a
pyramid, triangular or square etc. according to the order of the
polygonal numbers. The highest of such polygonal numbers is
the base, 1 is the apex, of each such pyramid. If 1 be omitted,
the pyramid is truncated (KoXovpos): if 1 and the next poly-
gonal number be omitted, the pyramid is Siic6\ovpo<; and so on.
Besides pyramids, there are cubes, beams (So/ciSes), tiles (TTXIV-
OiSes), wedges (crcjyrjvicrKoi,), spheres and parallelepipeds. 
Wedges
are numbers of the form (mxnx 
p), where all 3 dimensions are
different1: tiles are m2 (m — n): beams (or columns, o-T^Xt'Se? in
Iamblichus) are m2 (m + n). A number of the form m (m + 1)
is erepofiriKr)';: m (m + n) is oblong (vpofiriicrjs) if n > 1: a
parallelepiped is of the form m2 (m + 1). The powers of 1, 5 and
6 always end in 1, 5 and 6: the squares of these numbers may
therefore be called circular, their cubes spherical. In c. 18—20
square numbers and 6Tepofi^Kei<; (2, 6, 12 etc.) are set out in
parallel rows and attention is drawn to a number of curious
coincidences, thus exhibited : e.g. the differences between suc-
cessive squares form the series of odd, those between successive
erepofJirJKei'i the series of even, numbers: in the series of odd
numbers from 1, the first term is the first cube, the sum of the
2nd and 3rd terms is the 2nd cube, the sum of the 4th 5 th and
6th terms is the 3rd cube and so on.
59. At this point (c. 21) Nicomachus turns to the dis-
1 Also called a^/qdaKoi 'stakes' or 
(o. 16). On the origin of this classifi-
pw^lcKoi 'altars.' All solid numbers 
cation of numbers, see Dean Peacock in
of 3 unequal dimensions are scalene 
Ency. Metrop. I. pp. 422, 423.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
93
cussion of proportion (dvaXoyiai, /teo-oTJjre?)1, which, he says, is
very necessary for " natural science, music, spherical trigo-
nometry and planimetry and particularly for the study of the
ancient mathematicians." He begins with a slovenly definition:
" ratio (X0709) is the relation between two terms: proportion is
the composition of ratios2." 
When the same term is "on both
sides," consequent (i57roXoyo?, comes) to the highest number,
antecedent (77/30X0709, dux) to the least, the proportion is called
'continued' (avvrj/n/xevrj). "When the middle terms are different
from one another, the proportion is 'disjunct' (Sie^evyfiivrjY.
He goes on to say that Pythagoras, Plato and Aristotle knew
only six kinds of proportion, viz. the arithmetical, geometrical
and harmonical, and "their three sub-contraries*, which have no
names." 
Later writers added four more. 
He then describes
(c. 23—25) the first three kinds, with a few remarks on each.
In a continued arithmetical proportion (a — b — b — c), he has
discovered a " most splendid rule, which has escaped most
mathematicians," viz. that b2 — ac = (a — Vf = (b — c)2. In a
continued geometrical proportion (a : b :: b : c), he notices5
that a — b : b — c :: a : b, and that between 2 square numbers
there is one, between 2 cubes two geometrical means. In a
harmonic proportion (a : c :: a — b : b — c) he observes, among
other things, that (a + c) b = 2ac. In c. 27, he states that
between any two numbers, even or odd, three mean terms may
always be found, one arithmetical, one geometrical and one
1 Properly (i.e. originally) ai>a\oyia says that the first three only were known
means geometrical proportion: /ie<7<Sr?/s 
to Pythagoras, the second three were in-
any other kind. But this distinction 
vented by Eudoxus. 
The remaining
was practically lost by Nicomachus' 
four he attributes (p. 163) to the Pytha-
time. 
See an excellent note in Nessel- 
goreans, Temnonides and Euphranor.
mann, pp. 210—212. 
All ten are treated in the Euclidean
2 Euclid v. Deff. 3 and 8 is more 
manner by Pappus, Math. Coll. in. (ed.
precise. 
Iamblichus himself corrects 
Hultsch) pp. 85 sqq.
Nicomachus on this point. 
5 A similar rule is true of any geo-
3 Euclid's name for a continued pro- 
metrical proportion, not necessarily
portion is dpi0,ui>if£^sacd\o7oi': Theon's 
continued. Euclid v. 17 and 19. 
The
is trvvex'is dvakoyla. Theon's name for 
next proposition mentioned in the text
an ordinary proportion of 4 terms is 
is the Platonic theorem proved in
diyprmivri. It is also called Suxhs. 
Euclid vin. 11, 12.
4 Iamblichus (In Nicom. pp. 141—2)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

94
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
harmonical1. He next (c. 28) states the remaining seven kinds
of proportion viz.
a- 6 (e.g. 6, 5, 3).
a-6(e.g. 5,4, 2).
a-6(e.g. 6,4, 1).
h-c {e.g. 9,8, 6).
o-6(e.g. 9,7,6).
h-c (e.g. 7,6,4).
a-h (e.g. 8,5,3).
We have previously been told (c. 22) that the number of
proportions was expressly raised to 10, because that was held
by the Pythagoreans to be the most perfect number. It is
rather surprising, therefore, to find that Nicomachus has yet
another in reserve, the musical, which he calls reXeioTdrr), the
" most perfect, comprehending 3 dimensions and embracing all
the other proportions." This, as was above stated (p. 70), is of
h, the 2nd term being the arith-
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
a
r-O
a
a
a
r-O
h
c :
c :
: 6 :
c :
c :
C :
c :
: 
h-c
: 6-e
: 6-o
: a — c
: a — c
: a — c
: a — c
,, 
» 
a + h
the torm a. : —_—
a + h
metical, and the 3rd the harmonical, mean between the two
extremes.
60. The foregoing summary is sufficient to show that, in
the interval of 400 years or so between Euclid and Nicomachus,
something had been done, though we know not by whom, for
the theory of numbers. In plane numbers, Euclid knows, or at
least uses, only the square and the gnomon: in solids, only the
cube : in proportions, only the geometrical. Almost the whole
learning of polygonal numbers and solids and proportions was
elaborated after his time, and before that of Nicomachus, for it
is evident that the Introductio contains little that is original.
In the meanwhile, again, mathematics had passed from the
study of the philosopher to the lecture-room of the under-
graduate. We have no more the grave and orderly proposition,
with its deductive proof. Nicomachus writes a continuous
1 He omits to mention that the two
given numbers multiplied must produce
a square, else the geometrical mean
will be irrational. He also fails to
notice that the three means will be
in geometrical proportion, viz.
a + 6_ i— lab
——— • KI &O '. 
: •
2 
^ 
a + b
Nesselmann, p. 215.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
95
narrative, with some attempt at rhetoric, with many inter-
spersed allusions to philosophy and history. But more im-
portant than any other change is this, that the dpoO/nrjTiKij of
Nicomachus is inductive, not deductive. It retains from the old
geometrical style only its nomenclature. Its sole business is
classification, and all its classes are derived from, and are
exhibited in, actual numbers. But since arithmetical inductions
are necessarily incomplete, a general proposition, though prima
facie true, cannot be strictly proved save by means of an
universal symbolism. Now though geometry was competent to
provide this to a certain extent, yet it was useless for precisely
those propositions in which Nicomachus takes most interest.
The Euclidean symbolism would not show, for instance, that all
the powers of 5 end in 5 or that the square numbers are the
sums of the series of odd numbers. What was wanted, was a
symbolism similar to the ordinary numerical kind, and thus
inductive dpiO^rjriKr) led the way to algebra.
61. Contemporary with, or not much later than Nico-
machus, was Theon of Smyrna, author of a treatise on "the
mathematical rules necessary for the study of Plato1." The date
of this author may be roughly determined by the fact that,
in citing all the writers on music since Pythagoras, he stops at
Thrasyllus (the friend of Tiberius) and does not quote the
apfioviicr) of Ptolemy. Ptolemy himself also quotes from a
certain Theon four observations of Mercury and Venus taken in
the years A. D. 139—142. There seems no reason to doubt that
this was Theon Smyrnaeus, whose Expositio is largely devoted
to astronomy. The book itself2 contains almost exactly the same
matter as Nicomachus (without the chapters on proportion),
but is very ill-arranged, so that rules are anticipated, one class
of numbers is treated in two or three widely separate chapters,
1 Cited as 'Expositio rerum matlie- 
on geometry, stereometry and the
rmticarum ad legendum Platonem uti- 
music of the spheres. Cantor and the
Hum.' Ed. Hiller, Leipzig, 1878. 
most recent editor, Hiller, are of opin-
2 The Expositio, as we have it, was 
ion, however, that we have the entire
formerly thought to be only a fragment. 
work. See Cantor Vwles. p. 367.
We have it in two books, one on arith- 
Nesselmann p. 231 (quoting Bouil-
metic, the other on astronomy. It was 
laud).
supposed that three more were missing,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

96 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
the same facts are many times repeated1. It contains, however,
two novelties, which may be thus stated. (1) Every square2, or
every square minus 1, is divisible by 3 or 4 or both: if the
square is divisible only by 3, then minus 1, it is divisible by 4:
and if it is divisible only by 4, then minus 1, it is divisible by
3 : if it is not divisible by 3 or 4, then minus 1 it is divisible by
both 3 and 4. (2) Theon introduces a new kind of numbers, called
diameters (Bta/ierpiKol c. 31). These are numbers whose squares
are of the form 2«2 + 1. They are obtained in the following way.
If 1 and 1 be the side and diameter of a square, then 1 +1 is the
side of the next, and 3 or 2 + 1 is its diameter: 2 + 3 is the next
side, 4+ 3 is its diameter : 5 + 7 is the next side, 10 + 7 is its
diameter etc., each successive side being the sum of the last
side + last diameter, and each successive diameter being twice
the last side + last diameter. Each diameter is the whole
number nearest to the root of twice the square of the corre-
sponding side8. It is curious that the ratios between these
diameters and the corresponding sides are represented by the
successive convergents of the continued fraction
1 1 1 
1
1 +2^+2+2+-
which represents the approximate value of >J2. Theon, how-
ever, says nothing either of \/2 or of continued fractions4.
62. At some unknown date, certainly before Iamblichus,
(i.e. before A.D. 300) lived one Thymaridas, the inventor of
a certain proposition, known as his ltravQt]y.a or 'after-blossom.'
A brief and obscure account of this is preserved by Iamblichus5,
1 See Nesselmann, pp. 226—227. 
rational numbers, to two indeterminate
2 C. 20. The same rule is given by 
quadratic equations, viz. 2t2 + l = « 2
Iamblichus, In Nicom. p. 126. 
and 2a;2 - 1 = 2/2. He does not, indeed,
3 These diameters are the [yip-ai Sid- 
suppose that Theon knew this, but the
ixerpot, 'rational diameters' to which 
fact is interesting as bearing on the
Plato seems to allude in the famous 
work of Diophantus.
passage about the 'nuptial number'. 
6 Ira Nicom. p. 88. Cantor, in his
Sep. VIII. 246. 
Math. Beitrdge, pp. 97 and 880, iden-
4 See Cantor Vorles. pp. 229, 272— 
tified this Thymaridas with him of
274, 369—370. Nesselmann, pp. 229, 
Tarentum, who is said by Iamblichus
230 observes that Theon has here stated 
to have been a pupil of Pythagoras,
a mode of finding all the solutions, in 
In the Vorles. (Pref. vn.) he abandons
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmeticct. 
97
and has been brilliantly explained by Nesselmann (pp. 232—
236). 
The proposition, which is curiously worded, is as follows:
" When any defined or undefined (copierpivot rj aoptaToi) quantities
amount to a given sum and the sum of one of them plus every
other (in pairs) is given, the sum of these pairs minus the
first-given sum is (if there be 3 quantities) equal to the quantity
which was added to all the rest (in the pairs) : or (if there be 4
quantities) to £ of it: (if 5) to J: (if 6) to \ " etc. That is,
if x1 + x2 + os3 = S, be given, and a?t + x^ = si and xr + xs = s2,
then x1 — sx + s2 — 8. 
If four quantities xt 4- #2 + x3 + xi = S be
given, and xx + %2 = sv xt + x3 = s2, xx + tct = s3 be given, then
o _L o _L g 
fit
#! = -1 
*—«—8 
. And generally, if x. + x3 + x3 +... + xa = S,
and x1 + x2 = sv x1 + x3 = sr. ,xx + xn= sH_v then
Xl~ 
n-2
What is chiefly of importance in this proposition1 is the use
of the word dopMTTOs for an " unknown quantity." 
It does not,
indeed, appear whether Thymaridas had or had not a corre-
sponding symbol, but at least he has here stated an algebraical
theorem and used an algebraical expression. He has gone
beyond Nicomachus and nearly approached Diophantus.
63. The <rvvayco<yij, or Mathematical Collections, of Pappus
the Alexandrian must have been written about A.D. 300.
Probably the first two books were arithmetical, since a fragment
of the 2nd Book contains an account of the tetrads of Apol-
lonius already described (supra, p. 62) and the remaining eight
deal almost entirely with geometry and mechanics. Iamblichus,
who has been so often quoted in these pages, is a little later.
He was born at Chalcis in Coele-Syria and may have been alive
this supposition. 
Two other facts 
in Strophe 29 of the Algebra of Aryab-
about Thymaridas are mentioned by 
hatta (ed. L. Eodet, pp. 14, 15, 38, 39
Iambliehus, (1) that he called unity 
in Journal Asiatique for 1879). Cantor
the 'terminating quantity' (-rrtpaivowa 
(Varies, pp. 529—530) maintains that
swirls), and (2) that he called prime 
the Indian (who was born A.D. 476)
numbers ciBvypaniuicol, because they 
has purposely disguised the epanthem,
cannot form plane 
figures. 
in order to conceal his plagiarism.
1 A very similar proposition appears
G. G. M. 
7
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

98 
GREEK THEORY OP NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica.
as late as A.D. 360\ It has been already stated (supra, p. 89)
that his commentary on Nicomachus forms the 4th Book of his
treatise on Pythagorean philosophy, the greater part of which
is still extant. In this commentary Iamblichus includes some
new matter, most of which is unimportant and need not be here
quoted2. One very singular statement, however, should not be
omitted. Iamblichus says that the Pythagoreans called 10 'the
unit of the second course,' 100 'the unit of the third course,'
1000 of the fourth and so on3. Upon this he founds the
following proposition: "If the units of any three consecutive
numbers, whereof the highest is divisible by 3, be added to-
gether and the units (i.e. digits) of their sum be added together
again and so on, the final sum will be 6." E.g. 7 + 8 + 9 = 24
and 2 + 4 = 6 : 997 + 998 + 999 = 2994 : 2 + 9+9 + 4 = 24,
2 + 4 = 6. It will at once be seen that this was, for a Greek, a
very difficult and remarkable discovery, and it tends very much
to confirm the suspicion that the octads and tetrads of Archi-
medes and Apollonius were in fact accompanied by a symbolism
which, if applied to tens, hundreds etc., would closely have
resembled the Arabic numeral system.
64. The extracts given, in previous pages, from Nicomachus
and Thymaridas will have led the reader to expect that algebra
is not far distant. This expectation becomes the more lively,
when we find that about this time problems leading to
equations were a common form of puzzle. Between 50 and 60
riddles of this kind are preserved in the Palatine Codex of Greek
epigrams (usually called the Palatine Anthology) and else-
where. At least 30 of these are attributed to one Metrodorus,
of the time of the Emperor Constantine (A.D. 306—337)4.
1 The Emperor Julian (A.D. 361—363) 
tor Vorles. 390—392.
is supposed to have corresponded with 
3 novas SevTepwSovii&yi, Tpiu5ov/j.ii>r),
Iamblichus, but the extant letters are 
&c. The name was suggested by a
of doubtful authenticity. 
singular fancy of arranging numbers
2 SeeNesselmann, pp. 237-242. Can- 
in a kind of race-course ; thus:
(ftrTrXn?, ' start') 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . 8 . 9 
. . .
U<r«, 'goal') 
1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . 8 . 9 • 1 0 ^
"
^
The next course begins at 10 and goes 
4 Jacobs, Comim. in Gr. Anthol. Pt.
on to 100 and back and so on. Iambli- 
xm. p. 917.
chus makes great use of this figure.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica. 
99
A few of them are older, though perhaps their metrical form is
of this date: many, no doubt, are much later, for the anthology
was not collected till the 10th century1. One of them, at-
tributed to Euclid2, is to this effect. A mule and a donkey
were walking along laden with corn. The mule says to the
donkey, "If you gave me one measure I should carry twice
as much as you : if I gave you one, we should both carry equal
burdens. Tell me their burdens, 0 most learned master of
geometry." It will be allowed that this problem, if authentic,
was not beyond Euclid, and the appeal to geometry smacks
of antiquity. Another and a far more difficult puzzle is the
famous ' cattle-problem' (irpofiXrifia fioeiicov) which Archimedes
is said to have propounded to the Alexandrian mathematicians3.
It is to the following effect. The sun had a herd of bulls and
cows, of different colours. (1) Of Bulls, the white (W) were,
in number, (\ +^) of the blue (B) and yellow (F): the B were
(i +1) of the Y and piebald (P): the P were Q- + f) of W and
Y, (2) Of Cows, which had the same colours, (w, b, y, p),
b): 6-(l + i)(P+i»): p= (* + *) (F+y):
). 
Find the number of bulls and cows4.
This is a very difficult problem, leading to excessively high
numbers, and may very well have been invented by Archi-
medes. The problems of Metrodorus are shorter. One of them
is of a kind still very familiar to schoolboys. It runs (Jacobs,
xiv. no. 130): " Of four pipes, one fills the cistern in one day,
the next in two days, the third in three days, the fourth in four
days: if all run together, how soon will they fill the cistern?"
There are several more of the same pattern. Another (Jacobs
1 See art. Planudes in Smith's Die. 
Nesselmann, who gives a translation
of Biogr. Most of the algebraical epi- 
and discusses it exhaustively (pp. 481—
grams are in Pt. xiv. of Jacobs' Antho- 
491), stoutly denies its authenticity.
logy, but a few more are in the Appen- 
Heiberg (Quaest. Archim. p. 26) is
dix (e.g. Nos. 19, 25, 26). 
Those 
inclined to admit it. It is not in
attributed to Metrodorus are in xiv. 
Jacobs.
116—146. See Nesselmann, pp. 477 
4 Solution in Nesselmann, pp. 484—
sqq. Cantor Tories, pp. 393—4. 
485. Some later hand has added some
a Jacobs' Appendix, No. 26. 
further difficulties: W+B is a square-
8 Discovered and printed by Leasing, 
number, P+Y 
is a triangular. 
On
Zur Gesch. der Lit. I. pp. 421—446. 
this, see also Nesselmann's comments.
7—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

100 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
XIV. 127) is : "Demochares has lived ^th of his life as a boy:
•|th as a young man; |rd as a man, and 13 years as an old man.
How old is he ?" and there are more of this sort1. Another,
not by Metrodorus (Jacobs,. xiv. 49) is : ' Make me a crown of
gold and copper and tin and iron, weighing 60 minae. Copper
and gold shall be frds of it: gold and tin fths: gold and iron
|ths. How much gold, copper, tin and iron are in the 60 minae ?'
This is a problem on the epanthem of Thymaridas. None of
these problems, of course, lead to more than simple equations,
in which a line would be as good a symbol for the unknown
quantity as any other. But they are all arithmetical pro-
blems requiring analytical treatment, and they all involve the
consideration of an unknown quantity, for which some quasi-
arithmetical symbol would be most convenient. They became
especially popular just about the time of Diophantus3, and they
are therefore, as will be seen presently, of some historical
importance.
65- Contemporary with Iamblichus, or perhaps rather
earlier, lived Diophantus of Alexandria, the last and one of the
most fruitful of the great Greek mathematicians. His date
indeed can hardly be determined exactly. An arithmetical
epigram on his age is attributed to Metrodorus. From this, it
would appear that he died at the age of 84 years, some time
1 One of this kind is on the life of 
A.D. 1114, author of the Lildvatt, form-
Diophantus (Jacobs xiv. 126.) On 
ing part of the larger work Siddhanta-
these problems, Dean Peacock (art. 
giromani). By the ' regula duorum fal-
Arithmetic in Ency. Metrop. Pure Sci. 
sorum' (Arabic el Cataym, i.e. 'the two
I. §§ 244—248) remarks that,many of 
errors') two false assumptions were
them may have been solved (as similar 
taken and x was found from their
problems were by the Indians, Arabians 
difference. The simple 'falsa positio'
and early Italians) by the rule of 'falsa 
is called in the Lilavatl 'Ishta carman',
positio' or 'regula duorum falsorum': 
or'operation with an assumed number',
which dispensed with any algebraical 
Both are continually used by Luca
symbol. The simple 'falsapositio' was 
Pacioli and Tartaglia. See Dean Pea-
the assigning of an assumed value to 
cock's art. supra cit.: Hankel. p. 259,
the unknown quantity: which value, if 
Cantor Varies, pp. 524, 628—9. Also
wrong, could be corrected, in effect, by 
below p. 116 n.
a ' rule of three' sum (as in the modern 
2 An epigram is actually included in
rules for Interest, Discount or Present 
Dioph. Arithm. (v. 33) and the problem
Worth). This was used by the Egyptian 
solved. The epigram is printed in
AhmesandbytheIndianBhaskara(born 
Jacobs, App. no. 19.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
101
before A.D. 330 or thereabouts. But he is not quoted by any
writer before the younger Theon1, who was working A.D. 365—
372 and later. Theon's daughter, the famous Hypatia (died
A.D. 415) is said by Suidas (s. v.) to have written a commentary
on Diophantus. Abulpharagius, a Syrian historian of the 13th
century, says positively that Diophantus was a contemporary of
Julian the Apostate, who was emperor A.D. 361—363. If the
date of Metrodorus were certain, and the epigrams ascribed
to him were undoubtedly authentic, the. epigram above cited
would be conclusive. But it is not so, and Abulpharagius may be
right2. It would suit either testimony if we assign Diophantus
to the first half of the 4th century, a time at which algebra cer-
tainly ought to have appeared, but he may have been much
earlier. Doubts were at one time felt whether his name might
not be Diophantes, for the passages in which he is mentioned,
generally have the genitive Aio<f>dvTov, which would suit either
nominative3, but Theon and Abulpharagius both call him Dio-
phantos, and this may be taken to be his real name.
Only one work by Diophantus is cited, viz. the 'ApiO-
/irjTiicd. Two, however, are extant, viz. an ' A.pid/j,t)Tiicd and a
pamphlet on polygonal numbers, both mutilated. 
Diophantus
himself, in the opening words of his 'Api6/u,r)Tiicd, announces it
as a woik in 13 books: yet all the existing copies (save one)
have it in 6 books, and the one exception (Vatican MSS. no.
200) has it in 74. Yet it is evident that these 6 or 7 books are
1 Comm. on the Almagest. 
Ed. 
3 One MS. of Suidas, {s.v. Hypatia)
Halma. i. 111. The 6th definition 
has Aio0acrij», but others have Ai6-
of Diophantus is there quoted verbatim. 
(pavrov. Nesselmann, indeed (pp. 244,
2 On the question of Diophantus' 
247—249), thinks all are wrong and
date, see an exhaustive discussion in 
that the true reading of the passage
Nesselmann, pp. 243 —256. Here, how- 
(Kiister's) is ixofiyrj/ia eis Aio0dpTou
ever, Hypsioles, whom Diophantus 
da-Tpovo/MKiv Kaviva. 
This would be
quotes, is assigned to far too late a 
the name of a commentary by Hypatia
date, and Diophantus is (probably 
on the astronomical tables of some other
wrongly) identified with him who, ac- 
Diophantus.
cording to Suidas, was teacher of Li- 
* The known MSS. of Diophantus
banius the sophist (cir. A.D. 314—400). 
are enumerated by Nesselmann, p. 256
Cantor Varies. Pref. p. vn cites Tan- 
n. They are three Vatican (nos. 191,
nery, in Bulletin de Sci. Math, et 
200 and 304) one at Paris, one in the
Astron., but I cannot find the article. 
Palatine library (at Heidelberg). The
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

102 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
not a reasonable, and therefore probably not the original,
division. Some propositions contained in the 2nd Book (1—5
and 18, 19) clearly belong to the 1st, others, as clearly ought to
belong to the 3rd (especially the last two, 35 and 36). Similar
suspicions are aroused in other books. Evidence of mutilation
is afforded also by many propositions (e.g. II. 19 and several of
the 5th Book) which are not proved at all1. Two subjects,
which Diophantus must have treated, are entirely omitted, viz.
the solutions of determinate quadratic and of indeterminate
simple equations. On the other hand, the last books of our
copies are pretty clearly the limit of Diophantus' learning. For
all these reasons, Nesselmann'2 comes to the conclusion that the
6 or 7 books of the ''Api9/j,r)rticd, as we have them, do sub-
stantially represent the original, minus the two omitted subjects:
that the omitted subjects were treated between the 1st and 2nd
Books of our editions, and that the mutilation took place before
the date of the earliest MS. (i.e. before the 13th century).
A further question arises, whether the fragment on polygonal
numbers ever formed part of the 'Api0/u,r)Tiicd or not. Nessel-
mann thinks it did: Hankel and Cantor hold that it did not.
It can hardly be doubted that the latter are right. The 'ApiO-
IMTj'TiKd is purely algebraical and analytic (with the single
exception of V. 13): the fragment on polygonal numbers is
purely geometrical and synthetic. A similar question arises as
to a work called Hoplafiara (? 'Corollaries') which Diophantus
quotes in at least three places (v. 3, 5 and 19): but as this is lost,
it is not worth while in the present place to consider what it may
extant works of Diophantus were pub- 
do with the problem to which it is
lished with a commentary by Bachet 
attached. 
Nesselmann (pp. 410—413)
de Meziriac (Paris, 1621): further notes 
suggests that here the problem properly
were afterwards 
added by Fermat 
follows on v. 21: its solution is lost:
(Toulouse, 1670). A German transla- 
the two next problems with their solu-
tion was published by 0. Schulz (Berlin, 
tions are lost: the next problem is lost,
1822). A Latin paraphrase by Xylan- 
but its solution remains.
der(Holzmann)Basle,1571,firstbrought 
2 See esp. pp. 265 sqq. 
Cantor
Diophantus into general notice, though 
Vorles. pp. 397—398. Hankel, pp.
many scholars knew of his existence 
157—158. Nesselmann quotes, in sup-
before, 
port of his views (p. 272) Colebrooke's
1 A very striking instance occurs in 
Algebra of the Hindus, note M, p. LXI.
v. 22, where the solution has nothing to
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
103
have contained, and how it would have fitted into the extant
works1.
66. Of these latter, the fragment of Polygonal numbers
may be first dismissed, both because it is very short and
because, also, it is in the antique geometrical style. The only
difference, here, between Diophantus and his predecessors is
that he treats of polygonal numbers generally, without specially
handling the different classes of them. The book, as we have
it, is divided into 10 propositions, which is an excessive number
for the actual matter contained2. It begins "by stating (as well-
known) that all numbers above 3 are polygons, containing as
many angles as units: and that the side of each such polygon is
2. Then follows a statement of the purpose of the work to this
effect: " As a square number is known to be the product of a
number multiplied by itself, so every polygonal number, multi-
plied by one number and added to another, both of which
depend upon the number of its angles, produces a square
number. I shall prove this, and shall show also how from a
given side to find its polygon and conversely. Some auxiliary
propositions must first be proved." Then follow some pro-
positions on arithmetical progression, proved geometrically.
Their result may be stated algebraically thus: Prop. n8. If a,
a + 6, a + 26 be three terms of an A. P. then 8 (a + 26) (a + 6)
+ a2 = [(a + 26) + 2 (a + b)]". Prop. in. If a, a + 6, a + 26 etc.
be an A. P. the difference between the 1st term and the nth is
(n — 1) 6. Props, iv. v. Summation of an A. P. of n -terms,
proved first where n is even, secondly where n is odd. The
following propositions introduce the more familiar progressions,
in which the first term is 1. Thus vi.* if S be the sum of n
terms of the series 1, 1 + 6,, 1+26 etc. then 8bS+{b — 2)"
= [6 (2n — 1) + 2]2. Prop. vil. contains the geometrical proof
that 62(2ra-l)2=[6(2rc-l)]2. The most important is viil.:
in the series 1, 1+6, 1+26 etc. the sum of n terms is a
1 The curious may consult Nessel- 
mary of Props. Tin. and rx. in Cantor
mann, pp. 269—270, and his 10th 
Vorles. p. 414.
Chapter, pp. 437 sqq. 
3 Proof given in full by Nesselmann,
2 See a very full abstract in Nessel- 
pp. 471—472,
mann, ch. xi. pp. 462—476. A sum- 
4 Proof in Nesselmann, pp. 473—4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

104 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmeticd.
polygon, containing b + 2 angles, and its si<Je is the sum of the
preceding (n — 1) terms (compare Hypsicles, whom Diophantus
here quotes)1. Thence follows a "definition" of a polygonal
number to this effect: " Every polygonal number of n angles,
multiplied by 8 (n — 2) and added to (n — 4)8, is a square
number"2. This with the ixth Prop., in fact, completes the
promise of the introduction, but a xth proposition is added
"To find in how many orders a given number is polygonal3."
Only a fragment of this remains, from which it is impossible to
discern how Diophantus intended to complete his proof. All
these propositions are given in the Euclidean manner, with an
enunciation, a linear symbolism, and a synthetic proof ending
oirep eSet Belgai. (Q. E. D.). But it is to be remembered that
lines, with Diophantus, are symbols for numbers only (as in
Euclid vir,—ix), and not for magnitudes (as in Euclid II. or
x.) Nevertheless, he adopts for arithmetical purposes pro-
positions proved for geometrical by Euclid (e.g. II. 3, 4 and 8)
and from this it is evident that the arithmetical uses of Euclid
were known to the later Greek mathematicians4.
1 The proof is given in full by 
runs thus:
Nesselmann, pp. 474—476. 
| 
| 
|
2 If P be the polygonal number, 
E 
A 
B 
D G
8 (n - 2) P + (n - 4)2 = a square number. 
'' Three numbers, AB, BG, BD have a
This proposition was known of tri- 
constant difference { = GD). It is to
angular numbers as early as Plutarch 
be proved that 8 AB . BG + BDs = a
{Plat. Quaest. v. 2, 4), and is so repeated 
square of which the side is AB + 2BG.
by Iamblichus. The general proof is 
SinGeAB = BG + GD,8AB .BG = 8BG2
probably Diophantus' own. Baehet 
+8BG.GD, and 4AB.BG=4BG*
remarks that the converse is not ne- 
+4BG.GD. 
But(Eucl.n.8)4J3G.GD
cessarily true. If 8 (ra - 2) P + [n - 4)s 
+ BD*=ABS. 
The inquiry therefore is
is a square, it does not follow that P 
h<ywABi + iAB.BG + iBG2 give a sum
is a polygon of the nth order, unless 
which is a square number. 
Take
n is 3 or 4. E.g. If n = 5, 24P + 1 
AE = BG. Then (Euclidn. 3)±BA. AE
is a square, if P = 2: but 2 is not a 
+4AE!!=IBE.EA 
and4BE.EA+BA*
pentagonal number. See Nesselmann, 
=(BE + EAf. 
But (BE + EA)=AB
p. 467. 
+2AE=AB + 2BG, Q.B.D." It will
3 E.g. 36 has 3, 4, 13 or 36 angles: 
be seen that this proof is wholly Eucli-
225 has 4, 8, 24, 76 or 225 angles, etc. 
dean, but omits many steps which
Nesselmann. pp. 468—470. 
Euclid would certainly have inserted,
4 The proof of the 1st proposition is 
and that it uses Euclid u. 3 and 8 for
short enough to be inserted here. It 
arithmetical purposes.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetical,. 
105
67. The Arithmetica is a work of infinitely greater im-
portance. It is a treatise on algebra, and, if not the first that
ever was written, is by far the earliest now extant. It is devoted
to the solution of equations, which Diophantus expresses with
algebraical symbols and treats always analytically. But as Dio-
phantus does not claim for himself the credit of inventing either
the symbols which he uses or his method of proof, a short
recapitulation should be here inserted to account, as far as
possible, for both inventions.
The ancient geometers knew two modes of proof, which
they called synthetic and analytic1. With the former, a pro-
position is proved directly by steps advancing from the known
to the unknown. With the latter (of which the reductio ad
absurdurn is a particular kind), a proposition to be proved is
assumed to be true or untrue, and the assumption is shown
to be consistent or inconsistent with some simpler facts already
known, or is shown to be so upon certain conditions. Algebraic
proof is of this latter, the analytical, kind. The invention of
this kind of proof is expressly attributed to Plato2. We have
already seen {supra, p. 18), that calculation with an unknown
quantity (called Hau or ' heap') was practised by the Egyptians
in very remote antiquity, and that some conventional signs
at least for addition and subtraction were then used. So useful
an art can hardly have disappeared entirely from the later
Egyptian civilization. Aristotle first, so far as we know,
employed letters of the alphabet to indicate unknown magni-
tudes, though not for purposes of calculation3. But this
1 Euclid xm. 1, (Schol.) Pappus, Bk. 
. „ 
i# 
,. 
, 
.„ 
B
T> r 
xij 
n ii. i 
<.->, 
o f the motion, then A will move ^j
vn. Preface. Ed. Hultsch, p. 634. 
' 
2
Proclus, ed. Friedlein, pp. 211—212. 
twice the distance Y in the time A or
Todhunter's Euclid, Notes, pp. 309 
the whole distance Y in half the time
sqq. 
A," etc. Poggendorf, Gesch. der Phy-
2 Proclus, loc. cit. and Diog. Laert. 
sik. p. 242, sees in this the germ of
in. 24. 
the principle of virtual velocity. 
It
3 See, for example, Physics, vn. vm. 
is evident also that Aristotle understood
passim: but esp. vn. 5 (pp. 249—250 
the advantage of these alphabetic sym-
of the Berlin ed.), where it is stated: 
bols, for he explains (Anal. Post. i. 5,
"If A be the mover, B the moved 
p. 74 a 17) how much time and trouble
thing, V the distance and A the time 
is saved by a general symbolism.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

106 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica.
suggestion could hardly be followed up because the alphabet,
soon after Aristotle's time, came to be used for ordinary arith-
metical purposes. 
Euclid uses lines as symbols for magni-
tudes, including numbers, and though he solves quadratic
equations and performs other operations of universal arithmetic,
he uses always the synthetic mode of proof, and confines himself
strictly to geometrical conditions. He will not add a line to a
square, or divide a line by another line or name a particular
number. 
The limitations imposed upon universal arithmetic by
the linear symbolism were too great. 
Algebra could come only
from the practical calculator who was not hampered by such
difficulties. 
The first step seems to have been taken, not by a
Greek, but by the Egyptian Heron. 
Thus, in a proposition
now included in the Geometria (p. 101 in Hultsch's edition)
but originally part of " another book " unknown, Heron does not
scruple to add an area to a circumference1. In modern symbols,
the proposition runs: ' If 8 be the sum of the area {A), the
circumference (O), and the diameter (D) of a circle, find the
A- 
4- 
rnu 
, . , , 
. 
. , 
J154S + 841 - 29
diameter, lne answer which he gives is a = - 
^ 
.
The proof, which he does not give, is obviously as follows:
A is y d3 : C is ird : IT is %?. Then S = ^ d* + (ir + 1) d =
4 
' 
4
. Multiply each term by 154 (=11 x 14). Then
121 cf + 638 d + 841 = 154S + 841 or"(11 d + 29)3 = 154 S+ 841,
from which Heron's answer immediately follows. It cannot be
doubted that Heron could solve an impure quadratic equation
in a way which, but for the want of a symbolism, would be
simply algebraical3. Two centuries or more afterwards, we find,
1 Compare Diophantus, who, in his 
a geometrical discussion, and to divide
5th Book, means by a "right-angled 
a line by another line. He finds the
triangle" three numbers such that 
value of v and some other similar ratios
, 
, 2 
9 J J -4. 
"b 4. -i 
-3 
but does Dot himself pursue such inves-
a2 + fi2=C2 adds its area -z- to its side, 
,. ,. 
. . . 
, . 
. . . . 
, ,
2 
tigations further and is not followed by
treats its side upon occasion as a cube, 
any other writer. 
Trigonometry was
etc. 
Hankel, p. 159. Of the great 
used only for astronomical purposes
Greek 
mathematicians, Archimedes 
and did not form part of geometry at
alone (in his Circuli Dimensio) ven- 
all.
tures to introduce actual numbers into 
3 Cantor Varies, pp. 341—2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
ArithmetlCd. 
107
in the Semite Nicomachus, that the practical calculator has taken
to proving, by induction from numbers themselves, the theories
which hitherto had been proved deductively by the geo-
metrician. In the 2nd Book of Pappus, the Aristotelian use of
the alphabet appears again, but whether this was due to
Apollonius or his predecessor Archimedes cannot be discovered.
Pappus, at any rate, uses A for 20, B for 3, V for 4, Z for 2 and
T for an unknown number1. Thymaridas calls an unknown
number dopia-Tos, and proves an algebraical theorem. Problems
leading to simple equations become a common form of amuse-
ment; and finally, in Diophantus, the method of forming and
handling equations appears almost complete, accompanied by
an algebraical symbolism which was probably not new but
of which no trace has been found in previous writers. The
foregoing statement is sufficient to raise a very strong suspicion
that there are large gaps in the history of Greek dpiO/Mr/riKij,
and that the later Greek mathematicians were not by any
means so futile as they are sometimes represented to be2.
Nevertheless hardly any writers are quoted save those of whose
works large portions are still extant. It is therefore not an
improbable supposition that there were in Alexandria and
Pergamum and elsewhere, as in the English universities at the
present day, many mathematicians of great ability and in-
ventiveness, who did not write books at all but were content to
allow their knowledge to ooze out in lectures and private com-
munications3. What little evidence there is, and the absence of
more, alike suggest that these mathematicians were of Semitic
or Egyptian origin. On the other hand, it is still possible that
1 See Hultsch's Ed. pp. 8 and 18. 
an Archimedes, an Apollonius. It is
Cantor Vorles. pp. 298, 387. 
dotage without a future which wearies
2 ThusHankel (p. 157) says, "Of the 
us in these writings. In the midst of
performances of the Greeks in arith- 
this dreary waste appears suddenly a
metic our judgment may be stated 
man with youthful energy, Diophan-
shortly thus: they are, in form and 
tus."
contents, unimportant, childish even: 
3 What, for instance, was the Logistic
and yet they are not the first steps 
of Magnus, and how did it assist Porus
which science takes, as yet ignorant 
and Philo of Gadara in those researches
of her aim, tottering upon shaky 
which Eutocius (ad Arch. Cir. Dim.)
ground: they are the work of a people 
mentions, but which he could not
which had once produced an Euclid, 
understand?
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

108 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
Diophantus actually invented the symbolism, and the rules which
first appear in his book but for which he claims no credit.
In any case, Diophantus must always be esteemed one of the
most brilliant of Greek mathematicians.
68. The Arithmetica begins with a prefatory letter to one
Dionysius, to whom Diophantus says, " Knowing that you are
anxious to learn the solution of arithmetical problems, I have
tried to systematise (or 'state in a handy form', opyavwa-ai) the
method, beginning from the foundations of the matter. You
will think it hard before you get thoroughly acquainted with
it" etc. He then proceeds to definitions (11 altogether), in
which he does not (as an inventor would) use the imperatives,
eoro), KaXeladco, ' let it be',' let it be called', etc. but the in-
dicatives, e'crri, /caXelrai, ' it is ', ' it is called', etc. With such
expressions he states the symbolism and the rules of algebraical
multiplication. "He gives as a fact, without explanation, that' a
negative term multiplied by a negative produces a positive'1,
and (after recommending continual practice in the use of the
previous rules) he states shortly how to reduce an equation to
its simplest form. This is the evidence from which it is con-
cluded that Diophantus was not the inventor of the method
which he employs. The method itself may be shortly described
as follows.
Diophantus uses only one unknown, which he calls 6 dpiO/Ao*;
or 6 aopiGTos dpi0/j,6<;*. Its symbol is 9' or 90' in the plural 99
or 99°', and, as in this last case, all inflexions may be appended
to the symbol as 905, 99°"s etc8. The square of the unknown a?
Def. 9, \«^ts M Xeti/'u' iro\\a.ir\a- 
s This symbol j , as it appears in our
oiuvwap^iv Xelij/isStiTrlvirap- MSS. is always assumed to be the final
fiPTi-oieiAen/w. This should properly be 
sigma, adopted here because it was the
translated, "A difference multiplied by final letter of &pi$fds, and because also
a difference makes an addition" etc. 
it was the only Greek letter which had
For it is to be remembered that Dio- 
not a numerical value. It must, how-
phantus has no notion of a negative 
ever, be remembered (1) that it is only
term standing by itself or of subtracting 
cursive Greek which has a final sigma
a greater term from a less. 8x - 20 is 
and that the cursive form did not come
to him an absurdity unless x=2J at 
into use till the 8th or 9th century:
the least. 
(2) that inflexions are appended to
2 In the definition described as wXrjOos Diophantus' symbol s' (e.g. s°v, ss°C
SXoyov. 
etc.) and that his other symbols (except
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica.
109
is called Svva/us, its symbol is S": x" is called KJ//3O? (symbol
K") : x*' is called Bwafiohuvafii';, (symbol SS"): x6 is called
8VVO,H6KV/3O<; (symbol S/c") : xe is called tcvfionvftos (symbol KK?) :
but beyond this sixth power of the unknown Diophantus does
not go. These terms and symbols are not applied to the powers
of any number except the unknown. 
All known numbers are
called povaSes, (symbol /A5) and unity itself is always written
/4s a or yu,3 /xia. The coefficients are written after the symbols
(e.g. ?9°' K = 20x : /A° K = 20). 
The sign of subtraction is the
word Xetyei (minus), its symbol is Jjv, a truncated and inverted -i^-
(Def. 9). 
The symbol of equality is i, the initial of tVo?, taoi1.
In a composite expression, the negative terms are placed after
all the positive, but there is no sign of addition save mere
juxtaposition. 
Thus BB°d S"r f£"a J/I /tsS??t/3 means
9x< + 6*s + 1 - 4*3 - 12x (IV. 29).
/ft) are initial letters or syllables. The
objection (1) might be disposed of by
the fact that the Greeks had two uncial
sigmas C and £, one of which might
have been used by Diophantus, but I
do not see my way to dismissing objec-
tion (2). It would be of great historical
importance if we could discover what
symbol Diophantus used, and of what
word the inflexions appended to the
symbol were supposed to form part.
Both word and symbol may be Egyp-
tian or Indian or Babylonian, and may
reveal an entirely unknown chapter in
the history of mathematics. Since,
however, the only distinct anticipa-
tions of Diophantus' art are found in
Egypt in Ahmes and Heron (who also
is believed to have been an Egyptian)
I am inclined to look for the origin of
Diophantus' symbols in some hieratic
characters. The Greek sign s' is in
form practically identical with two
hieratic signs (1) for a, papyrus-roll, s'a,
a determinative of unknown force,
which, as it happens, is the last charac-
ter of the four with which Ahmes wrote
his hau (Eisenlohr i. p. 60, II. pi. xi):
(2) for 'sum-total', tmt. The hieratic
signs differ slightly in form, and are
said to be derived from different hiero-
glyphic pictures (see Levi, Baccolta dei
Segni Ieratici, 1875, Plates 37 and 52):
but Dr Birch tells me that he thinks
the sign for a ' sum-total' is identical
with the papyrus-roll. So also I should
expect to find ^ in some hieratic cha-
racter. If I could prove these points,
I would recast this chapter.
1 Luca Pacioli (1491) uses p and m
for plus and minus: Tartaglia (1556)
uses 0 for plus: Tieta has + and - ,
also = (later en) for the sign of differ-
ence (A u~> B): Oughtred first has x :
Harriot (1634) writes factors consecu-
tively without any sign of multiplica-
tion. 
Descartes uses en for equal.
Wallis turned this into =. See Nessel-
mann,p.3O5.- Hallam,however, (Europ.
Lit. Pt. i. Ch. ix. s. 6) rightly ascribes
+ and - to Stifel (1544): and says
also that Xylander in his Diophantus
used II for =. As to + and - see
De Morgan's Arithmetical Books—A
Bibliography—1847, pp. 19—20, andhis
art. in Trans. Canib. Philos. Soc. Vol. ix.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

110 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
AHthmetica.
Fractions, of which the denominator is some power of the
unknown, e.g. - , —s, -j etc, are described as dpiO/ioarbp,
SvvafiocrTov, KvfiocrTov etc.: in the symbolism generally the
denominator is written above and after the numerator, SSoCa
means - , 7s0* means - 5 : but if the numerator itself contains
00 
00
a fraction, then the whole word dpidfioa-rop etc. is written
before the numerator (as dpiO/jiocrrov a aB = — etc.). 
If,
00
however, the numerator and denominator are composite ex-
pressions (also if they are very high numbers) Diophantus writes
the numerator first, then ev fioplw or fioplov, then the denomi-
_ 
_ 
_ 
8 
^ _
nator: e.g. [i° i) fiopcov S" a . s°" a means 
3 
, 88° /3, e^ ev
25600*
fiopi'mp/c/3, aicemeans . . . . •, Some further details might be
added but they are not necessary for the present purpose.
Suffice it to say that Diophantus often writes a name in full
where a symbol would have served, that his symbols are only
abbreviations of the words (except •$), that inflexions are
appended to symbols (not to 8B, /eB p?) as if they were words,
and that he states, in grammatical sentences, the nature and
the result of each step in an operation1. 
The following brief
1 Nesselmann (p. 302) divides alge- 
the later Europeans down to the middle
braioal styles into 3 classes: 
of the 17th century.
(a) the Rhetorical, where no symbols 
(c) the Symbolical, the modern style,
are used and every term and operation 
where no words are used at all. Vieta
is described in full. 
This is the style 
(1540—1603), who in time belongs
of Thymaridas, Iamblichus, all the Ara- 
rather to the early Italians, uses a style
bian and Persian algebraists, and the 
which is very nearly symbolical and
early Italians (e.g. Leon. Bonacci, of 
which was not generally adopted till
the 13th, Eegiomontanus and Luca 
more than a century later. Before his
Pacioli of the 15th century.) 
time, the Italians used E (res or radix),
(b) the Syncopated, where abbrevia- 
Z {zensus), C (cubus), etc. for x, a;2, x3,
tions are used for the most common 
etc.: and Bachet and Fermat long after-
words and operations, but in other 
wards have N (numerus), Q (quadratus),
respects syntactical rules are observed. 
etc. in the style of Diophantus. Vieta,
This is the style of Diophantus and of 
however, wrote A, Aq, Ac, Aqq etc.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
I l l
examples will illustrate all these points. 
The Prop. V. 3
concludes ical ylverai 6 T€Tpd<ya>vo<; 8" 8 fi° X? Xetyei 99 KB ?<TO<;
Svvdfiecn 
8 ??°'! KI) . fi° X8 teal ylverai 6 fi6 a"? etc. i.e. The
square 4#a + 36 — 2ix is equal to 4#2 + 28* + 34 and x is -^ .
In IV. 42 we read XOMTOP Be TO VTTO TOV irpanov 
ical 
rpirov
<rvvafA(j)OTipo(,s earao irevT die is. aXX' 0 virb TOV irpwrov 
ical
rpirov ecrrl Sv t/3 iv fioplw S" a /A/3 Xe/i/ret 95 f': i.e. It remains
that the product of the first and third shall be 5 times their
12*
sum. But their product is -^—=n—n~ > e^c-
X T 1Z — 1 X
69. It might have been expected that Diophantus, in
introducing a new method of inquiry, which consists mainly in
applying to a number, pro tern, unknown, the ordinary rules of
calculation, would have called his work Xoyicmicd. But it has
been already pointed out that the distinction between dpiQ^Tiicr)
and Xoyia-Ti/cri, though originally perhaps only one of method,
soon became one of purpose. 
Logistic seeks only to find an
answer to a question about some particular numbers, while
dpi0/jL7]Ti,icr] endeavours to define classes of numbers or to find
rules which are applicable to all numbers. 
Ostensibly, the
problems which Diophantus sets himself are generally of this
latter kind : e.g. II. 33. To find three numbers such that the
square of each plus the next number is a square : in. 7. To
find three numbers such that their sum, and also the sum of
any two of them, shall be a square: iv. 22. 'To find three
thus admitting of more than one un- 
bol Z was derived, is a mis-spelling of
known (as Bq, Cqq etc.) and he also 
census, which is a bad Latin translation
introduced general coefficients as (mA 
of mul (i.e. 'wealth', or 'possession'),
etc.) Harriot (1631) and Wallis (1685) 
the Arabic name for the square of the
used to write aaa, etc. for as, etc. 
unknown. 
The Arabs called the un-
Descartes is sometimes said to have 
known shai, 
'thing', 
translated in
introduced 
the numeral 
exponents 
Latin res, in Italian 
cosa, whence
(which Wallis also uses) but Hallam 
algebra used to be called the Cossic
(loc. cit.) ascribes this to Michael Stifel 
art. See Colebrooke Algebra of the
(1544). See Nesselmann, pp. 58, 296, 
Hindus, p. xiii. The same writer (p.
302 sqq. See also preceding note and 
x. n) says that Eobt. Eecorde (A.D. 1540)
the preface to Wallis's Algebra, 1685. 
first used the sign=. The history of such
The word zensus, from which the sym- 
signs seema to require investigation.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

112 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
AHthmetica.
numbers in continued proportion, such that the difference be-
tween any two of them is a square :' v. 17. 'To divide a given
number into four parts, such that the sum of any three parts is
a square:' VI. 14. 'To find a right-angled triangle such that
its area minus either of the sides is a square.' Problems of
this sort should be capable of general solutions: they are in-
tended to discover classes of numbers having a common pro-
perty, and are therefore rightly ascribed to dpidfi^TtKr]. But
Diophantus does not, in fact, treat them generally. 
He is
satisfied with a solution which gives only one case or a few
cases. Usually he arrives at an equation to which he finds
only one particular solution. Even where the problem leads to
a quadratic equation, which may be solved for two positive
roots, he never gives more than one1. With a symbolism which
admitted of only one unknown quantity, he could not have
been expected to find a perfectly general solution, but he might
have done much more than he does2. It must be added also
that he will not accept a result which is either a negative or an
irrational quantity3. Equations which lead to such are 'im-
possible' or 'absurd' {aZvvarov IV. 28, droirov, V. 2). On the
other hand, he does not by any means object to a fractional
result, and he is the first of the Greeks to whom a fraction was
a number and not a ratio.
70. Of the 6 Books of the 'Api6/At)rt,icd now extant, the
first, as has been said already, is mainly devoted to determinate
equations of the first degree, the remainder to indeterminate
equations of the second. The problems, however, which Dio-
phantus sets before the reader, do not as a rule lead immediately
1 In such a case, says Nesselmann, find two numbers such that their sum
(p. 320) the Arabs and the earliest 
and product shall = given numbers'
Italians always gave both roots. 
he adds (as a 7rpo<rSiopi<r/i6s or 'deter-
2 Hankel (p. 162) suggests that Dio- 
mination') 'If the square of their
phantus' habit of only giving one solu- 
sum be subtracted from twice the sum
tion, was a relic of the old geometrical 
of their squares, the remainder must
practice. It seems to me more probable 
be a square' ji.e. 2x2 + 2y2-(x2+2xy
that algebra was originally the inven- 
+ t/2) must = a square number with a
tion of practical men, who only wanted 
rational root.} Similarly v. 33. Nes-
one solution. 
sehnann, p. 326.
3 Hence, for instance to v. 30, 'To
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica. 
113
and easily to equations with only one unknown. 
His art
therefore distinguishes itself in two separate departments, the
construction of equations and their solution. The second of
these may be treated here first.
In Def, xi. Diophantus gives a rule for the solution of pure
equations in the following manner: " If a problem leads to an
equation containing the same powers of the unknown (eiSij ta
on both sides but not with the same coefficients (/X.J)
OT])1, you must deduct like from like till only two equal
terms remain. But when on one side or both some terms are
negative (iveWelirei), you must add the negative terms to both
sides till all the terms are positive {evvirap-^ei) and then deduct
as before stated2." He then promises to give the method of
solving mixed or adfected quadratic equations*, but this rule
does not appear in our texts, and unfortunately Diophantus,
though he often arrives at such equations, never goes through
the process of solving them. He merely states a root or says
that the equation is soluble (e.g. VI. 6 "84#2 + lx = 7 whence x is
found = 1": or vi. 8 "630#a+73a;=6, whencethe rootis rational1").
But it is evident that he did not solve them empirically, for
where a root is irrational, he sometimes gives approximations to
it (e.g. v. 33). His method of solution seems to have differed
from ours only in this, that in an equation mx*+px = q, he first
multiplied the terms by m instead of dividing them*. Three
forms of adfected quadratics occur in Diophantus viz. (1)
1 ir\ij$os is the ordinary Diophantic • 
5 Nesselmann, p. 319. On p. 324
expression for 'coefficient'. 
sqq. Nesselmann discusses from what
2 The addition of the negative terms 
source Diophantus obtained his method
was called by the Arabs al-jebr (or 'res- 
of solution. The ancients, from Eu-
titution'): the deduction was called al- 
clid's time or earlier, could solve the
mukabalah ('comparison'). These two 
equations x*±px-q and px-x!* = q,
nxmes were used together for Algebra 
geometrically considered. Thusx(x+p)
until the end of the 16th century, when 
= q would be in geometrical language:
the second was discarded. Nesselmann, 
To produce a given straight line p to a
pp. 47 sqq. and 315. Comp. the 1st 
length p + x, so that the rectangle be-
chap. of Wallis's Algebra, 
tween the whole line so produced and
3 varepov Si aoi Sel^o/iev ical irfis, Sio 
the part produced i.e. x(p + x) shall be
dS&y tawv tvi KaTa\et<p6tvTt>n>, rb Totovrov 
equal to a given figure q. The other
Menu. 
cases are equally easy to put geometri-
4 Cf. Nesselmann, p. 318. 
cally. All three are solved in Euclid
G. G. M. 
8
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

114
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica.
=q (e.g. VI. 6), (2) ma?=pas+q (e.g. IV. 45) and
(3) ma? + q = px (e.g. VI. 24). One cubic equation (reducible
at once to x3 + x = 4x2 + 4) occurs, vi. 19. No example of
indeterminate simple equations occurs in the present text of
Diophantus. Some problems, leading to such, are contained in
the 1st Book (Nos. 14. 25—28), but Diophantus takes a short
way with these by assuming one of the required numbers and
so converts the equations into a determinate form. Indeter-
minate quadratics are confined to the case " that one or two
(never more) functions of the unknown, of the form Ax* + Bx+ G,
must be a rational square (taov reTpaydvo)). Hence we have to
do only with the equation Ax* + Bx + G=y* or with two equa-
tions of the same form." Let the single equation be considered
first. It assumes many forms according as one or another term
is wanting or is eliminated. These need not here be considered,
but it should be mentioned that the complete expression
Ax2 + Bx + G = y* is deemed by Diophantus to be soluble1
only (1) when A is a positive square number: in which case
a2 x*+ Bx+ C = y*: he then takes y = ax +m: (2) when Gis a
positive square number: in which case he takes y = mx + s/ G:
vi. 28, 29 stated above (p. 84 n.). In
the figures
D
A
E
B
F
C
I)
F
E
To the line AB, a rectangle AE is to be
applied so that AE = q and BE is
similar to me* (or BC :CE = m:l). If
AD = x, then BC = mx. 
AC=p±mx:
and AE=x(p±mx), 
BO that the proof
of the geometrical proposition involves
the solution of the quadratic equa-
tions. This fact was first pointed out
by Montuola Hist. Math. i. p. 413.
Nesselmann quotes other suggestions
by Cossali and Bachet, but does not
decide for any. It should be stated
that Diophantus nowhere appeals to a
geometrical figure, whereas modern
algebraists (ace. to Hankel, p. 162)
down to the end of the 17th century
always added one as an illustration to
the solution of a quadratic equation.
I do not, however, find this in Harriot
or Wallis.
1 It must be remembered that Dio-
phantus does not avoid fractional solu-
tionsioi indeterminate equations,hence
the problems which in modern text-
books are called Diophantic (viz. to
find a solution in positive integers for
ax + by = c) are wrongly named, since
Diophantus does not treat such equa-
tions nor does he solve for integers
those which he does treat. (Hankel,
p. 163.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OP NUMBERS. 
Arithmetica. 
115
B
2
(3) when -j- — A G is a positive square number, a condition
which he uses only covertly. In such a case (e.g. IV. 33) he
takes y=rax. If beside Ax* + Boo + G — y2, another function of a>
Atx2 + B^ + Cj is to be made equal to another square number
y* Diophantus calls the problem a " double equation" (hiiikoU
o-orqs, SnfKrj WTOT^?, BOTTXTJ 'lawais). He seems unable to solve
these simultaneous equations unless A and Ax are the same
square number, but if x* is wanting in both expressions, he can
solve them either if B and Bt are to one another as two squares or
G and Ot are both squares. Several examples of indeterminate
equations of degrees higher than the second also occur. The
opinion of Nesselmann on the methods of Diophantus is
shortly as follows: (1) Indeterminate equations of the 2nd
degree are treated completely only when the quadratic or the
absolute term is wanting: his solution of the equations
Ax* + G = y* and Ax2 + Bx + G= y2 is in many respects cramped.
(2) For the 'double equation' of the 2nd degree he has a
definite rule only when the quadratic term is wanting in both
expressions: even then his solution is not -general. 
More
complicated expressions occur only under specially favourable
circumstances. (3) The solution of the higher indeterminates
depends almost entirely on very favourable numerical con-
ditions and his methods are defective1.
71. But the extraordinary ability of Diophantus appears
rather in the other department of his art, namely the ingenuity
with which he reduces every problem to an equation which he
is competent to solve. To exhibit completely his cleverness in
this respect would be, as Nesselmann says : "to transcribe his
book2." The same critic, however, has selected a number of
1 The following remarks by an accom. 
Bach calls for a quite distinct method,
plished critic-will sufficiently excuse me 
which is often useless for the most
for saying so little on the Diophantio 
closely-related problems. It is there-
equations and their solutions. "In 130 
fore difficult for a modern, after study-
indeterminate equations, which Dio- 
ing 100 Diophantic equations, to solve
phantus treats, there are more than 50 
the 101st." Hankel, pp. 164—165.
different classes...Almost more various 
2 Nesselmann, ch. 9, pp. 355 sqq.
than the problems are their solutions..,
8—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

116 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
typical specimens, exhibiting the most striking characteristics
of Diophantus' style. Some of these may be here given.
(1) Diophantus shows great Adroitness in selecting the unknown,
especially with a view to avoiding an adfected quadratic. Thus
iv. 38 is a problem 'to find 3 numbers, so that the product of
any two + the sum of the same two shall be given numbers1.'
Here ab + a + b = 8 : be + b +c = 15 : ac+ a + c = 24. Here he
takes b + 1 = x, whence b = x — 1. Then from the first equation
9 
16
a = 
1: from the second c = —• — 1: from the third x = *#.
x 
x 
5
In i. 16 'To find 3 numbers such that the sum of each pair is
a given number,' the three given sums being a, b, c he takes the
sum of all three numbers together = x. The numbers therefore
are x — a, x — b, x — c. 
Whence 3x — (a + b + c) = x: and
x = 
. (2) The most common and characteristic of
Diophantus' methods is his use of tentative assumptions2 which
is applied in nearly every problem of the later books. It con-
sists in assigning to the unknown a preliminary value which
satisfies one or two only of the necessary conditions, in order
that, from its failure to satisfy the remaining conditions, the
operator may perceive what exactly is required for that purpose.
1 Cf. also i. 16, 18, 23, n. 33, in. 5, 
above p. 100 n.), with which it has
6, 7, 16, iv. 14, 16, 38 etc. Diophan- 
nothing in common. Both processes
tus, of course, does not, in the selected 
seem to me to go pari passu up to a
specimen or elsewhere, use a, b, c, or 
certain point. Here is an Italian speci-
other symbols. 
He says ' the first, men of the simple ' falsa positio' given
second, third numbers, the product of 
by Dean Peacock. 'I buy a jewel and
the first and second' etc. describing 
sell it for 50 lire (1 lira = 100 soldi): I
in full every expression which does not 
make 3J soldi on each lira of the origi-
contain the unknown s. I have oc- 
nal price. What did I give for the
casionally, for shortness, also altered 
jewel?" The operator says: 'Assume
the wording of a problem, by intro- 
that I gave 30 lire: then I should have
ducing the given number or given ratio 
sold it for 31. But, in reality, I sold
etc. into the enunciation. 
it for 50. Therefore the original price
2 Nesselmann quotes too many speci- 
30 x 50 , T _. , 
,
, 
, 
. . , 
„ 
,, 
, . 
w a s ~6i~ • In Diophantus, however,
mens to be here cited. He calls this 
ol
procedure 'Falscher Ansatz', but says 
the original assumption is completely
that it is to be distinguished from the 
dismissed, when its falsity, and the
later "so beriihmt gewordene regula 
reason of this, are discovered, and no
falsi oder falsa positio" (mentioned 
further use is made of it.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetioa. 
117
A good example is IY. 9: 'To find a cube and its root such
that if the same number be added to each, the sums shall also
be a cube and its root.' Here let x be the number added, 2x
the root, 8a:8 the cube. Then 8x3+x= (3%)3 = 27x3, whence
19a;4 =1. As a; is to have a rational value, 19a;2 = 1 will not suit.
'Now this 19 arises' says Diophantus in effect 'from the differ-
ence of 27a;3 and 8a?, or the cubes of Sx and 2%. There is a
difference of 1 between these last coefficients. Let me now
find two numbers x and x + 1 such that the difference between
their cubes is a square number. 
That difference will be
3a;5 + 3a; + 1. If I assume this to be = (2a; - I)2, I shall find
x = 7, and my two numbers are 7 and 8. Now I return to my
original problem. Let x again be the number to be added, 7a;
the root and 343a;3 the cube. Then 343a;s + x = (7a; + xf=512x3,
whence 169a;2 = 1 and x = ^.' 
This example will serve also to
illustrate a third characteristic of Diophantus, viz. (3) the
use of the symbol for the unknown in different senses1. The
following is a more complicated instance of both methods. In
IV. 17 the problem is 'to find 3 numbers, such that their sum
is a square and that the square of any one of them + the
following number is a square.' The 3 numbers are first taken
as x - 1, 4a; and 8a; + 1, where [x - I)2 + 4a: and (4a;)2 + 8* + 1
are both square numbers. Two conditions are thus satisfied. But
the sum of all 3 numbers, -viz. 13a:, must be a square. 'Take
13a; equal to- a;2 with some square coefficient, e.g. 169a?2. Then
x = 13a:2.' A new use of x is thus introduced and 13a;2 is sub-
stituted for the original x, the numbers now being 13a;2 — 1,
52x* and 104a;2 +1. A fourth condition remains, viz. that
(104a;2 +1)2 + (13a;2 — 1) shall be a square number. Diophantus,
then, takes this expression equal to a? (104a; +1)2, findsa; = f|,
and substitutes this value in the expression. 
The use of
'tentative assumptions' leads, again, to another device which
may be called (4) the method of limits2. This may best be
illustrated by a particular example. If Diophantus wishes to
find a square lying between 10 and 11, he multiplies these
1 If in any particular case, confusion 
by name. Nesselmann cites i. 22, in.
is likely, Diophantus alludes to the 
18, iv. 17, 18, vi. 13, 14,15 etc.
first symbol as i abpurros, rj 86i/afus etc. 
2 Compare iv. 45, v. 33, vi. 2, 23 etc.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

118 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
numbers by successive squares till a square lies between the
products. Thus between 40 and 44, 90 and 99 no square lies,
but between 160 and 176 there lies the square 169. Hence
x* = ^ 9 will lie between the proposed limits. The method is
very neatly used in the following instance. 
In IV. 34 the
problem is 'to divide 1 into two parts, such that if 3 be added
to the one part and 5 to the other, the product of the two sums
shall be a square.' If one part be x — 3, the other is 4 — x.
Then x (9 — x) must be a square. Suppose it =4x!: then #=•§.
But this will not suit the original assumption, since x must be
greater than 3 (and less than 4). Now 5 is 4 + 1: hence what
9
is wanted is to find a number y* + 1 such that -^—- is > 3 and
< 4. For such a purpose yl must be < 2 and > l j . "I resolve
these expressions into square fractions" says Diophantus and
selects ^j
8 and ff between which lies the square *££ or ff. 
He
25#
then takes x (9 — x) = 
instead of 4x2. Sometimes, indeed,
Diophantus solves a problem wholly or in part by (5) synthesis1.
Thus IV. 31 is 'To find 4 squares, such that their sum added to
the sum of their roots is a given number.' The solution is as
follows. "Let the given number be 12. Since a square + its
root +1 is a square, the root of which minus \ is the root of the
first-mentioned square, and since the four numbers added
together = 12, which plus the four quarters (12+ |) is 13, it
follows that the problem is to divide 13 into four squares. The
roots of these minus \ each will be the roots of the four squares
sought for. Now 13 is composed of two squares 4 and 9: each
of which is composed of two squares, viz. ff, ||, ^ 
and ft.
The roots of these, viz. f, f, ^ and f, minus \ each, are the
roots of the four squares sought for, viz. \\, ^, $, i | : and the
four squares themselves are ||$, T
4<^, ff^ and i|§." Although
it has been said above, and has been sufficiently shown by the
foregoing examples, that Diophantus does not treat his problems
generally and is usually content with finding any particular
numbers which happen to satisfy the conditions of his problems,
1 Compare also in. 16, iv. 32, v. 17, 23 etc.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. 
Arithmeticd. 
119
yet it should be added that he does occasionally attempt (6)
such general solutions1 as were possible to him. But these
solutions are not often exhaustive because he had no symbol for
a general coefficient. Thus in V. 21 'to find 3 numbers, such
that each of them shall be a square minus 1 and their sum
shall be a biquadrate (SwafioBiivafiis)' he finds the 3 numbers
in the form xi — 2x*, a? + 2x and xa — 2x, and adds 'the problem
has been solved in general (aopio-Toi*;) terms,' and at the end of
IV. 37 (comp. also IV. 20) where a similar solution is given he
remarks " A solution in general terms is such that the unknown
in the expressions for the numbers sought may have any value
you please." The problems iv. 20, 37, 39 and 41 are expressly
problems for finding general expressions. He solves them by a
'tentative assumption.' For instance IV. 39 is 'To find two
general expressions for numbers such that their product minus
their sum is a given number.' The solution runs as follows:
'The given number is 8. The first number may be taken as x,
the second as 3. Then 2x — 3 =8, and # = 5J. Now 5J is y,
11 is the given number plus the second: and 2 is the second
minus 1. Hence at whatever value the second number be
taken, if I add it to the given number and divide the sum by
the second number minus 1,1 get the first number. 
Suppose
x -t- 9
the second number to be x + 1: then 
is the first.' These
x
general solutions for two numbers are immediately afterwards
(iv. 21, 38, 40, 42) used in problems of a similar character for
three numbers, of which two are first found in general terms
and then the third by a determination of x in the usual manner.
Sometimes, however (e.g. iv. 26 and frequently in the 6th
book1), a problem after being solved by particular numbers
(as 40, 27, 25) is solved generally (by 40a;, 27*, 25a; in IV. 26).
But though the defects in Diophantus' proofs are in general
due to the limitation of his symbolism, it is not so always.
Very frequently indeed Diophantus introduces into a solution
(7) arbitrary conditions and determinations which are not in the
1 vi. 3,4, 6, 7,8,9,10,11, 13, 15,17. 
entirely with 'right-angled triangles',
See Nesselmann, pp. 418—421. The 
i.e. with sets of three numbers, such
problems of the vith Book deal almost 
that a;2 + y2 = z5.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

120 
«REEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetical.
problem. Of such " fudged " solutions, as a schoolboy would call
them, two particular kinds are very frequent. 
Sometimes an
unknown is assumed at a determinate value1: as in I. 14 ' To
find two numbers whose product is three times their sum/
where Diophantus, without a word of apology, takes the first
number as x, the second as 12. Sometimes a new condition is
introduced, as in VI. 19, where, two numbers being sought such
that the cube of one is greater by 2 than the square of the
other, Diophantus takes the numbers as #—1 and # + 1, thus
introducing a condition that the difference between the two
numbers shall be 2. A very remarkable case of the latter kind
occurs in IV. 7 where the problem would be, in our symbolism,
to find three numbers, as, 62, c2, so that a3 + c2 shall be a square,
b* + c2 a cuba 
Diophantus begins his solution by taking
62 + e2 = a8. Arbitrariness of this kind is of course different
from the cases in which Diophantus merely takes a particular
number, where any other would evidently do as well. In the
latter, he is urged by the defects of his symbolism: in the
former he is urged only by the want of a solution to a particular
problem: the difference is one of kind and not of degree.
72. From the very brief survey of the Arithmetica, it will
be obvious to the reader that it is a work of the utmost
ingenuity but that it is deficient, sometimes pardonably, some-
times without excuse, in generalization. The book of Poris-
mata, to which Diophantus sometimes refers, seems on the other
hand to have been entirely devoted to the discussion of general
properties of numbers. It is three times expressly quoted in
the Arithmetica. These quotations, when expressed in modern
symbols, are to the following effect. In v. 3 the porism? is cited :
'If m + a = m2, y + a — rt2, and xy + a = p\ then m = n + 1': in
v. 5: 'If three numbers xl, (x +1)2, 4a;2 + 4# + 4, be taken, the
1 Other examples in I. 25, 26,27,28, 
the numbers but he will not trust him-
II. 19, v. 7, 30, 31. 
self to find them. Of the 3rd he says
2 Nesselmann, pp. 441—443, shews 
(pp. 445—446, after Format) that Vieta
that the conditions may be satisfied by 
uses it in the last propositions of the
numbers of other forms. Of the 2nd 
4th Book of his Zetetica. The 3rd
porism he says (p. 445) that more 
porism is mutilated in the quotation,
general expressions might be found for
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GREEK THEORY OP NUMBERS. 
Arithmeticd. 
121
product of any two + their sum, or + the remaining number, is
a square: in v. 19 'the difference between two cubes maybe
resolved into the sum of two cubes.' Of all these propositions he
says e^ofiev ev TOI<; •jropicrfiao-iv, 'we find it in the Porisms'; but
he cites also a great many similar propositions without expressly
referring to the Porisms. These latter citations fall into two
classes, the first of which contains mere identities, such as the
algebraical equivalents of the theorems in Euclid II. 
For
instance in Diophantus n. 31, 32, and IV. 17 it is stated, in
effect, that a? + y~ ± 2scy is always a square (Eucl. n. 4): in
II. 35, 36, in. 12, 14 and many more places it is stated that
(—jj— J +db is always a square (Eucl. II. 5) etc1. The other
class contains general propositions concerning the resolution of
numbers into the sum of two, three or four8 squares. For
instance, in n. 8, 9 it is stated 'Every square number' (in n. 10
'every number which is the sum of two squares') 'may be re-
solved into the sum of two squares in an infinite number of
ways': in V. 12 'A number of the form (4» + 3) can never be
resolved into two squares,' but 'every prime number of the
form (4w +1) maybe resolved into two squares': in v. 14 'A
number of the form (8n + 7) can never be resolved into three
squares.' It will be seen that all these propositions are of the
general form which ought to have been but is not adopted in
the Arithmetica. 
We are therefore led to the conclusion
that the Porismata, like the pamphlet on Polygonal Numbers,
was a synthetic and not an analytic treatise. 
It is open,
however, to anyone to maintain the contrary, since no proof
of any porism is now extant.
With Diophantus the history of Greek arithmetic comes
to an end. No original work, that we know of, was done
afterwards. 
A few scholiasts appear, such as Eutocius of
1 Nesselmann, pp. 446—450, cites 10 
can be resolved into four squares,' but
such identities, most of which are used 
Nesselmann (p. 460—1) inclines to the
more than once by Diophantus. 
opinion that Diophantus did not know
2 In iv. 31, 32, v. 17 Fermat 
this proposition generally but was rely-
thought that Diophantus was using a 
ing on the known properties of certain
proposition 'Every number whatever 
determinate numbers.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

122 
GREEK THEORY OF NUMBERS. Arithmetica.
Askalon {cir. A.D. 550) who wrote on Archimedes, Asclepius
of Tralles and his pupil John Philoponus {dr. A.D. 650) who
wrote on Nicomachus, and the unknown commentators who
have added lemmas to the arithmetical books of Euclid; but
though there is evidence that the old mathematicians were still
studied in Athens and Alexandria and elsewhere, no writer of
genius appears and the history of arithmetic and algebra is
continued henceforth by the Indians and Arabs.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

