
Grimscribe
 
His Lives 
and Works
 
Thomas Ligotti
Subterranean Press 2011

Grimscribe Copyright © 2011 by Thomas Ligotti. 
All rights reserved.
Dust jacket illustration Copyright © 2011 by Aeron Alfrey. 
All rights reserved.
Print Interior design Copyright © 2011 by Desert Isle Design, LLC.
All rights reserved.
Electronic Edition
ISBN
9781596065178
Subterranean Press
PO Box 190106
Burton, MI 48519
www.subterraneanpress.com

To my brother Bob

Introduction

His name is…
Will it ever come to me? There is a grand lapse of memory that may be the
only thing to save us from ultimate horror. Perhaps they know the truth who
preach the passing of one life into another, vowing that between a certain death
and a certain birth there is an interval in which an old name is forgotten before a
new one is learned. And to remember the name of a former life is to begin the
backward slide into that great blackness in which all names have their source,
becoming incarnate in a succession of bodies like numberless verses of an infinite
scripture.
To find that you have had so many names is to lose claim to any one of them.
To gain the memory of so many lives is to lose them all.
So he keeps his name secret, his many names. He hides each one from all the
others, so that they will not become lost among themselves. Protecting his life from
all his lives, from the memory of so many lives, he hides behind the mask of
anonymity.
But even if I cannot know his name, I have always known his voice. That is
one thing he can never disguise, even if it sounds like many different voices. I know
his voice when I hear it speak, because it is always speaking of terrible secrets. It
speaks of the most grotesque mysteries and encounters, sometimes with despair,
sometimes with delight, and sometimes with a spirit not possible to define. What
crime or curse has kept him turning upon this same wheel of terror, spinning out
his tales which always tell of the strangeness and horror of things? When will he
make an end to his telling?
 He has told us so many things, and he will tell us more. Yet he will never tell
his name. Not before the very end of his old life, and not after the beginning of each
new one. Not until time itself has erased every name and taken away every life.
But until then, everyone needs a name. Everyone must be called something. So
what can we say is the name of everyone?
Our name is GRIMSCRIBE. 
This is our voice.

The Voice
of the
DAMNED

The Last Feast of Harlequin

My interest in the town of Mirocaw was first aroused when I heard that an annual
festival was held there which, among its other elements of pageantry, featured the
participation of clowns. A former colleague of mine, who is now attached to the
anthropology department of a distant university, had read one of my recent articles
(“The Clown Figure in American Media,” Journal of Popular Culture), and wrote
to me that he vaguely remembered reading about or being told of a town
somewhere in the state that held a kind of “Fool’s Feast” every year, thinking that
this might be pertinent to my peculiar line of study. It was, of course, more
pertinent than he had reason to think, both to my academic aims in this area and to
my personal pursuits.
Aside from my teaching, I had for some years been engaged in various
anthropological projects with the primary ambition of articulating the significance
of the clown figure in diverse cultural contexts. Every year for the past twenty
years I have attended the pre-Lenten festivals that are held in various places
throughout the southern United States. Every year I learned something more
concerning the esoterics of celebration. In these studies I was an eager participant—
along with playing my part as an anthropologist, I also took a place behind the
clownish mask myself. And I cherished this role as I did nothing else in my life. To
me the title of Clown has always carried connotations of a noble sort. I was an
adroit jester, strangely enough, and had always taken pride in the skills I worked so
diligently to develop.
I wrote to the State Department of Recreation, indicating what information I
desired and exposing an enthusiastic urgency which came naturally to me on this
topic. Many weeks later I received a tan envelope imprinted with a government
logo. Inside was a pamphlet that catalogued all of the various seasonal festivities of
which the state was officially aware, and I noted in passing that there were as many
in late autumn and winter as in the warmer seasons. A letter inserted within the
pamphlet explained to me that, according to their voluminous records, no festivals
held in the town of Mirocaw had been officially registered. Their files, nonetheless,
could be placed at my disposal if I should wish to research this or similar matters in

connection with some definite project. At the time this offer was made I was
already laboring under so many professional and personal burdens that, with a
weary hand, I simply deposited the envelope and its contents in a drawer, never to
be consulted again.
Some months later, however, I made an impulsive digression from my
responsibilities and, rather haphazardly, took up the Mirocaw project. This
happened as I was driving north one afternoon in late summer with the intention of
examining some journals in the holdings of a library at another university. Once out
of the city limits the scenery changed to sunny fields and farms, diverting my
thoughts from the signs that I passed along the highway. Nevertheless, the
subconscious scholar in me must have been regarding these with studious care. The
name of a town loomed into my vision. Instantly the scholar retrieved certain
records from some deep mental drawer, and I was faced with making a few hasty
calculations as to whether there was enough time and motivation for an
investigative side trip. But the exit sign was even hastier in making its appearance,
and I soon found myself leaving the highway, recalling the road sign’s promise that
the town was no more than seven miles east.
These seven miles included several confusing turns, the forced taking of a
temporarily alternate route, and a destination not even visible until a steep rise had
been fully ascended. On the descent another helpful sign informed me that I was
within the city limits of Mirocaw. Some scattered houses on the outskirts of the
town were the first structures I encountered. Beyond them the numerical highway
became Townshend Street, the main avenue of Mirocaw.
The town impressed me as being much larger once I was within its limits than
it had appeared from the prominence just outside. I saw that the general hilliness of
the surrounding countryside was also an internal feature of Mirocaw. Here,
though, the effect was different. The parts of the town did not look as if they
adhered very well to one another. This condition might be blamed on the irregular
topography of the town. Behind some of the old stores in the business district,
steeply roofed houses had been erected on a sudden incline, their peaks appearing at

an extraordinary elevation above the lower buildings. And because the foundations
of these houses could not be glimpsed, they conveyed the illusion of being either
precariously suspended in air, threatening to topple down, or else constructed with
an unnatural loftiness in relation to their width and mass. This situation also
created a weird distortion of perspective. The two levels of structures overlapped
each other without giving a sense of depth, so that the houses, because of their
higher elevation and nearness to the foreground buildings, did not appear
diminished in size as background objects should. Consequently, a look of flatness, as
in a photograph, predominated in this area. Indeed, Mirocaw could be compared to
an album of old snapshots, particularly ones in which the camera had been upset in
the process of photography, causing the pictures to develop on an angle: a cone-
roofed turret, like a pointed hat jauntily askew, peeked over the houses on a
neighboring street; a billboard displaying a group of grinning vegetables tipped its
contents slightly westward; cars parked along steep curbs seemed to be flying
skyward in the glare-distorted windows of a five-and-ten; people leaned
lethargically as they trod up and down sidewalks; and on that sunny day a clock
tower, which at first I mistook for a church steeple, cast a long shadow that seemed
to extend an impossible distance and wander into unlikely places in its progress
across the town. I should say that perhaps the disharmonies of Mirocaw are more
acutely affecting my imagination in retrospect than they were on that first day,
when I was primarily concerned with locating the city hall or some other center of
information.
I pulled around a corner and parked. Sliding over to the other side of the seat,
I rolled down the window and called to a passerby: “Excuse me, sir.” The man,
who was shabbily dressed and very old, paused for a moment without approaching
the car. Though he had apparently responded to my call, his vacant expression did
not betray the least awareness of my presence, and for a moment I thought it just a
coincidence that he halted on the sidewalk at the same time I addressed him. His
eyes were focused somewhere beyond me with a weary and imbecilic gaze. After a
few moments he continued on his way and I said nothing to call him back, even

though at the last second his face began to appear dimly familiar. Someone else
finally came along who was able to direct me to the Mirocaw City Hall and
Community Center.
The city hall turned out to be the building with the clock tower. Inside I stood
at a counter behind which some people were working at desks and walking up and
down a back hallway. On one wall was a poster for the state lottery: a jack-in-the-
box with both hands grasping green bills. After a few moments, a tall, middle-aged
woman came over to the counter.
“Can I help you?” she asked in a neutral, bureaucratic voice.
I explained that I had heard about the festival—saying nothing about being a
nosy academic—and asked if she could provide me with further information or
direct me to someone who could.
“Do you mean the one held in the winter?” she asked.
“How many of them are there?”
“Just that one.”
“I suppose, then, that that’s the one I mean.” I smiled as if sharing a joke with
her.
Without another word, she walked off into the back hallway. While she was
absent I exchanged glances with several of the people behind the counter who
periodically looked up from their work.
“There you are,” she said when she returned, handing me a piece of paper that
looked like the product of a cheap copy machine. Please Come to the Fun, it said in
large letters. Parades, it went on, Street Masquerade, Bands, The Winter Raffle,
and The Coronation of the Winter Queen. The page continued with the mention
of a number of miscellaneous festivities. I read the words again. There was
something about that imploring little “please” at the top of the announcement that
made the whole affair seem like a charity function.
“When is it held? It doesn’t say when the festival takes place.”
“Most people already know that.” She abruptly snatched the page from my
hands and wrote something at the bottom. When she gave it back to me, I saw

“Dec. 19-21” written in blue-green ink. I was immediately struck by an odd sense of
scheduling on the part of the festival committee. There was, of course, solid
anthropological and historical precedent for holding festivities around the winter
solstice, but the timing of this particular event did not seem entirely practical.
“If you don’t mind my asking, don’t these days somewhat conflict with the
regular holiday season? I mean, most people have enough going on at that time.”
“It’s just tradition,” she said, as if invoking some venerable 
ancestry behind her words.
“That’s very interesting,” I said as much to myself as to her.
“Is there anything else?” she asked.
“Yes. Could you tell me if this festival has anything to do with clowns? I see
there’s something about a masquerade.”
“Yes, of course there are some people in…costumes. I’ve never been in that
position myself…that is, yes, there are clowns of a sort.”
At that point my interest was definitely aroused, but I was not sure how
much further I wanted to pursue it. I thanked the woman for her help and asked
the best means of access to the highway, not anxious to retrace the labyrinthine
route by which I had entered the town. I walked back to my car with a whole
flurry of half-formed questions, and as many vague and conflicting answers,
cluttering my mind.
The directions the woman gave me necessitated passing through the south end
of Mirocaw. There were not many people moving about in this section of town.
Those that I did see, shuffling lethargically down a block of battered storefronts,
exhibited the same sort of forlorn expression and manner as the old man from
whom I had asked directions earlier. I must have been traversing a central artery of
this area, for on either side stretched street after street of poorly tended yards and
houses bowed with age and indifference. When I came to a stop at a streetcorner,
one of the citizens of this slum passed in front of my car. This lean, morose, and
epicene person turned my way and sneered outrageously with a taut little mouth,
yet seemed to be looking at no one in particular. After progressing a few streets

farther, I came to a road that led back to the highway. I felt detectably more
comfortable as soon as I found myself traveling once again through the expanses of
sun-drenched farmlands.
I reached the library with more than enough time for my research, and so I
decided to make a scholarly detour to see what material I could find that might
illuminate the winter festival held in Mirocaw. The library, one of the oldest in the
state, included in its holdings the entire run of the Mirocaw Courier. I thought this
would be an excellent place to start. I soon found, however, that there was no
handy way to research information from this newspaper, and I did not want to
engage in a blind search for articles concerning a specific subject.
I next turned to the more organized resources of the newspapers for the larger
cities located in the same county, which incidentally shares its name with Mirocaw.
I uncovered very little about the town, and almost nothing concerning its festival,
except in one general article on annual events in the area that erroneously
attributed to Mirocaw a “large Middle-Eastern community” which every spring
hosted a kind of ethnic jamboree. From what I had already observed, and from
what I subsequently learned, the citizens of Mirocaw were solidly Midwestern-
American, the probable descendants in a direct line from some enterprising pack of
New Englanders of the last century. There was one brief item devoted to a
Mirocavian event, but this merely turned out to be an obituary notice for an old
woman who had quietly taken her life around Christmastime. Thus, I returned
home that day all but empty-handed on the subject of Mirocaw.
However, it was not long afterward that I received another letter from the
former colleague of mine who had first led me to seek out Mirocaw and its festival.
As it happened, he rediscovered the article that caused him to stir my interest in a
local “Fool’s Feast.” This article had its sole appearance in an obscure festschrift of
anthropology studies published in Amsterdam twenty years before. Most of these
papers were in Dutch, a few in German, and only one was in English: “The Last
Feast of Harlequin: Preliminary Notes on a Local Festival.” It was exciting, of
course, finally to be able to read this study, but even more exciting was the name of

its author: Dr. Raymond Thoss.
 
2.
 
Before proceeding any further, I should mention something about Thoss, and
inevitably about myself. Over two decades ago, at my alma mater in Cambridge,
Mass., Thoss was a professor of mine. Long before playing a role in the events I am
about to describe, he was already one of the most important figures in my life. A
striking personality, he inevitably influenced everyone who came in contact with
him. I remember his lectures on social anthropology, how he turned that dim room
into a brilliant and profound circus of learning. He moved in an uncannily brisk
manner. When he swept his arm around to indicate some common term on the
blackboard behind him, one felt he was presenting nothing less than an item of
fantastic qualities and secret value. When he replaced his hand in the pocket of his
old jacket this fleeting magic was once again stored away in its well-worn pouch, to
be retrieved at the sorcerer’s discretion. We sensed he was teaching us more than
we could possibly learn, and that he himself was in possession of greater and deeper
knowledge than he could possibly impart. On one occasion I summoned up the
audacity to offer an interpretation—which was somewhat opposed to his own—
regarding the tribal clowns of the Hopi Indians. I implied that personal experience
as an amateur clown and special devotion to this study provided me with an insight
possibly more valuable than his own. It was then he disclosed, casually and very
obiter dicta, that he had actually acted in the role of one of these masked tribal fools
and had celebrated with them the dance of the kachinas. In revealing these facts,
however, he somehow managed not to add to the humiliation I had already
inflicted upon myself. And for this I was grateful to him.
Thoss’s activities were such that he sometimes became the object of gossip or
romanticized speculation. He was a fieldworker par excellence, and his ability to

insinuate himself into exotic cultures and situations, thereby gaining insights where
other anthropologists merely collected data, was renowned. At various times in his
career there had been rumors of his having “gone native” à la the Frank Hamilton
Cushing legend. There were hints, which were not always irresponsible or cheaply
glamorized, that he was involved in projects of a freakish sort, many of which
focused on New England. It is a fact that he spent six months posing as a mental
patient at an institution in western Massachusetts, gathering information on the
“culture” of the psychically disturbed. When his book Winter Solstice: The Longest
Night of a Society was published, the general opinion was that it was
disappointingly subjective and impressionistic, and that, aside from a few moving
but “poetically obscure” observations, there was nothing at all to give it value.
Those who defended Thoss claimed he was a kind of super-anthropologist: while
much of his work emphasized his own mind and feelings, his experience had in fact
penetrated to a rich core of hard data which he had yet to disclose in objective
discourse. As a student of Thoss, I tended to support this latter estimation of him.
For a variety of tenable and untenable reasons, I believed Thoss capable of
unearthing hitherto inaccessible strata of human existence. So it was gratifying at
first that this article entitled “The Last Feast of Harlequin” seemed to uphold the
Thoss mystique, and in an area I personally found captivating.
Much of the content of the article I did not immediately comprehend, given its
author’s characteristic and often strategic obscurities. On first reading, the most
interesting aspect of this brief study—the “notes” encompassed only twenty pages
—was the general mood of the piece. Thoss’s eccentricities were definitely present
in these pages, but only as a struggling inner force which was definitely contained
—incarcerated, I might say—by the somber rhythmic movements of his prose and
by some gloomy references he occasionally called upon. Two references in particular
shared a common theme. One was a quotation from Poe’s “The Conqueror
Worm,” which Thoss employed as a rather sensational epigraph. The point of the
epigraph, however, was nowhere echoed in the text of the article save in another
passing reference. Thoss brought up the well-known genesis of the modern

Christmas celebration, which of course descends from the Roman Saturnalia. Then,
making it clear he had not yet observed the Mirocaw festival and had only
gathered its nature from various informants, he established that it too contained
many, even more overt, elements of the Saturnalia. Next he made what seemed to
me a trivial and purely linguistic observation, one that had less to do with his main
course of argument than it did with the equally peripheral Poe epigraph. He briefly
mentioned that an early sect of the Syrian Gnostics called themselves “Saturnians”
and believed, among other religious heresies, that mankind was created by angels
who were in turn created by the Supreme Unknown. The angels, however, did not
possess the power to make their creation an erect being and for a time it crawled
upon the earth like a worm. Eventually, the Creator remedied this grotesque state
of affairs. At the time I supposed that the symbolic correspondences of mankind’s
origins and ultimate condition being associated with worms, combined with a year-
end festival recognizing the winter death of the earth, was the gist of this Thossian
“insight,” a poetic but scientifically valueless observation.
Other observations he made on the Mirocaw festival were also strictly etic; in
other words, they were based on second-hand sources, hearsay testimony. Even at
that juncture, however, I felt Thoss knew more than he disclosed; and, as I later
discovered, he had indeed included information on certain aspects of Mirocaw
suggesting he was already in possession of several keys which for the moment he
was keeping securely in his own pocket. By then I, too, possessed a most revealing
morsel of knowledge. A note to the “Harlequin” article apprised the reader that the
piece was only a fragment in rude form of a more wide-ranging work in
preparation. This work was never seen by the world. My former professor had not
published anything since his withdrawal from academic circulation some twenty
years ago. Now I suspected where he had gone.
For the man I had stopped on the streets of Mirocaw and from whom I tried
to obtain directions, the man with the disconcertingly lethargic gaze, had very much
resembled a superannuated version of Dr. Raymond Thoss.
 

3.
 
And now I have a confession to make. Despite my reasons for being enthusiastic
about Mirocaw and its mysteries, especially its relationship to both Thoss and my
own deepest concerns as a scholar—I contemplated the days ahead of me with no
more than a feeling of frigid numbness and often with a sense of profound
depression. Yet I had no reason to be surprised at this emotional state, which had
little relevance to the outward events in my life but was determined by inward
conditions that worked according to their own, quite enigmatic, seasons and cycles.
For many years, at least since my university days, I have suffered from this dark
malady, this recurrent despondency in which I would become buried when it came
time for the earth to grow cold and bare and the skies heavy with shadows.
Nevertheless, I pursued my plans, though somewhat mechanically, to visit
Mirocaw during its festival days, for I superstitiously hoped that this activity might
diminish the weight of my seasonal despair. In Mirocaw would be parades and
parties and the opportunity to play the clown once again.
For weeks in advance I practiced my art, even perfecting a new feat of juggling
magic, which was my special forte in foolery. I had my costumes cleaned, purchased
fresh makeup, and was ready. I received permission from the university to cancel
some of my classes prior to the holiday, explaining the nature of my project and the
necessity of arriving in the town a few days before the festival began, in order to do
some preliminary research, establish informants, and so on. Actually, my plan was
to postpone any formal inquiry until after the festival and to involve myself
beforehand as much as possible in its activities. I would, of course, keep a journal
during this time.
There was one resource I did want to consult, however. Specifically, I
returned to that outstate library to examine those issues of the Mirocaw Courier
dating from December two decades ago. One story in particular confirmed a point

Thoss made in the “Harlequin” article, though the event it chronicled must have
taken place after Thoss had written his study.
The Courier story appeared two weeks after the festival had ended for that
year and was concerned with the disappearance of a woman named Elizabeth
Beadle, the wife of Samuel Beadle, a hotel owner in Mirocaw. The county
authorities speculated that this was another instance of the “holiday suicides”
which seemed to occur with inordinate seasonal regularity in the Mirocaw region.
Thoss documented this phenomenon in his “Harlequin” article, though I suspect
that today these deaths would be neatly categorized under the heading “seasonal
affective disorder.” In any case, the authorities searched a half-frozen lake near the
outskirts of Mirocaw where they had found many successful suicides in years past.
This year, however, no body was discovered. Alongside the article was a picture of
Elizabeth Beadle. Even in the grainy microfilm reproduction one could detect a
certain vibrancy and vitality in Mrs. Beadle’s face. That a hypothesis of “holiday
suicide” should be so readily posited to explain her disappearance seemed strange
and in some way unjust.
Thoss, in his brief article, wrote that every year changes occurred of a moral
or spiritual cast which seemed to affect Mirocaw along with the usual winter
metamorphosis. He was not precise about its origin or nature but stated, in
typically mystifying fashion, that the effect of this “subseason” on the town was
conspicuously negative. In addition to the number of suicides actually accomplished
during this time, there was also a rise in treatment of “hypochondriacal” conditions,
which was how the medical men of twenty years past characterized these cases in
discussions with Thoss. This state of affairs would gradually worsen and finally
reach a climax during the days scheduled for the Mirocaw festival. Thoss
speculated that given the secretive nature of small towns, the situation was
probably even more intensely pronounced than casual investigation could reveal.
The connection between the festival and this insidious subseasonal climate in
Mirocaw was a point on which Thoss did not come to any rigid conclusions. He
did write, nevertheless, that these two “climatic aspects” had had a parallel

existence in the town’s history as far back as available records could document. A
late nineteenth-century history of Mirocaw County speaks of the town by its
original name of New Colstead, and castigates the townspeople for holding a
“ribald and soulless feast” to the exclusion of normal Christmas observances. (Thoss
comments that the historian had mistakenly fused two distinct aspects of the
season, their actual relationship being essentially antagonistic.) The “Harlequin”
article did not trace the festival to its earliest appearance (this may not have been
possible), though Thoss emphasized the New England origins of Mirocaw’s
founders. The festival, therefore, was one imported from this region and could
reasonably be extended at least a century; that is, if it had not been brought over
from the Old World, in which case its roots would become indefinite until further
research could be done. Surely Thoss’s allusion to the Syrian Gnostics suggested the
latter possibility could not entirely be ruled out.
But it seemed to be the festival’s link to New England that nourished Thoss’s
speculations. He wrote of this patch of geography as if it were an acceptable place
to end the search. For him, the very words “New England” seemed to be stripped
of all traditional connotations and had come to imply nothing less than a gateway to
all lands, both known and suspected, and even to ages beyond the civilized history
of the region. Having been educated partly in New England, I could somewhat
understand this sentimental exaggeration, for indeed there are places that seem
archaic beyond chronological measure, appearing to transcend relative standards of
time and achieving a kind of absolute antiquity which cannot be logically fathomed.
But how this vague suggestion related to a small town in the Midwest I could not
imagine. Thoss himself observed that the residents of Mirocaw did not betray any
mysteriously primitive consciousness. On the contrary, they appeared superficially
unaware of the genesis of their winter merrymaking. That such a tradition had
endured through the years, however, even eclipsing the conventional Christmas
holiday, revealed a profound awareness of the festival’s meaning and function.
I cannot deny that what I had learned about the Mirocaw festival inspired me
with a trite sense of fate, especially given the involvement of such an important

figure from my past as Thoss. It was the first time in my academic career that I
knew myself to be better suited than anyone else to discern the true meaning of
scattered data, even if I could only attribute this special authority to chance
circumstances.
Nevertheless, as I sat in that library on a morning in mid-December I doubted
for a moment the wisdom of setting out for Mirocaw rather than returning home,
where the more familiar rite de passage of winter depression awaited me. My
original scheme was to avoid the cyclical blues the season held for me, but it seemed
this was also a part of the history of Mirocaw, only on a much larger scale. My
emotional instability, however, was exactly what qualified me most for the
particular fieldwork ahead, though I did not take pride or consolation in the fact.
And to retreat would have been to deny myself an opportunity that might never
offer itself again. In retrospect, there seems to have been no fortuitous resolution to
the decision I had to make. As it happened, I went ahead to the town.
 
4.
 
Just past noon, on December 18, I started driving toward Mirocaw. A blur of dull,
earthen-colored scenery extended in every direction. The snowfalls of late autumn
had been sparse, and only a few white patches appeared in the harvested fields
along the highway. The clouds were gray and abundant. Passing by a stretch of
forest, I noticed the black, ragged clumps of abandoned nests clinging to the twisted
mesh of bare branches. I thought I saw black birds skittering over the road ahead,
but they were only dead leaves and they flew into the air as I drove by.
I approached Mirocaw from the south, entering the town from the direction I
had left it on my visit the previous summer. This took me once again through that
part of town which seemed to exist on the wrong side of some great invisible
barrier dividing the desirable sections of Mirocaw from the undesirable. As lurid as

this district had appeared to me under the summer sun, in the thin light of that
winter afternoon it degenerated into a pale phantom of itself. The frail stores and
starved-looking houses suggested a borderline region between the material and
nonmaterial worlds, with one sardonically wearing the mask of the other. I saw a
few gaunt pedestrians who turned as I passed by, though seemingly not because I
passed by, making my way up to the main street of Mirocaw.
Driving up the steep rise of Townshend Street, I found the sights there
comparatively welcoming. The rolling avenues of the town were in readiness for
the festival. Streetlights had their poles raveled with evergreen, the fresh boughs
proudly conspicuous in a barren season. On the doors of many of the businesses on
Townshend were holly wreaths, equally green but observably plastic. However,
although there was nothing unusual in this traditional greenery of the season, it
soon became apparent to me that Mirocaw had quite abandoned itself to this
particular symbol of Yuletide. It was garishly in evidence everywhere. The
windows of stores and houses were framed in green lights, green streamers hung
down from storefront awnings, and the beacons of the Red Rooster Bar were
peacock green floodlights. I supposed the residents of Mirocaw desired these
decorations, but the effect was one of excess. An eerie emerald haze permeated the
town, and faces looked slightly reptilian.
At the time I assumed that the prodigious evergreen, holly wreaths, and
colored lights (if only of a single color) demonstrated an emphasis on the vegetable
symbols of the Nordic Yuletide, which would inevitably be muddled into the
winter festival of any northern country just as they had been adopted for the
Christmas season. In his “Harlequin” article Thoss wrote of the pagan aspect of
Mirocaw’s festival, likening it to the ritual of a fertility cult, with probable
connections to chthonic divinities at sometime in the past. But Thoss had mistaken,
as I had, what was only part of the festival’s significance for the whole.
 
 

The hotel at which I had made reservations was located on Townshend. It was an
old building of brown brick, with an arched doorway and a pathetic coping
intended to convey an impression of neoclassicism. I found a parking space in front
and left my suitcases in the car.
When I first entered the hotel lobby it was empty. I thought perhaps the
Mirocaw festival would have attracted enough visitors to at least bolster the
business of its only hotel, but it seemed I was mistaken. Tapping a little bell, I
leaned on the desk and turned to look at a small, traditionally decorated Christmas
tree on a table near the entranceway. It was complete with shiny, egg-fragile bulbs;
miniature candy canes; flat, laughing Santas with arms wide; a star on top nodding
awkwardly against the delicate shoulder of an upper branch; and colored lights that
bloomed out of flower-shaped sockets. For some reason this seemed to me a sorry
little piece.
“May I help you?” said a young woman arriving from a room adjacent to the
lobby.
I must have been staring rather intently at her, for she looked away and
seemed quite uneasy. I could hardly imagine what to say to her or how to explain
what I was thinking. In person she immediately radiated a chilling brilliance of
manner and expression. But if this woman had not committed suicide twenty years
before, as the newspaper article had suggested, neither had she aged in that time.
“Sarah,” called a masculine voice from the invisible heights of a stairway. A
tall, middle-aged man came down the steps. “I thought you were in your room,”
said the man, whom I took to be Samuel Beadle. Sarah, not Elizabeth, Beadle
glanced sideways in my direction to indicate to her father that she was conducting
the business of the hotel. Beadle apologized to me, and then excused the two of
them for a moment while they went off to one side to continue their exchange.
I smiled and pretended everything was normal, while trying to remain within
earshot of their conversation. They spoke in tones that suggested their conflict was
a familiar one: Beadle’s overprotective concern with his daughter’s whereabouts
and Sarah’s frustrated understanding of certain restrictions placed upon her. The

conversation ended, and Sarah ascended the stairs, turning for a moment to give me
a facial pantomime of apology for the unprofessional scene that had just taken place.
“Now, sir, what can I do for you?” Beadle asked, almost demanded.
“Yes, I have a reservation. Actually, I’m a day early, if that doesn’t present a
problem.” I gave the hotel the benefit of the doubt that its business might have
been secretly flourishing.
“No problem at all, sir,” he said, presenting me with the registration form, and
then a brass-colored key dangling from a plastic disc bearing the number 44.
“Luggage?”
“Yes, it’s in my car.”
“I’ll give you a hand with that.”
While Beadle was settling me in my fourth-floor room it seemed an opportune
moment to broach the subject of the festival, the holiday suicides, and perhaps,
depending upon his reaction, the fate of his wife. I needed a respondent who had
lived in the town for a good many years and who could enlighten me about the
attitude of Mirocavians toward their season of sea-green lights.
“This is just fine,” I said about the clean but somber room. “Nice view. I can
see the bright green lights of Mirocaw just fine from up here. Is the town usually
all decked out like this? For the festival, I mean.”
“Yes, sir, for the festival,” he replied mechanically.
“I imagine you’ll probably be getting quite a few of us out-of-towners in the
next couple days.”
“Could be. Is there anything else?”
“Yes, there is. I wonder if you could tell me something about the festivities.”
“Such as…”
“Well, you know, the clowns and so forth.”
“Only clowns here are the ones that’re…well, picked out, I 
suppose you would say.”
“I don’t understand.”
“Excuse me, sir. I’m very busy right now. Is there anything else?”

I could think of nothing at the moment to perpetuate our conversation. Beadle
wished me a good stay and left.
I unpacked my suitcases. In addition to regular clothing I had also brought
along some of the items from my clown’s wardrobe. Beadle’s comment that the
clowns of Mirocaw were “picked out” left me wondering exactly what purpose
these street masqueraders served in the festival. The clown figure has had so many
meanings in different times and cultures. The jolly, well-loved joker familiar to most
people is actually but one aspect of this protean creature. Madmen, hunchbacks,
amputees, and other abnormals were once considered natural clowns; they were
elected to fulfill a comic role which could allow others to see them as ludicrous
rather than as terrible reminders of the forces of disorder in the world. But
sometimes a cheerless jester was required to draw attention to this same disorder,
as in the case of King Lear’s morbid and honest fool, who of course was eventually
hanged, and so much for his clownish wisdom. Clowns have often had ambiguous
and sometimes contradictory roles to play. Thus, I knew enough not to brashly
jump into costume and cry out, “Here I am again!”
That first day in Mirocaw I did not stray far from the hotel. I read and rested
for a few hours and then ate at a nearby diner. Through the window beside my
table I watched the winter night turn the soft green glow of the town into a harsh
and almost totally new color as it contrasted with the darkness. The streets of
Mirocaw seemed to me unusually busy for a small town at evening. Yet it was not
the kind of activity one normally sees before an approaching Christmas holiday.
This was not a crowd of bustling shoppers loaded with bright bags of presents.
Their arms were empty, their hands shoved deep in their pockets against the cold,
which nevertheless had not driven them to the solitude of their presumably warm
houses. I watched them enter and exit store after store without buying anything.
Many merchants remained open late, and even the places that were closed had left
their neon signs illuminated. The faces that passed the window of the diner were
possibly just stiffened by the cold, I thought; frozen into deep frowns and nothing
else. In the same window I saw the reflection of my own face. It was not the face of

an adept clown; it was slack and flabby and at that moment seemed the face of
someone less than alive. Outside was the town of Mirocaw, its streets dipping and
rising with a lunatic severity, its citizens packing the sidewalks, its heart bathed in
green: as promising a field of professional and personal challenge as I had ever
encountered—and I was bored to the point of dread. I hurried back to my hotel
room.
“Mirocaw has another coldness within its cold,” I wrote in my journal that
night. “Another set of buildings and streets that exists behind the visible town’s
facade like a world of disgraceful back alleys.” I went on like this for about a page,
across which I finally engraved a big “ X.” Then I went to bed.
In the morning I left my car at the hotel and walked toward the main business
district a few blocks away. Mingling with the good people of Mirocaw seemed like
the proper thing to do at that point in my scientific sojourn. But as I began
laboriously walking up Townshend (the sidewalks were cramped with wandering
pedestrians), a glimpse of someone suddenly replaced my haphazard plan with a
more specific and immediate one. Through the crowd and about fifteen paces ahead
was my goal.
“Dr. Thoss,” I called.
His head almost seemed to turn and look back in response to my shout, but I
could not be certain. I pushed past several warmly wrapped bodies and green-
scarved necks, only to find that the object of my pursuit appeared to be maintaining
the same distance from me, though I did not know if this was being done
deliberately or not. At the next corner, the dark-coated Thoss abruptly turned right
onto a steep street which led downward directly toward the dilapidated south end
of Mirocaw. When I reached the corner I looked down the sidewalk and could see
him very clearly from above. I also saw how he managed to stay so far ahead of me
in a mob that had impeded my own progress. For some reason the people on the
sidewalk made room so that he could move past them easily, without the usual
jostling of bodies. It was not a dramatic physical avoidance, though it seemed

nonetheless intentional. Fighting the tight fabric of the throng, I continued to
follow Thoss, losing and regaining sight of him.
By the time I reached the bottom of the sloping street the crowd had thinned
out considerably, and after walking a block or so farther I found myself practically a
lone pedestrian pacing behind a distant figure that I hoped was still Thoss. He was
now walking quite swiftly and in a way that seemed to acknowledge my pursuit of
him, though really it felt as if he were leading me as much as I was chasing him. I
called his name a few more times at a volume he could not have failed to hear,
assuming that deafness was not one of the changes to have come over him; he was,
after all, not a young man, even a middle-aged one any longer.
Thoss suddenly crossed in the middle of the street. He walked a few more
steps and entered a signless brick building between a liquor store and a repair shop
of some kind. In the “Harlequin” article Thoss had mentioned that the people living
in this section of Mirocaw maintained their own businesses, and that these were
patronized almost exclusively by residents of the area. I could well believe this
statement when I looked at these little sheds of commerce, for they had the same
badly weathered appearance as their clientele. The formidable shoddiness of these
buildings notwithstanding, I followed Thoss into the plain brick shell of what had
been, or possibly still was, a diner.
Inside it was unusually dark. Even before my eyes made the adjustment I
sensed that this was not a thriving restaurant cozily cluttered with chairs and tables
—as was the establishment where I had eaten the night before—but a place with
only a few disarranged furnishings, and very cold. It seemed colder, in fact, than the
winter streets outside.
“Dr. Thoss?” I called toward a table near the center of the long room. Perhaps
four or five were sitting around the table, with some others blending into the
dimness behind them. Scattered across the tabletop were some books and loose
papers. Seated there was an old man indicating something in the pages before him,
but it was not Thoss. Beside him were two youths whose wholesome features
distinguished them from the grim weariness of the others. I approached the table

and they all looked up at me. None of them showed a glimmer of emotion except
the two boys, who exchanged worried and guilt-ridden glances with each other, as
if they had just been discovered in some shameful act. They both suddenly burst
from the table and ran into the dark background, where a light appeared briefly as
they exited by a back door.
“I’m sorry,” I said diffidently. “I thought I saw someone I knew come in here.”
They said nothing. Out of a back room others began to emerge, no doubt
interested in the source of the commotion. In a few moments the room was
crowded with these tramp-like figures, all of them gazing emptily in the dimness. I
was not at this point frightened of them; at least I was not afraid they would do me
any physical harm. Actually, I felt as if it was quite within my power to pummel
them easily into submission, their mousy faces almost inviting a succession of firm
blows. But there were so many of them.
They slid slowly toward me in a wormy mass. Their eyes seemed empty and
unfocused, and I wondered a moment if they were even aware of my presence.
Nevertheless, I was the center upon which their lethargic shuffling converged, their
shoes scuffing softly along the bare floor. I began to deliver a number of hasty
inanities as they continued to press toward me, their weak and unexpectedly
odorless bodies nudging against mine. (I understood now why the people along the
sidewalks seemed instinctively to avoid Thoss.) Unseen legs became entangled with
my own; I staggered and then regained my balance. This sudden movement aroused
me from a kind of mesmeric daze into which I must have fallen without being
aware of it. I had intended to leave that dreary place long before events had
reached such a juncture, but for some reason I could not focus my intentions
strongly enough to cause myself to act. My mind had been drifting farther away as
these abject things approached. In a sudden surge of panic I pushed through their
soft ranks and was outside.
The open air revived me to my former alertness, and I immediately started
pacing swiftly up the hill. I was no longer sure that I had not simply imagined what
had seemed, and at the same time did not seem, like a perilous moment. Had their

movements been directed toward a harmful assault, or were they trying merely to
intimidate me? As I reached the green-glazed main street of Mirocaw I really could
not determine what had just happened.
The sidewalks were still jammed with a multitude of pedestrians, who now
seemed more lively than they had been only a short time before. There was a kind
of vitality that could only be attributed to the imminent festivities. A group of
young men had begun celebrating prematurely and strode noisily across the street
at midpoint, obviously intoxicated. From the laughter and joking among the still
sober citizens I gathered that, mardi-gras style, public drunkenness was within the
traditions of this winter festival. I looked for anything to indicate the beginnings of
the Street Masquerade, but saw nothing: no brightly garbed harlequins or snow-
white pierrots. Were the ceremonies even now in preparation for the coronation of
the Winter Queen? “The Winter Queen,” I wrote in my journal. “Figure of fertility
invested with symbolic powers of revival and prosperity. Elected in the manner of a
high school prom queen. Check for possible consort figure in the form of a
representative from the underworld.”
In the pre-darkness hours of December 19 I sat in my hotel room and wrote
and thought and organized. I did not feel too badly, all things considered. The
holiday excitement which was steadily rising in the streets below my window was
definitely infecting me. I forced myself to take a short nap in anticipation of a long
night. When I awoke, Mirocaw’s annual feast was in full motion.
 
5.
 
Practically bounding from my bed to the sounds of bustling and carousing outside, I
went to the window and looked out over the town. It seemed all the lights of
Mirocaw were shining, save in that section down the hill which became part of the
black void of winter. And now the town’s greenish tinge was even more

pronounced, spreading everywhere like a great green rainbow that had melted from
the sky and endured, phosphorescent, into the night. In the streets was the
brightness of an artificial spring. The byways of Mirocaw vibrated with activity:
on a nearby corner a brass band blared; marauding cars blew their horns and were
sometimes mounted by laughing pedestrians; a man emerged from the Red Rooster
Bar, threw up his arms, and crowed. I looked closely at the individual celebrants,
searching for the vestments of clowns. Soon, delightedly, I saw them. The costume
was red and white, with matching cap, and the face painted a noble alabaster. It
almost seemed to be a clownish incarnation of that white-bearded and black-booted
Christmas fool.
This particular fool, however, was not receiving the affection and respect
usually accorded to a Santa Claus. My poor fellow-clown was in the middle of a
circle of revelers who were pushing him back and forth from one to the other. The
object of this abuse seemed to accept it somewhat willingly, but this little game
nevertheless appeared to have humiliation as its purpose. “Only clowns here are the
ones that’re picked out,” echoed Beadle’s voice in my memory. “Picked on” seemed
closer to the truth.
Packing myself in some heavy clothes, I went out into the green gleaming
streets. Not far from the hotel I was stumbled into by a character with a wide blue
and red grin and bright baggy clothes. Actually he had been shoved in my direction
by some young men outside a drugstore. He lost his footing on the slick sidewalk
and tumbled down into a bank of snow along the street.
“See the freak,” said an obese and drunken fellow. “See the freak fall.”
My first response was anger, and then fear as I saw two others flanking the
fat drunk. They walked toward me and I tensed myself for a confrontation.
“This is a disgrace,” one said, the neck of a wine bottle held loosely in his left
hand.
But it was not to me they were speaking; it was to the clown. His three
persecutors helped him up with a sudden jerk and then splashed wine in his face.
They ignored me altogether.

“Let him loose,” the fat one said. “Crawl away, freak. Oh, he flies!”
The clown trotted off, becoming lost in the throng.
“Wait a minute,” I said to the rowdy trio, who had started lumbering away. I
quickly decided that it would probably be futile to ask them to explain what I had
just witnessed, especially amid the noise and confusion of the festivities. In my best
jovial fashion I proposed we all go someplace where I could buy them each a drink.
They had no objection and in a short while we were all squeezed around a table in
the Red Rooster.
Soon after we were served, I told them that I was from out of town and asked
if they could explain some things… I did not understand about their festival.
“I don’t think there’s anything to understand,” the fat one said. “It’s just what
you see.”
I asked him about the people dressed as clowns.
“Them? They’re the freaks. It’s their turn this year. Everyone takes their turn.
Next year it might be mine. Or yours,” he said, pointing at one of his friends across
the table. “And when we find out which one you are—”
“You’re not smart enough,” said the defiant potential freak.
This was an important point: the fact that individuals who played the clowns
remained, or at least attempted to remain, anonymous. This arrangement would
help remove inhibitions a resident of Mirocaw might have about abusing his own
neighbor or even a family relation. From what I later observed, the extent of this
abuse did not go beyond a kind of playful roughhousing. And even so, it was only
the occasional group of rowdies who actually took advantage of this aspect of the
festival, the majority of the citizens very much content to stay on the sidelines.
As far as being able to illuminate the meaning of this custom, my three young
friends were quite useless. To them it was just amusement, as I imagine it was to
the majority of Mirocavians. This was understandable. I suppose the average
person would not be able to explain exactly how the profoundly familiar Christmas
holiday came to be celebrated in its present form.
I left the bar alone and not unaffected by the drinks I had consumed there.

Outside, the general merrymaking continued. Loud music emanated from several
quarters. Mirocaw had fully transformed itself from a sedate small town to an
enclave of Saturnalia within the dark immensity of a winter night. But Saturn is
also the planetary symbol of melancholy and sterility, a clash of opposites contained
within that single word. And as I wandered half-drunkenly down the street, I
discovered that there was a conflict within the winter festival itself. This discovery
indeed appeared to be that secret key which Thoss withheld in his study of the
town. Oddly enough, it was through my unfamiliarity with the outward nature of
the festival that I came to know its true nature.
I was mingling with the crowd on the street, warmly enjoying the confusion
around me, when I saw a strangely designed creature lingering on the corner up
ahead. It was one of the Mirocaw clowns. Its clothes were shabby and nondescript,
almost in the style of a tramp-type clown, but not humorously exaggerated enough.
The face, though, made up for the lackluster costume. I had never seen such a
strange conception for a clown’s countenance. The figure stood beneath a dim
streetlight, and when it turned its head my way I felt a sense of recognition. The
thin, smooth, and pale head; the wide eyes; the oval-shaped features resembling
nothing so much as the skull-faced, screaming creature in that famous painting
(memory fails me). This clownish imitation rivaled the original in summoning an
effect of stricken horror and despair. It had an inhuman likeness more proper to
something under the earth than upon it.
From the first moment I saw this creature, I thought of those inhabitants of
the ghetto down the hill. There was the same nauseating passivity and languor in
its bearing. Perhaps if I had not been drinking earlier I would not have been bold
enough to take the action I did. I decided to join in one of the upstanding traditions
of the winter festival, for it annoyed me to see this morbid impostor of a clown
standing up. When I reached the corner I laughingly pushed myself into the
creature—“Whoops!”—who stumbled backward and ended up on the sidewalk. I
laughed again and looked around for approval from my fellow merrymakers in the
vicinity. No one, however, seemed to appreciate or even acknowledge what I had

done. They did not laugh with me or point with amusement, but only passed by,
perhaps walking a little faster until they were some distance from this streetcorner
incident. I realized instantly I had violated some tacit rule of behavior, though I had
thought my action well within the common practice. The idea occurred to me that I
might even be apprehended and prosecuted for what in any other circumstances
was certainly a criminal act. I turned around to help the clown back to his feet,
hoping to somehow redeem my offense, but the creature was gone. Solemnly I
walked away from the scene of my inadvertent crime and sought other streets away
from its witnesses.
Along the various back avenues of Mirocaw I wandered, pausing exhaustedly
at one point to sit at the counter of a small sandwich shop that was packed with
customers. I ordered a cup of coffee to revive my inebriated system. Warming my
hands around the cup and sipping slowly from it, I watched the people outside as
they passed the front window. It was well after midnight but the thick flow of
passersby gave no indication that anyone was going home early. A carnival of
profiles filed past the window and I was content simply to sit back and observe,
until finally one of these faces made me start. It was that frightful little clown I had
roughed up earlier. But although its face was familiar in its ghastly aspect, there
was something different about it. And I wondered that there should be two
hideous freaks.
Quickly paying the man at the counter, I dashed out to get a second glimpse of
the clown, who was now nowhere to be seen. I wondered how it could have made
its way so easily out of sight, unless the dense crowd along the sidewalk had
instinctively allowed this creature to pass unhindered through its massive ranks, as
it did for Thoss. In the process of searching for this particular freak, I discovered
that interspersed among the celebrating populace of Mirocaw, which included the
sanctioned festival clowns, there was not one or two, but a considerable number of
these pale, wraithlike creatures. And they all drifted along the streets unmolested
by even the rowdiest of revelers. I now understood one of the taboos of the festival.
These other clowns were not to be disturbed and should even be avoided, much as

were the residents of the slum at the edge of town. Nevertheless, I felt instinctively
that the two groups of clowns were somehow identified with each other, even if
the ghetto clowns were not welcome at Mirocaw’s winter festival. Indeed, they
might legitimately be regarded as part of the community and celebrating the season
in their own way. To all appearances, this group of melancholy mummers
constituted nothing less than an entirely independent festival—a festival within a
festival.
Returning to my room, I entered my suppositions into the journal I was
keeping for this venture. The following are excerpts:
 
There is a superstitiousness displayed by the residents of Mirocaw with regard to
these people from the slum section, particularly as they lately appear in those
dreadful faces signifying their own festival. What is the relationship between these
simultaneous celebrations? Did one precede the other? If so, which? My opinion at
this point—and I claim no conclusiveness for it—is that Mirocaw’s winter festival
is the later manifestation, that it appeared after the festival of those depressingly
pallid clowns, in order to cover it up or mitigate its effect. The holiday suicides
come to mind, and the “subclimate” Thoss wrote about, as well as the
disappearance of Elizabeth Beadle twenty years ago, and my encounter this very
day with the pariah clan existing outside yet within the community. Of my own
experience with this emotionally deleterious subseason I would rather not speak at
this time. Still not able to say whether or not my usual winter melancholy is the
cause. On the general subject of mental health, I must consider Thoss’s book about
his stay in a psychiatric hospital (in western Massachusetts, almost sure of that.
Check on this book and Mirocaw’s New England roots). The winter solstice is
tomorrow, albeit sometime past midnight.  It is, of course, the day of the year on
which night hours surpass daylight hours by the greatest margin. Note what this
has to do with the suicides and a rise in psychic disorder. Recalling Thoss’s list of
documented suicides in his article, there seemed to be a recurrence of specific family
names, as there very likely might be for any kind of data collected in a small town.

Among these names was a Beadle or two. Perhaps, then, there is a hereditary basis
for the suicides which has nothing to do with Thoss’s mystical subclimate, which is
a colorful idea to be sure and one that seems fitting for this town of various
outward and inward aspects, but is not a conception that can be substantiated.
 
One thing that seems certain, however, is the division of Mirocaw into two very
distinct types of citizenry, resulting in two festivals and the appearance of similar
clowns—a term now used in an extremely loose sense. But there is a connection,
and I believe I have some idea of what it is. I said before that the normal residents
of the town regard those from the ghetto, and especially their clown figures, with
superstition. Yet it’s more than that: there is fear, perhaps hatred—the particular
kind of hatred resulting from some powerful and irrational memory. What
threatens Mirocaw I think I can very well understand. I recall the incident earlier
today in that vacant diner. “Vacant” is the appropriate word here. The
congregation of that half-lit room formed less a presence than an absence, even
considering the oppressive number of them. Those eyes that did not or could not
focus on anything, the pining lassitude of their faces, the lazy march of their feet. I
was spiritually drained when I ran out of there. I then understood why these
people and their activities are avoided.
I cannot question the wisdom of those ancestral Mirocavians who began the
tradition of the winter festival and gave the town a pretext for celebration and
social intercourse at a time when the consequences of brooding isolation are most
severe, those longest and darkest days of the solstice. A mood of Christmas joviality
obviously would not be sufficient to counter the menace of this season. But even so,
there are still the suicides of individuals who are somehow cut off, I imagine, from
the vitalizing activities of the festival.
It is the nature of this insidious subseason that seems to determine the
outward forms of Mirocaw’s winter festival: the optimistic greenery in a period of
gray dormancy; the fertile promise of the Winter Queen; and, most interesting to
my mind, the clowns—the bright clowns of Mirocaw who are treated so badly.

They appear to serve as surrogate figures for those dark-eyed mummers of the
slums. Since the latter are feared for some power or influence they possess, they
may still be symbolically confronted and conquered through their counterparts,
who are elected for precisely this function. If I am right about this, I wonder to
what extent there is a conscious awareness among the town’s populace of this
indirect show of aggression. Those three young men I spoke with tonight did not
seem to possess much insight beyond seeing that there was a certain amount of
robust fun in the festival’s tradition. For that matter, how much awareness is there
on the other side of these two antagonistic festivals? Too horrible to think of such a
thing, but I must wonder if, for all their apparent aimlessness, those inhabitants of
the ghetto are not the only ones who know what they are about. No denying that
behind those inhumanly limp expressions there seems to be a kind of obnoxious
intelligence.
 
As I wobbled from street to street tonight, watching those oval-mouthed clowns, I
could not help feeling that all the merrymaking in Mirocaw was somehow allowed
only by their sufferance. This I hope is no more than a fanciful Thossian intuition,
the sort of idea that is curious and thought-provoking without ever seeming to gain
the benefit of confirmation. I know my mind is not entirely lucid, but I feel that it
may be possible to penetrate Mirocaw’s many complexities and illuminate the
hidden side of the festival season. In particular I must look for the significance of
the other festival. Is it also some kind of fertility celebration? From what I have
seen, the tenor of this “celebrating” sub-group is one of anti-fertility, if anything.
How have they managed to keep from dying out completely over the years? How
do they maintain their numbers?
 
But I was too tired to formulate any more of my sodden speculations. Falling onto
my bed, I soon became lost in dreams of streets and faces.
 

6.
 
I was, of course, slightly hung over when I woke up late the next morning. The
festival was still going strong, and blaring music outside roused me from a
nightmare. It was a parade. A number of floats proceeded down Townshend, a
familiar color predominating. There were theme floats of pilgrims and Indians,
cowboys and Indians, and clowns of an orthodox type. In the middle of it all was
the Winter Queen herself, freezing atop an icy throne. She waved in all directions. I
even imagined she waved up at my dark window. In the first few groggy moments
of wakefulness I had no sympathy with my excitation of the previous night. But I
discovered that my former enthusiasm had merely lain dormant, and soon returned
with an even greater intensity. Never before had my mind and senses been so active
during this usually inert time of year. At home I would have been playing
lugubrious old records and looking out the window quite a bit. I was terribly
grateful in a completely abstract way for my commitment to a meaningful mania.
And I was eager to get to work after I had had some breakfast at the coffee shop.
When I got back to my room I discovered the door was unlocked. And there
was something written on the dresser mirror. The writing was red and greasy, as if
done with a clown’s make-up pencil—my own, I realized. I read the legend, or
rather I should say riddle, several times: “What buries itself before it is dead?” I
looked at it for quite a while, very shaken at how vulnerable my holiday
fortifications were. Was this supposed to be a warning of some kind? A threat to
the effect that if I persisted in a certain course I would end up prematurely
interred? I would have to be careful, I told myself. My resolution was to let
nothing deter me from the inspired strategy I had conceived for myself. I wiped the
mirror clean, for it was now needed for other purposes.
I spent the rest of the day devising a very special costume and the appropriate
face to go with it. I easily shabbied up my overcoat with a torn pocket or two and a
complete set of stains. Combined with blue jeans and a pair of rather scuffed-up

shoes, I had a passable costume for a derelict. The face, however, was more
difficult, for I had to experiment from memory. Conjuring a mental image of the
shrieking pierrot in that painting (The Scream, I now recall), helped me quite a bit.
At nightfall I exited the hotel by the back stairway.
It was strange to walk down the crowded street in this gruesome disguise.
Though I thought I would feel conspicuous, the actual experience was very close, I
imagined, to one of complete invisibility. No one looked at me as I strolled by, or as
they strolled by, or as we strolled by each other. I was a phantom—perhaps the
ghost of festivals past, or those yet to come.
I had no clear idea where my disguise would take me that night, only vague
expectations of gaining the confidence of my fellow specters and possibly in some
way coming to know their secrets. For a while I would simply wander around in
that lackadaisical manner I had learned from them, following their lead in any way
they might indicate. And for the most part this meant doing almost nothing and
doing it silently. If I passed one of my kind on the sidewalk there was no speaking,
no exchange of knowing looks, no recognition at all that I was aware of. We were
there on the streets of Mirocaw to create a presence and nothing more. At least
this is how I came to feel about it. As I drifted along with my bodiless invisibility, I
felt myself more and more becoming an empty, floating shape, seeing without being
seen and walking without the interference of those grosser creatures who shared
my world. It was not an experience completely without interest and even
enjoyment. The clown’s shibboleth of “Here we are again” took on a new meaning
for me as I felt myself a novitiate of a more rarefied order of harlequinry. And very
soon the opportunity to make further progress along this path presented itself.
Going the opposite direction, down the street, a pickup truck slowly passed,
gently parting a sea of zigging and zagging celebrants. The cargo in the back of this
truck was curious, for it was made up entirely of my fellow sectarians. At the end
of the block the truck stopped and another of them boarded it over the back gate.
One block down I saw still another get on. Then the truck made a U-turn at an
intersection and headed in my direction.

I stood at the curb as I had seen the others do. I was not sure the truck would
pick me up, thinking that somehow they knew I was an impostor. The truck did,
however, slow down, almost coming to a stop when it reached me. The others
were crowded on the floor of the truck bed. Most of them were just staring at
nothing with the usual indifference I had come to expect from their kind. But a few
actually glanced at me with some anticipation. For a second I hesitated, not sure I
wanted to pursue this ruse any further. At the last moment, though, some impulse
sent me climbing up the back of the truck and squeezing myself in among the
others.
There were only a few more to pick up before the truck headed for the
outskirts of Mirocaw and beyond. At first I tried to maintain a clear orientation
with respect to the town. But as we took turn after turn through the darkness of
narrow country roads, I found myself unable to preserve any sense of direction. The
majority of the others in the back of the truck exhibited no apparent awareness of
their fellow passengers. Guardedly, I looked from face to ghostly face. A few of
them spoke in short whispered phrases to others close by. I could not make out
what they were saying but the tone of their voices was one of innocent normalcy,
as if they were not of the 
hardened slum-herd of Mirocaw. Perhaps, I thought, these were thrill-seekers who
had disguised themselves as I had done, or, more likely, initiates of some kind.
Possibly they had received prior instructions at such meetings as I had stumbled
onto the day before. It was also likely that among this crew were those very boys I
had frightened into a precipitate exit from that old diner.
The truck was now speeding along a fairly open stretch of country, heading
toward those higher hills that surrounded the now distant town of Mirocaw. The
icy wind whipped around us, and I could not keep myself from trembling with cold.
This definitely betrayed me as one of the newcomers among the group, for the two
bodies that pressed against mine were rigidly still and even seemed to be radiating a
frigidity of their own. I glanced ahead at the darkness into which we were rapidly
progressing.

We had left all open country behind us now, and the road was enclosed by
thick woods. The mass of bodies in the truck leaned into one another as we began
traveling up a steep incline. Above us, at the top of the hill, were lights shining
somewhere within the woods. When the road leveled off, the truck made an abrupt
turn, steering into what looked like a great ditch. There was an unpaved path,
however, upon which the truck proceeded toward the glowing in the near distance.
This glowing became brighter and sharper as we approached it, flickering
upon the trees and revealing stark detail where there had formerly been only
smooth darkness. As the truck pulled into a clearing and came to a stop, I saw a
loose assembly of figures, many of which held lanterns that beamed with a dazzling
and frosty light. I stood up in the back of the truck to unboard as the others were
doing. Glancing around from that height I saw approximately thirty more of those
cadaverous clowns milling about. One of my fellow passengers spied me lingering in
the truck and in a strangely high-pitched whisper told me to hurry, explaining
something about the “apex of darkness.” I thought again about this solstice night; it
was technically the longest period of darkness of the year, even if not by a very
significant margin from many other winter nights. Its true significance, though, was
related to considerations having little to do with either statistics or the calendar.
I went over to the place where the others were forming into a tighter crowd,
which betrayed a sense of expectancy in the subtle gestures and expressions of its
individual members. Glances were now exchanged, the hand of one lightly touched
the shoulder of another, and a pair of circled eyes gazed over to where two figures
were setting their lanterns on the ground about six feet apart. The illumination of
these lanterns revealed an opening in the earth. Eventually the awareness of
everyone was focused on this roundish pit, and as if by prearranged signal we all
began huddling around it. The only sounds were those of the wind and our own
movements as we crushed frozen leaves and sticks underfoot.
Finally, when we had all surrounded this gaping hole, the first one jumped in,
leaving our sight for a moment but then reappearing to take hold of a lantern which
another handed him from above. The miniature abyss filled with light, and I could

see it was no more than six feet deep. One of its walls opened into the mouth of a
tunnel. The figure holding the lantern stooped a little and disappeared into the
passage.
Each of us, in turn, dropped into the darkness of this pit, and every fifth one
took a lantern. I kept to the back of the group, for whatever subterranean activities
were going to take place, I was sure I wanted to be on their periphery. When only
about ten of us remained on the ground above, I maneuvered to let four of them
precede me so that I might receive a lantern. This was exactly how it worked out,
for after I had leaped to the bottom of the hole a light was ritually handed down to
me. Turning about-face, I quickly entered the passageway. At that point I shook so
with cold that I was neither curious nor afraid, grateful for the shelter.
I entered a long, gently sloping tunnel, just high enough for me to stand
upright. It was considerably warmer down there than outside in the cold darkness
of the woods. After a few moments I had sufficiently thawed out so that my
concerns shifted from those of physical comfort to a sudden and justified
preoccupation with my survival. As I walked I held my lantern close to the sides of
the tunnel. They were relatively smooth as if the passage had not been made by
manual digging but had been burrowed by something which left behind a clue to its
dimensions in the tunnel’s size and shape. This delirious idea came to me when I
recalled the message that had been left on my hotel room mirror: “What buries
itself before it is dead?”
I had to hurry along to keep up with those uncanny spelunkers who preceded
me. The lanterns ahead bobbed with every step of their bearers, the lumbering
procession seeming less and less real the farther we marched into that snug little
tunnel. At some point I noticed the line ahead of me growing shorter. The
processioners were emptying out into a cavernous chamber where I, too, soon
arrived. This area was about thirty feet in height, its other dimensions
approximating those of a large ballroom. Gazing into the distance above made me
uncomfortably aware of how far we had descended into the earth. Unlike the
smooth sides of the tunnel, the walls of this cavern looked jagged and irregular, as

though they had been gnawed at. The earth had been removed, I assumed, either
through the tunnel from which we had emerged, or else by way of one of the many
other black openings that I saw around the edges of the chamber, for possibly they
too led back to the surface.
But the structure of this chamber occupied my mind a great deal less than did
its occupants. There to meet us on the floor of the great cavern was what must
have been the entire slum population of Mirocaw, and more, all with the same
eerily wide-eyed and oval-mouthed faces. They formed a circle around an altar-like
object which had some kind of dark, leathery covering draped over it. Upon the
altar, another covering of the same material concealed a lumpy form beneath. And
behind this form, looking down upon the altar, was the only figure whose face was
not greased with makeup.
He wore a long snowy robe that was the same color as the wispy hair
berimming his head. His arms were calmly at his sides. He made no movement. The
man I once believed would penetrate great secrets stood before us with the same
professorial bearing that had impressed me so many years ago, yet now I felt
nothing but dread at the thought of what revelations lay pocketed within the
abysmal folds of his magisterial attire. Had I really come here to challenge such a
formidable figure? The name by which I knew him seemed itself insufficient to
designate one of his stature. Rather I should name him by his other incarnations:
god of all wisdom, scribe of all sacred books, father of all magicians, thrice great and
more—rather I should call him Thoth.
He raised his cupped hands to his congregation and the ceremony was
underway.
It was all very simple. The entire assembly, which had remained speechless
until this moment, broke into the most horrendous high-pitched singing that can be
imagined. It was a choir of sorrow, lament, and mortification. The cavern rang with
the dissonant, whining chorus. My voice, too, was added to the congregation’s,
trying to blend with their maimed music. But my singing could not imitate theirs,
having a huskiness at odds with the keening ululation of that company. To keep

from exposing myself as an intruder I continued to mouth their words without
sound. These words were a revelation of the moody malignancy which until then I
had no more than sensed whenever in the presence of these figures. They were
singing to the “unborn in paradise,” to the “pure unlived lives.” They sang a dirge
for existence, for all its vital forms and seasons. Their ideal was a melancholy half-
existence consecrated to all the many shapes of death and dissolution. A sea of thin,
bloodless faces trembled and screamed their antipathy to being itself. And the
robed, guiding figure at the heart of all this—elevated over the course of twenty
years to the status of high priest—was the man from whom I had taken so many of
my own life’s principles. It would be useless to describe what I felt at that moment
and a waste of the time I need to describe the events which followed.
The singing abruptly stopped and the towering white-haired figure began to
speak. He was welcoming those of the new generation—twenty winters had passed
since the “Pure Ones” had expanded their ranks. The word “pure” in this setting
was a violence to what sense and composure I still retained, for nothing could have
been more foul than what was to come. Thoss—and I employ this defunct identity
only as a convenience—closed his sermon and drew closer to the dark-skinned altar.
Then, with all the flourish of his former life, he drew back the topmost covering.
Beneath it was a limp-limbed effigy, a collapsed puppet sprawled upon the slab. I
was standing toward the rear of the congregation and attempted to keep as close to
the exit passage as I could. Thus, I did not see everything as clearly as I might have.
Thoss looked down upon the crooked, doll-like form and then out at the
gathering. I even imagined that he made knowing eye-contact with myself. He
spread his arms and a stream of continuous and unintelligible words flowed from
his moaning mouth. The congregation began to stir, not greatly but perceptibly.
Until that 
moment there was a limit to what I believed was the evil of these people. They
were, after all, only that. They were merely morbid souls with beliefs that were
eccentric to the healthy social order around them. If there was anything I had
learned in all my years as an anthropologist it was that the world is infinitely rich in

phenomena that society as we know it (whoever “we” might be) would regard as
strange, even to the point where the concept of strangeness itself had little meaning
for me. But with the scene I then witnessed, my conscience vaulted into a realm
from which it will never return.
For now was the transformation scene, the culmination of every harlequinade.
It began slowly. There was increasing movement among those on the far side
of the chamber from where I stood. Someone had fallen to the floor and the others
in the area backed away. The voice at the altar continued its chanting. I tried to
gain a better view but there were too many of them around me. Through the mass
of 
obstructing bodies I caught only glimpses of what was taking place.
The one who had swooned to the floor of the chamber seemed to be losing all
former shape and proportion. I thought it was a clown’s trick. They were clowns,
were they not? I myself could make four white balls transform into four black balls
as I juggled them. And this was not my most astonishing feat of clownish magic.
And is there not always a sleight-of-hand inherent in all ceremonies, often
dependent on the transported delusions of the celebrants? This was a good show, I
thought, and giggled to myself. The transformation scene of Harlequin throwing off
his fool’s facade. O God, Harlequin, do not move like that! Harlequin, where are
your arms? And your legs have melted together and begun squirming upon the
floor. What horrible, mouthing umbilicus is that where your face should be? What
is it that buries itself before it is dead? The almighty serpent of wisdom—the
Conqueror Worm.
It now started happening all around the chamber. Individual members of the
congregation would gaze emptily—caught for a moment in a frozen trance—and
then collapse to the floor to begin the sickening metamorphosis. This happened
with ever-increasing frequency the louder and more frantically Thoss chanted his
insane prayer or curse. Then there began a writhing movement toward the altar,
and Thoss welcomed the things as they curled their way to the altar-top. I knew
now what lax figure lay upon it.

This was Kora and Persephone, the daughter of Ceres and the Winter Queen:
the child abducted into the underworld of death. Except this child had no
supernatural mother to save her, no living mother at all. For the sacrifice I
witnessed was an echo of one that had occurred twenty years before, the carnival
feast of the preceding generation—O carne vale! Now both mother and daughter
had become victims of this subterranean sabbat. I finally realized this truth when
the figure stirred upon the altar, lifted its head of icy beauty, and screamed at the
sight of mute mouths closing around her.
I ran from the chamber into the tunnel. (There was nothing else that could be
done, I have obsessively told myself.) Some of the others who had not yet changed
began to pursue me. They would have caught up to me, I have no doubt, for I fell
only a few yards into the passage. And for a moment I imagined that I too was
about to undergo a transformation. Anything seemed possible now. When I heard
the approaching footsteps of my pursuers I was sure there was nothing left for me
but the worst finale a human being can suffer—the death known to those whom
the gods have first made mad. Perhaps I would even be forced to take a place on
the altar among the gory remnants of the Winter Queen. But the footsteps behind
me ceased and retreated. They had received an order in the voice of their high
priest. I too heard the order, though I wish I had not, for until then I had imagined
that Thoss did not remember who I was. It was that voice which taught me
otherwise.
For the moment I was free to leave. I struggled to my feet and, having broken
my lantern in the fall, retraced my way back through cloacal blackness.
Everything seemed to happen very quickly once I emerged from the tunnel
and climbed up from the pit. I wiped the reeking greasepaint from my face as I ran
through the woods and back to the road. A passing car stopped, though I gave it no
other choice except to run me down.
“Thank you for stopping.”
“What the hell are you doing out here?” the driver asked.
I caught my breath. “It was a joke. The festival. Friends thought it would be

funny. Please drive on.”
My ride let me off about a mile out of town, and from there I could find my
way. It was the same route I traveled when I first visited Mirocaw the summer
before. I stood for a while at the summit of that high hill just outside the city limits,
looking down upon the busy little hamlet. The intensity of the festival had not
abated. I walked toward the welcoming glow of green and slipped through the
festivities unnoticed. 
When I reached the hotel I was glad to see that no one was about. Given that
I was so obviously a wreck, I feared meeting anyone who might ask what had
happened to me. The hotel desk was unattended, so I was spared having to speak
with Beadle. Indeed, there was an atmosphere of abandonment throughout the
place that I found ominous yet did not pause to contemplate.
I trod up the stairs to my room. Locking the door behind me, I then collapsed
upon the bed and was soon enshrouded by a merciful blackness.
 
7.
 
When I awoke the next morning I saw from my window that the town and
surrounding countryside had been visited during the night by a heavy snowfall, one
which was entirely unpredicted. A few leftover flakes were still lighting on the
now deserted streets of Mirocaw, and buried beneath the drifts below were the last
vestiges of revelry and celebration. The festival was over. Everyone had retired to
their homes.
And this was exactly my own intention. Any action on my part concerning
what I had seen the night before would have to wait until I was away from the
town. I am still not sure it will do the slightest good to speak up like this. Any
accusations I have made with respect to the slum populace of Mirocaw are
eminently subject to dismissal, perhaps as a hoax or a festival hallucination. And

thereafter this document will take its place alongside the works of Raymond Thoss.
With packed suitcases in both hands I walked up to the front desk to check
out. The man behind the desk was not Samuel Beadle, and he had to fumble around
to find my bill.
“Here we are. Everything all right?”
“Fine,” I answered in a dead voice. “Is Mr. Beadle around?”
“No, I’m afraid he’s not back yet. Been out all night looking for his daughter.
She’s a very popular girl, being the Winter Queen and all that nonsense. Probably
find she was at a party somewhere.”
A little noise came out of my throat.
I threw my suitcases in the back seat of my car and got behind the wheel. On
that morning nothing I could recall seemed real to me. The snow was falling and I
watched it through my windshield, slow and silent and entrancing. I started up my
car, routinely glancing in my rear view mirror. What I saw there is now vividly
framed in my mind, as it was framed in the back window of my car when I turned
to verify its reality.
In the middle of the street behind me, standing ankle-deep in snow, were
Thoss and another figure. When I looked closely at the other I recognized him as
one of the boys whom I surprised in that diner. But he had now taken on a listless
resemblance to his new family. Both he and Thoss stared at me, making no attempt
to forestall my departure. Thoss knew that this was unnecessary.
I had to carry the image of those two dark figures in my mind as I drove back
home. And only now has the full gravity of my experience descended upon me. So
far I have claimed illness in order to avoid my teaching schedule. To face the normal
flow of life as I had formerly known it would be impossible. I am now very much
under the influence of a season and a climate far colder and more barren than all the
winters in human memory. And mentally retracing past events does not seem to
have helped. If anything, I now feel myself sinking deeper into a velvety white
abyss.

At certain times I could almost dissolve entirely into this inner realm of purity
and emptiness, the paradise of the unborn. I remember how I was momentarily
overtaken by a feeling I had never known when in disguise I drifted through the
streets of Mirocaw, untouched by the drunken, noisy forms around me:
untouchable. It was the feeling that I had been liberated from the weight of life.
But I recoil at this seductive nostalgia, for it mocks my existence as mere foolery, a
bright clown’s mask behind which I have sought to hide my darkness. I realize what
is happening and what I do not want to be true, though Thoss proclaimed it was. I
recall his command to those others as I lay helplessly prone in the tunnel. They
could have apprehended me, but Thoss, my old master, called them back. His voice
echoed throughout that cavern, and it now reverberates within the psychic
chambers of my memory.
“He is one of us,” it said. “He has always been one of us.”
It is this voice which now fills my dreams and my days and my long winter
nights. I have seen you, Dr. Thoss, through the snow outside my window. Soon I
will celebrate, alone, that last feast which will kill your words, only to prove how
well I have learned their truth.
 
To the memory of H. P. Lovecraft

The Spectacles in the Drawer

Last year at this time, perhaps on this very day, Plomb visited me at my home. He
always seemed to know when I had returned from my habitual traveling and
always appeared uninvited on my doorstep. Although my former residence was
pathetically run-down, Plomb seemed to regard it as a kind of palace of wonders,
and he would gaze at its high ceilings and antiquated fixtures as if he saw some new
glamour in them on each of his visits. That day—a dim one, I think—he did not
fail to do the same. Then we settled into one of the spacious though sparsely
furnished rooms of my house.
“And how were your travels?” he asked, as if only in the spirit of polite
conversation. I could see by his smile—an emulation of my own, no doubt—that he
was glad to be back in my house and in my company. I smiled too and stood up.
Plomb, of course, stood up along with me, almost simultaneously with my own
movements.
“Shall we go then?” I said. What a pest, I thought.
Our footsteps tapped a moderate time on the hard wooden floor leading to the
stairway. We ascended to the second floor, which I left almost entirely empty, and
then up a narrower stairway to the third floor. Although I had led him along this
route several times before, I could see from his wandering eyes that, for him, every
crack in the walls, every cobweb fluttering in the corners above, every stale draft of
the house composed a suspenseful prelude to our destination. At the end of the
third-floor hall there was a small wooden stairway, no more than a ladder, that led
to an old storeroom where I kept certain things which I collected.
It was not by any means a spacious room, and its enclosed atmosphere was
thickened, as Plomb would have emphasized, by its claustrophobic arrangement of
tall cabinets, ceiling-high shelves, and various trunks and crates. This is simply how
matters worked out over a period of time. In any case, Plomb seemed to favor this
state of affairs. “Ah, the room of secret mystery,” he said. “The chamber where all
your hermetical prodigies are cached away.”
These treasures and marvels, as Plomb called them, were, I suppose,
remarkable from a certain point of view. Plomb loved to go through my collection

of curiosities, gathering together a lapful of exotic objects and settling down on the
dusty sofa at the center of the room. But it was the new items, whenever I returned
from one of my protracted tours, that always took precedence in Plomb’s hierarchy
of fascination. Thus, I immediately brought out the double-
handled dagger with the single blade of polished stone. At first sight of the
ceremonial object, Plomb held out the flat palms of his hands, and I placed this
queer device upon its rightful altar. “Who could have made such a thing?” he
asked, though rhetorically. He expected no answer to his questions and possibly did
not really desire any. And of course I offered no more elaborate an explanation than
a simple smile. But how quickly, I noticed on this occasion, the magic of that first
token of my “tantalizing arcana,” as he would say, lost its initial surge of attraction.
How fast that glistening fog, which surrounded only Plomb, dispersed to unveil a
tedious clarity. I had to move faster.
“Here,” I said, my arm searching the shadows of an open wardrobe. “This
should be worn when you handle that sacrificial artifact.” And I threw the robe
about his shoulders, engulfing his smallish frame with a cyclone of strange patterns
and colors. He admired himself in the mirror attached inside the door of the
wardrobe. “Look at the robe in the mirror,” he practically shouted. “The designs
are all turned around. How much stranger, how much better.” While he stood
there glaring at himself, I relieved him of the dagger before he had a chance to do
something careless. This left his hands free to raise themselves up to the dust-caked
ceiling of the room, and to the dark gods of his imagination. Gripping each handle
of the dagger, I suddenly elevated it above his head, where I held it poised. In a few
moments he started to giggle, and then fell into spasms of sardonic hilarity. He
stumbled over to the old sofa and collapsed upon its soft cushions. I followed, but
when I reached his prostrate form it was not the pale-blue blade that I brought
down upon his chest—it was simply a book, one of many I had put before him. His
peaked legs created a lectern on which he rested the huge volume, propping it
securely as he began turning the stiff crackling pages. The sound seemed to absorb
him as much as the sight of a language he could not even name let alone

comprehend.
“The lost grimoire of the Abbot of Tine,” he giggled. “Transcribed in the
language of—”
“A wild guess,” I interjected. “And a wrong one.”
“Then the forbidden Psalms of the Silent. The book without 
an author.”
“Without an author whoever lived in this world, if you will recall what I told
you about it. But you’re very wide of the mark.”
“Well, suppose you give me a hint,” he said with an impatience that surprised
me. 
“But wouldn’t you prefer to speculate on its secrets?” I suggested. Some
moments of precarious silence passed.
“I suppose I would,” he finally answered. Then I watched him gorge his eyes
on the inscrutable script of the ancient volume.
In truth, the mysteries of this Sacred Writ were among the most genuine of
their kind, for it had never been my intention to dupe my disciple, as he justly
thought of himself, with false secrets. But the secrets of such a book are not
perpetual. Once they are known, they become relegated to a lesser sphere, which is
that of the knower. Having lost the prestige they once enjoyed, these former secrets
now function as tools in the excavation of still deeper ones which, in turn, will
suffer the same corrosive fate. And this is the fate of all the secrets of the universe.
Eventually the seeker of a recondite knowledge may conclude—either through
insight or sheer exhaustion—that this ruthless process is never-ending, that the
mortification of one mystery after another has no terminus beyond that of the
seeker’s own extinction. And how many still remain susceptible to the search? How
many pursue it to the end of their days with undying hope of some ultimate
revelation? Better not to think in precise terms just how few the faithful are. More
to the present point, it seems that Plomb belonged to their infinitesimal number.
And it was my intention to reduce that number by one.
The plan was simple: to feed Plomb’s hunger for mysterious sensations to the

point of nausea…and beyond. The only thing to survive would be a gutful of
shame and regret for a defunct passion.
As Plomb lay upon the sofa, ogling that stupid book, I moved toward a large
cabinet whose several doors were composed of a tarnished metal grillwork framed
by dark wood. I opened one of these doors and exposed a number of shelves
cluttered with books and odd objects. Upon one shelf, resting there as its sole
occupant, was a very white box. It was no larger, as I mentally envision it, than a
modest jewelry case. There were no markings on the box, except the fingerprints,
or rather thumbprints, smearing its smooth white surface at its opposing edges and
halfway along its length. There were no handles or embellishments of any kind; not
even, at first sight, the thinnest of seams to indicate the level at which the lower
part of the box met the upper part, or perhaps give away the existence of a drawer.
I smiled a little at the mock intrigue of the object, then gripped it from either side,
gently, and placed my thumbs precisely over the fresh, greasy prints. I applied
pressure with each thumb, and a shallow drawer popped open at the front of the
box. As hoped, Plomb had been watching me as I went through these motions.
“What do you have there?” he asked.
“Patience, Plomb. You will see,” I answered while delicately removing two
sparkling items from the drawer: one a small and silvery knife which very much
resembled a razor-sharp letter opener, and the other a pair of old-fashioned wire-
rimmed spectacles.
Plomb laid aside the now-boring book and sat up straight against the arm of
the sofa. I sat down beside him and opened up the spectacles so that the stems were
pointing toward his face. When he leaned forward, I slipped them on. “They’re
only plain glass,” he said with a definite tone of disappointment. “Or a very weak
prescription.” His eyes rolled about as he attempted to scrutinize what rested upon
his own face. Without saying a word, I held up the little knife in front of him until
he finally took notice of it. “Ahhhh,” he said, smiling. “There’s more to it.” “Of
course there is,” I said, gently twirling the steely blade before his fascinated eyes. “If
you would, I need you to hold out the palm of your hand. It doesn’t matter which

one. Good, just like that. Don’t worry, you won’t even feel this. There,” I said after
making a tiny cut. “Now,” I instructed him, “keep watching that thin red trickle.
“Your eyes are now fused with those fantastic lenses, and your sight is one
with its object. And what exactly is that object? Obviously it is everything that
fascinates, everything that has power over your gaze and your dreams. You cannot
even conceive the wish to look away. And even if there are no simple images to see,
nonetheless there is a vision of some kind, an infinite and overwhelming scene
expanding before you. And the vastness of this scene is such that even the dazzling
diffusion of all the known universes cannot convey these prodigies. Everything is so
brilliant, so great, and so alive. Landscapes without end are rolling with a life
unknown to mortal eyes. Unimaginable diversity of form and motion, design and
dimension, with each detail perfectly crystalline, from the mammoth shapes
lurching in outline against endless horizons to the minutest cilia wriggling in an
obscure oceanic niche. And even this is only a mere fragment of all that there is to
see and to know. There are labyrinthine astronomies mingling together and yielding
instantaneous evolutions, constant transformations of both appearance and essence.
You feel yourself to be a witness to the most cryptic phenomena that exist or ever
could exist. And yet, somehow concealed in the shadows of what you can see is
something that is not yet visible, something that is beating like a thunderous pulse
and promises still greater visions. All else is merely its membrane enclosing the 
ultimate thing waiting to be born, preparing for the cataclysm which will be both
the beginning and the end. To behold the prelude to this event is an experience of
unbearable anticipation, so that ecstasy and dread merge into a new emotion, one
corresponding perfectly to the exposure of the ultimate source of all manifestation.
The next instant, it seems, will bring with it a revolution of the total substance of
things. As the seconds keep passing, the experience grows more fascinating without
fulfilling its portents, without extinguishing itself in revelation. And although the
visions remain active inside you, deep in your blood—you now awake.”
Pushing himself up from the sofa, Plomb staggered forward a few steps and
wiped his bloodied palm on the front of his shirt, as if to wipe away the visions he

had seen. He shook his head vigorously once or twice, but the spectacles remained
secure.
“Is everything all right?” I asked him.
Plomb appeared to be dazzled in the worst way. Behind the spectacles his eyes
gazed dumbly, and his mouth gaped with countless unspoken words. However,
when I said, “Perhaps I should remove these for you,” his hand rose toward mine,
as if to prevent me from doing so. But his effort was half-hearted. Folding their
wire stems one across the other, I replaced them back in their box. Plomb now
watched me, as if I were performing some ritual of great moment. He seemed to be
still composing himself from his experience.
“Well?” I asked.
“Dreadful,” he answered. “But…”
“But?”
“What I mean is—where did they come from?”
“Can’t you imagine that for yourself?” I countered. And for a moment it
seemed that in this case, too, he desired some simple answer, contrary to his most
hardened habits. Then he smiled rather deviously and threw himself down upon
the sofa. His eyes glazed over as he fabricated an anecdote to his fancy.
“I can see you,” he said, “at an occultist auction in a disreputable quarter of a
foreign city. The box is carried forward, the spectacles taken out. They were made
several generations ago by a man who was at once a student of the Gnostics and a
master of optometry. His ambition: to construct a pair of artificial eyes that would
allow him to bypass the obstacle of physical appearances and glimpse a far-off realm
of secret truth whose gateway is within the depths of our own blood.”
“Remarkable,” I replied. “Your speculation is so close to truth itself that the
details are not worth mentioning for the mere sake of vulgar accuracy.”
In fact, the spectacles belonged to a lot of antiquarian rubbish I once bought
blindly, and the box was of unknown, or rather unremembered, origin—just
something I had lying around in my attic room. And the knife, a magician’s prop for
efficiently slicing up paper money and silk ties.

I carried the box containing both spectacles and knife over to Plomb, holding it
just beyond his reach. I said, “Can you imagine the dangers involved, the possible
nightmare of possessing such ‘artificial eyes?’” He nodded gravely in agreement.
“And you can imagine the restraint the possessor of such a gruesome contrivance
must practice.” His eyes were all comprehension, and he was sucking a little at his
slightly lacerated palm. “Then nothing would please me more than to pass the
ownership of this miraculous artifact on to you, my dear Plomb. I’m sure you will
hold it in wonder as no one else could.”
And it was exactly this wonder that it was my malicious aim to undermine, or
rather to expand until it ripped itself apart. For I could no longer endure the sight
of it.
As Plomb once again stood at the door of my home, holding his precious gift
with a child’s awkward embrace, I could not resist asking him the question. 
“By the way, Plomb, have you ever been hypnotized?”
“No,” he said. “Why do you ask?”
“Curiosity,” I replied. “You know how I am. Well, good night.”
Then I closed the door behind the most willing subject in the world, hoping it
would be some time before he returned. “If ever,” I said aloud, and the words
echoed in the hollows of my home.
 
2.
 
But it was not long afterward that Plomb and I had our next confrontation, though
the circumstances were accidental. Late one afternoon, as it happens, I was
browsing through a shop that dealt in second-hand merchandise of the most
pathetic sort. The place was positively littered with tossed-off oddments and pure
trash: rusty scales that once would have given your weight for a penny, cockeyed
bookcases, broken toys, old furniture, standing ashtrays late of some hotel lobby,

and a hodge-podge of items that seemed entirely inscrutable in their origin and
purpose. For me, however, such desolate bazaars offered more diversion and
consolation than the most exotic marketplaces, which so often made good on their
strange promises that mystery itself ceased to have meaning. But my second-hand
seller made no promises and inspired no dreams, leaving all that to those more
ambitious hucksters who trafficked in such stock in trade. And I had left that
search behind me, as previously explained. What the mystical rarities of this earth
were for Plomb, the most used-up and dismal commodities had become for me.
Now I could ask no more of a given gray afternoon than to find myself in an
establishment that had nothing to sell but the charm of disenchantment.
By coincidence, that particular afternoon in the second-hand shop brought me,
if only in an indirect manner, together with Plomb. The visual transaction took
place in a tilting mirror that stood near the shop’s back wall, one of the many
mirrors that seemed to constitute a specialty of the place. I had squatted down
before this relic and wiped my bare hand across its dusty surface. And there,
hidden beneath the dust, was the face of Plomb, who must have just entered the
shop and was standing a room’s length away. While he seemed to recognize
immediately the reverse side of me, his expression betrayed the hope that I had not
seen him. There was shock as well as shame upon that face, and something else
besides. And if Plomb had approached me, what could I have said to him? Perhaps
I would have mentioned that he did not look very well or that it appeared he had
been the victim of an accident. But how could he explain what had happened to
him except to reveal the truth that we both knew and neither would speak?
Fortunately, this scene was to remain in its hypothetical state, because a moment
later he was out the door.
I cautiously approached the front window of the shop in time to see Plomb
hurrying off into the dull, unreflecting day, his right hand held up to his face. “It
was only my intention to cure him,” I mumbled to myself. I had not considered that
he was incurable, nor that things would have developed in the way they did.
 

3.
 
After that day I wondered, eventually to the point of obsession, what kind of hell
had claimed poor Plomb for its own. I knew only that I had provided him with a
type of toy: the subliminal ability to feast his eyes on an imaginary universe in a
droplet of his own blood. The possibility that he would desire to magnify this
experience, or indeed that he would be capable of such a feat, had not seriously
occurred to me. Obviously, however, this had become the case. I now had to ask
myself how much farther Plomb’s situation could be extended. The answer, though
I could not guess it at the time, was presented to me in a dream.
And it seemed fitting that the dream had its setting in that old attic storeroom
of my house, which Plomb once prized above all other rooms in the world. I was
sitting in a chair, a huge and enveloping chair which in reality does not exist but in
the dream directly faces the sofa. No thoughts or feelings troubled me, and I had
only the faintest sense that someone else was in the room. But I could not see who
it was, because everything appeared so dim in outline, blurry and grayish. There
seemed to be some movement in the region of the sofa, as if the enormous cushions
themselves had become lethargically restless. Unable to fathom the source of this
movement, I touched my hand to my temple in thought. This was how I discovered
that I was wearing a pair of spectacles with circular lenses connected to wiry stems.
I thought to myself: “If I remove these spectacles I will be able to see more clearly.”
But a voice told me not to remove them, and I recognized that voice. Then
something moved, a man-shaped shadow upon the sofa. A climate of dull horror
began to invade my surroundings. “Go away, Plomb. You have nothing to show
me,” I said. But the voice disagreed with me in sinister whispers that made no sense
yet seemed filled with meaning. I would indeed be shown things, these whispers
seemed to be saying. Already I was being shown things, astonishing things—
mysteries and marvels beyond anything I had ever suspected. And suddenly all my

feelings, as I gazed through the spectacles, were proof of that garbled
pronouncement. They were feelings of a peculiar nature which, to my knowledge,
one experiences only in dreams: sensations of infinite expansiveness and ineffable
meaning that have no place elsewhere in our lives. But although these astronomical
emotions suggested wonders of incredible magnitude and character, I saw nothing
through those magic lenses except this: the obscure shape in the shadows before me
as its outline grew clearer and clearer to my eyes. Gradually I came to view what
appeared to be a mutilated carcass, something of a terrible rawness, a torn and
flayed thing whose every laceration could be seen with microscopic precision. The
only thing of color in my grayish surroundings, it twitched and quivered like a gory
heart exposed beneath the body of the dream. And it made a sound like hellish
giggling. Then it said, “I am back from my trip,” as if mocking me.
It was this simple statement that inspired my efforts to tear the spectacles
from my face, even though they now seemed to be part of my flesh. I gripped them
with both hands and flung them against the wall, where they shattered. Somehow
this served to exorcise my tormented companion, who faded back into the grayness.
Then I looked at the wall and saw that it was running red where the spectacles had
struck. And the broken lenses that lay upon the floor were bleeding.
To experience such a dream as this on a single occasion might very well be the
stuff of a haunting, lifelong memory, something that perhaps might even be
cherished for its unfathomable depths of feeling. But to suffer over and over this
same nightmare, as I soon found was my fate, leads one to seek nothing so much as
a way to kill the dream, to expose all its secrets and reduce it to fragments that can
be forgotten.
In my search for this deliverance, I first looked to the sheltering shadows of
my home, the sobering shadows which at other times had granted me a cold and
stagnant peace. I tried to argue myself free of my nightly excursions, to discourse
these visions away, lecturing the walls contra the prodigies of a mysterious world.
“Since any form of existence,” I muttered, “since any form of existence is by
definition a conflict of forces, or it is nothing at all, what can it possibly matter if

these skirmishes take place in a world of marvels or one of mud? The difference
between the two is not worth mentioning, or none. Such distinctions are the work
of only the crudest and most limited perspectives, the sense of mystery and wonder
foremost among them. Even the most esoteric ecstasy, when it comes down to it,
requires the prop of vulgar pain in order to stand up as an experience. Having
acknowledged the truth, however provisional, and the reality, if subject to
mutation, of all that is most strange in the universe—whether known, unknown, or
merely suspected—one must conclude that such marvels change nothing in our
existence. The gallery of human sensations that existed in prehistory is identical to
the one that faces each life today, that will continue to face each new life as it
enters this world … and then looks beyond it.”
Thus I attempted to reason my way back to self-possession. But no measure of
my former serenity was forthcoming. On the contrary, my days as well as my nights
were now poisoned by an obsession with Plomb. Why had I given him those
spectacles! More to the point, why did I allow him to retain them? It was time to
take back my gift, to confiscate those little bits of glass and twisted metal that were
now harrowing the wrong mind. And since I had succeeded too well in keeping
him away from my door, I would have to be the one to approach his.
 
4.
 
But it was not Plomb who answered the rotting door of that house which stood at
the street’s end and beside a broad expanse of empty field. It was not Plomb who
asked if I was a newspaper journalist or a policeman before closing that gouged and
filthy door in my face when I replied that I was neither of those. Pounding on the
door, which seemed about to crumble under my fist, I summoned the sunken-eyed
man a second time to ask if this in fact was Mr. Plomb’s address. I had never visited
him at his home, that hopeless little box in which he lived and slept and dreamed.

“Was he a relative?”
“No,” I answered.
“Then what? You’re not here to collect a bill, because if that’s the case…”
For the sake of simplicity I interjected that I was a friend of Mr. Plomb.
“Then how is it you don’t know?”
For the sake of my curiosity I said that I had been away on a trip, as I often
was, and had my own reasons for notifying Mr. Plomb of my return.
“Then you don’t know anything,” he stated flatly.
“Exactly,” I replied.
“It was even in the newspaper. And they asked me about him.”
“Plomb,” I confirmed.
“That’s right,” he said, as if he had suddenly become the custodian of a secret
knowledge.
Then he waved me into the house and led me through its ugly, airless interior
to a small storage room at the back. He reached along the wall inside the room, as if
he wanted to avoid entering it, and switched on the light.
Immediately I understood why the hollow-faced man preferred not to go into
that room, for Plomb had renovated this space in a very strange way. Each wall, as
well as the ceiling and floor, was a mosaic of mirrors, a shocking galaxy of
redundant reflections. And each mirror was splattered across its surface, as if
someone had swung brushfuls of paint from various points throughout the room,
spreading dark stars across a silvery firmament. In his attempt to exhaust or
exaggerate the visions to which he had apparently become enslaved, Plomb had
done nothing less than multiplied these visions into infinity, creating oceans of his
own blood and enabling himself to see with countless eyes. Entranced by such
aspiration, I gazed at the mirrors in speechless wonder. Among them was that
tilting mirror I remembered looking into not so long ago.
The landlord, who did not follow me into the room, said something about
suicide and a body ripped raw. This news was of course unnecessary as I stood
overwhelmed at Plomb’s ingenuity. It was some time before I could look away from

that gallery of glass and gore. Only afterward did I fully realize that I would never
be rid of the horrible Plomb. He had broken through all the mirrors, projected
himself into the eternity beyond them.
And even when I abandoned my home, with its hideous attic storeroom,
Plomb still followed me in my dreams. He now travels with me to the ends of the
earth, initiating me night after night into his unspeakable wonders. I can only hope
that we will not meet in another place, one where the mysteries are always new
and dreams never end. Oh, Plomb, will you not stay in that box where they have
put your self-riven body?

Flowers of the Abyss

Imust whisper my words in the wind, knowing somehow that they will reach you
who sent me here. Let this misadventure, like the first rank scent of autumn, be
carried back to you, my good people. For it was you who decided where I would
go, you who wished I come here and to him. And I agreed, because the fear that
filled your voices and lined your faces was so much greater than your words could
explain. I feared your fear of him: the one whose name we did not know, the one
who lived far from town in that ruined house which long ago had seen the passing
of the family Van Livenn. “What a tragedy,” we all agreed. “And they kept that
beautiful garden for so long. But he . . . he doesn’t seem much interested in such
things.”
I was chosen to unravel his secrets and find what malice or indifference the
new owner harbored toward our town. I should be the one, you said. Was I not
the teacher of the town’s child-citizens, the one who had knowledge that you had
not and who might therefore see deeper into the mystery of our man? That was
what you said, in the shadows of our church where we met that night; but what
you thought, I could not help but sense, was that he has no children of his own, no
one, and so many of his hours are spent walking through those same woods in
which lives the stranger. It would seem quite natural if I happened to pass the old
Van Livenn house, if I happened to stop and perhaps beg a glass of water for a
thirsty walker of the woods. But these simple actions, even then, seemed an
extraordinary adventure, though none of us confessed to this feeling. Nothing to
fear, you said. And so I was chosen to go alone to that house which had fallen into
such disrepair.
You have seen the house and how, approaching it from the road that leads out
of town, it sprouts suddenly into view—a pale flower amid the dark summer trees,
now a ghostly flower at autumn. At first this is how it appeared to my eyes. (Yes,
my eyes, think about them, good people: dream about them.) But as I neared the
house, its grayish planks, bowed and buckled and oddly spotted, turned the pallid
lily to a pulpy toadstool. Surely the house has played this trick on some of you, and
all of you have seen it at one time or another: its roof of rippling shingles shaped

like scales from some great fish, sea-green and sparkling in the autumn sun; its two
attic gables with paned windows that come to a point like the tip of a tear; its
sepulcher-shaped doorway at the top of rotted wooden stairs. And as I stood
among the shadows outside that door, I heard hundreds of raindrops running up
the steps behind me, as the air went cold and the skies gained shadows of their
own. The light rain spotted the empty, ashen plot nearby the house, watering the
barren ground where that remarkable garden had blossomed in the time of the Van
Livenns. What better excuse for my imposing upon the present owner of this
house? Shelter me, stranger, from the icy autumn storm, and from a fragrance damp
and decayed.
He responded promptly to my rapping, without suspicious movements of the
ragged curtains, and I entered his dark home. There was no need for explanation;
he had already seen me walking ahead of the clouds, though I had not seen him: his
lanky limbs like vaguely twisted branches; his lazy expressionless face; the colorless
rags which are easier to see as tattered wrappings than as parts of even the poorest
wardrobe. But his voice, that is something none of you has ever heard. Although
shaken at how gentle and musical it sounded, I was even less prepared for the sense
of great distances created by the echo of his hollow words.
“It was just such a day as this when I saw you for the first time walking in the
woods,” he said, looking out at the rain. “But you did not come near to the house. I
wondered if you ever would.”
His words put me at ease, for our introduction to each other appeared to have
already been made. I removed my coat, which he took and placed on a very small
wooden chair beside the front door. Extending a long crooked arm and wide hand
toward the interior, he formally welcomed me into his home.
But somehow he himself did not seem at home there. It was as if the Van
Livenn family had left all their worldly goods behind them for the use of the next
occupant of their house, which would not be peculiar, tragedy considered. Nothing
seemed to belong to him, though there was little enough in that house to be
possessed by anyone. Apart from the two old chairs in which we sat down and the

tiny misshapen table between them, the few other objects I could see appeared to
have been brought together only by accident or default, a sign of the last days of
the Van Livenns. A huge trunk lying in the corner, its great tarnished lock sprung
open and its heavy straps falling loosely to the floor, would have looked much less
sullen buried away in an attic or a cellar. And that miniature chair by the door,
with an identical twin fallen on its back near the opposite wall, belonged in a child’s
room. Standing by the shuttered window, a tall bookcase seemed proper enough, if
only those cracked pots, bent boots, and other paraphernalia foreign to bookcases
had not been stuffed among its battered volumes. A large bedroom bureau stood
against one wall, but that would have seemed misplaced in any room: the hollows
of its absent drawers were deeply webbed with disuse. All of these things seemed
to me wracked with the history of degeneration and death chronicled in our
memory of the Van Livenns. But let that rest for now, lest I forget to tell of the
thick, dreamy smell that permeated that room, inspiring the sense that malodorous
gardens of misshapen growths were budding in the dust and dirty corners
everywhere around me. 
The only light in the house was provided by two lamps that burned on either
side of a mantle over the fireplace. Behind each of these lamps was an oval mirror in
an ornate frame, and the reflected light of their quivering wicks threw our shadows
onto the wide bare wall at our backs. And while the two of us were sitting still and
silent, I saw those other two fidgeting upon the wall, as if wind-blown or perhaps
undergoing some subtle torture.
“I have something for you to drink,” he said. “I know how far it is to walk
from the town.”
And I did not have to feign my thirst, good people, for it was such that I
wanted to swallow the storm, which I could hear beyond the door and the walls
but could only see as a brilliance occasionally flashing behind the curtains or shining
needle-bright between the dull slats of the shutters.
In the absence of my host, I directed my eyes to the treasures of his house and
made them my own. But there was something I had not yet seen, somehow I felt

this. Then again, I was sent to spy and so everything around me appeared
suspicious. Can you see now what I failed to see then? Can you see it coming into
focus through my eyes? Can you peek into those cobwebbed corners or scan the
titles of those tilting books? Yes; but can you now, in the maddest dream of your
lives, peer into places that have no corners and bear no names? This is what I tried
to do: to see beyond the ghoulish remnants of the Van Livenns; to see beyond the
haunted stage upon which I had made my entrance. And so I had to turn corners
inside-out with my eyes and to read the third side of a book’s page, seeking in
futility to gaze at what I could then touch with none of my senses. It remained
something shapeless and nameless, dampish and submerged, something swampy and
abysmal which opposed the pure cold of the autumn storm outside.
When my host returned, he carried with him a dusty green bottle and a
sparkling glass, both of which he set upon that little table between our chairs. I
took up the bottle and it felt warm in my hand. Expecting some thickish dark liquid
to gush from the bottle’s neck, I was surprised to see only the purest liquid flowing
into the glass. I drank and for a few moments was removed to a world of frozen
light that lived within the cool and limpid water. 
In the meantime, the blank-faced man had placed something else upon the
table. It was a small music box made of some dark wood which looked as if it had
the hardness of a jewel and was florid with strange designs that were at once
distinct and impossible to focalize. “I found this while rummaging about this place,”
the stranger said. Then slowly he drew back the cover of the box and sat back in
his chair. I held both hands around that cold glass and listened to the still colder
music. The crisp little notes that arose from the box were like stars of sound coming
out in the twilight shadows and silence of the house. The storm had ended, leaving
the world outside muffled by wetness. Within those closed rooms, which might
now have been transported to the brink of a chasm or deep inside the earth, the
music glimmered like infinitesimal flakes of light in that barren décor of dead days.
Neither of us appeared to be breathing, and even the shadows behind our chairs
were charmed with enchanted immobility. Everything held for a moment to allow

the wandering music from the box to pass on toward some sublimely terrible
destination. I tried to follow it—through the yellowish haze of the room and deep
into the darkness that pressed against the walls, and then deeper into the darkness
between the walls, then through the walls and into the unbordered spaces where
those silvery tones ascended and quivered like a swarm of insects. There was still
beauty in this vision, however tinged it was with the sinister. Even at that point I
felt I could lose myself in the vastness spreading about me, a tenebrous expanse rich
with unknown exploits. But then something began stirring, irrupting like a disease,
poking its horribly colored head through the cool blackness … and chasing me back
to my body.
“So what did you think? It was getting bad toward the end, wasn’t it? I closed
the box before it got worse. Would you say I was correct in my action?”
“Yes,” I said, my voice trembling.
“I could see it on your face. My purpose wasn’t to harm you. I just wanted to
show you something—to give you a glimpse.”
I drank the rest of the water, then set the glass I was still holding on the table.
Settling down a bit, I said, “And what was it that you showed me?”
“The madness of things,” he said. And he pronounced these words calmly,
precisely, while staring into my eyes to see how I would react.
Of course, I had to hear more. After all, that was why I was there, was it not?
Can you hear me in your dreams, my friends?
“The madness of things,” I reiterated, trying to draw more from him. “I’m
afraid I don’t understand.”
“Nor do I. But that is all I can say about it. Those are the only words I can
use. The only ones that apply. Once I delighted in them. As a young student in
philosophy I used to say to myself, ‘I am going to learn the madness of things.’ This
was something I felt I needed to know—that I needed to confront. If I could face
the madness of things, I thought, then I would have nothing more to fear. I could
live in the universe without feeling I was coming apart, without feeling I would
explode with the madness of things that to my mind formed the very foundation of

existence. I wanted to tear off the veil and see things as they are, not to blind
myself to them.”
“And did you succeed?” I asked, not caring in the least if I were listening to a
lunatic, so fascinated was I by what he had to say. Though I could hardly grasp his
words, I knew there was something in them that was not alien to me, and for some
moments I was distracted by their implications. For who among us has not
experienced something that could be called the madness of things? Even if we do
not use those exact words, we must at sometime in our lives have had a sense of
their meaning. We must have touched, or been touched, by that derangement
which the stranger thought to be the foundation of existence. If nothing else, my
good people, we have all known the fate of the Van Livenns. It would not be
unusual if we pondered in the solitude of our minds what we call their “tragedy”
and wondered at this world of ours.
“Succeeded?” said the stranger, bringing me back to myself. “Oh, yes. Only
too well I would say. I succeeded in tearing myself loose from all my fears, and even
from the world itself. Now I am a vagabond of the universe, a drifter among spaces
where the madness of things has no limits. One day, after years of study and
practice, I 
gave myself over to whatever awaited me. But I cannot say where 
I go or why I go there. Everything is so much chaos in my existence. Somehow,
though, I always come back to this world, as if I were some creature that returns on
occasion to its home ground. These places at which I arrive seem to draw me to
them, as if they have been prepared, even invaded before me. For there are always
things, little items, that are just what I would expect. That music box, for instance.
I looked around until I found something of that sort. By its designs I could see it
had been touched by the madness of things, and so could you, I noticed. What
havoc it must have caused for those unready for such phenomena. What happened
in this house? I can only wonder.”
And so the tragedy of the Van Livenns was illuminated. Which of them had
come across the music box where it must have lain hidden for who knows how

long? Over time, they must have all become its victims. The condition of the house
and its grounds—that was the first sign. And then the shouting we began to hear
from inside that made us stay away. What did it all mean? It was almost a year
before there were no longer any sounds or any movement behind the shutters of
the house. Soon after, the five bodies were found, some of them dead longer than
others. None of them whole. All of them savaged beyond what was human. We
wanted to think it was a stranger, but could not do so for long. Not after an
inspection was conducted, and the conclusion drawn that they had gone after one
another over at least a month’s time. They said that old man Van Livenn must
have been the last of them. His body was a mess of hacked pieces, but he must have
done it himself, judging by the axe that was still gripped in his dead hand. 
“Excuse me,” said the stranger, once again arousing me from a state of
distraction. He was now standing by the shuttered window, peering through a row
of slats he had pulled open. With a slow movement of his hand, he beckoned me to
join him, surreptitiously it seemed. “Look. Can you see them?”
Through the slats of the shuttered window I could see something outside, just
where the Van Livenns had once cultivated their much-admired garden in bygone
days. But what I saw was like the designs on the music box—intricate yet
indistinct.
“They almost look like flowers, don’t they? So brightly colored as they shine
in the night. And yet when I first came upon them—not in this body, of course—
almost everything was dark. But it wasn’t dark as a house is sometimes dark or as
the woods are dark because of thick trees keeping out the light. It was dark only
because there was nothing to keep out the darkness. How do I know this? I know
because I could see with more than my eyes—I could see with the darkness itself.
With the darkness I saw the darkness. It was immensity without end around me—
unbroken expansion, dark horizon meeting dark horizon. And there were also
things within the darkness, and I believe within my own form, so that if I reached
out to touch them across a universe of darkness, I also reached deep inside of
myself, such as I was. Yet all I could feel were those things, the flowers. To touch

them was like touching light and colors and a thousand kinds of bristling and
growing shapes. In all that darkness which let me see with itself, these things
squirmed, a wormy mass that was trying to make itself part of me. I must have
brought them here when I came to this place. After I took this shape, they
abandoned me and burrowed into that ground over there. They broke through the
earth that same night, and I thought they would come after me. But somehow the
situation had changed. I think they like being where they are now. You can see
yourself how they twist about, almost happily.”
After these words he fell silent for a moment. It was a dark night, the skies
still blanketed by the clouds that earlier had brought the rain. The lamps upon the
mantle shone with a piercing light that cut shadows out of the cloth of blackness
around us. Why, good people, was I so astonished that this phantom before me
could walk across the room and actually lift one of the lamps, then carry it toward
the back hallway of the house? He paused, turned, and gestured for me to follow.
“Now you will see them better for the darkness. That is, if you would see the
true madness.”
Oh, my friends, please do not despise me for the choice I made this night.
Remember it was you who sent me, for I was the one who belonged least to our
town.
Quietly we walked from the house, as if we were two children sneaking away
for a night in the woods. The lamplight skimmed across the wet grass behind the
house and then paused where the yard ended and the woods began, fragrant and
wind-blown. The light moved to the left and I moved with it, toward that area
where a garden once grew.
“Look at them wriggling in the light,” he said when the first rays fell on a
convulsing tangle of shapes, like the radiant entrails of hell. But the shapes quickly
disappeared into the darkness and out of view, pulling themselves from the rain-
softened soil. “They retreat from this light. And you see how they return to their
places when the light is withdrawn.”
They closed in again like parted waters rushing to remerge. But these were

corrupt waters whose currents had congealed and diversified into creaturely forms
strung with sticky and pumping veins, hung with working mouths.
“Move the light as close as you can to the garden,” I said.
He stepped to the very edge, as I stepped farther still toward that retreating
flood of slimy tendrils, those aberrations of the abyss. When I was deep into their
mesh, I whispered behind me: “Don’t lose the light, or they will cover again the
ground I am standing on. I can see them so well. The true madness.  I have
confronted it without fear.”
“No,” said the stranger. “You are not prepared. Come back to the light before
the candle blows out.”
But I did not listen to him, or to the wind that rose up. It came down from the
trees and swept across the garden, throwing it into darkness.
And the wind now carries my words to you, good people. I cannot be there to
guide you, but you know now what must be done, both to this horrible house and
to its garden that was brought into this world by one who doomed himself to
wander other worlds. Please, one last word to stir your sleep. I remember
screaming to the stranger:
They are drawing me into themselves. My eyes can see everything in the
darkness. I am not who I am. Can you hear me? Can you hear my words?
 
 
“I just had the most terrible dream,” whispered one of the many who were
awakening in the dark bedrooms of the town.
“It was not a dream. Can you hear the others outside?”
A night-gowned figure rose from the bed and moved as a silhouette to the
window. Down in the street was a crowd carrying lights and rapping on doors for
those still dreaming to join them. Their lamps and lanterns bobbed in the darkness,
and the fires of their torches flickered madly. Clusters of flame shot up into the
night.

The people of the town said not a word to one another, but they knew where
they were going and what they would do to free their fellow citizen, my own self,
from his tragedy. And though their eyes saw nothing but the wild destruction that
lay ahead, buried like a forgotten dream within each one of them was a perfect
picture of other eyes and of the unspeakable shapes in which they were now
embedded. But do not let your fires burn out while you go about your work. Do
not let them take you, too, into their unearthly realm. Come, then, and close my
eyes. Murder the beings into which they have been drawn. Then shutter your
minds as well as you can to the abyss that is home to the madness of things.

Nethescurial
The Idol and the Island

Ihave uncovered a rather wonderful manuscript, the letter began. It was an entirely
fortuitous find, made during my day’s dreary labors among some of the older and
more decomposed remains entombed in the library archives. If I am any judge of
antique documents, and of course I am, these brittle pages date back to the closing
decades of the last century. (A more precise estimate of age will follow, along with
a photocopy which I fear will not do justice to the delicate, crinkly script, nor to the
greenish black discoloration the ink has taken on over the years.) Unfortunately
there is no indication of authorship either within the manuscript itself or in the
numerous and tedious papers whose company it has been keeping, none of which
seem related to the item under discussion. And what an item it is—a real
storybook stranger in a crowd of documentary types, and probably destined to
remain unknown.
I am almost certain that this invention, though at times it seems to pose as a
letter or journal entry, has never appeared in common print. Given the bizarre
nature of its content, I would surely have known of it before now. Although it is
an untitled “statement” of sorts, the opening lines were more than enough to cause
me to put everything else aside and seclude myself in a corner of the library stacks
for the rest of the afternoon.
So it begins: “Amid the rooms of our houses and beyond their walls—beneath
dark waters and across moonlit skies—below earth mound and above mountain
peak—in northern leaf and southern flower—inside each star and the voids
between them—within blood and bone—throughout all souls and spirits—upon
the watchful winds of this and the several worlds—behind the faces of the living
and the dead…” And there it trails off, a quoted fragment of some more ancient
text. But this is certainly not the last we will hear of this rambling refrain!
As it happens, the above string of phrases is cited by the narrator in reference
to a certain presence, more properly an omnipresence, which he encounters on an
obscure island located at some unspecified northern latitude. Briefly, he has been
summoned to this island, which appears on a local map under the name of
Nethescurial, in order to rendezvous with another man, an archaeologist who is

designated only as Dr. N—and who will come to know the narrator of the
manuscript by the self-admitted alias of “Bartholomew Gray.”
Dr. N—, it seems, has been occupying himself upon that barren, remote, and
otherwise uninhabited isle with some peculiar antiquarian rummagings. As Mr.
Gray sails toward the island he observes the murky skies above him and the murky
waters below. His prose style is somewhat plain for my taste, but it serves well
enough once he approaches the island and takes surprisingly scrupulous notice of its
eerie aspect: contorted rock formations; pointed pines and spruces of gigantic
stature and uncanny movements; the masklike countenance of sea-facing cliffs; and a
sickly, stagnant fog clinging to the landscape like a fungus.
From the moment Mr. Gray begins describing the island, a sudden glamour
enters into his account—that sinister enchantment which derives from a profound
evil that is kept at just the right distance from us so that we may experience both
our love and our fear of it in one sweeping sensation. Too close and we may be
reminded of an omnipresent evil in the living world, and threatened with having
our sleeping sense of doom awakened into full vigor. Too far away and we become
even more incurious and complacent than is our usual state, and ultimately
exasperated when an imaginary evil is so poorly evoked that it fails to offer the
faintest echo of its real and all-pervasive counterpart. Of course, any number of
locales may serve as the setting to reveal ominous truths; evil, beloved and
menacing evil, may show itself anywhere precisely because it is everywhere and is
as stunningly set off by a foil of sunshine and flowers as it is by darkness and dead
leaves. A purely private quirk, nevertheless, sometimes allows the purest essence of
life’s malignity to be aroused only by sites such as the lonely island of Nethescurial,
where the real and the unreal swirl freely and madly about in the same fog.
It seems that in this place, this far-flung realm, Dr. N—has discovered an
ancient and long-sought artifact, a marginal but astonishing entry in that
unspeakably voluminous journal of creation. Soon after landfall, Mr. Gray finds
himself verifying the truth of the archaeologist’s claims: that the island has been
strangely molded in all its parts, and within its shores every manifestation of plant

or mineral or anything whatever appears to have fallen at the mercy of some
shaping force of demonic temperament, a genius loci which has sculpted its
nightmares out of the atoms of the local earth. Closer inspection of this insular spot
on the map serves to deepen the sense of evil enchantment that had been lightly
sketched earlier in the manuscript. But I refrain from further quotation (it is getting
late and I want to wrap up this letter before bedtime) in order to cut straight
through the epidermis of this tale and penetrate to its very bones and viscera.
Indeed, the manuscript does seem to have an anatomy of its own, its dark green
holography rippling over it like veins, and I regret that my paraphrase may not
deliver it alive. Enough!
Mr. Gray makes his way inland, lugging along with him a fat little traveling
bag. In a clearing he comes upon a large but unadorned, almost primitive house
which stands against the backdrop of the island’s wartlike hills and tumorous trees.
The outside of the house is encrusted with the motley and leprous stones so
abundant in the surrounding landscape. The inside of the house, which the visitor
sees upon opening the unlocked door, is spacious as a cathedral but far less
ornamented. The walls are white and smoothly surfaced; they also seem to taper
inward, pyramid-like, as they rise from floor to lofty ceiling. There are no windows,
and numerous oil lamps scattered about fill the interior of the house with a sacral
glow. A figure descends a long staircase, crosses the great distance of the room, and
solemnly greets his guest. At first wary of each other, they eventually achieve a
degree of mutual ease and finally get down to their true business.
Thus far one can see that the drama enacted is a familiar one: the stage is
rigidly traditional and the performers upon it are caught up in its style. For these
actors are not so much people as they are puppets from the old shows, the ones that
have told the same story for centuries, the ones that can still be very strange to us.
Traipsing through the same old foggy scene, seeking the same old isolated house,
the puppets in these plays always find everything new and unknown, because they
have no memories to speak of and can hardly recall making these stilted motions
countless times in the past. They struggle through the same gestures, repeat the

same lines, although in rare moments they may feel a dim suspicion that this has all
happened before. How like they are to the human race itself! This is what makes
them our perfect representatives—this and the fact that they are hand carved in
the image of maniacal victims who seek to share the secrets of their individual
torments as their strings are manipulated by the same master.
The secrets which these two Punchinellos share are rather deviously
presented by the author of this confession (for upon consideration this is the genre
to which it truly belongs). Indeed, Mr. Gray, or whatever his name might be,
appears to know much more than he is telling, especially with respect to his
colleague the archaeologist. 
Nevertheless, he records what Dr. N—knows and, more importantly, what this
avid excavator has found buried on the island. The thing is only a fragment of an
object dating from antiquity. Known to be part of a religious idol, it is difficult to
say which part. It is a twisted piece of a puzzle, one suggesting that the figure as a
whole is wickedly repulsive in its design. The fragment is also darkened with the
verdigris of centuries, causing its substance to resemble something like decomposing
jade.
And were the other pieces of this idol also to be found on the same island?
The answer is no. The idol seems to have been shattered ages ago, and each broken
part of it buried in some remote place so that its entirety might not easily be joined
together again. Although it was a mere representation, the effigy itself was the
focus of a great power. The members of the ancient sect which was formed to
worship this power seem to have been pantheists of a sort, believing that all created
things—appearances to the contrary—are of a single, unified, and transcendent
stuff, an emanation of a central creative force. Hence the ritual chant which runs
“amid the rooms of our houses,” et cetera, and alludes to the all-present nature of
this deity—a most primal and pervasive type of god, one that falls into the category
of “gods who eclipse all others,” territorialist divinities whose claim to the creation
purportedly supersedes that of their rivals. (The words of the famous chant, by the
way, are the only ones to come down to us from the ancient cult and appeared for

the first time in an ethnographical, quasi-esoteric work entitled Illuminations of the
Ancient World, which was published in the latter part of the nineteenth century,
around the same time, I would guess, as this manuscript I am rushing to summarize
was written.) At some point in their career as worshipers of the “Great One God,”
a shadow fell upon the sect. It appears that one day it was revealed to them, in a
manner both obscure and hideous, that the power to which they bowed was
essentially evil in character and that their religious mode of pantheism was in truth
a kind of pandemonism. But this revelation was not a surprise to all of the
sectarians, since there seems to have been an internecine struggle which ended in
slaughter. In any case, the anti-demonists prevailed, and they immediately
rechristened their ex-deity to reflect its newly discovered essence in evil. And the
name by which they henceforth called it was Nethescurial.
A nice turn of affairs: this obscure island openly advertises itself as the home
of the idol of Nethescurial. Of course, the island is only one of several to which the
pieces of the vandalized totem were scattered. The original members of the sect
who had treacherously turned against their god knew that the power concentrated
in the effigy could not be destroyed, and so they decided to parcel it out to isolated
corners of the earth where it could do the least harm. But would they have brought
attention to this fact by allowing these widely disseminated burial plots to bear the
name of the pandemoniacal god? This is doubtful, just as it is equally unlikely that
it was they who built those crude houses, temples of a fashion, to mark the spot
where a particular shard of the old idol might be located by others.
Thus, Dr. N—is forced to postulate a survival of the demonist faction of the
sect, a cult that had devoted itself to searching out those places which had been
transformed by the presence of the idol and might thus be known by their
gruesome features. This quest would require a great deal of time and effort for its
completion, given the global reaches where those splinters of evil might be tucked
away. Known as the “seeking,” it also involved the enlistment of outsiders, who in
latter days were often researchers into the ways of bygone cultures, though they
remained ignorant that the cause they served was still a living one. Dr. N—

therefore warns his “colleague, Mr. Gray,” that they may be in danger from those
who carried on the effort to reassemble the idol and revive its power. The very
presence of that great and crude house on the island certainly proved that the cult
was already aware of the location of this fragment of the idol. In fact, the
mysterious Mr. Gray, not unexpectedly, is actually a member of the cult in its
modern incarnation; furthermore, he has brought with him to the island—bulky
traveling bag, you know—all the other pieces of the idol, which have been
recovered through centuries of seeking. Now he only needs the one piece
discovered by Dr. N—to make the idol whole again for the first time in a couple
millennia.
But he also needs the archaeologist himself as a kind of sacrifice to
Nethescurial, a ceremony which takes place later the same night in the upper part
of the house. If I may telescope the ending for brevity’s sake, the sacrificial ritual
holds some horrific surprises for Mr. Gray (these people seem never to realize what
they are getting themselves into), who soon repents of his evil practices and is
driven to smash the idol to pieces once more. Making his escape from that weird
island, he throws these pieces overboard, sowing the cold gray waters with the
scraps of an incredible power. Later, fearing an obscure threat to his existence
(perhaps the reprisal of his fellow cultists), he composes an account of a horror
which is both his own and that of the whole human race.
End of manuscript. *
 
 
Now, despite my penchant for such wild yarns as I have just attempted to describe,
I am not oblivious to their shortcomings. For one thing, whatever emotional impact
the narrative may have lost in the foregoing précis, it certainly gained in coherence.
The incidents in the manuscript are clumsily developed; important details lack
proper emphasis; and impossible things are thrown at the reader without any real
effort at persuasion of their veracity. I do admire the fantastic principle at the core

of this piece. The nature of that pandemoniac entity is very intriguing. Imagine all
of creation as a mere mask for the foulest evil, an absolute evil whose reality is
mitigated only by our blindness to it, an evil at the heart of things, existing “inside
each star and the voids between them—within blood and bone—through all souls
and spirits,” and so forth. There is even a reference in the manuscript that suggests
an analogy between Nethescurial and that beautiful myth of the Australian
aborigines known as the Alchera (the Dreamtime, or Dreaming), a super-reality
which is the source of all we see in the world around us. (And this reference will
be useful in dating the manuscript, since it was toward the end of the last century
that Australian anthropologists made the aboriginal cosmology known to the
general public.) Imagine the universe as the dream, the feverish nightmare of a
demonic demiurge. O Supreme Nethescurial!
The problem is that such supernatural inventions are indeed quite difficult to
imagine. So often they fail to materialize in the mind, to take on a mental texture,
and thus remain unfelt as anything but an abstract monster of metaphysics—an
elegant or awkward schematic that cannot rise from the paper to touch us. Of
course, we do need to keep a certain distance from such specters as Nethescurial,
and this is usually secured through the medium of words as such, which ensnare all
kinds of menacing creatures before they can tear us body and soul. (And yet the
words of this particular manuscript seem rather weak in this regard, possibly
because they are only the drab green scratchings of a human hand and not the
heavy mesh of black type.) But we do want to get close enough to feel the foul
breath of these beasts, or to see them as prehistoric leviathans circling about the
tiny island on which we have taken refuge. Even if we are incapable of a sincere
belief in ancient cults and their unheard of idols, even if these pseudonymous
adventurers and archaeologists appear to be mere shadows on a wall, and even if
strange houses on remote islands are of shaky construction, there may still be a
power in these things that threatens us like a bad dream. And this power emanates
not so much from within the tale as it does from somewhere behind it, some place
of infinite darkness and ubiquitous malignity in which we may walk unaware.

But never mind these night thoughts; it’s only to bed that I will walk after
closing this letter.
 
Postscript
 
Later the same night.
Several hours have passed since I set down the above description and analysis
of that manuscript. How naive those words of mine now sound to me. And yet
they are still true enough, from a certain perspective. But that perspective was a
privileged one which, at least for the moment, I do not enjoy. The distance between
me and a devastating evil has lessened considerably. I no longer find it so difficult to
imagine the horrors delineated in that manuscript, for I have known them in the
most intimate way. What a fool I seem to myself for playing with such visions.
How easily a simple dream can destroy one’s sense of safety, if only for a few
turbulent hours. Certainly I have experienced all this before, but never as acutely as
tonight.
I had not been asleep for long but apparently long enough. At the start of the
dream I was sitting at a desk in a very dark room. It also seemed to me that the
room was very large, though I could see little of it beyond the area of the desktop,
at either end of which glowed a lamp of some kind. Spread out before me were
many papers varying in size. These I knew to be maps of one sort or another, and I
was studying them each in turn. I had become quite absorbed in their chartings,
which now dominated the dream to the exclusion of all other images. Each of them
focused on some concatenation of islands without reference to larger, more familiar
land masses. A powerful impression of remoteness and seclusion was conveyed by
these irregular daubs of earth fixed in bodies of water that were unnamed. But
although the location of the islands was not specific, somehow I was sure that those
for whom the maps were meant already had this knowledge. Nevertheless, this
secrecy was only superficial, for no esoteric key was required to seek out the greater

geography of which these maps were an exaggerated detail: they were all
distinguished by some known language in which the islands were named, different
languages for different maps. Yet upon closer view (indeed, I felt as if I were
actually journeying among those exotic fragments of land, tiny pieces of shattered
mystery), I saw that every map had one thing in common: within each group of
islands, whatever language was used to name them, there was always one called
Nethescurial. It was as if all over the world this terrible name had been insinuated
into diverse locales as the only one suitable for a certain island. Of course there
were variant cognate forms and spellings, sometimes transliterations, of the word.
(How precisely I saw them!) Still, with the strange conviction that may overcome a
dreamer, I knew these places had all been claimed in the name of Nethescurial and
that they bore the unique sign of something which had been buried there—the
pieces of that dismembered idol.
And with this thought, the dream reshaped itself. The maps dissolved into a
kind of mist; the desk before me became something else, an altar of coarse stone, and
the two lamps upon it flared up to reveal a strange object now positioned between
them. So many visions in the dream were piercingly clear, but this dark object was
not. My impression was that it was conglomerate in form, suggesting a monstrous
whole. At the same time these outlines which alluded to both man and beast,
flower and insect, reptiles, stones, and countless things I could not even name, all
seemed to be changing, mingling in a thousand ways that prevented any sensible
image of the idol.
With the upsurge in illumination offered by the lamps, I could see that the
room was truly of unusual dimensions. The four enormous walls slanted toward
one another and joined at a point high above the floor, giving the space around me
the shape of a perfect pyramid. But I now saw things from an oddly remote
perspective: the altar with its idol stood in the middle of the room and I was some
distance away, or perhaps not even in the scene. Then, from a dark corner or secret
door, there emerged a file of figures walking slowly toward the altar and finally
congregating in a half-circle before it. I could see that they were all quite skeletal in

shape, for each of them was identically dressed in a black material which clung
tightly to their bodies and made them look like skinny shadows. They seemed to be
actually bound in blackness from head to foot, with only their faces exposed. But
they were not, in fact, faces—they were pale, expressionless, and identical masks.
The masks were without openings and bestowed upon their wearers a terrible
anonymity, an ancient anonymity. Behind these smooth and barely contoured faces
were spirits beyond all hope or consolation except in the evil to which they would
willingly abandon themselves. Yet this abandonment was a highly selective process,
a ceremony of the chosen.
One of the white-faced shadows stepped forward from the group, seemingly
drawn forth into the proximity of the idol. The figure stood motionless, while from
within its dark body something began to drift out like luminous smoke. It floated,
swirling gently, toward the idol and there was absorbed. And I knew—for was this
not my own dream?—that the idol and its sacrifice were becoming one within each
other. This spectacle continued until nothing of the glowing, ectoplasmic haze
remained to be extracted, and the figure—now shrunken to the size of a marionette
—collapsed. But soon it was being lifted, rather tenderly, by another from the
group who placed the dwarfish form upon the altar and, taking up a knife, carved
deep into the body, making no sound. Then something oozed upon the altar,
something thick and oily and strangely colored, darkly colored though not with any
of the shades of blood. Although the strangeness of this color was more an idea
than a matter of vision, it began to fill the dream and to determine the final stage of
its development.
Quite abruptly, that closed, cavernous room dissolved into a stretch of land
that was cluttered with a bric-a-brac topography whose crazed shapes were of that
single and sinister color, as if everything were covered with an ancient, darkened
mold. It was a landscape that might once have been of stone and earth and trees
(such was my impression) but had been transformed entirely into something like
petrified lichen. Spreading before me, twisting in the way of wrought iron tracery
or great overgrown gardens of writhing coral, was an intricate latticework whose

surface was overrun with a chaos of little carvings, scabby designs that suggested a
world of demonic faces and forms. And their complexion was so much like all else I
have described that I felt there was nowhere I could turn, not even to my own
flesh, to escape its aspect. It was then I sensed that peculiar panic welling up within
me that often precedes one’s emergence from a nightmare. Yet before I broke free of
my dream, I beheld one further occurrence of the ubiquitous color of that island. 
As if to heighten the horror of my oneiric visions, it was also the color of the inkish
waters washing upon the island’s shores and trending into the far distance.
As I wrote a few pages ago, I have been awake for some hours now. What I
did not mention was the state in which I found myself after waking. Throughout
the dream, and particularly in those last moments when I positively identified that
foul place, there was an unseen presence, something I could feel was circulating
within all things and unifying them in an infinitely extensive body of evil. I suppose
it is nothing unusual that I continued to be under this visionary spell even after I
left my bed. I tried to invoke the gods of the ordinary world—calling them with
the whistle of a coffee pot and praying before their icon of the electric light—but
they were too weak to deliver me from that other whose name I can no longer
bring myself to write. It seemed to be in possession of my house, of every common
object inside and the whole of the dark world outside. Yes—lurking among the
watchful winds of this and the several worlds. Everything seemed to be a
manifestation of this evil and to my eyes was taking on its aspect. I could feel it also
emerging in myself, growing stronger behind this living face that I am afraid to
confront in the mirror.
Nevertheless, these dream-induced illusions now seem to be abating, perhaps
driven off by my writing about them. Like someone who has had too much to drink
the night before and swears off liquor for life, I have forsworn any further
indulgence in weird reading matter. No doubt this is only a temporary vow, and
soon enough my old habits will return. But certainly not before morning!
 
The Puppets in the Park

The Puppets in the Park
 
Some days later, and quite late at night.
Well, it seems this letter has mutated into a chronicle of my adventures
Nethescurialian. See, I can now write that unique nomen with ease; furthermore, I
feel almost no apprehension in stepping up to my mirror. Soon I may even be able
to sleep in the way I once did, without visionary intrusions of any kind. No denying
that my experiences of late have tipped the scales of the strange. I found myself just
walking restlessly about—impossible to work, you know—and always carrying
with me this heavy dread in my solar plexus, as if I had feasted at a banquet of fear
and the meal would not digest. Most strange, since I have been loath to take
nourishment during this time. How could I ingest even the least morsel when
everything looked the way it did? Hard enough to touch a doorknob or a pair of
shoes, even with the protection of gloves. I could feel every damn thing squirming,
not excluding my own flesh. And I could also see what was squirming beneath
every surface, my vision penetrating through the usual armor of objects and
discerning the same gushing stuff inside whatever I looked upon. It was that dark
color from the dream, I could identify it clearly now. Dark and greenish. How could
I possibly feed myself? How could I even bring myself to settle very long in one
spot? So I kept on the move. And I tried not to look too closely at how everything,
everything was crawling within itself and making all kinds of shapes inside there,
making all kinds of faces at me. (Yet it was really all the same face, everything
gorged with that same creeping stuff.) There were also sounds that I heard, voices
speaking vague words, voices that came not from the mouths of the people I passed
on the street but from the very bottom of their brains, garbled whisperings at first
and then so clear, so eloquent.
This rising wave of chaos reached its culmination tonight and then came
crashing down. But my timely maneuvering, I trust, has put everything right again.
Here, now, are the terminal events of this nightmare as they occurred. (And
how I wish I were not speaking figuratively, that I was in fact only in the world of

dreams or back in the pages of books and old manuscripts.) This conclusion had its
beginning in the park, a place that is actually some distance from my home, so far
had I wandered. It was already late at night, but I was still walking about, treading
the narrow asphalt path that winds through that island of grass and trees in the
middle of the city. (And somehow it seemed I had already walked in this same
place on this same night, that this had all happened to me before.) The path was lit
by globes of light balanced upon slim metal poles; another glowing orb was set in
the great blackness above. Off the path the grass was darkened by shadows, and
the trees swishing overhead were the same color of muddied green.
After walking some indefinite time along some indefinite route, I came upon a
clearing where an audience had assembled for a late-night entertainment. Strings of
colored lights had been hung around the perimeter of this area and rows of benches
had been set up. The people seated on these benches were all watching a tall,
illuminated booth. It was the kind of booth used for puppet shows, with wild
designs painted across the lower part and a curtained opening at the top. The
curtains were now drawn back and two clownish creatures were twisting about in
a glary light which emanated from inside the booth. They leaned and squawked
and awkwardly batted each other with soft paddles they were hugging in their
little arms. Suddenly they froze at the height of their battle; slowly they turned
about and faced the audience. It seemed the puppets were looking directly at the
place I was standing behind the last row of benches. Their misshapen heads tilted,
and their glassy eyes stared straight into mine.
Then I noticed that the others were doing the same: all of them had turned
around on the benches and, with expressionless faces and dead puppet eyes, held me
to the spot. Although their mouths didn’t move, they were not silent. But the
voices I heard were far more numerous than was the gathering before me. These
were the voices I had been hearing as they chanted confused words in the depths of
everyone’s thoughts, fathoms below the level of their awareness. The words still
sounded hushed and slow, monotonous phrases mingling like the sequences of a
fugue. But now I could understand these words, even as more voices picked up the

chant at different points and overlapped one another, saying, “Amid the rooms of
our houses—across moonlit skies—throughout all souls and spirits—behind the
faces of the living and the dead.”
I find it impossible to say how long it was before I was able to move, before I
backed up toward the path, all those multitudinous voices chanting everywhere
around me and all those many-colored lights bobbing in the wind-blown trees. Yet
it now seemed to be only a single voice I heard, and a single color I saw, as I found
my way home, stumbling through the greenish darkness of the night.
I knew what needed to be done. Gathering up some old boards from my
basement, I piled them into the fireplace and opened the flue. As soon as they were
burning brightly, I added one more thing to the fire: a manuscript whose ink was of
a certain color. Blessed with a saving vision, I could now see whose signature was
on that manuscript, whose hand had really written those pages and had been hiding
in them for a hundred years. The author of that narrative had broken up the idol
and drowned it in deep waters, but the stain of its ancient patina had stayed upon
him. It had invaded the author’s crabbed script of blackish green and survived
there, waiting to crawl into another lost soul who failed to see what dark places he
was wandering into. How I knew this to be true! And has this not been proved by
the color of the smoke that rose from the burning manuscript, and keeps rising from
it?
I am writing these words as I sit before the fireplace. The flames have gone
out but still the smoke from the charred paper hovers within the hearth, refusing to
ascend the chimney and disperse itself into the night. Perhaps the chimney has
become blocked. Yes, this must be the case, this must be true. Those other things
are lies, illusions. That mold-colored smoke has not taken on the shape of the idol,
the shape that cannot be seen steadily and whole but keeps turning out so many
arms and heads, so many eyes, then pulls them back in and brings them out again in
other configurations. That shape is not drawing something out of me and putting
something else in its place, something that seems to be bleeding into the words as I
write. And my pen is not growing bigger in my hand, nor is my hand growing

smaller, smaller…
See, there is no shape in the fireplace. The smoke is gone, gone up the chimney
and out into the sky. And there is nothing in the sky, nothing I can see through the
window. There is the moon, of course, high and round. But no shadow falls across
the moon, no churning chaos of smoke that chokes the frail order of the earth. It is
not a squirming, creeping, smearing shape I see upon the moon, not the shape of a
great deformed crab scuttling out of the black oceans of infinity and invading the
island of the moon, crawling with its innumerable bodies upon all the spinning
islands of space. That shape is not the cancerous totality of all creatures, not the
oozing ichor that flows within all things. Nethescurial is not the secret name of the
creation. It is not amid the rooms of our houses and beyond their walls—beneath
dark waters and across moonlit skies—below earth mound and above mountain
peak—in northern leaf and southern flower—inside each star and the voids
between them—within blood and bone—throughout all souls and spirits—upon
the watchful winds of this and the several worlds—behind the faces of the living
and the dead.
I am not dying in a nightmare.
 
 
* except for the concluding lines, which reveal the somewhat extravagant, but not entirely uninteresting,
conclusion of the narrator himself. [back]

The Voice 
of the 
DEMON

The Dreaming in Nortown

There are those who require witnesses to their doom. Not content with a solitary
perdition, they seek an audience worthy of the spectacle—a mind to remember the
stages of their downfall or perhaps only a mirror to multiply their abject glory. Of
course, other motives may figure in this scheme, ones far too tenuous and strange
for mortal reminiscence. Yet there exists a memoir of dreams in which I may
recollect an erstwhile acquaintance whose name I shall give as Jack Quinn. For it
was he who sensed my peculiar powers of sympathy and, employing a rather
contrary stratagem, engaged them. This all began, according to my perspective, late
one night in the decaying and spacious apartment which Quinn and I shared and
which was located in that city—or, more precisely, in a certain region within it—
where we attended the same university.
I was asleep. In the darkness a voice was calling me away from my ill-mapped
world of dreams. Then something heavy weighed down the edge of the mattress
and a slightly infernal aroma filled the room, an acrid combination of tobacco and
autumn nights. A small red glow wandered in an arc toward the apex of the seated
figure and there glowed even brighter, faintly lighting the lower part of a face.
Quinn was smiling, the cigar in his mouth smoking in the darkness. He remained
silent for a moment and crossed his legs beneath his long threadbare overcoat, an
ancient thing that was wrapped loosely around him like a skin about to be
sloughed. So many pungent Octobers were collected in that coat. It is the events of
this month that I am remembering.
I assumed he was drunk, or perhaps still in the remote heights or depths of the
artificial paradise he had been exploring that night. When Quinn finally spoke, it
was definitely with the stumbling words of a returning explorer, a stuporous and
vaguely awed voice. But he seemed more than simply drug-entranced.
He had attended a meeting, he said, speaking the word in an odd way which
seemed to expand its significance. Of course there were others at this gathering,
people who to me remained simply “those others.” It was a kind of philosophical
society, he told me. The group sounded colorful enough: midnight assemblies, the
probable use of drugs, and participants in the grip of strange mystical ecstasies.

I got out of bed and switched on the light. Quinn was a chaotic sight, his
clothes more crumpled than usual, his face flushed, and his long red hair intricately
tangled.
“And exactly where did you go tonight?” I asked with the measure of true
curiosity he seemed to be seeking. I had the distinct idea that Quinn’s activities of
that evening had occurred in the vicinity of Nortown (another pseudonym, of
course, as are all the names in this narrative), where the apartment we shared was
located. I asked him if they had.
“And perhaps in other places,” he answered, laughing a little to himself as he
meditated upon the gray end of his cigar. “But you might not understand. Excuse
me, I have to go to bed.”
“As you wish,” I replied, leaving aside all complaints about this nocturnal
intrusion. He puffed on his cigar and went to his room, closing the door behind
him.
This, then, was the beginning of Quinn’s ultimate phase of esoteric
development. And until the final night, I actually saw very little of him during that
most decisive episode of his life. We were pursuing different courses of study in our
graduate school days—I in anthropology and he in … it troubles me to say I was
never entirely sure of his academic program. In any case, our respective timetables
seldom intersected. Nonetheless, Quinn’s daily movements, at least the few I was
aware of, did invite curiosity. There was a general tenor of chaos that I perceived in
his behavior, a quality which may or may not make for good company but which
always offers promise of the extraordinary.
He continued to come in quite late at night, always entering the apartment
with what seemed a contrived noisiness. After that first night he did not overtly
confide his activities to me. The door to his room would close, and immediately
afterward I would hear him collapse on the old springs of his mattress. It seemed he
did not undress for bed, perhaps never even removed the overcoat which was
becoming shabbier and more crumpled day by day. My sleep temporarily shattered,
I passed this wakeful time by eavesdropping on the noises in the next room. There

was a strange catalogue of sounds which either I had never noticed before or which
were somehow different from the usual nightly din: low moans emanating from the
most shadowy chasms of dream; sudden intakes of breath like the suction of a
startled gasp; and abrupt snarls and snorts of a bestial timbre. The whole rhythm of
his sleep betrayed expressions of unknown turmoil. And sometimes he would
violate the calm darkness of the night with a series of staccato groans followed by a
brief vocal siren that made me bolt up suddenly in my bed. This alarming sound
surely carried the entire audible spectrum of nightmare-inspired terror…but there
were also mingling overtones of awe and ecstasy, a willing submission to some
unknown ordeal.
“Have you finally died and gone to hell?” I shouted one night through his
bedroom door. The sound was still ringing in my ears.
“Go back to sleep,” he answered, his low-pitched voice still speaking from the
deeper registers of somnolence. The smell of a freshly lit cigar then filtered out of
his bedroom.
After these late-night disturbances, I would sometimes sit up to watch the
dun colors of dawn stirring in the distance outside my eastern window. And as the
weeks went by that October, the carnival of noise going on in the next room began
to work its strange influence upon my own sleep. Soon Quinn was not the only one
in the apartment having nightmares, as I was inundated by a flood of eidetic
horrors that left only a vague residue upon waking.
It was throughout the day that fleeting scenes of nightmare would suddenly
appear to my mind, brief and vivid, as though I had mistakenly opened a strange
door somewhere and, after inadvertently seeing something I should not have,
quickly closed it once again with a reverberating slam. Eventually, however, my
dream-censor himself fell asleep, and I recalled in total the elusive materials of one
of those night-visions, which returned to me painted in scenes of garishly vibrant
colors.
The dream took place at a small public library in Nortown where I sometimes
retreated to study. On the oneiric plane, however, I was not a studious patron of

the library but one of the librarians—the only one, it seemed, keeping vigil in that
desolate institution. I was just sitting there, complacently surveying the shelves of
books and laboring under the illusion that in my idleness I was performing some
routine but very important function. This did not continue very long—nothing
does in dreams—though the situation was one that already seemed interminable.
What shattered the status quo, initiating a new phase to the dream, was my
discovery that a note scrawled upon a slip of paper had been left on the well-
ordered surface of my desk. It was a request for a book and had been submitted by
a library patron whose identity I puzzled over, for I had not seen anyone put it
there. I fretted about this scrap of paper for many dream-moments: had it been
there even before I sat down at the desk and had I simply overlooked it? I suffered
a disproportionate anxiety over this possible dereliction. The imagined threat of a
reprimand of some strange nature terrorized me. Without delay I phoned the back
room to have the person on duty there bring forth the book. But I was truly alone
in that dream library and no one answered what was to my mind now an
emergency appeal. Feeling a sense of urgency in the face of some imaginary deadline,
and filled with a kind of exalted terror, I snatched up the request slip and set out to
retrieve the book myself.
In the stacks I saw that the telephone line was dead, for it had been ripped
from the wall and lay upon the floor like the frayed end of a disciplinary whip.
Trembling, I consulted the piece of paper I carried with me for the title of the book
and call-number. No longer can I remember that title, but it definitely had
something to do with the name of the city, suburb of a sort, where Quinn’s and my
apartment was located. I proceeded to walk down a seemingly endless aisle flanked
by innumerable smaller aisles between the lofty bookshelves. Indeed, they were so
lofty that when I finally reached my destination I had to climb a high ladder to
reach the spot where I could secure the desired book. Mounting the ladder until my
shaking hands gripped the highest rung, I was at eye level with the exact call-
number I was seeking, or some forgotten dream-glyphs which I took to be these
letters and digits. And like these symbols, the book I found is now hopelessly

unmemorable, its shape, color, and dimensions having perished on the journey back
from the dream. I may have even dropped the book, but that was not important.
What was important, however, was the dark little slot created when I
withdrew the book from its rank on the shelf. I peered in, somehow knowing I was
supposed to do this as part of the book-retrieving ritual. I gazed deeper…and the
next phase of the dream began.
The slot was a window, perhaps more of a crack in some dream-wall or a slit
in the billowing membrane that protects one world against the intrusion of another.
Beyond was something of a landscape—for lack of a more suitable term—which I
viewed through a narrow rectangular frame. But this landscape had no earth and
sky that hinged together in a neat line at the horizon, no floating or shining objects
above to echo and balance their earthbound counter shapes below. This landscape
was an infinite expanse of depth and distance, a never-ending morass deprived of all
coherence, a state of strange existence rather than a chartable locus, having no more
geographical extension than a mirage or a rainbow. There was definitely something
in my sight, elements that could be distinguished from one another but impossible
to fix in any kind of relationship. I experienced a prolonged gaze at what is usually
just a delirious glimpse, the way one might suddenly perceive some sidelong illusion
which disappears at the turn of the head, leaving no memory of what the mind had
deceptively seen.
The only way I can describe the visions I witnessed with even faint
approximation is in terms of other scenes which might arouse similar impressions of
tortuous chaos: perhaps a festival of colors twisting in blackness, a tentacled abyss
that alternately seems to glisten moistly as with some horrendous dew, then
suddenly dulls into an arid glow, like bone-colored stars shining over an
extraterrestrial desert. The vista of eerie disorder that I observed was further
abetted in its strangeness by my own feelings about it. They were magnified dream-
feelings, those encyclopedic emotions which involve complexities of intuition,
sensation, and knowledge impossible to express. My dream-emotion was indeed a
monstrous encyclopedia, one that described a universe kept under infinite wraps of

deception, a dimension of disguise.
It was only at the end of the dream that I saw the colors or colored shapes,
molten and moving shapes. I cannot remember if I felt them to be anything specific
or just abstract entities. They seemed to be the only things active within the moody
immensity I stared out upon. Their motion somehow was not pleasant to watch—a
bestial lurching of each color-mass, a legless pacing in a cage from which they might
escape at any moment. These phantasms introduced a degree of panic into the
dream sufficient to wake me.
Oddly enough, though the dream had nothing to do with my roommate, I
woke up calling his name repeatedly in my dream-distorted voice. But he did not
answer the call, for he was not home at the time.
 
 
I have reconstructed my nightmare at this point for two reasons. First, to show the
character of my inner life during this time; second, to provide a context in which I
could appreciate what I found the next day in Quinn’s room.
When I returned from classes that afternoon, Quinn was nowhere to be seen,
and I took this opportunity to research the nightmares that had been visiting our
apartment in Nortown. Actually I did not have to pry very deeply into the near-
fossilized clutter of Quinn’s room. Almost immediately I spied on his desk
something that made my investigation easier, this something being a spiral notebook
with a cover of mock marble. Switching on the desk lamp in that darkly curtained
room, I looked through the first few pages of the notebook. It seemed to be
concerned with the sect Quinn had become associated with some weeks before,
serving as a kind of spiritual diary. The entries were Quinn’s meditations upon his
inward evolution and employed an esoteric terminology which must remain largely
undocumented, since the notebook is no longer in existence. Its pages, as I recall
them, outlined Quinn’s progress along a path of offbeat enlightenment, a tentative
peering into what might have been merely symbolic realms.

Quinn seemed to have become one of a jaded philosophical society, a group of
arcane deviates. Their raison d’être was a kind of mystical masochism, forcing
initiates toward feats of occult dare-devilry—“glimpsing the inferno with eyes of
ice,” to take from the notebook a phrase that was repeated often and seemed a sort
of chant of power. As I suspected, hallucinogenic drugs were used by the sect, and
there was no doubt that they believed themselves communing with strange
metaphysical venues. Their chief aim, in true mystical fashion, was to transcend
common reality in the search for higher states of being, but their stratagem was
highly unorthodox, a strange detour along the usual path toward positive
illumination. Instead, they maintained a kind of blasphemous fatalism, a doomed
determinism which brought them face to face with realms of obscure horror.
Perhaps it was this very obscurity that allowed them the excitement of their central
purpose, which seemed to be a precarious flirting with personal apocalypse, the
striving for horrific dominion over horror itself.
Such was the subject matter of Quinn’s notebook, all of it quite interesting.
But the most intriguing entry was the last, which was brief and which I can
recreate nearly in full. In this entry, like most of the others, Quinn addressed
himself in the second person with various snatches of advice and admonishment.
Much of it was unintelligible, for it seemed to be obsessed almost entirely with
regions alien to the conscious mind. However, Quinn’s words did have a certain
curious meaning when I first read them, and more so later on. The following, then,
exemplifies the manner of his notes to himself:
 
So far your progress has been faulty but inexorable. Last night you saw the zone
and now know what it is like—wobbling glitter, a field of venomous colors, the
glistening inner skin of deadliest nightshade. Now that you are actually nearing the
plane of the zone, awake! Forget your dainty fantasies and learn to move like the
eyeless beast you must become. Listen, feel, smell for the zone. Dream your way
through its marvelous perils. You know what the things from there may do to you
with their dreaming. Be aware. Do not stay in one place for very long these next

few nights. This will be the strongest time. Get out (perhaps into the great night-
light of Nortown)—wander, tramp, tread, somnambulate if you must. Stop and
watch but not for very long. Be mindlessly cautious. Catch the entrancing fragrance
of fear—and prevail.
 
I read this brief passage over and over, and each time its substance seemed to
become less the fantasies of an overly imaginative sectarian and more a strange
reflection on matters by now familiar to me. Thus, I seemed to be serving my
purpose, for the sensitivity of my psyche had allowed a subtle link to Quinn’s
spiritual pursuits, even in their nuances of mood. And judging from the last entry in
Quinn’s notebook, the upcoming days were crucial in some way, the exact
significance of which may have been entirely psychological. Nevertheless, other
possibilities and hopes had crossed my mind. As it happened, the question was
settled the following night over the course of only a few hours. This post-meridian
adventure—somehow inevitably—took place amid the dreamy and debased
nightlife of Nortown.
 
2.
 
Technically a suburb, at least by any civic definition, Nortown was not located
outside the periphery of that larger city where Quinn and I attended the university,
but entirely within its boundaries. For the near-indigent student, the sole attraction
of this area is the inexpensive housing it offers in a variety of forms, even if the
accommodations are not always the most appealing. However, in the case of Quinn
and myself, the motives may have differed, for both of us were quite capable of
appreciating the hidden properties and possibilities of the little city. Because of
Nortown’s peculiar proximity to the downtown area of a large urban center it
absorbed much of the big city’s lurid glamour, only on a smaller scale and in a

concentrated way. Of course, there were a multitude of restaurants with bogusly
exotic cuisines as well as a variety of nightspots of bizarre reputation and numerous
establishments that existed in a twilight realm with regard to their legality.
But in addition to these second-rate epicurean attractions, Nortown also
offered less earthly interests, however ludicrous the form they happened to take.
The area seemed a kind of spawning ground for marginal people and movements. (I
believe that Quinn’s fellow sectarians—whoever they may have been—were either
residents or habitués of the suburb.) Along Nortown’s seven blocks or so of
bustling commerce, one may see storefront invitations to personalized readings of
the future or private lectures on the spiritual foci of the body. And if one looks up
while walking down certain streets, there is a chance of spying second-floor
windows with odd symbols pasted upon them, cryptic badges whose significance is
known only to the initiated. In a way difficult to analyze, the mood of these streets
was reminiscent of that remarkable dream I have previously described—the sense
of dim and disordered landscapes evoked by every sordid streetcorner of that city
within a city.
Not the least of Nortown’s inviting qualities is the simple fact that many of its
businesses are active every hour of the day and night, which was probably one
reason why Quinn’s activities gravitated to this place. And now I knew of at least a
few particular nights that he planned to spend treading Nortown’s mottled
sidewalks.
Quinn left the apartment just before dark. Through the window I watched
him walk around to the front of the building and then proceed up the street toward
Nortown’s business district. I followed when he seemed a safe distance ahead of
me. I supposed that if my plan to chart Quinn’s movements for the evening was
going to fail, it would do so in the next few minutes. Of course, it was reasonable to
credit Quinn with an extra sense or two which would alert him to my scheme. All
the same, I was not wrong to believe I was merely conforming to Quinn’s unspoken
wish for a spectator to his doom, a chronicler of his demonic quest. And everything
proceeded smoothly as we arrived in the more heavily trafficked area of Nortown

approaching Carton, the suburb’s main street.
Up ahead, the high buildings of the surrounding metropolis towered around
and above Nortown’s lower structures. In the distance a pale sun had almost set,
highlighting the peaks of the larger city’s skyline. The valleyed enclave of Nortown
now lay in this skyline’s shadows, a dwarfish replica of the enveloping city. And
this particular dwarf was of the colorfully clothed type suitable for entertaining
jaded royalty. The main street flashed comic colors from an electric spectrum,
dizzily hopping foot to foot in its attempt to conquer the nameless boredom of the
crowds along the sidewalks. The milling throng—unusual for a chilly autumn
evening—made it easier for me to remain inconspicuous, though more difficult to
shadow Quinn.
I almost lost him for a moment when he left the ranks of some sluggish
pedestrians and disappeared into a little drugstore on the north side of Carton. I
stopped farther down the block and window-shopped for second-hand clothes until
he came out onto the street again, which he did a few minutes later, holding a
newspaper in one hand and stuffing a flat package of cigars inside his overcoat with
the other. I saw him do this in the light flooding out of the drugstore windows, for
by now it was nightfall.
Quinn walked a few more steps and then crossed at midstreet. I saw that his
destination was only a restaurant with a semicircle of letters from the Greek
alphabet painted on the front windows. Through the window I could see him take
a seat at the counter inside and spread out his newspaper, ordering something from
the waitress who stood with pad in hand. For at least a little while he would be
easy to keep track of. Not that I simply wanted to observe Quinn go in and out of
restaurants and drugstores the rest of the night. I had hoped that his movements
would eventually become more revealing. But for the moment I was gaining
practice at being his shadow.
I watched Quinn at his dinner from inside a Middle-Eastern import store
located across the street from the restaurant. I could observe him easily through the
store’s front display window. Unfortunately I was the only patron of this musty

place, and three times a bony, aged woman asked if she could help me. “Just
looking,” I said, taking my eyes from the window momentarily and glancing around
at a collection of assorted trinkets and ersatz Arabiana. The woman eventually
went and stood behind a merchandise counter, where she kept her right hand
tenaciously out of view. For possibly no reason at all I was becoming very nervous
among the engraved brass and ruggy smells of that store. I decided to return to the
street, mingling along the crowded but strangely quiet sidewalks.
After about a half-hour, at approximately quarter to eight, Quinn came out of
the restaurant. From down the street and on the opposite side I watched him fold
up the newspaper he was carrying and neatly dispose of it in a nearby mailbox.
Then, a recently lit cigar alternating between hand and mouth, he started north
again. I let him walk half a block or so before I crossed the street and began tailing
him once more. Although nothing manifestly unusual had yet occurred, there now
seemed to be a certain promise of unknown happenings in the air of that autumn
night.
Quinn continued on his way through the dingy neon of Nortown’s streets.
But he now seemed to have no specific destination. His stride was less purposeful
than it had been, and he no longer looked expectantly before him but gawked
aimlessly about the scene, as if these surroundings were unfamiliar or had altered in
some way from the condition of previous visits. The overcoated and wild-haired
figure of my roommate gave me the impression he was overwhelmed by something
around him. He looked up toward the roof-ledges of buildings as though the full
weight of the black autumn sky were about to descend. Absent-mindedly he
nudged into a few people and at some point lost hold of his cigar, scattering sparks
across the sidewalk.
Quinn turned at the next corner, where Carton intersected with a minor
sidestreet. There were only a few places alive with activity in this area, which led
into the darker residential regions of Nortown. One of these places was a building
with a stairway leading below the street level. From a safe position of surveillance I
saw Quinn go down this stairway into what I assumed was a bar or coffeehouse of

some sort. Innocent as it may have been, my imagination impulsively populated that
cellar with patrons of fascinating diversity and strangeness. Suppressing my
fantasies, I confronted the practical decision of whether or not to follow Quinn
inside and risk shattering his illusion of a lonely mystic odyssey. I also speculated
that perhaps he was meeting others in this place, and possibly I would end up
following multiple cultists, penetrating their esoteric activities, such as they may
have been. But after I had cautiously descended the stairway and peered through
the smeary panes of the window there, I saw Quinn sitting in a distant corner…
and he was alone.
“Like peeping in windows?” asked a voice behind me. “Windows are the eyes
of the soulless,” said another. This twosome looked very much like professors from
the university, though not those familiar to me from the anthropology department.
I followed these distinguished academics into the bar, thereby making a less obvious
entrance than if I had gone in alone.
The place was dark and crowded and much larger than it looked from outside.
I sat at a table by the door and at a strategic remove from Quinn, who was seated
behind a half-wall some distance away. The décor around me looked like that of an
unfinished basement or a storage room. There were a great number of flea-market
antiquities hanging from the walls, and dangling from the ceiling were long objects
that resembled razor strops. After a few moments a rather vacant-looking girl
walked over and stood silently near my table. I did not immediately notice that she
was just a waitress, so unconvivial was her general appearance and manner.
At some point during the hour or so that I was allowed to sit there nursing
my drink, I discovered that if I leaned forward as far as possible in my chair, I could
catch a glimpse of Quinn on the other side of the half-wall. This tactic now
revealed to me a Quinn in an even greater state of agitated wariness than before. I
thought he would have settled down to a languid series of drinks, but he did not. In
fact, there was a cup of coffee, not a glass of spirits, sitting at his elbow. Quinn
seemed to be scrutinizing every inch of the room for something. His nervous glances
once nearly focused on my own face, and from then on I became more discreet.

A little later on, not long before Quinn’s and my exit, a girl with a guitar
wandered up onto a platform against one wall of the room. As she made herself
comfortable in a chair on the platform and tuned her instrument, someone switched
on a single spotlight on the floor. I noticed that attached to the front of the
spotlight was a movable disc divided into four sections: red, blue, green, and
transparent. It was now adjusted to shine only through the transparent section.
The entertainer gave herself no introduction and started singing a song after
lethargically strumming her guitar for a moment or so. I did not recognize the piece,
but I think any song would have sounded unfamiliar as rendered by this performer,
whose voice compared in my imagination to that of a feeble-minded siren locked
away somewhere and wailing pitifully to be set free. That the song was intended as
mournful I could not doubt. It was, however, a very foreign and disorienting kind
of mournfulness, as if the singer had eavesdropped on some exotic and grotesque
rituals for her inspiration.
She finished the song. After receiving applause from only a single person
somewhere in the room, she started into another number which sounded no
different from the first. Then, about a minute or so into the weird progress of this
second song, something happened—a moment of confusion—and seconds later I
found myself back on the streets.
What happened was actually no more than some petty mischief. While the
singer was calling feline-voiced to the lost love of the song’s verses, someone
sneaked up near the platform, grabbed the disc attached to the front of the
spotlight, and gave it a spin. A wild kaleidoscope ensued. The swarming colors
attacked the singer and those patrons at nearby tables. The singing continued, its
languishing tempo off-sync with the speedy reds, blues, and greens. There was
something menacing about the visual disorder of those colors gleefully swimming
around. And then, for a brief moment, the colorful chaos was eclipsed when a
silhouette hurriedly stumbled past, moving between my table and the singer on the
platform. I almost missed seeing who it was, for my eyes were averted from the
general scene. I let him make it out the door, which he seemed to have some trouble

opening, before dashing from the place myself.
When I emerged from the stairway onto the sidewalk, I saw Quinn standing
at the corner on Carton. As he paused to light a cigar, I kept my place in the
shadows until he proceeded up the street. 
We walked a few blocks that were profusely decorated with neon signs
streaming across the night. I was diverted by the sequentially lit letters spelling out
E-S-S-E-N-C-E LOUNGE, LOUNGE, LOUNGE; and I wondered what secrets
were revealed to those anointed by the priestesses of MEDEA’S MASSAGE.
Our next stop was a short one, though it also threatened the psychic rapport
Quinn and I had been so long in establishing. Quinn entered a bar where a sign
outside advertised for persons who desired work as professional dancers. I let a few
moments pass before following Quinn into the place. But just as I stepped within
the temporarily blinding darkness of the bar, someone shouldered me to one side in
his haste to leave. Fortunately I was standing in a crowd of men waiting for seats
inside, and Quinn did not seem to take note of me. In addition, his right hand—
with cigar—was visoring his eyes or perhaps giving his brow a quick massage. In
any case, he did not stop but charged past me and out the door. As I turned to
follow him in his brusque exit, I noticed the scene within the bar, particularly
focusing on a stage where a single figure gyred about—clothed in flashing colors.
And gazing briefly on this chaotic image, I recalled that other flurrying chaos at the
underground club, wondering if Quinn had been disturbed by this second
confrontation with a many-hued phantasmagoria, this flickering and disorderly
rainbow of dreams. Certainly he seemed to have been repulsed in some way,
causing his furious exit. I exited more calmly and resumed my chartings of Quinn’s
nocturnal voyage.
He next visited a number of places into which, for one reason or another, I
was wary to follow. Included among these stops was a bookstore (not an occult
one), a record shop with an outdoor speaker that blared madness into the street,
and a lively amusement arcade, where Quinn remained for only the briefest
moment. Between each of these diversions Quinn appeared to be getting

progressively more, I cannot say frantic, but surely…watchful. His once steady
stride was now interrupted by half-halts to glance into store windows, frequent
hesitations that betrayed a multitude of indecisive thoughts and impulses, and a
faltering uncertainty in general. His whole manner of movement had changed, its
aspects of rhythm, pace, and gesture adding up to a character-image radically
altered from his former self. At times I could even have doubted that this was Jack
Quinn if it had not been for his unmistakable appearance.
Perhaps, I thought, he had become subliminally aware of someone being
always at his back, and that, at this point in his plummet to an isolated hell, he no
longer required a companion or could not tolerate a voyeur of his destiny. But
ultimately I had to conclude that the cause of Quinn’s disquiet was something other
than a pair of footsteps trailing behind him. There was something else that he
seemed to be seeking, searching out clues in the brick and neon landscape, possibly
in some signal condition or circumstance from which he could derive guidance for
his movements that frigid and fragrant October night. But I do not think he found,
or could properly read, whatever sign it was he sought. Otherwise the
consequences might have been different.
The reason for Quinn’s lack of alertness had much to do with his penultimate
stop that evening. The time was close to midnight. We had worked our way down
Carton to the last block of Nortown’s commercial area. Here, also, were the
northern limits of the suburb, beyond which lay a stretch of condemned buildings
belonging to the surrounding city. This part of the suburb was similarly blighted in
ways both physical and atmospheric. On either side of the street stood a row of
attached buildings whose height sometimes varied dramatically. Many of the
businesses on this block were not equipped with outside lights or failed to employ
the ones they had. But the lack of outward illumination seldom signified that these
places were not open for business, at least judging by the comings and goings on the
sidewalks outside the darkened shops, bars, small theaters, and other
establishments. Casual pedestrian traffic at this end of the suburb had seemingly
diminished to certain determined individuals of specific taste and destination. Street

traffic too was reduced, and there was something about those few cars left parked
at the curbs that gave them a look of abandonment, if not complete immobility.
Of course, I am sure those cars, or most of them, were capable of motion, and
it was only the most pathetic of fallacies that caused one to view them as sentient
things somehow debilitated by their broken-down surroundings. But I think I may
have been dreaming on my feet for a few seconds: sounds and images seemed to
come to me from places outside the immediate environment. I stared at an old
building across the street—a bar, perhaps, or a nameless club of some exclusive
membership—and for a moment I received the impression that it was sending out
strange noises, not from within its walls but from a far more distant source, as if it
were transmitting from remote dimensions. And these noises had a visible aspect
too, a kind of vibration in the night air, like static that one could see sparkling in
the darkness. But all the while there was just an old building and nothing more
than that. I stared a little longer and the noises faded into confused echoes, the
sparkling became dull and disappeared, the connection lost, and the place fully
resumed its decrepit reality.
The building looked much too intimate in size to afford concealment, and I
perceived a certain privacy in its appearance that made me feel a newcomer would
have been awkwardly noticeable. Quinn, however, had unhesitantly gone inside. I
suppose it would have been helpful to observe him in there, to see what sort of
familiarity he had with this establishment and its patrons. But all I know is that he
remained in there for over an hour. During part of that time I waited at a counter
stool in a diner down the street.
When Quinn finally came out he was observably drunk. This surprised me,
because I had assumed that he intended to maintain the utmost control of his
faculties that evening. The coffee I saw him drinking at that underground club
seemed to support this assumption. But somehow Quinn’s intentions to hold on to
his sobriety, if he had such intentions to begin with, had been revised or forgotten.
I had positioned myself farther down the street by the time he reappeared, but
there was much less need for caution now. It was ridiculously easy to remain

unnoticed behind a Quinn who could barely see the pavement he walked upon. A
police car with flashing lights passed us on Carton, and Quinn exhibited no
awareness of it. He halted on the sidewalk, but only to light another cigar. And he
seemed to have a difficult time performing this task in a wind that turned his
unbuttoned overcoat into a wild-winged cape flapping behind him. It was this
wind, as much as Quinn himself, that led the way to our final stop where a few
lights relieved the darkness on the very edge of Nortown.
The lights were those of a theater marquee. And it was also here that we
caught up with the revolving beacons of the patrol car. Behind it was another
vehicle, a large luxury affair that had a deep gash in its shiny side. Not far away
along the curb was a No Parking sign that was creased into an L shape. A tall
policeman was inspecting the damaged city property, while the owner of the car
that had apparently done the deed was standing by. Quinn gave only a passing
glance at this tableau as he proceeded into the theater. A few moments later I
followed him, but not before hearing the owner of that disfigured car tell the
patrolman that something brightly colored had suddenly appeared in his headlights,
causing him to swerve. And whatever it was had subsequently vanished.
Stepping into the lobby of the theater, I noted that it must have been a place
of baroque elegance in former days, though now the outlines of the scrolled molding
above were blurred by grayish sediment and the enormous chandelier was missing
some of its parts and all of its glitter. The glass counter on my right, which no
doubt was once filled with boxes of candy and such, had been converted, probably
long ago, into a merchandise stand displaying pornographic magazines.
I walked through one of a long line of doors and stood around for a while in
the hallway behind the auditorium. Here a group of men were talking and smoking,
dropping their cigarettes onto the floor and stepping them out. Their voices almost
drowned out the soundtrack of the film that was being shown, the sound
emanating from the aisle entrances and humming unintelligibly in the back walls. I
looked into the film-lit auditorium and saw only a few moviegoers scattered here
and there in the worn seats of the theater, mostly sitting by themselves. By the

light of the film I located Quinn within the sparse audience. He was sitting very
close to the screen in a front-row seat next to some curtains and an exit sign.
He seemed to be dozing in his seat rather than watching the film, and I found
it a simple matter to position myself a few rows behind him. By that time Quinn
appeared to have lost what was left of his earlier resolve and intensity, and the
momentum of that night had all but run out. In the darkness of the theater I began
to nod and then fell asleep, much as it seemed Quinn had already done.
I did not sleep for long, no more than a few minutes. But during that time I
dreamed. However, there was no nightmarish scenery in this dream, no threatening
scenarios. Only darkness … darkness and a voice. The voice was that of Quinn. He
was calling out to me from a great distance, a distance that did not seem a matter of
physical space but one of immeasurable and alien dimensions. His words were
distorted, as if passing through some medium that was misshaping them, turning
human sounds into a beastlike rasping—the half-choking and half-shrieking voice of
something in the process of being slowly and methodically wounded. First he called
my name several times in the wild modulations of a coarse scream. Then he said, as
well as I can remember: “Stopped watching for them … fell into their zone …
where are you … help us … they’re dreaming, too … they’re dreaming … and
shaping things with their dreams.”
I awoke and the first thing I saw was what seemed a great shapeless mass of
colors, which was only the giant images of the film. My eyes focused, and I looked
down the rows toward Quinn. He seemed to be slumped over, hunching down, the
top of his head much too near his shoulders. A mound of movement struggled on
the other side of his seat, emerging sideways into the aisle. It was Quinn, but he
was now faintly luminous and diminished in size. The bottom of his overcoat
dragged along the floor, its sleeves hanging loose and handless, its collar caving in.
The thing fought to take each awkward step, as if it did not have full control of its
motion, like a marionette jerking this way and that way as it labored forth. Its glow
seemed to be gaining in radiance now, a pulsing opalescent aura that crawled or
flowed all around the lumbering dwarf.

I might still be in a dream, I reminded myself. Or this might be a distorted
after-vision, a delirious blend of images derived from nightmare, imagination, and
that enormous stain of colors at the front of the dark auditorium in which I had just
awakened. I tried to collect myself, to focus on the thing that was disappearing
behind the thick curtain beneath the lighted exit sign.
I followed, passing through the opening in the frayed, velvety curtain. Beyond
it was a cement stairway leading up to a metal door that was now swinging closed.
Halfway up the stairs I saw a familiar shoe which must have been lost in Quinn’s
frantic yet retarded haste. Where was he running and from what? These were my
only thoughts now, without consideration of the pure strangeness of the situation. I
had abandoned all connections to any guiding set of norms by which to judge
reality or unreality. However, all that was needed to shatter this acceptance waited
outside—something of total unacceptability atop a rickety scaffold of estrangement.
After I stepped out the door at the top of the stairs, I discovered that the previous
events of that night had only served as a springboard into other realms, a point of
departure from a world now diminishing with a furious velocity behind me.
The area outside the theater was unlit but nonetheless was not dark.
Something was shining in a long narrow passageway between the theater and an
adjacent building. This was where Quinn had gone. Illumination was there, and
sounds.
From around the corner’s edge a grotesque light was trickling out, the first
intimations of an ominous sunrise over a dark horizon. I dimly recognized this
wavering light, though not from my waking memory. It grew more intense, now
pouring out in weird streams from beyond the solid margin of the building. And
the more intense it grew, the more clearly I could hear the screaming voice that had
called out to me in a dream. I shouted his name, but the swelling, chromatic
brilliance was a field of fear which kept me from making any move in its direction.
What repelled me appeared as a rainbow in which all natural color had been
mutated into a painfully lush iridescence by some prism fantastically corrupted in its
form. It was an aurora painting the darkness with a shimmering blaze that did not

belong to this world. And, in actuality, it was nothing like these figurative
effusions, which are merely a feeble means of partially fixing a reality
incommunicable to those not initiated to it, a necessary resorting to the makeshift
gibberish of the mystic isolated by his experience and left without a language to
describe it.
The entire episode was temporally rather brief, though its phantasmagoric
quality made it seem of indefinite duration—the blink of an eye or an eon.
Suddenly the brightness ceased flowing out toward me, as if some strange spigot
had been abruptly turned off somewhere. The screaming had also stopped. With all
caution, I stepped into the passageway I had seen Quinn enter. But nothing was
there—nothing to relieve my sense of confusion as to what exactly had happened.
(Though not a dilettante of the unreal, I have had my moments of dazed
astonishment.) But perhaps there was one thing. On the ground was a burnt-out
patch of earth, a shapeless and bare spot that was deprived of the weeds and litter
that covered the surrounding area. Possibly it was only a place from which some
object had recently been removed, spirited off, leaving the earth beneath it vacant
and dead. For a moment, when I first looked at the spot, it seemed to twinkle with
a faint luminosity. Possibly I only imagined its outline as being that of a human
silhouette, though one contorted in such a way that it might also have been
mistaken for other things, other shapes. In any case, whatever had been there was
now gone.
And around this barren little swatch of ground was only trash: newspapers
mutilated by time and the elements; brown bags reduced by decay to their primal
pulp; thousands of cigarette butts; and one item of debris that was almost new and
had yet to have any transformations worked upon it. It was a thin book-like box. I
picked it up. There were still two fresh cigars in it.
 
3.

 
Quinn never returned to the apartment we shared. After a few days I reported him
as missing to the Nortown police. Before doing this I destroyed the notebook in his
room, for in a fit of paranoia I thought the police would find it in the course of
their investigations and then ask some rather uncomfortable questions. I did not
want to explain to them things that they simply would not believe, especially
activities indulged in that final night. This would only have erroneously cast
suspicion upon myself. Fortunately, the Nortown authorities are notoriously lax in
their official functions. As it turned out, they asked very few questions and never
came to the apartment.
 
 
After Quinn’s disappearance I immediately began looking for another place to
live. And although my roommate was gone, strange dreams continued during my
last days at the old residence. But these dreams were different in some particulars.
The general backdrop was much the same nightmare expanse, but now I viewed it
from a distance outside the dream. It was actually more like watching a film than
dreaming, and in a way they did not seem to be my own dreams at all. I considered
these to be Quinn’s leftover visions still haunting the apartment, for he always
played their central role. Perhaps it was in these dreams that I continued to follow
Quinn beyond the point at which I lost him. For at that point I imagined him as
already starting to change, and in my last dreams he changed further.
He no longer bore any resemblance to my former roommate, though with
dreamlike omniscience I knew it was he. His shape kept changing, or rather was
deliberately being changed by those kaleidoscopic beasts. Playing out a scene from
some Boschian hell, the tormenting demons encircled their victim and were
dreaming him. They carried him through a hideous series of transfigurations,
maliciously altering the screaming mass of a damned soul. They were dreaming
things out of him and dreaming things into him. Finally, the purpose of their

transformations became apparent. They were torturing their victim through a
number of stages which would ultimately result in his becoming one of them,
fulfilling his most fearful and obsessive vision. I no longer recognized him but saw
that there was now one more glittering beast that took its place with the others
and frolicked among them.
This was the last dream I had before leaving the apartment. There have been
no others since, at least none that have troubled my own sleep. I cannot say the
same for that of my new roommate, who rages in his slumber night after night in
the shabby, and quite reasonably priced, little place where we reside. Once or twice
he has attempted to communicate to me his strange visions and the company into
which they have led him. But I affect only the slightest interest in his adventures.
For as a student of anthropology, one of the few of my kind, I must keep a certain
distance from my subjects. They are of a rare type, and outright intimacy tends to
impact their behavior in ways that could spoil my study of them. In any case,
companionship is not what these adventurers in an alternative existence seek. What
they desire, like Jack Quinn, are witnesses to their downfall as they plummet into
an abyss of nightmares. What they want are chroniclers of their explorations in a
hell of their own choosing. And in these roles I am more than willing to
accommodate them, for their desires and mine are complementary. Nevertheless, I
sometimes feel a tinge of guilt on my side. In truth, I am a parasite who lives off a
malady that afflicts them while I remain immune. And the part I play is that of a
voyeur. For it is within my power to save them. If only I were moved to do so, I
could hold out my hand to them as they hover over the pit. I can only wonder,
then, what is the sickness from which I suffer that, like some depraved deity, I elect
to let them fall.

The Mystics of Muelenburg

If things are not what they seem—and we are forever reminded that this is the case
—then it must also be observed that enough of us ignore this truth to keep the
world from collapsing. Though never exact, always shifting somewhat, the
proportion is crucial. For a certain number of minds are fated to depart for realms
of delusion, as if in accordance with some hideous timetable, and many will never
be returning to us. Even among those who remain, how difficult it can be to hold
the focus sharp, to keep the picture of the world from fading, from blurring in
selected zones and, on occasion, from sustaining epic deformations over the entire
visible scene.
I once knew a man who claimed that, overnight, all the solid shapes of
existence had been replaced by cheap substitutes: trees made of poster board,
houses built of colored foam, whole landscapes composed of hair-clippings. His own
flesh, he said, was now just so much putty. Needless to add, this acquaintance had
deserted the cause of appearances and could no longer be depended on to stick to
the common story. Alone he had wandered into a tale of another sort altogether;
for him, all things now participated in this nightmare of nonsense. But although his
revelations conflicted with the lesser forms of truth, nonetheless he did live in the
light of a greater truth: that all is unreal. Within him this knowledge was vividly
present down to his very bones, which had been newly simulated by a compound of
mud and dust and ashes.
In my own case, I must confess that the myth of a natural universe—that is,
one that adheres to certain continuities whether we wish them or not—was losing
its grip on me and gradually being supplanted by a hallucinatory view of creation.
Forms, having nothing 
to offer except a mere suggestion of firmness, declined in importance; fantasy, that
misty domain of pure meaning, gained in power and influence. This was in the days
when esoteric wisdom seemed to count for something in my mind, and I would
willingly have sacrificed a great deal in its pursuit. Hence, my interest in the man
who called himself Klaus Klingman; hence, too, that brief yet profitable association
between us, which came about through channels too twisted to recall.

Without a doubt, Klingman was one of the illuminati and proved this many
times over in various psychic experiments, particularly those of the seance type. In
this regard, I need only mention the man who was severally known as Nemo the
Necromancer, Marlowe the Magus, and Master Marinetti, each of whom was
none other than Klaus Klingman himself. But Klingman’s highest achievement was
not a matter of public spectacle and consisted entirely of this private triumph that
he had attained, by laborious effort, an unwavering acceptance of the spectral
nature of things, which to him were neither what they seemed to be nor were they
quite anything at all.
Klingman lived in the enormous upper story of a warehouse that had been
part of his family’s legacy to him, and there I often found him wandering amidst a
few pieces of furniture and the cavernous wasteland of dim and empty storage
space. Collapsing into an ancient armchair, reposing far beneath crumbling rafters,
he would gaze beyond the physical body of his visitor, his eyes surveying remote
worlds and his facial expression badly disorganized by dreams and large quantities
of alcohol. “Fluidity, always fluidity,” he shouted out, his voice carrying through
the expansive haze around us, which muted daylight into dusk. The embodiment of
his mystic precepts, he appeared at any given moment to be on the verge of an
amazing disintegration, his particular complex of atoms ready to go shooting off into
the great void like a burst of fireworks.
We discussed the dangers—for me and for the world—of adopting a visionary
program of existence. “The chemistry of things is so delicate,” he warned. “And
this word chemistry. What does it mean but a mingling, a mixing, a gushing
together? These are things that people fear.” 
Indeed, I had already suspected the hazards of Klingman’s company, and, as
the sun was setting over the city beyond the great windows of the warehouse, I
became afraid. With an uncanny perception of my feelings, Klingman pointed at me
and bellowed: “The worst fear of the race—yes, the world suddenly transformed
into a senseless nightmare, horrible dissolution of things. Nothing compares, even
oblivion is a sweet dream. You understand why, of course. Why this peculiar

threat. These brooding psyches, all the busy minds everywhere. I hear them
buzzing like flies in the blackness. I see them as glow worms flitting in the blinding
sun. They are struggling, straining every second to keep the sky above them, to
keep the sun in the sky, to keep the dead in the earth—to keep all things, so to
speak, where they belong. What an undertaking! What a crushing task! Is it any
wonder that they are all tempted by a universal vice, that in some dark street of the
mind a single voice whispers to one and all, softly hissing, and says: ‘Lay down your
burden.’ Then thoughts begin to drift, a mystical magnetism pulls them this way
and that, faces start to change, shadows speak. And sooner or later the sky comes
down, melting like wax. But as you know, everything has not yet been lost:
absolute terror has proved its security against this fate. Is it any wonder that these
beings carry on the struggle at whatever cost?”
“And you?” I asked.
“I?”
“Yes, don’t you shoulder the universe in your own way?”
“Not at all,” he replied, smiling and sitting up in his chair as on a throne. “I
am a lucky one, parasite of chaos, maggot of vice. Where I live is all nightmare, thus
a certain nonchalance. I am accustomed to drifting in the delirium of history. And
by history I include events, and even whole eras, that have never gone on record.
Speaking with the dead can be so instructive. They remember what the living have
forgotten, or would not know if they could. The true frailty of things. What
happened in the old town of Muelenburg, for example. Now there was an
opportunity, a moment of distraction in which so much was nearly lost forever, so
many lost in that medieval gloom, catastrophe of dreams. How their minds
wandered in the shadows even as their bodies were seemingly bound to narrow
rutted streets and apparently safeguarded by the spired cathedral which was
erected between 1365 and 1399. A rare and fortuitous juncture when the burden of
the heavens was heaviest—so much to keep in its place—and the psyche so ill-
developed, so easily taxed and tempted away from its labors. But they knew
nothing about that, and never could. They only knew the prospect of absolute

terror.”
Klingman smiled, then began giggling, his mind obviously turning inward to
converse with itself.  Hoping to draw his conversation outward, I said. “Mr.
Klingman, you were speaking about Muelenburg. You said something about the
cathedral.”
“I see the cathedral, the colossal vault above, the central aisle stretching out
before us. The woodcarvings leer down from dark corners, animals and freaks, men
in the mouths of demons. Are you taking notes again? Fine, then take notes. Who
knows what you will remember of all this? Or if memory will help you at all? In
any case we are already there, sitting among the smothered sounds of the cathedral.
Beyond the jeweled windows is the town in twilight.”
Twilight, as Klingman explained, had come upon Muelenburg somewhat
prematurely on a certain day deep into the autumn season. Early that afternoon,
clouds had spread themselves evenly above the region surrounding the town,
withholding heaven’s light and giving a dull appearance to the landscape of forests,
thatched farmhouses, and windmills standing still against the horizon. Within the
high stone walls of Muelenburg itself, no one seemed particularly troubled that the
narrow streets—normally so cluttered with the pointed shadows of peaked roofs
and jutting gables at this time of day—were still immersed in a lukewarm dimness
which turned merchants’ brightly colored signs into faded artifacts of a dead town
and which made faces look as if they were fashioned of pale clay. And in the central
square—where the shadow from the clock-tower of the town hall at times
overlapped those cast by the twin spires of the cathedral on the one hand, or the
ones from high castle turrets looming at the border of the town on the other—
there was only grayness undisturbed.
Where were the minds of the townspeople? How had they ceased paying
homage to the ancient order of things? And when had the severing taken place that
set their world adrift on strange waters?
For some time they remained innocent of the disaster, going about their ways

as the ashen twilight lingered far too long, as it encroached upon the hours that
belonged to evening and suspended the town between day and night. Everywhere
windows began to glow with the yellow light of lamps, creating the illusion that
darkness was imminent. Any moment, it seemed, the natural cycle would relieve
the town of the prolonged dusk it had suffered that autumn day. How well-
received the blackness would have been by those who waited silently in sumptuous
chambers or humble rooms, for no one could bear the sight of Muelenburg’s
twisting streets in that eerie, overstaying twilight. Even the night watchman
shirked his nocturnal routine. And when the bells of the abbey sounded for the
monks’ midnight prayers, each toll spread like an alarm throughout the town still
held in the strange luminousness of the gloaming.
Exhausted by fear, many shuttered their windows, extinguished lamps, and
retired to their beds, hoping that all would be made right in the interval. Others sat
up with a candle, enjoying the lost luxury of shadows. A few, being itinerants who
were not fixed to the life of the town, broke through the unwatched gate and took
to the roads, all the while gazing at the pale sky and wondering where they would
go.
Whether they kept the hours in their dreams or in sleepless vigils, all of
Muelenburg’s citizens were disturbed by something in the spaces around them, as if
some strangeness had seeped into the atmosphere of their town, their homes, and
perhaps their souls. The air seemed heavier somehow, resisting them slightly, and
also seemed to be flowing with things that could not be perceived except as swift,
shadowlike movement escaping all sensible recognition, transparent flight which
barely caressed one’s vision.
When the clock high in the tower of the town hall proved that a nightful of
hours had passed, some opened their shutters, even ventured into the streets. But
the sky still hovered over them like an infinite vault of glowing dust. Here and
there throughout the town the people began to gather in whispering groups.
Appeals were soon made at the castle and the cathedral, and speculations were
offered to calm the crowd. There was a struggle in heaven, some had reasoned,

which had influenced the gross reality of the visible world. Others proposed a
deception by demons or an ingenious punishment from on high. Certain persons
met secretly in well-hidden chambers and spoke in stricken voices of old deities
formerly driven from the earth who were now monstrously groping their way back.
And all of these explications of the mystery were true in their own way, though
none could abate the dread which had settled upon the town of Muelenburg.
Submerged in unvarying grayness, distracted and confused by phantasmal
intrusions about them, the people of the town felt their world dissolving. Even the
clock in the town hall tower failed to keep their moments from wandering
strangely. Within such disorder were bred curious thoughts and actions. Thus, in
the garden of the abbey an ancient tree was shunned and rumors spread concerning
some change in its twisted silhouette, something flaccid and ropelike about its
branches, until finally the monks doused it with oil and set it aflame, their circle of
squinting faces bathing in the glare. Likewise, a fountain standing in one of the
castle’s most secluded courtyards became notorious when its waters appeared to
suggest fabulous depths far beyond the natural dimensions of its shell-shaped basin.
The cathedral itself had deteriorated into a hollow sanctuary where prayers were
mocked by queer movements among the carved figures in cornices and by shadows
streaming horribly in the twitching light of a thousand candles.
Throughout the town, all places and things bore evidence to striking revisions
in the base realm of matter: precisely sculptured stone began to loosen and lump, an
abandoned cart melded with the sucking mud of the street, and objects in desolate
rooms lost themselves in the surfaces they pressed upon, making metal tongs mix
with brick hearth, prismatic jewels with lavish velvet, a corpse with the wood of its
coffin. At last the faces of Muelenburg became subject to changing expressions
which at first were quite subtle, though later these divergences were so exaggerated
that it was no longer possible to recapture original forms. It followed that the
townspeople could no more recognize themselves than they could one another. All
were carried off in the great torrent of their dreams, all spinning in that grayish
whirlpool of indefinite twilight, all churning and in the end merging into utter

blackness.
It was within this blackness that the souls of Muelenburg struggled and
labored and ultimately awoke. The stars and high moon now lit up the night, and it
seemed that their town had been returned to them. And so terrible had been their
recent ordeal that of its beginning, its progress, and its termination, they could
remember … nothing.
“Nothing?” I echoed.
“Of course,” Klingman answered. “All of those terrible memories were left
behind in the blackness. How could they bear to bring them back?”
“But your story,” I protested. “These notes I’ve taken tonight.”
“What did I tell you? Privileged information, confidences spoken off the
historical record. You know that sooner or later each of the souls who occupied
Muelenburg recollected the episode in detail. It was all waiting for them in the
place where they had left it—the blackness which is the domain of death.”
I remembered the necromantic learning that Klingman had professed and to
which I gave no small credence. But this was too much. “Then nothing can be
verified, nothing you can produce to back up your story. I thought you might at
least conjure a spirit or two. You’ve never disappointed me before.”
“Nor will I disappoint you tonight. Remember, I am one with the dead of
Muelenburg . . . and with all who have known the great dream in all its true
liquescence. They have spoken to me as I am speaking to you. Many reminiscences
imparted by those old dreamers, many drunken dialogues I have held with them.”
“Like the drunkenness of this dialogue tonight,” I said, openly disdaining his
narrative.
“Perhaps, only much more vivid, more real. But the yarn which you suppose I
have merely spun has served its purpose. To cure you of doubt, you first had to be
made a doubter. Until now, pardon my saying so, you have shown no talent in that
direction. You believed every wild thing that came along, provided it had the least
evidence whatever. Unparalleled credulity. But tonight you have doubted and thus
you are ready to be cured of this doubt. And didn’t I mention time and again the

dangers? Unfortunately, you cannot count yourself among those forgetful souls of
Muelenburg. You even have your mnemonic notes, as if anyone will credit them
when this night is over. This is my gift to you. This will be your enlightenment.
For the time is right again for the return of fluidity, and for the world’s grip to go
slack. And later so much will have to be washed away, assuming a renascence of
things. Fluidity, always fluidity.”
When I left his company that night, abandoning the dead and shapeless hours
I had spent in that warehouse, Klingman was laughing like a madman. I remember
him slouched in that threadbare throne, his face flushed and twisted, his mouth
wailing at some hilarious arcana known only to himself. To all appearances, some
ultimate phase of dissipation had seized his soul.
Nevertheless, that I had underrated or misunderstood the power of Klaus
Klingman was soon demonstrated to me, though I wish it had not been. But no one
else remembers that time when the night would not leave and no dawn appeared to
be forthcoming. During the early part of the crisis there were sensible, rather than
apocalyptic, 
explanations proffered everywhere: blackout, bizarre meteorological phenomena, an
eclipse of sorts. Later, these myths became useless and ultimately unnecessary. As
we had done before, we once again returned to this flimsy world—this world I
must now view as a mere vapor of spectral manifestations, appearances cast out of
emptiness, an ornamented void. As Klingman had promised, my enlightenment
would be a lonely one. 
For no one else recalls the hysteria that prevailed when the stars and the
moon dimmed into blackness. Nor can they summon the least memory of when the
artificial illumination of this earth turned weak and lurid, and all the shapes we
once knew contorted into nightmares and nonsense.  And finally how the blackness
grew viscous, enveloping what light remained and drawing us into itself.  How
many such horrors await in that blackness to be restored to the legions of the dead.
For no one else living remembers when everything began to change, no one else
with the exception of Klaus Klingman and myself.

In the red dawn following that gruesomely protracted night, I went to the
warehouse. Unfortunately the place was untenanted, save by its spare furnishings
and a few empty bottles. Klingman had disappeared, perhaps into that same
blackness for which he seemed to have an incredible nostalgia. I, of course, make no
appeals for belief. There can be no belief where there is no doubt. This is far from
secret knowledge, as if such knowledge could change anything. This is only how it
seems, and seeming is everything.

In the Shadow of Another World

Many times in my life, and in many different places, I have found myself walking at
twilight down streets lined with gently stirring trees and old silent houses. On such
lulling occasions things seem firmly anchored, quietly settled and exceedingly
present to the natural eye: over distant rooftops the sun abandons the scene and
casts its last light upon windows, watered lawns, the edges of leaves. In this drowsy
setting both great things and small achieve an intricate union, apparently leaving
not the least space for anything else to intrude upon their visible domain. But other
realms are always capable of making their presence felt, hovering unseen like
strange cities disguised as clouds or hidden like a world of pale specters within a
fog. One is besieged by orders of entity that refuse to articulate their exact nature
or proper milieu. And soon those well-aligned streets reveal that they are, in fact,
situated among bizarre landscapes where simple trees and houses are marvelously
obscured, where everything is settled within the depths of a vast, echoing abyss.
Even the infinite sky itself, across which the sun spreads its expansive light, is
merely a blurry little window with a crack in it—a jagged fracture beyond which
one may see, at twilight, what pervades a vacant street lined with gently stirring
trees and old silent houses.
On one particular occasion I followed a tree-lined street past all the houses and
continued until it brought me to a single house a short distance from town. As the
road before me narrowed into a bristling path, and the path ascended in a swerving
course up the side of a hump in the otherwise even landscape, I stood before my
day’s destination.
Like other houses of its kind (I have seen so many of them outlined against a
pale sky at dusk), this one possessed the aspect of a mirage, a chimerical quality that
led one to doubt its existence. Despite its dark and angular mass, its peaks and
porches and worn wooden steps, there was something improperly tenuous about its
substance, as if it had been constructed of illicit materials—dreams and vapor
posing as solid matter. And this was not the full extent of its resemblance to a true
chimera, for somehow the house projected itself as having acquired its present form
through a fabulous overlap of properties. There seemed to be the appearance of

petrified flesh in its rough outer surfaces, and it was very simple to imagine an inner
framework not of beams and boards, but rather of gigantic bones from great beasts
of old. The chimneys and shingles, windows and doorways were thus the
embellishments of a later age which had misunderstood the real essence of this
ancient monstrosity, transforming it into a motley and ludicrous thing. Little
wonder, then, that in shame it would attempt to reject its reality and pass itself off
as only a shadow on the horizon, a thing of nightmarish beauty that aroused
impossible hopes.
As in the past, I looked to the unseen interior of such a house to be the focus
of unknown … celebrations. It was my conviction that the inner world of these
dwellings participated, after their own style, in a kind of ceremonious desolation—
that translucent festivals might be glimpsed in the corners of certain rooms and that
the faraway sounds of mad carnivals filled certain hallways at all hours of the day
and night. I am afraid, however, that a peculiar feature of the house in question
prevented full indulgence in my usual anticipations. My reference here is to a turret
built into one side of the house and rising to an unusual height beyond its roof, so
that it looked out upon the world as a lighthouse, diminishing the aspect of
introspection that is vital to such structures. And near the cone-roofed peak of this
turret, a row of large windows appeared to have been placed, as a quite recent
modification, around its entire circumference. But if the house was truly employing
its windows to gaze outward more than within, what it saw was nothing. For all
the windows of the three ample stories of the house, as well as those of the turret
and that small octagonal aperture in the attic, were shuttered closed.
This was, in fact, the state in which I anticipated finding the house, since I
had already exchanged numerous letters with Raymond Spare, the present owner.
“I thought you would arrive much sooner,” Spare said on opening the door.
“It’s almost nightfall and I was sure you understood that only at certain times…”
“My apologies, but I’m here now. Shall I come in?”
Spare stepped aside and gestured theatrically toward the interior of the house,
as if he were presenting one of those dubious spectacles that had earned him a

substantial livelihood. It was out of an instinct for mystification that he had
adopted the surname of the famed visionary and artist, even claiming some blood or
spiritual kinship with this great eccentric. But tonight I was playing the skeptic, as I
had in my correspondence with Spare, so that I might force him to earn my
credence. There would have been no other way to gain his invitation to witness the
phenomena that, as I understood from sources other than the illusionistic Spare,
were well worth my attention. Unexpectedly, my host was mundane in appearance,
which made it difficult to keep in mind his reputation for showmanship, his gift for
trumped-up histrionics.
“You have left everything as he had it before you?” I asked, referring to the
deceased former owner whose name Spare never disclosed to me, though I knew it
all the same. But that was of no importance.
“Yes, very much as it was. Excellent housekeeper, all things considered.”
Spare’s observation was regrettably true: the interior of the house was
immaculate to the point of being suspect. The great parlor in which we now sat, as
well as those other rooms and hallways that receded into the house, exuded the
atmosphere of a plush and well-tended mausoleum where the dead are truly at rest.
The furnishings were dense and archaic, yet they betrayed no oppressive awareness
of other times, no secret conspiracies with departed spirits, regardless of the
unnatural mood of twilight created by fastidiously clamped shutters which
admitted none of nature’s true twilight from the outside world. The clock that I
heard resonantly ticking in a nearby room caused no sinister echoes to sound
between dark, polished floors and lofty, uncobwebbed ceilings. Absent was all fear
or hope of encountering a malign presence in the cellar or an insane shadow in the
attic. Despite a certain odd effect created by thaumaturgic curios appearing on a
shelf, as well as a hermetic chart of the heavens nicely framed and hanging upon a
wall, no hint of hauntedness was evoked by either the surfaces or obscurities of this
house.
“Quite an innocent ambiance,” said Spare, who displayed no special prowess in
voicing this thought of mine.

“Astonishingly so. Was that part of his intention?”
Spare laughed. “The truth is that this was his original intention, the genesis of
what later occupied his genius. In the beginning…”
“A spiritual wasteland?”
“Exactly,” Spare confirmed.
“Sterile but…safe.”
“You understand, then. His reputation was for risk not retreat. But the
notebooks are very clear on the suffering caused by his fantastic gifts, his incredible
sensitivity. He required spiritually antiseptic surroundings, yet was hopelessly
tempted by the visionary. Again and again in his notebooks he describes himself as
‘overwhelmed’ to the point of madness. You can appreciate the irony.”
“I can certainly appreciate the horror,” I replied.
“Of course, well…tonight we will have the advantage of his unfortunate
experience. Before the evening advances much further I want to show you where
he worked.”
“And the shuttered windows?” I asked.
“‘They are very much to the point,” he answered.
The workshop of which Spare had spoken was located, as one might have
surmised, in the uppermost story of the turret in the westernmost part of the
house. This circular room could only be reached by climbing a twisting and tenuous
stairway into the attic, where a second set of stairs led up into the turret. Spare
fumbled with the key to the low wooden door, and soon we had gained entrance.
The room was definitely what Spare had implied: a workshop, or at least the
remains of one. “It seems that toward the end he had begun to destroy his
apparatus, as well as some of his work,” Spare explained as I stepped into the room
and saw the debris everywhere. Much of the mess consisted of shattered panes of
glass that had been colored and distorted in strange ways. A number of them still
existed intact, leaning against the curving wall or lying upon a long work table. A
few were set up on wooden easels like paintings in progress, the bizarre
transformations of their surfaces left unfinished. These panes of corrupted glass had

been cut into a variety of shapes, and each had affixed to it—upon a little card—a
scribbled character resembling an oriental ideograph. Similar symbols, although
much larger, had been inscribed into the wood of the shutters that covered the
windows all around the room.
“A symbology that I cannot pretend to understand,” Spare admitted, “except
in its function. Here, see what happens when I 
remove these labels with the little figures squiggled on them.”
I watched as Spare went about the room stripping the misshapen glyphs from
those chromatically deformed panels of glass. And it was not long before I noticed a
change in the general character of the room, a shift in atmospherics as when a clear
day is suddenly complicated by the shadowy nuances of clouds. Previously the
circular chamber had been bathed in a twisted kaleidoscope of colors as the simple
lights around the room diffused through the strangely tinted windowpanes. But the
effect had been purely decorative, an experience restricted to the realm of
aesthetics, with no implications of the spectral. Now, however, a new element
permeated the room, partially and briefly exposing qualities of quite a different
order in which the visible gave way to the transcendental. What formerly had
appeared as an artist’s studio, however eccentric, was gradually inheriting the aura
of a stained-glass cathedral, albeit one that had suffered some obscure desecration.
In certain places upon the floor, the ceiling, and the circular wall with the shuttered
windows, I perceived through those prismatic lenses vague forms which seemed to
be struggling toward visibility, freakish outlines laboring to gain full embodiment.
Whether their nature was that of the dead or the demonic—or possibly some
peculiar progeny generated by their union—I could not tell. But whatever class of
creation they seemed to occupy at the time, it was certain that they were gaining
not only in clarity and substance, but also in size, swelling and surging and
expanding their universe toward an eclipse of this world’s vision.
“Is it possible,” I said, turning to Spare, “that this effect of magnification is
solely a property of the medium through which…”
But before I could complete my speculation, Spare was rushing about the

room, frantically replacing the symbols on each sheet of glass, dissolving the images
into a quivering translucence and then obliterating or masking them altogether.
The room lapsed once again into its former state of iridescent sterility. Then Spare
hastily ushered me back to the ground floor, the door to the turret room standing
locked behind us.
Afterward he served as my guide through the other, less crucial rooms of the
house, each of which was sealed by dark shutters and all of which shared in the
same barren atmosphere—the aftermath of a strange exorcism, a purging of the
grounds which left them neither hallowed nor unholy, but had simply turned them
into a pristine laboratory where a fearful genius had practiced his science of
nightmares.
We passed several hours in the small, lamplit library. The sole window of that
room was curtained, and I imagined that I saw the night’s darkness behind the
pattern. But when I put my hand upon that symmetrical and velvety design, I felt
only solidity on the other side, as if I had touched a coffin beneath its pall. It was
this barrier that made the world outside seem twice darkened, although I knew
that when the shutters were opened I would be faced with one of the clearest
nights ever seen.
For some time Spare read to me passages from the notebooks whose
cryptography he had broken. I sat and listened to a voice that was accustomed to
speaking of miracles, a well-practiced tout of mystical freakshows. Yet I also
detected a grave sincerity in his words, which is to say that his usual unruffled
patter contained dissonant overtones of fear.
“We sleep,” he read, “among the shadows of another world. These are the
unshapely substance inflicted upon us and the prime material to which we give the
shapes of our understanding. And though we create what is seen, yet we are not
the creators of its essence. Thus nightmares are born from the impress of ourselves
on the life of things unknown. How terrible these forms of specter and demon
when the eyes of the flesh cast light and mold the shadows which are forever
around us. How much more terrible to witness their true forms roaming free upon

the land, or in the most homely rooms of our houses, or frolicking through that
luminous hell which in pursuit of psychic survival we have named the heavens.
Then we truly waken from our sleep, but only to sleep once more and shun the
nightmares which must ever return to that part of us which is hopelessly
dreaming.”
After witnessing some of the phenomena which had inspired this hypothesis, I
could not escape becoming somewhat entranced with its elegance, if not with its
originality. Nightmares both within and around us had been integrated into a
system that seemed to warrant admiration. However, the scheme was ultimately no
more than terror recollected in tranquility, a formula reflecting little of the mazy
trauma that had initiated these speculations. Should it be called revelation or
delirium when the mind interposes itself between the sensations of the soul and a
monstrous mystery? Truth was not an issue in this matter, nor were the mechanics
of the experiment (which, even if faulty, yielded worthy results), and in my mind it
was faithfulness to the mystery and its terror that was paramount, even sacred. In
this the theoretician of nightmares had failed, fallen on the lucid blade of theories
that, in the end, could not save him. On the other hand, those wonderful symbols
that Spare was at a loss to illuminate, those crude and cryptic designs, represented a
genuine power against the mystery’s madness, yet could not be explained by the
most esoteric analysis. As the erstwhile owner of the house knew, we truly live in
the shadow of another world, one which he designed his residence either to shut
out or reveal as he chose, but which in the end overtook him before he had a
chance to shutter for good those windows that disclosed the deranged and terrible
quiddity of existence.
“I have a question,” I said to Spare when he had closed the volume he held on
his lap. “The shutters elsewhere in the house are not painted with the signs that
are on those in the turret. Can you enlighten me?”
Spare led me to the window and drew back the curtains. Very cautiously he
pulled out one of the shutters just far enough to expose its edge, which revealed
that something of a contrasting color and texture composed a layer between the

two sides of the dark wood.
“Engraved upon a panel of glass placed inside each shutter,” 
he explained.
“And the ones in the turret?” I asked.
“The same. Whether the extra set of symbols there are precautionary or
merely redundant…”
His voice had faded and then stopped, though the pause did not seem to imply
any thoughtfulness on Spare’s part.
“Yes,” I prompted, “precautionary or redundant.”
For a moment he revived. “That is, whether the symbols were an added
measure against…”
It was at this point that Spare mentally abandoned the scene, following within
his own mind some controversy or suspicion, a witness to a dramatic conflict being
enacted upon a remote and shadowy stage.
“Spare,” I said in a somewhat normal voice.
“Spare,” he repeated, but in a voice that was not his own, a voice that
sounded more like the echo of a voice than natural speech. And for a moment I
asserted my pose of skepticism, placing none of my confidence in Spare or in the
things he had thus far shown me, for I knew that he was an adept of pasteboard
visions, a medium whose hauntings were of mucilage and gauze. But how much
more subtle and skillful were the present effects, as though he were manipulating
the very atmosphere around us, pulling the strings of light and shadow.
“The clearest light is now shining,” he said in that hollow, tremulous voice.
“Now light is flowing in the glass,” he spoke, placing his hand upon the shutter
before him. “Shadows gathering against…against…”
And it seemed that Spare was not so much pulling the shutter away from the
window as trying to push the shutter closed while it slowly opened further and
further, allowing a strange radiance to leak gradually into the house. It also
appeared that he finally gave up the struggle and let another force guide his actions.
“Flowing together in me,” he repeated several times as he went from window to

window, methodically opening the shutters like a sleepwalker performing some
obscure ritual.
Ransoming all judgment to fascination, I watched him pass through each room
on the main floor of the house, executing his duties like an old servant. Then he
ascended a long staircase, and I heard his footsteps traversing the floor above,
evenly pacing from one side of the house to the other. He was now a night
watchman making his rounds in accordance with a strange design. The sound of his
movements grew fainter as he progressed to the next floor and continued to
perform the services required of him. I listened very closely as he proceeded on his
somnambulistic course into the attic. And when I heard the echoes of a distant
door as it slammed shut, I knew he had gone into that room in the turret.
Engrossed in the lesser phenomenon of Spare’s suddenly altered behavior, I
had momentarily overlooked the greater one of the windows. But now I could no
longer ignore those phosphorescent panes which focused or reflected the incredible
brilliance of the sky that night. As I followed Spare’s circuit about the main floor, I
saw that each room was glowing with the superlunary light that was outlined by
each window frame. In the library I paused and approached one of the windows,
reaching out to touch its wrinkled surface. And I felt a lively rippling in the glass,
as if there actually were some force flowing within it, an uncanny sensation that my
tingling fingertips will never be able to forget. But it was the scene beyond the glass
that finally possessed my attention.
For a few moments I looked out only upon the level landscape that
surrounded the house, its open expanse lying desolate and pale beneath the
resplendent heavens. Then, almost inconspicuously, different scenes or fragments of
scenes began to intrude upon the outside vicinity, as if other geographies of the
earth were being superimposed upon the local one, composing a patchwork of
images that might seem to have been the hallucinated tableaux of some cosmic
tapestry.
The windows—which, for lack of a more accurate term, I must call enchanted
—had done their work. For the visions they offered were indeed those of a

haunted world, a multi-faceted mural portraying the marriage of insanity and
metaphysics. As the images clarified, I witnessed all the intersections which
commonly remain unseen to earthly sight, the conjoining of planes of entity which
should exclude each other and should no more be mingled than is flesh with the
inanimate objects that surround it. But this is precisely what took place in the
scenes before me, and it appeared that there existed no place on earth that was not
the home of a spectral ontogeny. In brief, the whole of the world was a pageant of
nightmares.
Sunlit bazaars in exotic cities thronged with faces that were transparent masks
for insectoid countenances; moonlit streets in antique towns harbored a strange-
eyed slithering within their very stones; dim galleries of empty museums sprouted a
ghostly mold that mirrored the sullen hues of old paintings; the land at the edge of
oceans gave birth to a new evolution transcending biology and remote islands
offered themselves as a haven for forms having no analogy outside of dreams;
jungles teemed with beast-like shapes that moved beside the sticky luxuriance as
well as through the depths of its pulpy warmth; deserts were alive with an uncanny
flux of sounds which might enter and animate the world of substance; and
subterranean landscapes heaved with cadaverous generations that had sunken and
merged into sculptures of human coral, bodies heaped and unwhole, limbs
projecting without order, eyes scattered and searching the darkness.
My own eyes suddenly closed, shutting out the visions for a moment. And
during that moment I once again became aware of the sterile quality of the house,
of its “innocent ambiance.” It was then that I realized that this house was possibly
the only place on earth, perhaps in the entire universe, that had been cured of the
plague of phantoms that raged everywhere. This achievement, however futile or
perverse, now elicited from me tremendous admiration as a monument to Terror
and the stricken ingenuity it may inspire.
And my admiration intensified as I pursued the way that Spare had laid out
for me and ascended a back staircase to the second floor. For on this level, where
room followed upon room through a maze of interconnecting doors which Spare

had left open, there seemed to be an escalation in the optical power of the
windows, thus heightening the threat to the house and its inhabitants. What had
appeared, through the windows of the floor below, as scenes in which spectral
monstrosities had merely intruded upon orthodox reality, were now magnified to
the point where that reality underwent a further eclipse: the other realm became
dominant and pushed through the cover of masks, the concealment of stones, spread
its moldy growths at will, generating apparitions of the most feverish properties
and intentions, erecting formations that enshadowed all familiar order.
By the time I reached the third floor, I was somewhat prepared for what I
might find, granted the elevating intensity of the visions to which the windows
were giving increasingly greater force and focus. Each window was now a framed
phantasmagoria of churning and forever changing shapes and colors, fabulous
depths and distances opening to the fascinated eye, grotesque transfigurations that
suggested a purely supernatural order, a systemless cosmogony reeling with all the
caprice of the immaterial. And as I wandered through those empty and weirdly
lucent rooms at the top of house, it seemed that the house itself had been
transported to another universe.
I have no idea how long I had been enthralled by the chaotic fantasies
imposing themselves upon the unprotected rooms of my mind. But this trance was
eventually interrupted by a commotion emanating from an even higher room—the
very crown of the turret and, as it were, the cranial chamber of that many-eyed
beast of a house. Making my way up the narrow, spiraling stairs to the attic, I
found that there, too, Spare had unsealed the octagonal window, which now
seemed the gazing eye of some god as it cast forth a pyrotechnic craze of colors and
gave a frenzied life to shadows. Through this maze of illusions I followed the voice
which was merely a vibrating echo of vocal utterance, the counterpart in sound to
the swirling sights around me. I climbed the last stairway to the door leading into
the turret, listening to the reverberant words that sounded from the other side.
“Now the shadows are moving in the stars as they are moving within me,
within all things. And their brilliance must reach throughout all things, all the

places which are created according to the essence of these shadows and of ourselves
. . . This house is an abomination, a vacuum and a void. Nothing must stand
against…against…”
And with each repetition of this last word it seemed that a struggle was
taking place and that the echoing alien voice was fading as the tone of Spare’s
natural voice was gaining dominance. Finally, Spare appeared to have resumed full
possession of himself. Then there was a pause, a brief interim during which I
considered a number of doubtful strategies, anxious not to misuse this moment of
unknown and extravagant possibilities. Was it merely the end of life that faced one
who remained in that room? Could the experience that had preceded the
disappearance of that other visionary, under identical circumstances, perhaps be
worth the strange price one would be asked to pay? No occult theories, no arcane
analyses, could be of any use in making my decision, nor justly serve the sensations
of those few seconds, when I stood gripping the handle of that door, waiting for the
impulse or accident that would decide everything. All that existed for the moment
was the irreducible certainty of nightmare.
From the other side of the door there now came a low, echoing laughter, a
sound which became louder as the laughing one approached. But I was not moved
by this sound and did nothing except grip the door handle more tightly, dreaming
of the great shadows in the stars, of the strange visions beyond the windows, and
of an infinite catastrophe. Then I heard a soft scraping noise at my feet; looking
down, I saw several small rectangles projecting from under the door, fanned out like
a hand of cards. My only action was to stoop and retrieve one of them, to stare in
mindless wonderment at the mysterious symbol which decorated its face. I counted
the others, realizing that none had been left attached to the windows within the
room in the turret.
It was the thought of what effect these windows might have, now that they
had been stripped of their protective signs and stood in the full glare of starlight,
that made me call out to Spare, even though I could not be sure that he still existed
as his former self. But by then the hollow laughter had stopped, and I am sure that

the last voice I heard was that of Raymond Spare. And when the voice began
screaming—the windows, it said, pulling me into the stars and shadows—I could
not help trying to enter the room. But now that the impetus for this action had
arrived, it proved to be useless for both Spare and myself. For the door was
securely locked, and Spare’s voice was fading into nothingness.
I can only imagine what those last few moments were like among all the
windows of that turret room and among orders of existence beyond all definition.
That night, it was to Spare alone that such secrets were confided; he was the one to
whom it fell—by some disaster or design—to be among the elect. Such privileged
arcana, on this occasion at least, were not to be mine. Nevertheless, it seemed at the
time that some fragment of this experience might be salvaged. And to do this, I
believed, was a simple matter of abandoning the house.
My intuition was correct. For as soon as I had gone out into the night and
turned back to face the house, I could see that its rooms were no longer empty, no
longer the pristine apartments I had lamented earlier that evening. As I had
thought, these windows were for looking in as well as out. And from where I
stood, the sights were now all inside the house, which had become an edifice
possessed by the festivities of another world. I remained there until morning, when
a cold sunlight settled the motley phantasms of the night before.
Years later I had the opportunity to revisit the house. In conformity with my
intuition, I found the place bare and abandoned: every one of its window frames
was empty and there was not a sign of glass anywhere. In the nearby town I
discovered that the house had also acquired a bad reputation. For years no one had
gone near it. Wisely avoiding the enchantments of hell, the citizens of the town
have kept to their own little streets of gently stirring trees and old silent houses.
And what more can they do in the way of caution? How can they know what it is
their houses are truly nestled among? They cannot see, nor even wish to see, that
world of shadows with which they consort every moment of their brief and
innocent lives. But often, perhaps during the visionary time of twilight, I am sure
they have sensed it.

The Cocoons

Early one morning, hours before sunrise, I was awakened by Dr. Dublanc. He was
standing at the foot of my bed, lightly tugging on its layered covers. In my quasi-
somnolent state, I was convinced for a moment that a small animal was prancing
about on my bedclothes, its movements signifying some nocturnal ritual unknown
to higher forms of life. Then I saw a gloved hand twitching in the glow of the
streetlight outside my window. Finally, I identified the silhouette, shaped by a hat
and overcoat, of Dr. Dublanc.
I switched on the nightstand lamp and sat up to face the well-known intruder.
“What’s wrong?” I asked as if in protest.
“My apologies,” he said in a rather unapologetic tone. “There is someone I
want you to meet. I think it might be beneficial for you.”
“If that’s what you say. But can’t it wait? I haven’t been sleeping well as it is.
Better than anyone you should know that.”
“Of course I know. I also know other things,” he asserted, betraying his
annoyance. “The gentleman I want to introduce to you will be leaving the country
very soon, so there is a question of timing.”
“All the same…”
“Yes, I know—your nervous condition. Here, take these.”
Dr. Dublanc placed two egg-shaped pills in the palm of my hand. I put them to
my lips and then swallowed a half-glass of water that was on the nightstand. I set
down the empty glass next to my alarm clock, which emitted a soft grinding noise
due to some unknown mutations of its internal mechanism. My eyes became fixed
by the slow, even movement of the second hand, but Dr. Dublanc, in a quietly
urgent voice, brought me out of my trance.
“We should really be going. I have a taxi waiting outside.”
So I hurried, thinking that I would end up being charged for this excursion,
cab fare and all.
Dr. Dublanc had left the taxi standing in the alley behind my apartment
building. Its headlights beamed rather weakly in the blackness, scarcely guiding us
as we approached the vehicle. Side by side, the doctor and I proceeded over the

uneven pavement and through blotched vapors emerging from the fumaroles of
several sewer covers. I could see the moon shining between the close rooftops, and I
thought that it subtly shifted phases before my eyes, bloating a bit into fullness.
The doctor caught me staring.
“It’s not going haywire up there, if that’s what is bothering you.”
“But it seemed to be changing.”
With a growl of exasperation, the doctor pulled me after him into the cab.
The driver appeared to have been stilled into a state of dormancy. Yet Dr.
Dublanc was able to evoke a response when he called out an address to the hack,
who turned his thin rodent face toward the back seat and glared briefly. For a time
we sat in silence as the taxi coasted through a series of unpeopled avenues. At that
hour the world on the other side of my window seemed to be no more than a mass
of shadows wavering at a great distance. The doctor touched my arm and said,
“Don’t worry if the pills I gave you seem to have no immediate effect.”
“I trust your judgment,” I said, only to receive a doubtful glance from the
doctor. “Well, it would help if you told me why we’re sitting in the back of a taxi
at this hour. Just who are we going to see that’s so important? What’s the
mystery?”
“No mystery,” the doctor replied. “We’re going to see a former patient of
mine. Not to say that some unfortunate aspects do not still exist in his case. For
certain reasons I will be introducing him to you as ‘Mr. Catch,’ though he’s also a
doctor of sorts—a brilliant scientist, in fact. Primarily I would like you to view a
document relating to his work. A film, to be precise. It’s something quite
remarkable. And possibly beneficial—to you, I mean. That’s all I can say at the
moment.”
I nodded as if this disclosure had satisfied me. Then I noticed how far we had
gone, almost to the opposite end of the city, if that was possible in what seemed a
relatively short period of time. (I had forgotten to wear my watch, and this
negligence somewhat aggravated my lack of orientation.) The district in which we
were now traveling was of the lowest order, a landscape without pattern or

substance, especially as I viewed it by moonlight.
There might be an open field heaped with debris, a devastated plain where
bits of glass and scraps of metal glittered. Occasionally a solitary building of some
indiscernible nature stood out in this wasteland, a skeletal structure with all
markings of identity scraped off its bones. And then, turning a corner, one left
behind this lunar spaciousness and entered a densely tangled nest of houses, the
dwarfish and the great all tightly nestled together and all eaten away, disfigured.
Even as I watched them through the taxi’s windows they appeared to be carrying
on their corruption, mutating in the dull light of the moon. Roofs and chimneys
elongated toward the stars, dark bricks multiplied and bulged like tumors upon the
facades of houses, entire streets twisted themselves along some unearthly design.
Although a few windows were filled with light, however sickly, the only human
being I saw was a derelict crumpled at the base of a traffic sign.
“Sorry, doctor, but this may be too much.”
“Just hold on to yourself,” he said, “we’re almost there. Driver, pull into that
alley behind those houses.”
The taxi joggled as we made our way through the narrow passage. On either
side of us were high wooden fences beyond which rose so many houses of such
impressive height and bulk, though of course they were still monuments to decay.
The cab’s headlights were barely up to the task of illuminating the cramped little
alley, which seemed to become ever narrower the further we proceeded. Suddenly
the driver jerked us to a stop to avoid running over an old man slouched against the
fence, an empty bottle lying at his side.
“This is where we get out,” said Dr. Dublanc. “Wait here for us, driver.”
As we emerged from the taxi I pulled at the doctor’s sleeve, whispering about
the expense of the fare. He replied in a loud voice, “You should worry more about
getting a taxi to take us back home. They keep their distance from this
neighborhood and rarely answer the calls they receive to come in here. Isn’t that
true, driver?” But the man had returned to that dormant state in which I first saw
him. “Come on,” said the doctor. “He’ll wait for us. This way.”

Dr. Dublanc pushed back a section of the fence that formed a kind of loosely
hinged gate, closing it carefully behind us after we passed through the opening. On
the other side was a small backyard, actually a miniature dumping ground where
shadows bulged with refuse. And before us, I assumed, stood the house of Mr.
Catch. It seemed very large, with an incredible number of bony peaks and dormers
outlined against the sky, and even a weathervane in some vague animal-shape that
stood atop a ruined turret grazed by moonlight. But although the moon was as
bright as before, it now appeared to be considerably thinner, as if it had been worn
down just like everything else in that neighborhood.
“It hasn’t altered in the least,” the doctor assured me. He was holding open
the back door of the house and gesturing for me to approach.
“Perhaps no one’s home,” I suggested.
“The door’s unlocked. You see how he’s expecting us?”
“There don’t appear to be any lights in use.”
“Mr. Catch likes to conserve on certain expenses. A minor mania of his. But in
other ways he’s quite extravagant. And by no means is he a poor man. Watch
yourself on the porch—some of these boards are not what they once were.”
As soon as I was standing by the doctor’s side he removed a flashlight from
the pocket of his overcoat, shining a path into the dark interior of the house. Once
inside, that yellowish swatch of illumination began flitting around in the blackness.
It settled briefly in a cobwebbed corner of the ceiling, then ran down a blank
battered wall and jittered along warped floor moldings. For a moment it revealed
two suitcases, quite well used, at the bottom of a stairway. It slid smoothly up the
stairway banister and flew straight to the floors above, where we heard some
scraping sounds, as if an animal with long-nailed paws was moving about.
“Does Mr. Catch keep a pet?” I asked in a low voice.
“Why shouldn’t he? But I don’t think we’ll find him up there.”
We went deeper into the house, passing through many rooms which
fortunately were unobstructed by furniture. Sometimes we crushed bits of broken
glass underfoot; once I inadvertently kicked an empty bottle and sent it clanging

across a bare floor. Reaching the far side of the house, we entered a long hallway
flanked by several doors. All of them were closed and behind some of them we
heard sounds similar to those being made on the second floor. We also heard
footsteps slowly ascending a stairway. Then the last door at the end of the hallway
opened, and a watery light pushed back some of the shadows ahead of us. A round-
bodied little man was standing in the light, lazily beckoning to us.
“You’re late. You’re very late,” he chided while leading us down into the
cellar. His voice was high-pitched yet also quite raspy. “I was just about to leave.”
“My apologies,” said Dr. Dublanc, who sounded entirely sincere on this
occasion. “Mr. Catch, allow me to introduce—”
“Never mind that ‘Mr. Catch’ nonsense. You know well enough what things
are like for me, don’t you, doctor? So let’s get started, I’m on a schedule now.”
In the cellar we paused amid the quivering light of candles, dozens of them
positioned high and low, melting upon a shelf or an old crate or right on the filth-
covered floor. Among the surrounding objects, I could see that an old-fashioned
film projector had been set up on a table toward the center of the room, and a
portable movie screen stood by the opposite wall. The projector was plugged into
what appeared to be a small electrical generator humming on the floor.
“I think there are some chairs about that you can sit on,” said Mr. Catch as he
threaded the film around the spools of the projector. Then for the first time he
spoke to me directly. “I’m not sure how much the doctor has explained about what
I’m going to show you. Probably very little.”
“Yes, and deliberately so,” interrupted Dr. Dublanc. “If you just roll the film I
think my purpose will be served, with or without explanations. What harm can it
do?”
Mr. Catch made no reply. After blowing out some of the candles to darken
the room sufficiently, he switched on the projector, which was a rather noisy
mechanism. I worried that whatever dialogue or narration the film might contain
would be drowned out between the whirring of the projector and the humming of
the generator. But I soon realized that this was a silent film, a cinematic document

that in every aspect of its production was thoroughly primitive, from its harsh light
and coarse photographic texture to its nearly unintelligible scenario.
It seemed to serve as a visual record of a scientific experiment, a laboratory
demonstration in fact. The setting, nevertheless, was anything but clinical—a bare
wall in a cellar which in some ways resembled, yet was not identical to, the one
where I was viewing this film. And the subject was human: a shabby, unshaven,
and unconscious derelict who had been propped up against a crude grayish wall.
Not too many moments passed before the man began to stir, perhaps awakening
from a deep stupor. However, the movements he made did not appear to be his
own. More specifically, they seemed to be the spasmodic twitchings of some energy
that inhabited the old tramp. One of his legs wiggled for a second. Then his chest
heaved and collapsed. Soon his head began to wobble, and it kept on wobbling, as if
something was making its way through the derelict’s scalp, rustling among long
greasy locks. Part of it finally poked upwards—a thin sticklike thing. More of them
emerged, dark wiry appendages that were bristling and bending and reaching for
the outer world. At the end of each was a pair of slender snapping pincers. What
ultimately broke through that shattered skull, pulling itself out with a wriggling
motion of its many newborn arms, was approximately the size and proportions of a
spider monkey. It had tiny translucent wings which fluttered a few times, glistening
but useless, and seemed to be in an emaciated condition. When it twisted its head
toward the camera, it stared into the lens with malicious eyes and seemed to be
chattering with its beaked mouth.
I whispered to Dr. Dublanc: “Please, I’m afraid that—”
“Exactly,” he hissed back at me. “But you need to face certain realities so that
you may free yourself from your fear of them.”
Now it was my turn to give the doctor a dubious look. I was not blind to the
fact that he was practicing a highly unconventional form of therapeutics, to say the
least. And our presence in that cellar—
that cold swamp of shadows in which candles flickered like fireflies—seemed to be
as much for Dr. Dublanc’s benefit as it was for mine, if “benefit” is the proper word

in this case. 
“You might indulge me on occasion,” I said.
“Shhh. Watch the film.”
It was almost finished. After the creature had hatched from its strange egg, it
proceeded very rapidly to consume the grubby derelict, leaving only a collection of
bones attired in cast-off clothes. Picked perfectly clean, the skull leaned wearily to
one side. And the creature, which earlier had been so emaciated, had grown rather
plump with its feast, becoming bloated and meaty like an overfed dog. In the final
sequence, a net was tossed into the scene, capturing the gigantic vermin and
dragging it off camera. Then whiteness filled the screen and the film was flapping
on its reel.
“So what did you think?” said the doctor. No doubt noticing that I was still
under the spell of what I had just seen, he snapped his fingers in front of my face.  I
blinked and then looked at him in dazed silence. Taking advantage of the moment,
he tried to lend a certain focus or coloration to the events of the film. “You must
understand,” he explained, “that the integrity of material forms is only a prejudice.
This is not to mention the substance of those forms, which is an even more dubious
state of affairs. That a monstrous insect could burst forth from the anatomy of a
human being should be no cause for consternation. Your prejudices about a
clockwork world of sunrise schedules and lunar routines have been a real obstacle in
the therapy I’ve been practicing with you. You’ve put me in the position of having
to cater to your anxiety that the world is not ruled by regularity. But it’s time you
realized that nothing is bolted down, so to speak. And no more is that thing which
we call the mind, with its craving for evermore novel sensations and perceptions.
You could learn a great deal from Mr. Catch. I know that I have. Of course, I still
recognize that there remain some unfortunate aspects to his case—there was only
so much I could do for him—but nonetheless I think that he has gained rare and
invaluable knowledge, the consequences notwithstanding.
“His research had taken him into areas where, how should I say, where the
shapes and levels of phenomena, the multiple planes of natural existence, revealed

their ability to establish new relationships with one another … to become
interconnected, as it were, in ways that we never thought possible. At some point
everything became a blur for him, a sort of pandemonium of forces, a
phantasmagoria of possibilities which he eagerly engaged. We can have no idea of
the tastes and temptations that may emerge or develop in the course of such work
… a curious hedonism that could not be controlled. Oh, the vagaries of
omnipotence, breeder of indulgence. Well, Mr. Catch retreated in panic from his
own powers, yet he could not put the pieces back as they had been: unheard of
habits and responses had already ingrained themselves into his system. The worst
sort of slavery, but how persuasively he spoke of the euphoria he had known, the
infinitely diverse sensations beyond all common understanding. It was just this
understanding that I required in order to free him of a life that, in its own fashion,
had become as abysmal and problematic as your own—except that his pathology
existed at the opposite pole. Some middle ground must be established, some balance.
How well I understand that now! This is why I have brought you two together.
This is the only reason, however it may seem to you.”
“It seems to me,” I replied, “that Mr. Catch has snuck out on us. Personally, I
hope we’ve seen the last of him.”
Dr. Dublanc emitted the shadow of a laugh. “Oh, he’s still in the house. You
can be sure of that. Let’s take a look upstairs.”
He was, in fact, not far at all. Stepping into that hallway of closed doors at the
top of the cellar stairs, we saw that one of those doors was now partially open and
the room beyond it was faintly aglow. Without announcing us, Dr. Dublanc slowly
pushed back the door until we could both see what had happened inside.
It was a small unfurnished room with a bare wooden floor upon which a
candle had been fixed with its own drippings. The candlelight shone dimly on the
full face of Mr. Catch, who seemed to have collapsed in a back corner of the room,
lying somewhat askew. He was sweating, though it was cold in the room, and his
eyes were half-closed in a kind of languorous exhaustion. But something was wrong
with his mouth: it seemed to be muddied and enlarged, sloppily painted into a

clown’s oversized grin. On the floor beside him were, to all appearances, the freshly
ravaged remains of one of those creatures in the film.
“You made me wait too long!” he suddenly shouted, opening his eyes fully and
straightening himself up for a moment before his posture crumbled once again. He
then repeated this outburst: “You couldn’t help me and now you make me wait too
long.”
“It was in order to help you that I came here,” the doctor said to him, yet all
the time fixing his eyes on the mutilated carcass on the floor. When he saw that I
had observed his greedy stare he regained himself. “I’m trying to help both of you
the only way you can be helped. Tell him, Mr. Catch. Tell him how you breed
those amazing individuals and enable them to induce the most rapturous exaltation,
bliss on the brink of apotheosis.”
Mr. Catch groped in his pants pocket, pulled out a large handkerchief, and
wiped off his mouth. He was smiling idiotically, quite obviously intoxicated by his
recent feast, and with difficulty worked himself to a standing position. His body
now seemed even more swollen and bulbous than before, really not quite human in
its proportions. After replacing his handkerchief in one pocket, he reached down
into the other, digging around inside it. “It’s really too much to go into detail,” he
explained in a voice that had become placid. “What should I say? Much of it is a
psychic matter. Hence, my appeal to the doctor. The rest involves some chemical
formulations to instigate what is essentially a universal process of transfiguration,
the so-called miracle of creation in all its forms. A catalyzing agent is introduced
into the subject by insemination or ingestion.” With a kind of giddy pride, he held
out his open hand. In the thick pad of his palm I could see two tiny objects that
were shaped like eggs. “The larvae of the gods,” he said with a hint of awe in his
voice.
I turned abruptly to the doctor. “The pills you gave me.”
“It was the only thing that could be done for you. I’ve tried so hard to help
you both.”
“I had suspected something was up,” said Mr. Catch, now reviving himself

from his stupefaction. “I should never have brought you into this. Don’t you realize
that it’s difficult enough without involving your own patients. The derelicts are
one thing, but this is quite another. I’m sorry I ever involved you in my
predicament. Well, my suitcases are packed. It’s your operation now, doctor. Let me
by, time to go.”
Mr. Catch maneuvered himself from the room, and a few moments later the
sound of a door being slammed echoed throughout the house. The doctor kept close
watch on me, waiting for some reaction, I suppose. Yet he was also listening very
intently to certain sounds emanating from the rooms around us. The noise of
restless skittering was everywhere.
“You understand, don’t you?” asked the doctor. “Mr. Catch isn’t the only one
who has waited too long … far too long. I thought by now the pills would have
had their effect.”
I went into my pocket and removed the two little eggs which I had failed to
swallow earlier. “I can’t claim that I had much faith in your methods,” I said. Then
I tossed the pills at Dr. Dublanc who, speechless, caught them. “You won’t mind if
I return home by myself.”
Indeed, he was probably relieved to see me go. In the course of treating Mr.
Catch, the doctor had apparently also become a hideous degenerate, a wholly
unbalanced specimen in need of the most radical therapy himself. As I traced my
way back through the house I heard him running about opening door after door,
finally crying out with a pitiful delight, “There you are, you beauties. There you
are.”
Although the doctor himself now seemed hopeless, I think that his therapeutic
strategy may have been somewhat beneficial in my case, or at least given me a
glimpse of how I could meet the demoniac undercurrents of existence halfway. For
during those first few moments on that hazy morning, when the taxi edged out of
the alley and passed through that neighborhood of deteriorating houses, I felt
myself attain the middle ground Dr. Dublanc spoke of—the balancing point
between an anxious flight from the abyss and the temptation to plunge into it.

There was a great sense of escape, as if I could exist serenely outside the grotesque
ultimatums of creation, an entranced spectator casting a clinical gaze at the chaotic
tumult both around and within himself.
But the feeling soon evaporated. A genuine cure for the quandaries of an
inconstant existence is exceedingly rare. “Could you go a little faster?” I said to the
driver, for it seemed to me that we were making no progress in our leave from that
district in which all order had dissipated. Things again appeared to be changing,
ready to burst forth from their sagging cocoons and take on uncertain forms. Even
the pale morning sun seemed to be wavering from its proper proportions.
At the end of the ride, I was content to pay the extraordinary fare and return
to my bed. The following day I started looking for a new doctor.

The Voice 
of the 
DREAMER

The Night School

Instructor Carniero was holding class once again.
I discovered this fact on my return from a movie theater. It was late and I
thought, “Why not take a short cut across the grounds of the school?” This
thought led to a whole train of thoughts that I often pondered, especially when I
was out walking at night. Mainly these thoughts were about my desire to know
something that I was sure was real about my existence, something that could help
me in my existence before it was my time to die and be put into the earth to rot, or
perhaps have my cremated remains drift out of a chimney stack and sully the sky.
Of course, this desire was by no means unique to me. Nonetheless, I had spent
quite a few years, my whole life it seemed, seeking to satisfy it in various ways.
Most recently, I had sought some kind of satisfaction by attending the classes of
Instructor Carniero. Though I had not attended his classes for very long, he seemed
to be someone who could reveal what was at the bottom of things. Lost in my
thoughts, then, I left the street I was walking along and proceeded across the
grounds of the school, which were vast and dark. It was quite cold that night, and
when I looked down the front of my overcoat I saw that the single remaining
button holding it together had become loose and possibly would not last much
longer. So a short cut on my return from that movie theater appeared to be the
wise move. 
I entered the school grounds as if they were only a great park located in the
midst of surrounding streets. The trees were set close and from the perimeter of
that parcel of land I could not see the school hidden within them. Look up here, I
thought I heard someone say to me. When I did look up, I saw that the branches
overhead were without leaves, and through their intertwining mesh the sky was
fully visible. How bright and dark it was at the same time. Bright with a high, full
moon shining among the spreading clouds, and dark with the shadows mingling
within those clouds—a slowly flowing mass of mottled shapes, a kind of unclean
outpouring from the black sewers of space.
I noticed that in one place these clouds were leaking down into the trees,
trickling in a narrow rivulet across the wall of the night. But it was really smoke,

dense and dirty, rising up to the sky. A short distance ahead, and well into the
thickly wooded grounds of the school, I saw the spastic flames of a small fire among
the trees. By the smell, I guessed that someone was burning refuse. Then I could see
the misshapen metal drum spewing smoke, and the figures standing behind the
firelight became visible to me, as I was to them.
“Class has resumed,” one of them called out. “He’s come back after all.”
I knew these were others from the school, but their faces would not hold
steady in the flickering light of the fire that warmed them. They seemed to be
smudged by the smoke, greased by the odorous garbage burning in that dark metal
drum, its outer surface almost glowing from the heat and flaking off in places.
“Look there,” said another member of the group, pointing deeper into the
school grounds. The massive outline of a building occupied the distance, a few of its
windows sending a dim light through the trees. From the roof of the building a
number of smokestacks stood out against the pale sky. 
A wind rose up. It droned noisily around us and breathed a crackling life into
the fire in the decayed metal drum. I tried to shout above the confusion of sounds.
“Was there an assignment?” I cried out. But they appeared not to hear me, or
perhaps were ignoring my words. When I repeated the question they briefly
glanced my way, as if I had said something improper. I left them hunched around
the fire, assuming they would be along. The wind died, and I could hear someone
say the word “maniac,” which was not spoken, I realized, either to me or about me.
Instructor Carniero, in his person, was rather vague to my mind. I had not
been in his class very long before some disease—a terribly serious affliction, one of
my fellow students hinted—had caused his absence. So what remained, for me, was
no more than the image of a slender gentleman in a dark suit, a gentleman with a
darkish complexion and a voice thick with a foreign accent. “He’s a Portuguese,”
someone told me. “But he’s lived almost everywhere.” And I recalled a particular
phrase of reproof he used to single out those of us who had not been attending to
the diagrams he was incessantly creating on the blackboard. “Look up here,” he
would say. “If you do not look, you will learn nothing—you will be nothing.” A

few members of the class never needed to be called to attention in this manner, a
certain small group who had been longtime students of the instructor and without
distraction scrutinized the unceasing series of diagrams he would design upon the
blackboard and then erase, only to construct again, with slight variation, a moment
later.
Although I cannot claim that these often complex diagrams were not directly
related to our studies, there were always extraneous elements within them which I
never bothered to transcribe into my own notes for the class. They were a strange
array of abstract symbols, frequently geometric figures altered in some way: various
polygons with asymmetrical sides, trapezoids whose sides did not meet, semicircles
with double or triple slashes across them, and many other examples of a deformed
or corrupted scientific notation. These signs appeared to be primitive in essence,
more relevant to magic than mathematics. The instructor marked them in an
extremely rapid hand upon the blackboard, as if they were the words of his natural
language. In most cases they formed a border around a familiar diagram allied to
chemistry or physics, enclosing it and sometimes, it seemed, transforming its sense.
Once a student questioned him regarding what seemed his apparently superfluous
embellishment of these diagrams. Why did Instructor Carniero subject us to these
bewildering symbols? “Because,” he answered, “a true instructor must share
everything, no matter how terrible or lurid it might be.”
As I proceeded across the grounds of the school, I noticed certain changes in
my surroundings. The trees nearer to the school looked different from those in the
encompassing area. These were so much thinner, emaciated and twisted like broken
bones that had never healed properly. And their bark seemed to be peeling away in
soft layers, because it was not only fallen leaves I trudged through on my way to
the school building, but also something like dark rags, strips of decomposed
material. Even the clouds upon which the moon cast its glow were thin or rotted,
unraveled by some process of degeneration in the highest atmosphere of the school
grounds. There was also a scent of corruption, an enchanting fragrance really—like
the mulchy rot of autumn or early spring—that I thought was emerging from the

earth as I disturbed the strange litter strewn over it. This odor became more
pungent as I approached the yellowish light of the school, and strongest as I finally
reached the old building itself.
It was a four-story structure of dark scabby bricks that had been patched
together in another era, a time so different that it might be imagined as belonging to
an entirely alien history, one composed solely of nights well advanced, an after-
hours history. How difficult it was to think of this place as if it had been
constructed in the usual manner. Far easier to credit some fantastic legend that it
had been erected by a consort of demons during the perpetual night of its past, and
that its materials were pilfered from other architectures, all of them defunct: ruined
factories, ravaged mausoleums, abandoned orphanages, penitentiaries long out of
use. The school was indeed a kind of freakish growth in a dumping ground, a
blossom of the cemetery or the cesspool. Here it was that Instructor Carniero, who
had been everywhere, held his class.
On the lower floors of the building a number of lights were in use, weak as
guttering candles. The highest story was blacked out, and many of the windows
were broken. Nevertheless, there was sufficient light to guide me into the school,
even if the main hallway could hardly be seen to its end. And its walls appeared to
be tarred over with something which exuded the same smell that filled the night
outside the school. Without touching these walls, I used them to navigate my way
into the school, following several of the greater and lesser hallways that burrowed
throughout the building. Room after room passed on either side of me, their
doorways filled with darkness or sealed by wide wooden doors whose coarse
surfaces were pocked and peeling. Eventually I found a classroom where a light was
on, though it was no brighter than the swarthy illumination of the hallway.
When I entered the room I saw that only some of the lamps were functioning,
leaving certain areas in darkness while others were smeared with the kind of greasy
glow peculiar to old paintings in oil. A few students were seated at desks here and
there, isolated from one another and silent. By no means was there a full class, and
no instructor stood at the lectern. The blackboard displayed no new diagrams but

only the blurred remnants of past lessons. I took a desk near the door, looking at
none of the others as they did not look at me. In one of the pockets of my overcoat I
turned up a little stub of a pencil but could find nothing on which to take notes.
Without any dramatic gestures, I scanned the room for some kind of paper. The
visible areas of the room featured various items of debris without offering anything
that would allow me to transcribe the complex instructions and diagrams demanded
by the class. I was reluctant to make a physical search of the shelves set into the
wall beside me because they were very deep and from them drifted that heady
fragrance of decay.
Two rows to my left sat a man with several thick notebooks stacked on his
desk. His hands were resting lightly on these notebooks, and his spectacled eyes
were fixed on the empty lectern, or perhaps on the blackboard beyond. The space
between the rows of desks was very narrow, so I was able to lean across the
unoccupied desk that separated us and speak to this man who seemed to have a
surplus of paper on which one could take notes, transcribe diagrams, and, in short,
do whatever scribbling was demanded by the instructor of the class.
“Pardon me,” I whispered to the staring figure. In a single, sudden movement,
his head turned to face me. I remembered his pitted complexion, which had
obviously grown worse since our class last met, and the eyes that squinted behind
heavy lenses. “Do you have any paper you could share with me?” I asked, and was
somehow surprised when he shifted his head toward his notebooks and began
leafing through the pages of the topmost one. As he performed this action, I
explained that I was unprepared for the class, that only a short time before did I
learn it had resumed. This happened entirely by chance, I said. I was coming home
from a movie theater and decided to take a short cut across the school grounds.
By the time I was finished illuminating my situation, the other student was
searching through his last notebook, the pages of which were as solidly covered
with jottings and diagrams as the previous ones. I observed that his notes were
different from those I had been taking for Instructor Carniero’s course. They were
far more detailed and scrupulous in their transcriptions of those strange geometric

figures which I considered only as decorative intrusions in the instructor’s diagrams.
Some of the other students’ notebook pages were wholly given over to rendering
these figures and symbols to the exclusion of the diagrams themselves.
“I’m sorry,” he said. “I don’t seem to have any paper I could share with you.”
“Well, could you tell me if there was an assignment?”
“That’s very possible. You can never tell with this instructor. He’s a
Portuguese, you know. But he’s been all over and knows everything. I think he’s
out of his mind. The kind of thing he’s been teaching should have gotten him into
trouble somewhere, and probably did. Not that he ever cared what happened to
him, or to anyone else. That is, those that he could influence, and some more than
others. The things he said to us. The lessons in measurement of cloacal forces. Time
as a flow of sewage. The excrement of space, scatology of creation. The voiding of
the self. The whole filthy integration of things and the nocturnal product, as he
called it, drowning in the pools of night.”
“I’m afraid I don’t recall those concepts,” I confessed.
“You’re new to the class. To tell the truth, you don’t seem to understand
what the instructor is teaching. But soon enough he will get through to you, if he
hasn’t already. You can never know. He’s very captivating, the instructor. And
always ready for anything.”
“I was told that he recovered from the sickness that caused his absence, and
that he was back teaching.”
“Oh, he’s back. He was always ready. Did you know that the class is now
being held in another part of the school? I couldn’t tell you where, since even I
haven’t been with Instructor Carniero as long as some of the others. To tell the
truth, I don’t care where it’s being held. Isn’t it enough that we’re here, in this
room?”
I had little idea how to answer this question and understood almost nothing of
what the man had been trying to explain to me. It did seem clear, or at least very
possible, that the class had moved to a different part of the school. But I had no
reason to think that the other students seated elsewhere in the room would be any

more helpful on this point than the one who had now turned his spectacled face
away from me. Wherever the class was being held, I was still in need of paper on
which to take notes, transcribe diagrams, and so forth. This could not be
accomplished by staying in that room where everyone and everything was
degenerating into the surrounding darkness.
For a time I wandered about the hallways on the main floor of the school,
keeping clear of the walls which certainly were thickening with a dark substance,
an odorous sap with the intoxicating potency of a thousand molting autumns or the
melting soil of spring. The stuff was running from top to bottom down the walls,
leaking from above and dulling the already dim light in the hallways.
I began to hear echoing voices coming from a distant part of the school I had
never visited before. No words were decipherable, but it sounded as if the same
ones were being repeated in a more or less constant succession of cries that rang
hollow in the halls. I followed them and along the way met up with someone
walking slowly from the opposite direction. He was dressed in dirty work clothes
and almost blended in with the shadows which were so abundant in the school that
night. I stopped him as he was about to shuffle straight past me. Turning an
indifferent gaze in my direction was a pair of yellowish eyes set in a thin face with a
coarse, patchy complexion. The man scratched at the left side of his forehead and
some dry flakes of skin fell away. I asked him:
“Could you tell me where Instructor Carniero is holding class tonight?”
He looked at me for some moments, and then pointed a finger at the ceiling.
“Up there,” he said. “Look up there.”
“On which floor?”
“The top one,” he answered, as if a little amazed at my ignorance.
“There are a lot of rooms on that floor,” I said.
“And every one of them is his. Nothing to be done about that. But I have to
keep the rest of this place in some kind of condition. I don’t see how I can do that
with him up there.” The man glanced around at the stained walls and let out a
single, wheezing laugh. “It only gets worse. Starts to get to you if you go up any

further. Listen. Hear the rest of them?” Then he groaned with disgust and went on
his way. 
But by that point I felt that any knowledge I had amassed—whether or not it
concerned Instructor Carniero and his night classes—was being taken away from
me piece by piece. The man in dirty work clothes had directed me to the top floor
of the school. Yet I remembered seeing no light on that floor when I first
approached the building. The only thing that seemed to occupy that floor was an
undiluted darkness, a darkness far greater than the night itself, a consolidated
darkness, something clotted with its own density. “The nocturnal product,” I could
hear the spectacled student reminding me in a hollow voice. “Drowning in the pools
of night.”
What could I know about the ways of the school? I had not been in
attendance very long, not nearly long enough, it seemed. I felt myself a stranger to
my fellow students, especially since they revealed themselves to be divided in their
ranks, as though among the degrees of a secret society. I did not know the
coursework in the way some of the others seemed to know it and in the spirit that
the instructor intended it to be known. My turn had not yet come to be
commanded by Instructor Carniero to look up at the hieroglyphs on the blackboard
and comprehend them fully. So I did not understand the doctrines of a truly septic
curriculum, the science of a spectral pathology, philosophy of absolute disease, the
metaphysics of things sinking into a common disintegration or rising together,
flowing together, in their dark rottenness. Above all, I did not know the instructor
himself: the places he had been … the things he had seen and done . . . the
experiences he had embraced … the laws he had ignored … the troubles he had
caused … the fate that he had incurred, gladly, upon himself and others. 
I was now close to a shaft of stairways leading to the upper floors of the
school. The voices became louder, though not more distinct, as I approached the
stairwell. The first flight of stairs seemed very long and steep, not to mention badly
defined in the dim light of the hallway. The landing at the top of the stairs was
barely visible for the poor light and unreflecting effluvia that here moved even

more thickly down the walls. But it did not appear to possess any real substance, no
sticky surface or viscous texture as one might have supposed, only a kind of density
like heavy smoke, filthy smoke from some smoldering source of expansive
corruption. And it carried the scent of corruption as well as the sight, only now it
was more potent with the nostalgic perfume of autumn decay or the feculent
muskiness of a spring thaw.
I climbed another flight of stairs, which ascended in the opposite direction
from the first, and reached the second floor. Each of the four stories of the school
had two flights of stairs going in opposite directions between them, with a narrow
landing that intervened before one could complete the ascent to a new floor. The
second floor was not as well-lighted as the one below, and the walls there were
even worse: their surface had been wholly obscured by that smoky blackness which
seeped down from above, the blackness so richly odorous with the offal of worlds in
decline or perhaps with the dark compost of those about to be born, the primeval
impurity in which all things are founded, the native putridity.
On the stairs that led up to the third floor I saw the first of them—a young
man who was seated on the lower steps of this flight and who had been one of the
instructor’s most assiduous students. He was absorbed in his own thoughts and did
not acknowledge me until I spoke to him.
“The class?” I said, stressing the words into a question.
He gazed at me calmly. “The instructor suffered a terrible disease, a
monumental disease.” This was all he said. Then he returned within himself and
would not respond.
There were others similarly positioned higher on the stairs or squatting on the
landing. The voices were still echoing in the stairwell, chanting a blurred phrase in
unison. But the voices did not belong to any of these students, who sat silent and
entranced amid the scattered pages torn from their voluminous notebooks. Pieces of
paper with strange symbols on them lay scattered everywhere like fallen leaves.
They rustled as I walked through them toward the stairs leading to the highest
story of the school.

The walls in the stairwell were now swollen with a blackness that was the
very face of a plague—pustulant, scabbed, and stinking terribly. It was reaching to
the edges of the floor, where it drifted and churned like a black fog. Only in the
moonlight that shone through a hallway window could I see anything of the third
floor. I stopped there, for the stairs to the fourth were deep in blackness. Only a
few faces rose above it and were visible in the moonlight. One of them was staring
at me, and, without prompting, spoke.
“The instructor is holding class again despite his terrible disease.  Can you
imagine? He is able to suffer anything and has been everywhere. Now he is in a
new place, somewhere he has not been.” The voice paused and the interval was
filled by the many voices calling and crying from the total blackness that prevailed
over the heights of the stairwell and buried everything beneath it like tightly
packed earth in a grave. Then the single voice said: “The instructor died in the
night. You see? He is with the night. You hear the voices? They are with him. And
he is with the night. The night has spread itself within him. He who has been
everywhere may go anywhere with the disease of the night. Listen. The Portuguese
is calling to us.”
I listened and finally the voices became clear. Look up here, they said. Look up
here.
The fog of blackness had now unfurled down to me and lay about my feet,
gathering there and rising. For a time I could not move or speak or form any
thoughts. Inside me everything was becoming black. The blackness was quivering
in my bones, eating away at them, making everything black within my body. It was
holding me, and the voices were saying, “Look up here, look up here.” And I began
to look. But I aborted my gesture before it was completed.  I was already too close
to something I could not endure, that I was not prepared to endure. Even the
blackness quivering inside me could not go on to its end. I could not remain where I
was nor look up to the place where the voices called out to me.
Then the blackness seemed to exude from my being, washing itself out of me,
and I was no longer inside the school but outside it, almost as if I had suddenly

awakened there. Without looking back, I retraced my steps across the grounds of
the school, forgetting about the short cut I had meant to take that night. I passed
those students who were still standing around the fire burning in an old metal
drum. They were feeding the bright flames with pages from their notebooks, pages
scribbled to blackness with all those diagrams and freakish signs. Some of those
among the group called out to me. “Did you see the Portuguese?” one of them
shouted above the noise of the fire and the wind. “Did you hear anything about an
assignment?” another voice cried out. And then I heard them all laughing among
themselves as I made my way back to the streets I had left before entering the
school grounds. I moved with such haste that the loose button on my overcoat
finally came off by the time I reached the street outside the grounds of the school.
As I walked beneath the streetlights, I held the front of my overcoat together
and tried to keep my eyes on the sidewalk before me. But I might have heard a
voice bid me, “Look up here,” because I did look, if only for a moment. Then I saw
the sky was clear of all clouds, and the full moon was shining in the black spaces
above. It was shining bright and blurry, as if coated with a luminous mold, floating
like a lamp in the great sewers of the night. The nocturnal product, I thought,
drowning in the pools of night. But these were only words I repeated without
understanding. My desire to know something that I was sure was real about my
existence, something that could help me in my existence before it was my time to
die and be put into the earth to rot, or perhaps have my cremated remains drift out
of a chimney stack and sully the sky—that would never be fulfilled. I had learned
nothing, and I was nothing. Yet instead of disappointment at my failure to fulfill
my most intense desire, I felt a tremendous relief. The urge to know the fundament
of things was now emptied from me, and I was more than content to be rid of it.
The following night I went to the movie theater again. But I did not take a short
cut home.

The Glamour

It had long been my practice to wander late at night and often to attend movie
theaters at this time. But something else was involved on the night I went to that
theater in a part of town I had never visited before. A new tendency, a mood or
penchant formerly unknown to me, seemed to lead the way. How difficult to say
anything precise about this mood that overcame me, because it seemed to belong to
my surroundings as much as to my self. As I advanced farther into that part of
town I had never visited before, my attention was drawn to a certain aspect of
things—a fine aura of fantasy radiating from the most common sights, places and
objects that were both blurred and brightened in my gaze.
Despite the lateness of the hour, there was an active glow cast through many
of the shop windows I passed. Along one particular avenue, the starless evening
was glazed by these lights, these diamonds of plate glass set within old buildings of
dark brick. I paused before the display window of a toy store and was entranced by
a chaotic tableau of preposterous excitation. My eyes followed several things at
once: the fated antics of mechanized monkeys that clapped tiny cymbals or
somersaulted uncontrollably; the destined pirouettes of a music-box ballerina; the
grotesque wobbling of a newly sprung jack-in-the-box. The inside of the store was a
Christmas-tree clutter of merchandise receding into a background that looked
shadowed and empty. An old man with a smooth pate and angular eyebrows
stepped forward to the front window and began rewinding some of the toys to
keep them in ceaseless gyration. While performing this task he suddenly looked up
at me, his face expressionless.
I moved down the street, where other windows framed little worlds so
strangely picturesque and so dreamily illuminated in the shabby darkness of that
part of town. One of them was a bakery whose window display was a gallery of
sculptured frosting, a winter landscape of swirling, drifting whiteness, of snowy
rosettes and layers of icy glitter. At the center of the glacial kingdom was a pair of
miniature people frozen atop a many-tiered wedding cake. But beyond the brilliant
arctic scene I saw only the deep blackness of an establishment that was closed for
the night. Standing outside another window nearby, I was uncertain if the place

was open for business or not. In the background, a few figures were positioned here
and there within faded lighting reminiscent of an old photograph, though it seemed
they were beings of the same kind as the window dummies of this store, which
apparently trafficked in dated styles of clothing. Even the faces of the manikins, as a
glossy light fell upon them, wore the placidly enigmatic expressions of a different
time.
I saw no one enter or exit the many doors along the sidewalks where I strolled
that night. A canvas awning that some proprietor had neglected to roll up for the
night was flapping in the wind. Nevertheless, as I have described, there reigned a
vitality of enterprise everywhere I looked, and I felt the kind of acute anticipation
that a child might experience at a carnival, where each lurid attraction incites
fantastic speculations, while unexpected desires arise for something which has no
specific qualities in the imagination yet seems to be only a few steps away. Thus my
mood had not abandoned me but only grew stronger, a possessing impulse without
object.
Then I saw the marquee for a movie theater, though not one I intended to
patronize. For the letters spelling out the name of the theater were broken and
unreadable, while the title on the marquee was similarly damaged, as if stones had
been thrown at it, a series of attempts made to efface the words that I finally
deciphered. The feature being advertised was called The Glamour.
When I reached the front of the theater I found that the row of doors forming
the entrance had been barricaded by crosswise planks with notices posted upon
them warning that the building had been condemned. This action was apparently
taken some time ago, judging by the weathered condition of the boards that blocked
my way and the dated appearance of the notices stuck upon them. As I was about
to proceed on my way, however, I saw that the marquee was illuminated,
wretchedly aglow with a light that I previously thought was a reflection from a
nearby streetlamp. It was beneath this same streetlamp that I now noticed a double-
faced sign propped up on the sidewalk, an inconspicuous little board that read:
ENTRANCE TO THE THEATER. Beneath these words was an arrow pointing

into an alleyway which separated the theater from the remaining buildings on the
block. Peeking into this dark opening, this aperture in the otherwise solid facade of
that particular street, I saw only a long, narrow corridor with a single light set far
into its depths. The light shone with a strange shade of purple, like that of a freshly
exposed heart, and appeared to be positioned over a doorway leading into the
theater. It had long been my practice to attend late performances at movie theaters
—this is what I reminded myself. But whatever reservations I felt at the time were
easily overcome by a new surge of the mood I was experiencing that night in a part
of town I had never visited before.
The purple lamp did indeed mark a way into the theater, casting its arterial
light upon a door that reiterated the word “ENTRANCE.” Stepping inside, I
entered a tight hallway where the walls glowed a deep pink, very similar in tint to
that little beacon in the alley but more reminiscent of a richly blooded brain than a
beating heart. At the end of the hallway I could see my reflection in a ticket
window, and approaching it I noticed that those walls so close to me were veiled
from floor to ceiling with what appeared to be cobwebs. This gossamer material
was also strewn upon the carpet leading to the ticket window, wispy shrouds that
did not scatter when I walked over them, as if they had securely bound themselves
to the carpet’s worn and shallow fiber, or were tightly combed into it, sparse hairs
sticking to the scalp of an old corpse. 
There was no one behind the ticket window, no one I could see in that small
space of darkness beyond the blur of purple-tinted glass in which my reflection was
held. Nevertheless, a ticket was protruding from a slot beneath the semi-circular
cutaway at the bottom of the window, sticking out like a paper tongue. A few hairs
lay beside it.
“Admission is free,” said a man who was now standing in the doorway beside
the ticket booth. His suit was well-fitted and neat, but his face appeared somehow a
mess, bristling over all its contours. His tone was polite, even passive, when he said,
“The theater is under new ownership.”
“Are you the manager?” I asked.

“I was just on my way to the rest room.”
Without further comment he drifted off into the darkness of the theater. For a
moment something floated in the empty space he left in the doorway—a swarm of
filaments like dust that scattered or settled before I stepped through. And in those
first few seconds inside, all I could see were the words “rest room” glowing above a
door as it slowly closed.
I maneuvered with caution until my sight became sufficient to the dark and
allowed me to find a door leading to the auditorium of the movie theater. But once
inside, as I stood at the summit of a sloping aisle, all previous orientation to my
surroundings underwent a setback. The room was illuminated by an elaborate
chandelier centered high above the floor, as well as a series of light fixtures along
either of the side walls. I was not surprised by the dimness of the lighting nor by its
hue, which made shadows appear faintly bloodshot—a sickly, liverish shade that
might be witnessed in an operating room where a torso lies open on the table, its
entrails a palette of pinks and reds and purples … diseased viscera imitating all the
shades of sunset.
However, my perception of the theater auditorium remained problematic not
because of any oddities of illumination but for another reason. While I experienced
no difficulty in mentally registering the elements around me—the separate aisles
and rows of seats, the curtain-flanked movie screen, the well-noted chandelier and
wall lights—it seemed impossible to gain a sense of these features in simple accord
with their appearances. I saw nothing that I have not described, yet the round-
backed seats were at the same time rows of headstones in a graveyard; the aisles
were endless filthy alleys, long desolate corridors in an old asylum, or the dripping
passages of a sewer narrowing into the distance; the pale movie screen was a dust-
blinded window in a dark unvisited cellar, a mirror gone rheumy with age in an
abandoned house; the chandelier and smaller fixtures were the facets of murky
crystals embedded in the clammy walls of an unknown cavern. In other words, this
movie theater was merely a virtual image, a veil upon a complex collage of other
places, all of which shared certain qualities that were projected into my vision, as

though the things I saw were possessed by something I could not see.
But as I lingered in the theater auditorium, settling in a seat toward the back
wall, I realized that even on the level of plain appearances there was a peculiar
phenomenon I had not formerly observed, or at least had yet to perceive to its
fullest extent. I am speaking of the cobwebs. 
When I first entered the theater I saw them clinging to the walls and
carpeting. Now I saw how much they were a part of the theater and how I had
mistaken the nature of these long pale threads. Even in the hazy purple light, I
could discern that they had penetrated into the fabric of the seats in the theater,
altering the weave in its depths and giving it a slight quality of movement, the slow
curling of thin smoke. It seemed the same with the movie screen, which might have
been a great rectangular web, densely woven and faintly in motion, vibrating at the
touch of some unseen force. I thought: “Perhaps this subtle and pervasive wriggling
within the theater may clarify the tendency of its elements to suggest other things
and other places thoroughly unlike a simple auditorium, a process parallel to the
ever-mutating images of clouds.” All textures in the theater appeared similarly
affected, without control over their own nature, but I could not clearly see as high
as the chandelier. Even some of the others in the audience, which was small and
widely scattered, were practically invisible to my eyes.
Furthermore, there may have been something in my mood that night, given
my sojourn in a part of town I had never visited before, that influenced what I was
able to see. And this mood had become steadily enhanced since I first stepped into
the theater, and indeed from the moment I looked upon the marquee advertising a
feature entitled The Glamour. Having taken my place among the quietly expectant
audience of the theater, I began to suffer an exacerbation of this mood. Specifically,
I sensed a greater proximity to the point of focus for my mood that night, a tingling
closeness to something quite literally behind the scene. Increasingly I became
unconcerned with anything except the consummation or terminus of this abject and
enchanting adventure. Consequences were evermore difficult to regard from my
tainted perspective.

Therefore I was not hesitant when this focal point for my mood suddenly felt
so near at hand, as close as the seat directly behind my own. I was quite sure this
seat had been empty when I selected mine, that all the seats for several rows
around me were unoccupied. And I would have been aware if someone had arrived
to fill this seat directly behind me. Nevertheless, like a sudden chill announcing bad
weather, there was now a definite presence I could feel at my back, a force that
pressed itself upon me and inspired a surge of dark elation. But when I looked
around, not quickly yet fully determined, I saw no occupant in the seat behind me,
or in any seat between me and the back wall of the theater. I continued to stare at
the empty seat because my sensation of a vibrant presence there was unrelieved.
And in my staring I perceived that the fabric of the seat, the inner webbing of
swirling fibers, had composed a pattern in the image of a face—an old woman’s face
with an expression of avid malignance—floating amidst wild shocks of twisting
hair. The face itself was a portrait of atrocity, a grinning image of lust for sites and
ceremonies of mayhem. And it was formed of those hairs stitching themselves
together.
All the stringy, writhing cobwebs of that theater, as I now discovered, were
the reaching tendrils of a vast netting of hairs. And in this discovery my mood of
the evening, which had delivered me to a part of town I had never visited before
and to that very theater, only became more expansive and defined, taking in scenes
of graveyards and alleyways, reeking sewers and musty corridors of insanity as well
as the immediate vision of an old theater that now, as I had been told, was under
new ownership. But my mood abruptly faded, along with the face in the fabric of
the theater seat, when a voice spoke to me. It said:
“You must have seen her, by the looks of you.”
A man sat down one seat away from mine. It was not the same person I had
met earlier; this one’s face was nearly normal, although his suit was littered with
hair that was not his own.
“So did you see her?” he asked.
“I’m not sure what I saw,” I replied.

He seemed almost to burst out giggling, his voice trembling on the edge of a
joyous hysteria. “You would be sure enough if there had been a private encounter, I
can tell you.”
“Something was happening, then you sat down.”
“Sorry,” he said. “Did you know that the theater has just come under new
ownership?”
“I didn’t notice what the show times are.”
“Show times?”
“For the feature.”
“Oh, there isn’t any feature. Not as such.”
“But there must be … something,” I insisted.
“Yes, there’s something,” he replied excitedly, his fingers stroking his cheek.
“What, exactly? And these cobwebs…”
But the lights were going down into darkness. “Quiet now,” he whispered.
“It’s about to begin.”
Soon the screen before us glowed a pale purple in the blackness and vague
images unaccompanied by sound began to take form upon it, as if a lens were being
focused on a microscopic world. To be sure, the movie screen might have been a
great glass slide upon which were projected to gigantic proportions a landscape of
organisms normally hidden from our sight. But as these visions coalesced and
clarified, I recognized them as something I had already seen, more accurately sensed,
in that theater. The images were appearing on the screen as if a pair of disembodied
eyes was moving within venues of profound morbidity and degeneration. Here was
the purest essence of those places I had felt were superimposing themselves on the
genuinely tangible aspects of the theater—those graveyards, alleys, grimy corridors,
and subterranean passages whose spirit had intruded on another locale and altered
it. Yet the places now revealed on the movie screen were without an identity I
could name: they were the fundament of the sinister and seamy regions which cast
their spectral ambiance on the reality of the theater but which were themselves
merely the shadows, the superficial counterparts, of a deeper, more obscure realm.

Farther and farther into it we were being taken.
The all-pervasive purple coloration could now be seen as emanating from the
labyrinth of a living anatomy: a compound of the reddish, bluish, palest pink
structures, all of them morbidly inflamed and lesioned to release a purple light. We
were being guided through a catacomb of putrid chambers and cloisters, the most
secreted ways and waysides of an infernal land. Whatever these spaces may once
have been, they were now habitations for ceremonies of a private sabbat. The
hollows in their fleshy, gelatinous integuments streamed with something like moss,
a fungus in flimsy strands that were threading themselves into translucent tissue
and quivering beneath it like veins. It was indeed the sabbat ground, secret and
unconsecrated, but it was also the theater of a mad surgery. The hair-thin sutures
stitched among the yielding entrails, unseen hands designing unnatural shapes and
systems, weaving a nest in which the possession would take place, a web wherein
the bits and pieces of the anatomy could be consumed at leisure. There seemed to
be no one in sight, yet everything was scrutinized from an intimate perspective, the
viewpoint of that invisible surgeon, the weaver and web-maker, the old puppet-
master who was setting a helpless creature with new strings and placing him under
the control of a new owner. And through her eyes, entranced, we witnessed the
work being done.
Then those eyes began to withdraw, and the purple world of the organism
receded into purple shadows. When the eyes finally emerged from where they had
been, the movie screen was filled with the face and naked chest of a man. His
posture was rigid, betraying a state of paralysis, and his eyes were fixed, yet
strikingly alive. “She’s showing us,” whispered the man who was sitting nearby me.
“She has taken him. He cannot feel who he is any longer, only her presence within
him.”
This statement, at first sight of the possessed, seemed to be the case. Certainly
such a view of the situation provided a terrific stimulus to my own mood of the
evening, urging it toward culmination in a type of degraded rapture, a seizure of
debauched panic. Nonetheless, as I stared at the face of the man on the screen, he

became known to me as the one I encountered in the vestibule of the theater. The
recognition was difficult, however, because his flesh was now even more obscured
by the webs of hair woven through it, thick as a full beard in spots. His eyes were
also quite changed and glared out at the audience with a ferocity that suggested he
indeed served as the host of great evil. But all the same, there was something in
those eyes that belied the fact of a complete transformation—an awareness of the
bewitchment and an appeal for deliverance. Within the next few moments, this
observation assumed a degree of substance.
For the man on the movie screen regained himself, although briefly and in
limited measure. His effort of will was evident in the subtle contortions of his face,
and his ultimate accomplishment was modest enough: he managed to open his
mouth in order to scream. Of course no sound was projected from the movie screen,
which only played a music of images for eyes that would see what should not be
seen. Thus, a disorienting effect was created, a sensory dissonance which resulted in
my being roused from the mood of the evening, its spell over me echoing to
nothingness. Because the scream that resonated in the auditorium had originated in
another part of the theater, a place beyond the auditorium’s towering back wall.
Consulting the man who was sitting near me, I found him oblivious to my
comments about the scream within the theater. He seemed neither to hear nor see
what was happening around him and what was happening to him. Long wiry hairs
were sprouting from the fabric of the seats, snaking low along their arms and along
every part of them. The hairs had also penetrated into the cloth of the man’s suit,
but I could not make him aware of what was happening. Finally I rose to leave,
because I could feel the hairs tugging to keep me in position. As I stood up they
ripped away from me like stray threads pulled from a sleeve or pocket.
No one else in the auditorium turned away from the man on the movie screen,
who had lost the ability to cry out and relapsed into a paralytic silence. Proceeding
up the aisle I glanced above at a rectangular opening high in the back wall of the
theater, the window-like slot from which images of a movie are projected. Framed
within this aperture was the silhouette of what looked like an old woman with long

and wildly tangled hair. I could see her eyes gazing fierce and malignant at the
purple glow of the movie screen. And from these eyes were sent forth two shafts of
the purest purple light that shot through the darkness of the auditorium.
Exiting the theater the way I had come in, it was not possible to ignore the
words “rest room,” so brightly were they now shining. But the lamp over the side
door in the alley was dead; the sign reading ENTRANCE TO THE THEATER
was gone. Even the letters spelling out the name of the feature that evening had
been taken down. So this had been the last performance. Henceforth the theater
would be closed to the public; somehow I knew this to be the case.
Also closed, if only for the night, were all the other businesses along that
particular street in a part of town I had never visited before. Despite the fact that
they had been lit up before, even the ones that had shut their doors at that late
hour, the shop windows were now dark. And how sure I was that behind each one
of those dark windows I passed was the even darker silhouette of an old woman
with glowing eyes and a great head of monstrous hair.

The Voice 
of the 
CHILD

The Library of Byzantium
Father Sevich’s Visit

In whatever corner of our old house I happened to find myself, I could always sense
the arrival of a priest. Even in the most distant rooms of the upper floors, those
rooms which had been closed up and which were forbidden to me, I would
suddenly experience a very certain feeling. The climate of my surroundings then
became inexplicably altered in a manner at first vaguely troublesome and afterward
rather attractive. It was as if a new presence had invaded the very echoes of the air
and entered into the mellow afternoon sunlight casting its glow upon dark wooden
floors and the pale contortions of ancient wallpaper. All around me invisible games
had begun. My earliest philosophy regarding the great priestly tribe was therefore
not a simple one by any means; rather, it comprised a thick maze of propositions, a
labyrinthine layering of systems in which abstract dread and a bizarre sort of
indebtedness were forever confronting each other. In retrospect, then, the prelude
to Father Sevich’s visit seems to me as crucial, and as introductory to later events,
as the visit itself. So I have no qualms about lingering upon these lonely moments.
For much of that day I had been secluded in my room, intently pursuing a
typical activity of my early life and in the process badly ravaging what previously
had been a well-made bed. Having sharpened my pencil innumerable times, and
having worn down a thick gray eraser into a stub, I was ready to give myself up as
a relentless failure. The paper itself seemed to defy me, laying snares within its
coarse texture to thwart my every aim. Yet this rebellious mood was a quite recent
manifestation: I had been allowed to fill in nearly the entire scene before this
breakdown in relations between myself and my materials.
The completed portion of my drawing was an intense impression of a monastic
fantasy, evoking the cloistral tunnels and the vaulted penetralia without attempting
a guide-book representation of them. Nevertheless, the absolute precision of two
specific elements in the picture was very much on my mind. The first of these was a
single row of columns receding in sharp perspective, a diminishing file of rigid
sentinels starkly etched into the surrounding gloom. The second element was a
figure who had hidden himself behind one of these columns and was peering out of
the shadows at something frightful beyond the immediate scene. Only the figure’s

face and a single column-clutching hand were to be rendered. The hand I executed
well enough, but when it came to the necessary features of fear which needed to be
implanted on that countenance—there was simply no way to capture the desired
effect. My wish was to have every detail of the unseen horror clearly readable in
the physiognomy of the seer himself, a maddening task and, at the time, a futile one.
Every manipulation of my soft-pointed pencil betrayed me, masking my victim with
a series of completely irrelevant expressions. First it was misty-eyed wonder, and
then a kind of cretinous bafflement. At one point the gentleman appeared to be
smiling in an almost amiable way at his imminent doom.
Thus, one may comprehend how easily I succumbed to the distraction of
Father Sevich’s visit. My pencil stopped dead on the paper, my eyes began to
wander about, checking the curtains, the corners, and the open closet for something
that had come to play hide-and-seek with me. I heard footsteps methodically
treading down the long hallway and stopping at my bedroom door. My father’s
voice, muffled by solid wood, instructed me to make an appearance downstairs.
There was a visitor.
 
 
My frustrations of that afternoon must have disadvantaged me somewhat, because
I completely fell into the trap of expectation: that is, I believed our caller was only
Father Orne, who often dropped by and who served as a kind of ecclesiastical
familiar of our family. But when I descended the stairs and saw that strange black
cloak drooping down from the many-pegged rack beside the front door, and when I
saw the wide-brimmed hat of the same color hanging beside it like an age-old
companion, I realized my error.
From the parlor came the sound of soft conversation, the softest part of which
was supplied by Father Sevich himself, whose speaking voice was no more than a
sleepy whisper. He was seated, quite fairly, in one of our most expansive armchairs,
toward which destination my mother maneuvered me as soon as I entered the

room. During the presentation I was silent, and for a few suspenseful moments
afterward continued to remain so. Father Sevich thought that I was fascinated into
muteness by his fancy walking stick, and he said as much. At that moment the
priest’s voice was infiltrated, to my amazement, by a foreign accent I had not
previously noticed. He handed his cane over to me for examination, and I hefted the
formidable length of wood a few times. However, the real source of my fascination
lay not in his personal accessories, but in the priest’s own person, specifically in the
chalky-looking texture of his round face.
Invited to join the afternoon gathering, I was seated in a chair identical to the
one supporting Father Sevich’s bulk, and angled slightly toward it. But my alliance
to this group was in body only: I contributed not a word to the ensuing
conversation, nor did I understand those words that now filled the parlor with
their drowsy music. My concentration on the priest’s face had wholly exiled me
from the world of good manners and polite talk. It was not just the pale and
powdery cast of his complexion, but also a certain emptiness, a look of
incompleteness that made me think of some unfinished effigy in a toymaker’s
workshop. The priest smiled and squinted and performed several other common
manipulations, none of which resulted in a true facial expression. Something vital to
expression was missing, some essential spirit in which all expressions are born and
evolve toward their unique destiny. And, to put it graphically, his flesh simply did
not have the appearance of flesh.
At some point my mother and father found an excuse to leave me alone with
Father Sevich, presumably to allow his influence to have a free rein over me, so
that his sacerdotal presence might not be adulterated by the secularity of theirs.
This development was in no way surprising, since it was my parents’ secret hope
that someday my life would take me at least as far as the seminary, if not beyond
that into the purple-robed mysteries of priesthood.
In the first few seconds after my parents had abandoned the scene, Father
Sevich and I looked each other over, almost as if our previous introduction had
counted for naught. And soon a very interesting thing happened: Father Sevich’s

face underwent a change, one in favor of the soul which had formerly been interred
within his most obscure depths. Now, from out of that chalky tomb emerged a face
of true expression, a masterly composition of animated eyes, living mouth, and
newly flushed cheeks. This transformation, however, must have been achieved at a
certain cost; for what his face gained in vitality, the priest’s voice lost in volume.
His words now sounded like those of a hopeless invalid, withered things reeking of
medicines and prayers. What their exact topic of discourse was I’m not completely
sure, but I do recall that my drawings were touched upon. Father Orne, of course,
was already familiar with these fledgling works, though I do not recall that he ever
expressed admiration for them. Nonetheless, it seemed that something in their
pictorial nature had caused him to mention them to his colleague who was visiting
us from the old country. Something had caused Father Orne to single my pictures
out, as it were, among the sights of his parish.
Father Sevich spoke of those scribblings of mine in a highly circuitous and
rarefied fashion, as if they were a painfully delicate subject which threatened a
breach in our acquaintanceship. I did not grasp what constituted his tortuous and
subtle interest in my pictures, but this issue was partially clarified when he showed
me something: a little book he was carrying within the intricate folds of his clerical
frock.
The covering of the book had the appearance of varnished wood, all darkish
and embellished with undulating grains. At first I thought that this object would
feel every bit as brittle as it looked, until Father Sevich actually placed it in my
hands and allowed me to discover that its deceptive binding was in fact extremely
supple, even slippery. There were no words on the front of the book, only two thin
black lines which intersected to create a cross. On closer examination, I observed
that the horizontal beam of the cross had, on either end, squiggly little extensions
resembling tiny hands. And the vertical beam appeared to widen at its vertex into
something like a little bulb, so that the black decoration formed a sort of stick man.
At Father Sevich’s instruction, I randomly opened the book and thumbed over
several of its incredibly thin pages, which were more like layers of living tissue than

dead pulp. There seemed to be an infinite number of them, with no possibility of
ever reaching the beginning or the end of the volume merely by turning over the
pages one by one. The priest warned me to be careful and not to harm any of these
delicate leaves, for the book was very old, very fragile, and unusually precious.
The language in which the book was written resisted all but imaginary
identifications by one who was as limited in years and learning as I was then. Even
now, memory will not permit me to improve upon my initial speculation that the
book was composed in some exotic tongue of antiquity. But its profusion of pictures
alleviated many frustrations and illuminated the darkness of the book’s secret
symbols. In these examples of the art of the woodcut, I could almost read the texts
composing the book, every one of which seemed devoted to wearing away at a
single theme: salvation through suffering.
It was this chamber of sacred horrors that Father Sevich believed would catch
my eye and my interest. How few of us, he explained, really understood the holy
purpose of such images of torment, the divine destiny toward which the paths of
anguish have always led. The production, and even the mere contemplation, of
these volumes of blessed agony was one of the great lost arts, he openly lamented.
Then he began to speak about a certain library in the old country. But his words
were now lost on me. My attention was already wandering along its own paths,
and my eye was inextricably caught by the dense landscape of these old woodcuts.
One scene in particular appeared exemplary of the book’s soul.
The central figure in this illustration was bearded and emaciated, with his
head bowed, hands folded, and knees bent. Contracted in an attitude of prayerful
pleading, he seemed to be suspended in mid-air. All around this bony ascetic were
torturing demons, surprisingly effective owing to, or perhaps despite, the artist’s
brutal technique and the sparseness of precise detail. An exception to this general
rule of style was a single squatting devil whose single eye had clusters of perfect
little eyes growing out of it; and each of the smaller eyes had its own bristling lashes
that sprouted like weeds, an explosion of minute grotesquerie. The ascetic’s own
eyes were the focus of his particular form: stark white openings in an otherwise

dark face, with two tiny pupils rolling deliriously heavenward. But what was it
about the transports written on this face which inspired in me the sense of things
other than fear or pain, or even piety? In any event, I did find inspiration in this
terrible scene, and tried to make an imprint of it upon the photographic plates of
my memory.
With a tight grip of my index finger and thumb, I was holding the page on
which this woodcut was reproduced when Father Sevich unexpectedly snatched
the book out of my hands. I looked up, not at the priest but at my mother and
father now returning to the parlor after their brief and calculated absence. Father
Sevich was gazing in the same direction, while blindly stashing the little book back
in its place. So he must not have noticed the thin leaf which was loosely draped
over my fingers and which I immediately concealed between my legs. At any rate,
he said nothing about the mishap. And at the time I could not imagine that any
power on earth could perceive the loss of a single page from the impossibly dense
and prodigious layers of that book. Certainly I was safe from the eyes of Father
Sevich, which had once again become as dull and expressionless as the plaster
complexion of his face.
Shortly thereafter the priest had to be on his way. With fascination I watched
as he assembled himself in our foyer, donning his cloak, adjusting his huge hat, and
propping up his large body with his walking stick. Before leaving, he invited us all
to visit him in the old country, and we promised to do so should our travels ever
take us to that part of the world. While my mother held me close to her side, my
father opened the door for the priest. And the sunny afternoon, now grown windy
and overcast, received him.
 
Father Sevich’s Return
 
The stolen woodcut from the priest’s prayer book, as I came to think of it, was not
the solution I thought it would be. Although I suspected that it possessed certain

inspirational powers, a modest fund of moral energy, I soon found that the macabre
icon withheld its blessings from outsiders. I had not then considered that a sacred
image of this kind would have such a secretive nature, for I was more infatuated
with the profane lessons I believed it could teach—above all, how I might provide
my faceless man in the monastery with a countenance of true terror. However, I
learned no such lessons and was forced to leave my figure in an unfinished state, a
ridiculously empty slate which I remained unable to embellish with the absolute
horror of an off-stage atrocity. But the picture, I mean the one in the prayer book,
did have another and unsuspected value for me.
Since I had already established a spiritual rapport with Father Sevich, I could
not obstruct a certain awareness of his own mysteries. He soon became connected
in my mind with unarticulated narratives of a certain kind, stories in the rough, and
ones potentially epic, even cosmic, in scope. Without a doubt there was an aura of
legend about him, a cycle of mute, incredible lore; and I resolved that his future
movements merited my closest possible attention. Such a difficult undertaking was
made infinitely easier due to my possession of that single, flimsy page torn from his
prayer book.
I kept it with me at all times, protectively enclosed in some wrapping tissue I
borrowed from my mother. The initial results were soon in coming, but at the same
time they were not entirely successful, considering the expense of this rather
prodigal burst of psychic effort. Hence, the early scenes were highly imperfect,
visions easily dispersed, fragmentary, some quite near to nonsense. Among them
was a visit Father Sevich paid another family, a morose vignette in which the
anemic priest seemed to have grown pale to the point of translucency.
And the others involved were even worse: some of them had barely
materialized or were visible only as a sort of anthropomorphic mist. There was
considerable improvement when Father Sevich was alone or in the presence of only
one other person. A lengthy conversation with Father Orne, for example, was
projected in its totality; but, as in an improperly lighted photographic scene, the
substance of every shape had been watered down into an eerie lividity. Also, given

the nature of these visionary endeavors, the entire meeting transpired in dead
silence, as if the two clergymen were merely pantomiming their parts.
And in all phases of activity, Father Sevich remained the model visitor from a
foreign diocese, laying no new ground for scandal since his brief, though infinitely
promising, visit with my parents and me. Perhaps the only occasions on which he
threatened to live up to this promise, this pledge to incarnate some of those abstract
myths that his character suggested to my imagination, took place during his
intervals of absolute privacy. In the most unconscious hours of darkness, when the
rest of the rectory’s population was in slumber, Father Sevich would leave the
austere comforts of his bed and, seating himself at a window-facing desk, would
pore over the contents of a certain book, turning page after page and stopping every
so often to mouth some of the strange words inscribed upon them. Somehow these
were the sentences of his own mysterious biography, a chronicle of truly
unspeakable things. In the formation of the priest’s lips as he mimed the
incantations of a dead language, in the darting movements of his tongue between
rows of immaculate teeth, one could almost chart the convoluted chronology of this
foreign man.
How alien is the deepest life of another: the unbelievable beginnings; the
unimaginably elaborate developments; and the incalculable eons which prepare,
which foretell, the multiform phenomena of an uncertain number of years! Much of
what Father Sevich had endured in his allotted span could already be read on his
face. But something still remained to be revealed in his features, something which
the glowing lamp resting upon the desk, joined by the light of every constellation in
the visible universe, was struggling to illuminate.
 
 
When Father Sevich returned to his homeland, I lost all touch with his life’s
whereabouts, and soon my own life collapsed back into its established routine.
After that weary and fruitless summer had passed, it was time for me to begin

another year of school, to encounter once again the oppressive mysteries of the
autumn season. But I had not entirely forgotten my adventure with Father Sevich.
At the height of the fall semester we began to draw pumpkins with thick orange
crayons whose points were awkwardly blunt, and with dull scissors we shaped
black cats from the formless depths of black paper. Succumbing to a hopeless urge
for innovation, I created a man-shaped silhouette with my paper and scissors. The
just proportions of my handiwork even received compliments from the nun who
served as our art instructor. But when I trimmed the figure with a tiny white collar
and gave it a crudely screaming mouth—there was outrage and there was
punishment. Without arguing a happy sequence of cause and effect between this
incident and what followed, it was not long afterward that the school season, for
me, became eventful with illness. And it was during this time of shattered routine,
as I lay three days and nights dripping with fever, that I regained my hold, with a
visionary grasp that reached across the ocean between us, on the curious itinerary
of Father Sevich.
With hat and cloak and walking stick, the old priest was hobbling along rather
briskly, and alone, down the narrow, nocturnal streets of some very old town in the
old country. It was a fairy-tale vision to which not even the most loving illustrator
of medieval legends could do justice. Fortunately, the town itself—the serpentine
lanes, the distorted glow of streetlamps, the superimposed confusion of pointed
roofs, the thinnest blade of moon which seemed to belong to this town as it
belonged to no other place on earth—does not require any protracted emphasis in
this memoir. Although it did not give away its identity, either in name or location,
the town still demanded a designation of some kind, some official title, however
much in error it might be. And of all the names that had ever been attached to
places of this world, the only one which seemed proper, in its delirious way, was an
ancient name which, after all these years, seems no less fitting and no less ludicrous
now than it did then. Unmentionably ludicrous, so I will not mention it.
Now Father Sevich was disappearing into a narrow niche between two dark
houses, which led him to an unpaved lane bordered by low walls, along which he

traveled in almost total blackness until the pathway opened into a small courtyard
surrounded by high walls and lit by a single dull lamp at its center. He paused a
moment to catch his breath, and when he gazed up at the night, as if to reconcile
his course with the stars above, one could see his face sweating and shining in the
jaundiced lamplight. Somewhere in the shadows that were draped and fluttering
upon those high walls was an opening. Passing through this doubtful gate, the old
priest continued his incredible rambling about the darkest and most remote
quarters of the old town.
Now he was descending a stairway of cut stone which led below the level of
the town’s streets; then a brief tunnel brought him to another stairway which
burrowed in a spiral down into the earth and absolute blackness. Knowing his way,
the priest ultimately emerged from this nowhere of blackness when he suddenly
entered a vast circular chamber. The place appeared to be a tower sunken beneath
the town and soaring to a great and paradoxical height. In the upper reaches of the
tower, tiny lights glimmered like stars and threw down their illumination in a
patternless weave of crisscrossing strands.
The subterranean structure, at whose center Father Sevich now stood,
ascended in a series of terraces, each bordered by a shining balustrade made of some
golden metal and each circling the perimeter of the inner chamber. These terraces
multiplied into the upward distance, contracting in perspective into smaller and
thinner circles, blurring together at some point and becoming lost in clouds of
shadows that hovered far above. Each level was furthermore provided with
numerous and regularly spaced portals, all of them dark, hinting at nothing of what
lay beyond their unguarded thresholds. But one might surmise that if this was the
library of which the priest spoke, if this was a true repository of such books as the
one he had just removed from under his cloak, then those slender openings must
have led to the archives of this prodigious athenaeum, suggesting nothing less than
a bibliographic honeycomb of unknown expanse and complexity. Scanning the
shadows about him, the priest seemed to be anticipating the appearance of someone
in charge, someone entrusted with the care of this institution. Then one of the

shadows, one of the most sizeable shadows and the one closest to the priest, turned
around … and three such caretakers now stood before him.
This triumvirate of figures seemed to share the same face, which was almost a
caricature of serenity. They were attired very much like the priest himself, and
their eyes were large and calm. When the priest held out the book to the one in the
middle, a hand moved forward to take it, a hand as white as the whitest glove. The
central figure then rested its other hand flat upon the front of the book, and then
the figure to the left extended a hand which laid itself upon the first; then a third
hand, belonging to the third figure, covered them both with its soft white palm and
long fingers, uniting the three. The hands remained thus placed for some time, as if
an invisible transference of fabulously subtle powers was occurring, something
being given or received. The heads of the three figures slowly turned toward one
another, and simultaneously there was a change in the atmosphere of the chamber
streaked with the chaotic rays of underworld starlight. And if forced to name this
new quality and point to its outward sign, one might draw attention to a certain
look in the large eyes of the three caretakers, a certain expression of rarefied scorn
or disgust.
They removed their hands from the book and placed them once again out of
view. Then the caretakers turned their eyes upon the priest, who had already
moved a few steps away from these indignant shadows. But as the priest began to
turn his back on them, almost precisely at the mid-point of his pivot, he seemed to
freeze abruptly in position, like someone who has just heard his name called out to
him in some strange place far from home. However, he did not remain thus
transfixed for very long, this statue poised to take a step which is forbidden to it,
with its face as rigid and pale as a monument’s stone. Soon his black, ankle-high
shoes began to kick about as they left the solid ground. And when the priest had
risen a little higher, well into the absolute insecurity of empty air, he lost hold of his
walking stick; and it fell to the great empty expanse of the tower’s floor, where it
looked as small as a twig or a pencil. His wide-brimmed hat soon followed, settling
crown-up beside the cane, as the priest began tossing and turning in the air like a

restless sleeper, wrapping himself up in the dark cocoon of his cloak. Then the cloak
was torn away, but not by the thrashing priest. Something else was up there with
him, ascending the uncountable tiers of the tower, or perhaps many unseen things
which ripped at his clothes, at the sparse locks of his hair, at the interlocking fingers
of his hands which were now folded and pressed to his forehead, as though in
desperate prayer. And finally at his face.
Now the priest was no more than a dark speck agitating in the greater heights
of the dark tower. Soon he was nothing at all. Below, the three figures had
absconded to their refuge of shadows, and the vast chamber appeared empty once
more. Then everything went black.
 
 
My fever grew worse over the course of several more days, and then late one night
it suddenly, quite unexpectedly, broke. Exhausted by the ordeals of my delirium, I
lay buried in my bed beneath heavy blankets, whose usually numerous layers had
been supplemented according to the ministrations of my mother. Just a few
moments before, or a few millennia, she had gone out of my room, believing that I
was at last asleep. But I had not even come near to sleeping, no more than I
approached a normal state of wakefulness. The only illumination in my room was
the natural nightlight of the moon shining through the windows. Through half-
closed eyes I focused on this light, suspecting strange things about it, until I finally
noticed that all the curtains in my room had been tightly drawn, that the pale glow
at the foot of my bed was an unnatural phosphorescence, an infernal aura or angelic
halo beaming about the form of Father Sevich himself.
In my confusion I greeted him, trying to lift my head from its pillow but falling
back in weakness. He showed no awareness of my presence, and for a second I
thought—in the hellish wanderings of my fever—that I was the revenant, not he.
Attempting to take a clearer account of things, I forced open my leaden eyelids
with all the strength I could muster. As a reward for this effort, I witnessed with

all possible acuity of my inward and outward vision the incorporeal grandeur of the
specter’s face. And in a moment immeasurable by earthly increments of time, I
grasped every detail, every datum and nuance of this visitor’s life-history, the
fantastic destiny which had culminated in the creation of this infinitely gruesome
visage, one whose expression had grown rigid at the sight of unimaginable horrors
and petrified into spectral stone. And in that same moment, I felt that I, too, could
see what this lost soul had seen.
Now, with all the force of a planet revolving its unspeakable tonnage in the
blackness of space, the face turned on its terrible axis and, while it still appeared to
have no apprehension of my existence, it spoke, as if to itself alone and to its
solitary doom:
 
Not given back as it had been given, the law of the book is broken. The law … of
the book … is broken.
 
The specter had barely spoken the last resounding syllables of its strange
pronouncement when it underwent a change. Before my eyes it began to shrivel like
something thrown into a fire, and without the least indication of anguish it crinkled
into nothing, as if some invisible power had suddenly decided to dispose of its work,
to crumple up an aborted exercise and toss it into oblivion. And it was then that I
felt my own purposes at an intersection, a fortuitous crossroads, with that savage
and unseen hand. But I would not scorn what I had seen. My health miraculously
restored, I gathered together my drawing materials and stayed up the rest of that
night recording the vision. At last I had the face I was seeking.
 

Postscriptum
 
Not long after that night, I paid a visit to our parish church. As this gesture was
entirely self-initiated, my parents were free to interpret it as a sign of things to
come, and no doubt they did so. The purpose of this act, however, was merely to
collect a small bottle of holy water from the handsome metal cistern which
dispensed this liquid to the public and which stood in the vestibule of the church.
With apologies to my mother and father, I did not on this occasion actually enter
the church itself. Gaining the priest-blessed solution, I hurried home, where I
immediately unearthed—from the bottom of my dresser drawer—the page torn
from Father Sevich’s book. Both items, prayer book page and bottle of holy water, I
took into the upstairs bathroom. I locked the door and placed the delicate little leaf
in the bathroom sink, staring for a few moments at that wonderful woodcut. I
wondered if one day I might make amends for my act of vandalism, perhaps by
offering something of my own to a certain repository for such treasures in the old
country. But then I recalled the fate of Father Sevich, which helped to chase the
whole matter from my mind. From the uncorked bottle, I sprinkled the holy water
over the precious page spread out at the bottom of the sink. For a few moments it
sizzled, exactly as if I had poured a powerful acid on it, and gave off a not
unpleasant vapor, an incense reeking of secret denial and privilege. Finally, it
dissolved altogether. Then I knew that the game was over, the dream at an end. In
the mirror above the sink I saw my own face smiling a smile of deep contentment.

MISS Plarr

It was spring, though still quite early in the season, when a young woman came to
live with us. Her purpose was to manage the affairs of the household while my
mother was suffering some vague ailment, lingering but not serious, and my father
was away on business. She arrived on one of those misty, drizzling days which often
prevailed during the young months of that particular year and which remain in my
memory as the signature of this remarkable time. Since my mother was self-confined
to her bed and my father absent, it was left for me to answer those sharp, urgent
rappings at the front door. How they echoed throughout the many rooms of the
house, reverberating in the farthest corners of the upper floors.
Pulling on the curved metal door handle, so huge in my child’s hand, I found
her standing with her back to me and staring deep into a world of darkening mist.
Her black hair glistened in the light from the vestibule. As she turned slowly
around, my eyes were fixed upon that great ebony turban of hair, folded so
elaborately into itself again and again yet in some way rebelling against this
discipline, with many shiny strands escaping their bonds and bursting out wildly.
Indeed, it was through a straggle of mist-covered locks that she first glared down at
me, saying: “My name is…”
“I know,” I said.
But at that moment it was not so much her name that I knew, despite my
father’s diligent recitations of it to me, as all the unexpected correspondences I
sensed in her physical presence. For even after she stepped into the house, she kept
her head slightly turned and glanced over her shoulder through the open door,
watching the elements outside and listening with intense expectancy. By then this
stranger had already gained a precise orientation amid the world’s chaos of faces
and other phenomena. Quite literally her place was an obscure one, lying
somewhere deep within the peculiar mood of that spring afternoon when the
natural gestures of the season had been apparently distanced and suppressed by an
otherworldly desolation—a seething luxuriance hidden behind dark battlements of
clouds looming above a bare, practically hibernal landscape. And the sounds for
which she listened also seemed remote and stifled, shut out by a mute and sullen

twilight, smothered in that tower of stone-gray sky.
However, while Miss Plarr appeared to reflect with exactitude all the signs
and mannerisms of those days all shackled in gloom, her place in our household was
still an uncertainty.
During the early part of her stay with us, Miss Plarr was more often heard
than seen. Her duties, whether by instruction or her own interpretation, had soon
engaged her in a routine of wandering throughout the echoing rooms and hallways
of the house. Rarely was there an interruption in those footsteps as they sounded
upon aged floorboards; day and night this gentle crepitating signaled the
whereabouts of our vigilant housekeeper. In the morning I awoke to the
movements of Miss Plarr on the floors above or below my bedroom, while late in
the afternoon, when I often spent time in the library upon my return from school, I
could hear the clip-clopping of her heels on the parquet in the adjacent room. Even
late at night, when the structure of the house expressed itself with a fugue of
noises, Miss Plarr augmented this decrepit music with her own slow pacing upon
the stairs or outside my door.
One time I felt myself awakened in the middle of the night, though it was not
any disturbing sounds that had broken my sleep. And I was unsure exactly what
made it impossible for me to close my eyes again. Finally, I slid out of bed, quietly
opened the door of my room a few inches, and peeped down the darkened hallway.
At the end of that long passage was a window filled with the livid radiance of
moonlight, and within the frame of that window was Miss Plarr, her entire form
shaded into a silhouette as black as the blackness of her hair, which was all piled up
into the wild shape of some night-blossom. So intently was she staring out the
window that she did not seem to detect my observance of her. I, on the other hand,
could no longer ignore the force of her presence.
The following day I began a series of sketches. These works first took form as
doodles in the margins of my school books, but swiftly evolved into projects of
greater size and ambition. Given the enigmas of any variety of creation, I was not
entirely surprised that the images I had elaborated did not include the overt

portrayal of Miss Plarr herself, nor of other persons who might serve by way of
symbolism or association. Instead, my drawings appeared to illustrate scenes from a
tale of some strange and cruel kingdom. Possessed by curious moods and visions, I
depicted a bleak domain that was obscured by a kind of fog or cloud whose depths
brought forth a plethora of incredible structures, all of them somehow twisted into
aspects of bizarre savagery. From the matrix of this fertile haze was born a litter of
towering edifices that combined the traits of castle and crypt, many-peaked palace
and multi-chambered mausoleum. But there were also clusters of smaller buildings,
warped offshoots of the greater ones, housing perhaps no more than a single room,
an apartment of ominously skewed design, an intimate dungeon cell reserved for the
most exclusive captivity. Of course, I betrayed no special genius in my execution of
these phantasmal venues: my technique was as barbarous as my subject. And
certainly I was unable to introduce into the menacing images any suggestion of
certain sounds that seemed integral to their proper representation, a kind of aural
accompaniment to these operatic stage sets. In fact, I was not able even to imagine
these sounds with any degree of clarity. Yet I knew that they belonged in the
pictures, and that, like the purely visible dimension of these works, their source
could be found in the person of Miss Plarr.
Although I had not intended to show her the sketches, there was evidence
that she had indulged in private viewings of them. They lay more or less in the
open on the desk in my bedroom; I made no effort to conceal my work. And I
began to suspect that their order was being disturbed in my absence, to sense a
subtle disarrangement that was vaguely telling but not conclusive. Finally, upon
returning from school one gray afternoon, I discovered a sure sign of Miss Plarr’s
investigations. For lying between two of my drawings, pressed like a memento in an
old scrapbook, was a long, black strand of hair.
I wanted to confront Miss Plarr immediately regarding her intrusion, not
because I resented it in any way but solely to seize the occasion to approach this
devious eccentric and perhaps draw closer to the strange sights and sounds she had
brought into our household. However, at that stage of her term of employment she

was no longer so easily located, having ceased her constant, noisy marauding and
begun practicing more sedentary or stealthy rituals.
Since there was no sign of her elsewhere in the house, I went directly to the
room which had been set aside for her, and which I had previously respected as her
sanctum. But as I slowly stepped up to the open doorway I saw that she was not
there. After entering the room and rummaging about, I realized that she was not
using it at all and perhaps had never settled in. I turned around to continue my
search for Miss Plarr when I found her standing silently in the doorway and gazing
into the room without fixing her eyes on anything, or anyone, within it. I
nevertheless appeared to be in a position of chastisement, losing all the advantage I
earlier possessed over this invader of my sanctum. Yet there was no mention of
either of these transgressions, despite what seemed our mutual understanding of
them. We were helplessly drifting into an abyss of unspoken reproaches and
suspicions. Finally, Miss Plarr rescued us both by making an 
announcement she had obviously been saving for the right moment.
“I have spoken with your mother,” she declared in a strong voice, “and we
have concluded that I should begin tutoring you in some of your weaker school
subjects.”
I believe that I must have nodded, or offered some other gesture of assent.
“Good,” she said. “We will start tomorrow.”
Then, rather quietly, she walked away, leaving her words to resound in the
cavity of that unoccupied room—unoccupied, I may claim, since my own presence
now seemed to have been eclipsed by the swelling shadow of Miss Plarr.
Nonetheless, this extra-scholastic instruction did prove of immense value in
illuminating what, at the time, was my weakest subject: Miss Plarr in general, with
special attention to where she had made accommodations for herself in our
household.
 
 

My tutelage was conducted in a room that Miss Plarr felt was especially suited to
the purpose, though her reasoning may not have been readily apparent. For the
place she had selected to impart her lessons to me was a small attic located beneath
a roof toward the back of the house. The slanted ceiling of that room exposed to us
its rotting beams like the ribbing of some ancient seagoing vessel that might carry us
to unknown destinations. And there were cold drafts that eddied around us,
opposing currents emanating from the warped frame in which a many-paned
window softly rattled now and then. The light by which I was schooled was
provided by overcast afternoons fading in that window, assisted by an old oil lamp
which Miss Plarr had hung upon a nail in one of the attic rafters. (I still wonder
where she unearthed that antique.) It was this greasy lamplight that enabled me to
glimpse a heap of old rags which had been piled in a corner to form a kind of crude
bedding. Nearby stood the suitcase Miss Plarr had arrived with.
The only furniture in this room was a low table, which served as my desk, and
a small frail chair, both articles being relics of my early childhood and no doubt
rediscovered in the course of my teacher’s many expeditions throughout the house.
Seated at the center of the room, I submitted to the musty pathos of my
surroundings. “In a room such as this,” Miss Plarr asserted, “one may learn certain
things of the greatest importance.” So I listened while Miss Plarr clomped noisily
about, wielding a long wooden pointer which had no blackboard to point to. All
considered, however, she did deliver a series of quite fascinating lectures.
Without attempting to render the exact rhetoric of her discourse, I remember
that Miss Plarr was especially concerned with my development in subjects that
often touched upon history or geography, occasionally broaching realms of
philosophy and science. She lectured from memory, never once hesitating in her
delivery of countless facts that had not reached me by way of the conventional
avenues of my education. Yet these talks were nonetheless as meandering as her
footsteps upon the cold floor of that attic room, and at first I was breathless trying
to follow her from one point to the next. Eventually, though, I began to extract
certain themes from her chaotic syllabus. For instance, she returned time and again

to the earliest twitchings of human life, portraying a world of only the most
rudimentary law but one intriguingly advanced in what she called “visceral
practices.” She allowed that much of what she said in this way was speculative. In
her discussions of later periods, she deferred to the restrictions, while also enjoying
the explicitness, of accepted records. Hence, I was made intimate with those ancient
atrocities which gained renown for a Persian monarch, with a century-old massacre
in the Brazilian backlands, and with the specific methods of punishment employed
by various societies often relegated to the margins of history. And in other flights
of instruction, during which Miss Plarr might flourish her pointer in the air like an
artist’s paintbrush, I was introduced to lands whose chief feature was a kind of
brutality and an air of exile—coarse and tortuous terrains, deliriums of earth and
sky. These included desolate, fog-bound islands in polar seas, countries of barren
peaks lacerated by unceasing winds, wastelands that consumed all sense of reality in
their vast spaces, shadowed realms littered with dead cities, and sweltering hells of
jungle where light itself is tinged with a bluish slime.
At some point, however, Miss Plarr’s specialized curriculum, once so novel
and engrossing, dulled with repetition. I started to fidget in my miniature seat; my
head slumped over my miniature desk. Then her words suddenly stopped, and she
drew close to me, laying her rubber-tipped pointer across my shoulder. When I
looked up I saw only those eyes glaring down at me, and that black bundle of hair
outlined in the dismal light drifting through the attic like a glowing vapor.
“In a room such as this,” she whispered, “one may also learn the proper way
to behave.”
The pointer was then pulled away, grazing my neck, and Miss Plarr walked
over to the window. Outside, one of the great mists of that spring obscured the
landscape. As if seen through murky sheets of ice, everything appeared remote and
hallucinatory. An indeterminate figure herself, Miss Plarr gazed out at a world of
shadows bound in place. She also seemed to be listening to it.
“Do you know the sound of something that stings the air?” she asked,
swinging her pointer lightly against herself. 

I understood her meaning and nodded my compliance. But at the same time I
imagined more than a teacher’s switch as it came down upon a pupil’s body. Sounds
more serious and more strange intruded upon the hush of the classroom. They were
faraway sounds lost in the hissing of rainy afternoons: immense blades sweeping
over vast spaces; expansive wings cutting through cold winds; long whips lashing in
darkness. I also heard the sound of things that were “stinging the air” in places
beyond all comprehension. These sounds grew increasingly louder. Finally, Miss
Plarr dropped her pointer and put her hands over her ears.
“That will be all for today,” she shouted.
And neither did she hold class on the following day, nor ever again resume my
tutelage.
 
 
It seemed, however, that my lessons with Miss Plarr had continued in a different
form. Those afternoons in that attic must have exhausted something within me,
and for a brief time I was unable to leave my bed. During this period I noticed that
Miss Plarr was suffering a decline of her own, allowing the intangible sympathies
which had already existed between us to become so much deeper and more
entangled. To some extent it might be said that my own process of degeneration
was following hers, much as my faculty of hearing, sensitized by illness, followed
her echoing footsteps as they moved about the house. For Miss Plarr had reverted
to her restless wandering, somehow having failed to settle herself into any kind of
repose.
On her visits to my room, which had become frequent and were always
unexpected, I could observe the phases of her dissolution on both a material and a
psychic level. Her hair now hung loose about her shoulders, twisting itself in the
most hideous ways like a dark mesh of nightmares, a foul nest in which her own
suspicions were swarming. Moreover, her links to a strictly mundane order had
become shockingly decayed, and my relationship with her was conducted at the risk

of intimacy with spheres of a highly questionable nature.
One afternoon I awoke from a nap to discover that all the drawings she had
inspired me to produce had been torn to pieces and lay scattered about my room.
But this primitive attempt at exorcism proved to have no effect, for in the late
hours of that same night I found her sitting on my bed and leaning close to me, her
hair brushing against my face. “Tell me about those sounds,” she demanded.
“You’ve been doing this to frighten me, haven’t you?” For a while I felt she had
slipped away altogether, severing our extraordinary bond and allowing my health
to improve. But just as I seemed to be approaching a full recovery, Miss Plarr
returned.
“I think that you’re much better now,” she said as she entered my room with
a briskness that seemed to be an effort. “You can get dressed today. I have to do
some shopping, and I want you to come along and assist me.”
I might have protested that to go out on such a day would cause me to relapse,
for outside waited a heavy spring dampness and so much fog that I could see
nothing beyond my bedroom window. But Miss Plarr was already lost to the world
of wholesome practicalities, while her manner betrayed a hypnotic and fateful
determination that I could not have resisted.
“As for this fog,” she said, even though I had not mentioned it, “I think we
shall be able to find our way.”
Having a child’s weakness for prospects of misadventure, I followed Miss
Plarr into that fog-smothered landscape. After walking only a few steps we lost
sight of the house, and even the ground beneath our feet was submerged under
layers of a pale, floating web. But she took my hand and marched on as if guided by
some peculiar vision.
And it was by her grasp that this vision was conducted into me, setting both
of us upon a strange path. Yet as we progressed, I began to recognize certain shapes
gradually emerging around us—that brood of dark forms which pushed through
the fog, as if their growth could no longer be contained by it. When I tightened my
grip on Miss Plarr’s hand—which seemed to be losing its strength, fading in its

substance—the vision surged toward clarity. With the aspect of some leviathan
rising into view from the abyss, a monstrous world defined itself before our eyes,
forcing its way through the surface of the fog, which now trailed in wisps about the
structures of an immense and awful kingdom.
More expansive and intricate than my earlier, purely artistic imaginings, these
structures sprung forth like a patternless conglomerate of crystals, angular and
many-faceted monuments clustering in a misty graveyard. It was a dead city indeed,
and all residents were entombed within its walls—or they were nowhere. There
were streets of a sort which cut through this chaos of architecture, winding among
the lopsided buildings, and yet it all retained an interlocking unity, much like a
mountain range of wildly carved peaks and chasms and very much like the
mountainous and murky thunderheads of a rainy season. Surely the very essence of
a storm inhered in the jagged dynamism of these structures, a pyrotechnics that
remained suspended or hidden, its violence a matter of suspicion and conjecture,
suggesting a realm of atrocious potential—that infinite country which hovers
beyond fogs and mists and gray heaping skies.
But even here something remained obscure, a sense provoked of rites or
observances being enacted in concealment. And this peculiar sense was aroused by
certain sounds, as of smothered cacophonous echoes lashing out in black cells and
scourging the lengths of blind passages. Through the silence of the fog they
gradually disseminated.
“Do you hear them?” asked Miss Plarr, though by then they had already risen
to a conspicuous stridency. “There are rooms we cannot see where those sounds are
being made. Sounds of something that stings the air.”
Her eyes seemed to be possessed by the sight of these rooms she spoke of; her
hair was mingling with the mist around us. Finally, she released her hold on my
hand and drifted onward. There was no struggle: she had known for some time
what loomed in the background of her wandering and what waited her approach.
Perhaps she thought this was something she could pass on to others, or in which
she might gain their company. But her company, her proper company, had all the

time been preparing for her arrival elsewhere. Nevertheless, she had honored me as
the heir of her visions.
The fog swept around her and thickened once again until there was nothing
else that could be seen. After a few moments I managed to gain my geographical
bearings, finding myself in the middle of the street only a few blocks from home.
 
 
Soon after the disappearance of Miss Plarr, our household was again
established in its routine: my mother made a strong recovery from her pseudo-illness
and my father returned from his business excursion. The hired girl, it seemed, had
vacated the house without giving notice, a turn of events that caused little surprise
in my mother. “Such a flighty creature,” she said about our former housekeeper.
I supported this characterization of Miss Plarr, but offered nothing that might
suggest the nature of her flight. In truth, no word of mine could possibly have
brought the least clarity to the situation. Nor did I wish to deepen the mysteries of
this episode by revealing what Miss Plarr had left behind in that attic room. For
me this chamber was now invested with a dour mystique, and I revisited its drafty
spaces on several occasions over the years. Especially on afternoons in early spring
when I could not close my ears to certain sounds that reached me from beyond a
gray mist or from skies of hissing rain, as if somewhere the tenuous forms of spirits
were thrashing in a dark and forsaken world.

The Voice 
of Our 
NAME

The Shadow at the Bottom of the World

Before there occurred anything of a truly prodigious nature, the season had
manifestly erupted with some feverish intent. This, at least, was how it appeared to
us, whether we happened to live in town or somewhere outside its limits. (And
traveling between town and countryside was Mr. Marble, who had been studying
the seasonal signs far longer and in greater depth than we, disclosing prophecies
that no one would credit at the time.) On the calendars which hung in so many of
our homes, the monthly photograph illustrated the spirit of the numbered days
below it: sheaves of cornstalks standing brownish and brittle in a newly harvested
field, a narrow house and wide barn in the background, a sky of empty light above,
and fiery leafage frolicking about the edges of the scene. But something dark,
something abysmal always finds its way into the bland beauty of such pictures,
something that usually holds itself in abeyance, some entwining presence that we
always know is there. And it was exactly this presence that had gone into crisis, or
perhaps had been secretly invoked by small shadowy voices calling out in the midst
of our dreams. There came a bitter scent into the air, as of sweet wine turning to
vinegar, and there was a hysteric brilliance flourished by the trees in town as well
as those in the woods beyond, while along the roads between were the intemperate
displays of thorn apple, sumac, and towering sunflowers that nodded behind
crooked roadside fences. Even the stars of chill nights seemed to grow delirious and
take on the tints of an earthly inflammation. Finally, there was a moonlit field
where a scarecrow had been left to watch over ground that had long been cleared
yet would not turn cold.
Adjacent to the edge of town, the field allowed full view of itself from so
many of our windows. It lay spacious beyond tilting fence-posts and under a bright
round moon, uncluttered save for the peaked silhouettes of corn shocks and a
manlike shape that stood fixed in the nocturnal solitude. The head of the figure was
slumped forward, as if a grotesque slumber had overtaken its straw-stuffed body,
and the arms were slackly extended in a way that suggested some incredible gesture
toward flight. For a moment it seemed to be an insistent wind which was flapping
those patched-up overalls and fluttering the worn flannel of those shirt sleeves.

And it would seem a forceful wind indeed which caused that stitched-up head to
nod in its dreams. But nothing else joined in such movements: the withered leaves
of the cornstalks were stiff and unstirring, the trees of the distant woods were in a
lull against the clear night. Only one thing appeared to be living where the
moonlight spread across that dead field. And there were some who claimed that
the scarecrow actually raised its arms and its empty face to the sky, as though
declaring itself to the heavens, while others thought that its legs kicked wildly, like
those of a man who is hanged, and that they kept on kicking for the longest time
before the thing collapsed and lay quiet. Many of us, we discovered, had been
nudged from our beds that night, called as witnesses to this obscure spectacle.
Afterward, the sight we had seen, whatever we believed its reason, would not rest
within us but snatched at the edges of our sleep until morning.
And during the overcast hours of the following day we could not keep
ourselves from visiting the place around which various rumors had hastily arisen.
As pilgrims we wandered into that field, scrutinizing the debris of its harvest for
augural signs, circling that scarecrow as if it were a great idol in shabby disguise, a
sacred avatar out of season. But everything upon that land seemed unwilling to
support our hunger for revelation, and our congregation was lost in fidgeting
bemusement. (With the exception, of course, of Mr. Marble, whose eyes, we recall,
were gleaming with perceptions he could not offer us in any words we would
understand.) The sky had hidden itself behind a leaden vault of clouds, depriving us
of the crucial element of pure sunlight which we needed to fully burn off the misty
dreams of the past night. A vine-twisted stone wall along the property line of the
farm was the same shade as the sky, while the dormant vines themselves were as
colorless as the stone they enmeshed like a strange network of dead veins. But this
calculated grayness was merely an aspect of the scene, for the colors of the
abundant woods along the margins of the landscape were undulled, as if those
radiant leaves possessed some inner source of illumination or stood in contrast to
some deeper shadow which they served to mask.
Such conditions no doubt impeded our efforts to come to terms with our fears

about that particular field. Above all these manifestations, however, was the fact
that the earth of those harvested acres, especially in the area surrounding the
scarecrow, was unnaturally warm for the season. It seemed, in fact, that a late
harvest was due. And some insisted that the odd droning noises that filled the air
could not be blamed on the legions of local cicadas but indeed rose up from under
the ground.
By the time of twilight, only a few stragglers remained in the field, among
them the old farmer who owned this suddenly notorious acreage. We knew that he
shared the same impulse as the rest of us when he stepped up to his scarecrow and
began to tear the impostor to pieces. Others joined in the vandalism, pulling out
handfuls of straw and stripping away the clothes until they had exposed what lay
beneath them—the strange and unexpected sight.
For the skeleton of the thing should have been merely two crosswise planks.
We verified this common fact with its maker, and he swore that no other materials
had been used. Yet the shape that stood before us was of a wholly different nature.
It was something black and twisted into the form of a man, something that seemed
to have come up from the earth and grown over the wooden planks like a dark
fungus, consuming the structure. There were now black legs that hung as if charred
and withered; there was a head that sagged like a sack of ashes upon a meager body
of blackness; and there were thin arms stretched like knobby branches from a
lightning-scorched tree. All of this was supported by a thick, dark stalk which rose
from the earth and reached into the effigy like a hand into a puppet.
And as that sunless day began to dim, our vision was still held by that thing
which dangled ominously in the dusk. Its composition appeared to be of the
blackest earth, of earth that had gone stagnant somewhere in its depths, where a
rich loam had festered into a bog of shadows. Soon we realized that each of us had
fallen silent, entranced by a deep blackness which seemed to absorb our sight but
which exposed nothing to scrutiny except an abyss in the outline of a man. Even
when we ventured to lay our hands on that mass of darkness, we found only
greater mysteries. For there was almost no tangible aspect to it, merely a hint of

material sensation, barely the feel of wind or water. It seemed to possess no more
substance than a few shifting flames, but flames of only the slightest warmth, black
flames that have curled together to take on the molten texture of spoiled fruit. And
there was a vague sense of circulation, as though a kind of serpentine life swirled
gently within. But no one could stand to keep his hold upon it for long before
stepping away.
“Damn the thing, it’s not going to be rooted to my land,” said the old farmer.
Then he walked off toward the barn. And like the rest of us he was trying to rub
something from the hand that had touched the shriveled scarecrow, something that
could not be seen.
He returned to us with an armory of axes, shovels, and other implements for
uprooting what had grown upon his land, this eccentricity of the harvest. It would
seem to have been a simple task: the ground was curiously soft all around the base
of that black growth and its tenuous substance could hardly resist the wide blade of
the farmer’s axe. But when the old man swung and tried to split the thing like a
piece of firewood, the blade would not cleave. The axe entered and was closed
upon, as if sunk within a viscous mire. The farmer pulled at the handle and
managed to dislodge the axe, but he immediately let it fall from his hands. “It was
pulling back on me,” he said in a low voice. “And you heard that sound.” Indeed,
the sound which had haunted the area all that day—like innumerable insects
laughing—did seem to rise in pitch and intensity when the thing was struck.
Without a word, we began digging up the earth where that thick black stalk
was buried. We dug fairly deep before the approaching night forced us to abandon
our efforts. Yet no matter how far down we burrowed, it was not far enough to
reach the bottom of that sprouting blackness. Furthermore, our attempts became
hindered by a perverse reluctance, as in the instance of someone who is hesitant to
have a diseased part of his own body cut away in order to keep the disease from
spreading.
The clouds of that day had lingered to hide the moon, and in the darkness our
voices whispered various strategies, so that we might yet accomplish what we had

thereto failed in doing. Nor did any of our words now rise above a whisper,
although none of us would have said why this was so.
 
 
The great shadow of a moonless night encompassed the landscape, preserving us
from seeing the old farmer’s field and what was tenanted there. And yet so many of
the houses in town were in vigil throughout those dark hours. Soft lights shone
through curtained windows along the length of each street, where our trim wooden
homes seemed as small as dollhouses beneath the dark rustling depths of the season.
Above the gathered roofs hovered the glass globes of streetlamps, like little moons
set inside the dense leaves of elms and oaks and maples. Even in the night, the light
shining through those leaves betrayed the festival of colors seething within them,
blazing auras which had not faded with the passing days, a plague of colors that
had already begun to infect our dreams. This prodigy had by then become
connected in our minds with that field just outside of town and the strange growth
which there had taken root.
Thus, a sense of urgency led us back to that place, where we found the old
farmer waiting for us as the frigid aurora of dawn appeared above the distant
woods. Our eyes scanned the frost-powdered earth and studied every space among
shadows and corn shocks spread out over the land, searching for what was no
longer present in the scene. “It’s gone back,” the farmer revealed to us. “Gone into
the earth like something hiding in its shell. Don’t walk there,” he warned, pointing
to the mouth of a wide pit.
We gathered about the edge of this opening in the ground, gazing into its
depths. Even full daybreak did not show us the bottom of that dark well. Our
speculations were brief and futile. Some of us picked up the shovels lying nearby, as
if to begin the long duty of filling in the great aperture. “No use in that,” said the
farmer. He then found a large stone and dropped it straight down the shaft. We
waited and waited; we put our heads close to the hole and listened. But all we

seemed to hear were remote, humming echoes, as of countless voices of insects
chattering unseen. Finally, we covered the hazardous pit with some boards and
buried the makeshift enclosure under a mound of soft dirt. “Maybe there’ll be some
change in the spring,” someone said. But the old farmer only chuckled. “You mean
when the ground warms up? Why do you think those leaves aren’t falling the way
they should?”
It was not long after this troubling episode that our dreams, which formerly
had been the merest shadows and glimpses, swelled into full phase. Yet they must
not have been dreams entirely, but also excavations into the season which had
inspired them. In sleep we were consumed by the feverish life of the earth, cast
among a ripe, fairly rotting world of strange growth and transformation. We took a
place within a darkly flourishing landscape where even the air was ripened into
ruddy hues and everything wore the wrinkled grimace of decay, the mottled
complexion of old flesh. The face of the land itself was knotted with so many other
faces, ones that were corrupted by vile impulses. Grotesque expressions were
molding themselves into the darkish grooves of ancient bark and the whorls of
withered leaf; pulpy, misshapen features peered out of damp furrows; and the crisp
skin of stalks and dead seeds split into a multitude of crooked smiles. All was a
freakish mask painted with russet, rashy colors—colors that bled with a virulent
intensity, so rich and vibrant that things trembled with their own ripeness. 
But despite their gross palpability, there remained something spectral at the
heart of our new dreams. It moved in shadow, a presence that was in the world of
solid forms but not of it. Nor did it belong to any other world that could be named,
unless it was to that realm which is suggested to us by an autumn night when fields
lay ragged in moonlight and some wild spirit has entered into things, a great
aberration sprouting forth from a chasm of moist and fertile shadows, a hollow-eyed
howling malignity rising to present itself to the cold emptiness of space and the pale
gaze of the moon.
And it was to that moon we were forced to look for comfort when we awoke
trembling in the night, overcome by the sense that another life was taking root

within us, seeking its ultimate incarnation in the bodies we always dreamed were
our own and inviting us into the depths of an extraordinary harvest.
Certainly there was some relief when we began to discover, after many
insecure hints and delvings, that the dreams were not a sickness restricted to
solitary individuals or families but in fact were epidemic throughout the
community. No longer were we required to disguise our uneasiness as we met on
the streets under the luxuriant shadows of trees that would not cast off their gaudy
foliage, the mocking plumage of a strange season. We had become a race of
eccentrics and openly declared an array of singular whims and suspicions, at least
while daylight allowed this audacity.
Honored among us was that one old fellow, well known for his oddities, who
had anticipated our troubles weeks beforehand. As he wandered about town,
wheeling the blade-sharpening grindstone by which he earned his living, Mr.
Marble had spoken of what he could “read in the leaves,” as if those fluttering
scraps of lush color were the pages of a secret book in which he perused gold and
crimson hieroglyphs. “Just look at them,” he urged passersby, “bleeding their colors
like that. They should be bled dry, but now they’re making pictures. Something
inside trying to show itself. They’re as dead as rags now, all limp and flapping. But
something’s still in there. Those pictures, do you see them?”
Yes, we saw them, though somewhat belatedly. And they were not seen only
in the chromatic designs of those deathless leaves. They could show themselves
anywhere, if always briefly. Upon a cellar wall there might appear an ill-formed
visage among the damp and fractured stones, a hideous impersonation of a face
infiltrating the dark corners of our homes. Other faces, leprous masks, would arise
within the grain of paneled walls or wooden floors, spying for a moment before
sinking back into the knotty shadows, withdrawing below the surface. And there
were so many nameless patterns that might spread themselves across the boards of
an old fence or the side of a shed, engravings all tangled and wizened like a
subterranean craze of roots and tendrils, an underworld riot of branching
convolutions, gnarled ornamentations. Yet these designs were not unfamiliar to us

… for in them we recognized the same outlines of autumnal decay we saw our
dreams.
Like the old visionary who sharpened knives and axes and curving scythes, we
too could now read the great book of countless colored leaves. But still he remained
far in advance of what was happening deep within us all. For it was he who
manifested certain idiosyncrasies of manner that would later appear in so many
others, whether they lived in town or somewhere outside its limits. Of course, he
had always set himself apart from us by his waywardness of speech, his willingness
to utter pronouncements of dire or delightful curiosity. To a child he might say:
“The sight of the night can fly like a kite,” while someone older would be told:
“Doesn’t have arms, but it knows how to use them. Doesn’t have a face, but it
knows where to find one.”
Nevertheless, he plied his trade with every efficiency, pedaling the mechanism
that turned the grindstone, expertly honing each blade and taking his pay like any
man of business. Then, we noticed, he seemed to become distracted in his work. In
a dull trance he touched metal implements to his spinning wheel of stone, careless of
the sparks that flew into his face. Yet there was also a wild luminousness in his
eyes, as of a diamond-bright fever burning within him. Eventually we found
ourselves unable to abide his company, though we now attributed this merely to
some upsurge in his perennial strangeness rather than to a wholly unprecedented
change in his behavior. It was not until he no longer appeared on the streets of
town, or anywhere else, that we admitted our fears about him.
And these fears necessarily became linked to the other disruptions of that
season, those extravagant omens which were gaining force all around us. The
disappearance of Mr. Marble coincided with a new phenomenon, one that finally
became apparent in the twilight of a certain day when all of the clustering and
tenacious foliage seemed to exude a vague phosphorescence. By nightfall this
prodigy was beyond skepticism. The multicolored leaves were softly glowing
against the black sky, creating an untimely nocturnal rainbow which scattered its
spectral tints everywhere and dyed the night with a harvest of hues: peach gold and

pumpkin orange, honey yellow and winy amber, apple red and plum violet.
Lustrous within their leafy shapes, the colors cast themselves across the darkness
and were splattered upon our streets and our fields and our faces. Everything was
resplendent with the pyrotechnics of a new autumn.
That night we kept to our houses and watched at our windows. It was no
marvel, then, that so many of us saw the one who wandered about the town on
that iridescent eve, and who joined in its outbursts and celebrations. Possessed by
the ecstasies of a dark festival, he moved in a trance, bearing in his hand that great
ceremonial knife whose keen edge flashed a thousand glittering dreams. He was
seen standing alone beneath trees whose colors shined upon him, staining his face
and his tattered clothes. He was seen standing alone in the yards of our houses, a
rigid scarecrow concocted from a patchwork of shadows. He was seen stalking
beside high wooden fences that were now painted with a quivering glow. Finally,
he was seen at a certain intersection of streets at the center of town.
By then, we knew what needed to happen. The slaughtering beast had come
for its own. A season was upon us out of all seasons, and an aberration had risen
that did not belong to the course of life we had always known. It grew out of the
earth in a farmer’s field, and beneath it was a bottomless hole that we covered with
a mound of dirt, thereby denying a hungering presence what it asked of us.
Unsated, it would now take what it desired. As frightened as we were, we also felt
resentment and outrage. From the beginning, there was an exchange to which we
had resigned ourselves: that which is given must one day be given back. In time the
eternal darkness would arrive, as each of our lives was reclaimed at its end and
went back to the earth that had borne our bodies and sustained them with its
plenty. But the phenomenon we confronted seemed nothing less than a premature
craving, a greed surpassing our covenant with earth’s estate. What we were forced
to stipulate, then, was another, perhaps more fundamental, order of being than our
species had suspected, even a betrayal or deception on the part of creation itself. All
that was left to us was to wonder: who knows all that is innate to this world, or to
any other? Why should there not be something buried deep within appearances,

something that wears a mask to hide itself behind the visibility of nature?
But whatever it was that secreted itself in outward shapes mattered less to us
that night than the plan it had conceived for an expertly whetted blade and the
possessed hand that held it. We had no illusions that our fate could be evaded or
opposed. For if the power or entity that had seized our land could exercise its will
as we had seen, what was there that it could not do? And now it was rousing itself
to a furor. More than ever, the trees burned with an eerie incandescence, and the
chittering noises that commanded the sultry air began rising to a pitch of vicious
laughter. As Mr. Marble stood in the center of town, he eyed our houses in turn,
the matter of his mind seemingly focused on where the blood would begin and how
voracious would be the ravening demanded by whatever mystery empowered him
as its brutal servant.  
Like any group of persons who feel a sure sense of imminent mayhem, each of
us hoped that it might pass us by and the worst would be visited on others.
Cowards all, we prayed to be overlooked in the coming massacre. But our shame
was not long-lived. Voices began to call from the street to those of us who were
still in hiding. “He’s gone,” someone said. “We saw him go off into the woods.” He
had raised his knife, it was reported, but his hand trembled, as if he was fighting
against it. Then he walked off past the town limits. “More like staggered,” said a
woman who was holding a spatula like a weapon. “You’d think he was walking in a
windstorm that way he leaned forward, pushing and pushing. I was afraid that he’d
tumble back into Main Street.” A man who came late to the scene avowed to all of
us that if Mr. Marble had stayed any longer, he was going to approach him and
say, “Take me and spare the others. Blood is blood.” It was not difficult to see
through his fabrication.
For some hours, we huddled in the center of town, waiting to see if Mr.
Marble would return. The trees around us seemed to be fading in their radiance,
and the night was quiet, the din of shrill vibrations in the air having abated
entirely. A few at a time, we turned back to our houses, which had now lost their
reek of moldering shadows, and gradually the town succumbed to a dreamless sleep.

Somehow we all felt assured that what we feared would happen that night would
not come to pass.
 
 
Yet at daybreak it became evident that something had indeed happened during the
night. Everywhere the earth had at last turned cold. And the trees now stood bare
of leaves, all of which lay dark and withered upon the ground, as if their strangely
deferred dying had finally overtaken them in a sudden rage of mortification. We
searched both the town and countryside for any remaining sign of the appalling
season we had endured. And it was not long before Mr. Marble was discovered.
The corpse reposed in a field, stretched face-down across a mound of dirt and
alongside the remains of a dismantled scarecrow. When we turned over the body
we looked upon open eyes as colorless as that ashen autumn morning. Then we
marked that the figure’s left arm had been slashed to the bone by the knife still
gripped in its right hand. 
Blood had flowed over the earth and blackened the flesh of the self-murdered
man. But those of us who handled that limp, nearly weightless body, dipping our
fingers into the dark wound, found nothing at all that had the feeling of blood. We
knew very well, of course, what that shadowy blackness did feel like. We knew
what had found its way into the man before us and dragged him into its savage
world. His affinity with the immanent schemes of existence had always been much
deeper than ours. So we buried him deep in a bottomless grave.

