
Hair Cells
Micromechanics and Hearing

A Singular Audiology Textbook
Jeffrey L. Danhauer, Ph.D.
Audiology Editor

Hair Cells
Micromechanics and Hearing
Edited by
Charles I. Berlin, Ph.D.
Kenneth and Frances Barnes Bullington Professor of Hearing Science
Director, Kresge Hearing Research Laboratory of the South
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
Department of Otolaryngology and Biocommunication
New Orleans, Louisiana
Richard P. Bobbin, Ph.D.
Professor
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Biocommunication
Kresge Hearing Research Laboratory of the South
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
New Orleans, Louisiana
A u s t r a l i a
C a n a d a
M e x i c o
S i n g a p o r e
S p a i n
U n i t e d
K i n g d o m
U n i t e d
S t a t e s

Hair Cells: Micromechanics and Hearing
by Charles I. Berlin, Ph.D. and Richard P. Bobbin, Ph.D.
Business Unit Director:
William Brottmiller
Acquisitions Editor:
Marie Linvill
Editorial Assistant:
Kristin Banach
Executive Marketing
Manager:
Dawn Gerrain
Channel Manager:
Tara Carter
Executive Production Editor:
Karen Leet
Production Editor:
Brad Bielawski
COPYRIGHT © 2001 by Singu-
lar,
an imprint of Delmar, a division
of Thomson Learning, Inc.
Thomson Learning™is a trade-
mark
used herein under license
Printed in Canada
1 2 3 4 5 XXX 06  05 04 02 01
For more information contact
Singular,
401 West “A” Street, Suite 325
San Diego, CA 92101-7904
Or find us on the World Wide
Web at http://www.singpub.com
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.No
part of this work covered by the
copyright here-on may be repro-
duced or used in any
form or by any means—graphic,
electronic, or mechanical, in-
cluding photocopying, recording,
taping, Web distribution or infor-
mation storage and retrieval
systems—without written per-
mission of the publisher.
For permission to use material
from this
text or product, contact us by
Tel (800) 730-2214
Fax (800) 730-2215
www.thomsonrights.com
Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Available upon request
NOTICE TO THE READER
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or perform any independent
analysis in connection with any of the product information contained herein. Publisher does not assume,
and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and
include information other than that provided to it by the manufacturer.
The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might be indicated by the
activities herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instructions contained herein, the read-
er willingly assumes all risks in connection with such
instructions.
The Publisher makes no representation or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, the war-
ranties of fitness for particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any such representations implied with
respect to the material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with respect to such ma-
terial. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in
whole or part, from the readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this material.

v
Contents
Preface by Charles I. Berlin, Ph.D. 
and Richard P. Bobbin, Ph.D.
Contributors
Chapter 1
Transduction and Adaptation by Vertebrate Hair Cells
1
David P. Corey, Ph.D.
Chapter 2
How a Living Hair cell Repairs Itself: Involvement of
27
Purinoceptors In the Repair of Hair Bundle
Mechanoreceptors of Sea Anemones
Glen M. Watson, Ph.D.
Chapter 3
Fast Transducer Adaptation, Physiological Implications
45
and Underlying Mechanisms
Anthony J. Ricci, Ph.D.
Chapter 4
Hearing in a Primitive Animal
67
Patricia Mire, Ph.D.
Chapter 5
Brn-3.1 is Required for Development and Survival
93
of the Hair Cell
Allen F. Ryan, Ph.D.
Chapter 6
Enhancing Signal Discrimination by Means of a
103
Metabotropic Glutamate Receptor
Adam W. Hendricson, Grace Athas, Ph.D.,
Paul S. Guth, Ph.D.
Chapter 7
Additional Studies on the Role of ATP as a
129
Neuromulator in the Organ of Corti
Richard P. Bobbin, Ph.D.,  Christopher S. LeBlanc,
Manisha Mandhare, Margarett S. Parker
Index
155


Preface
On October 8th, 1999, Dr. David Corey of Harvard University became the
sixth winner (recipient) of the annual Kresge-Mirmelstein Award. This
award was jointly conceived by the late Rona Mirmelstein and Dr. Charles
I. Berlin to promote hearing research in general, and tangibly reward the
world’s best auditory scientists for their successful efforts. The winner is
now chosen by the previous winners purely on the basis of the power and
importance of their scientific contribution and this selection is made with
no other consideration.
Once he or she accepts the award, each winner is asked to exchange a
chapter describing his or her work for the cash award. At the meeting, re-
lated other invited investigators give papers and the manuscripts are then
collated into a publication. In fact, the resulting manuscripts become what,
in German, is an ideal word…a Festschrift, meaning a collection of writ-
ings to celebrate either a person or an event. In this case we celebrate both
the person and the event.
Each of the previous winners contributed the leading chapter to the
following books all published by Singular Publishing Group:
Title
Winner
Year 
of 
Year
(Recipient)
Awarded
Book
Published
William Brownell, Ph.D.,
1994
Hair Cells and Hearing Aids
1996
Robert Wenthold, Ph.D.,
1995
Neurotransmission and
1997
Hearing Loss
David Kemp, Ph.D.
1996
Otoacoustic Emissions
1998
M.C.Liberman, Ph.D.
1997
The Efferent Auditory System
1999
Karen Steele, Ph.D.
1998
Genetics and Hearing Loss
2000
David Corey, Ph.D.
1999
Hair Cells: Micomechanics
2000
and Hearing
The seventh recipient of this award is Peter Dallos, Ph.D. for his work
cloning the hair cell motor about which Brownell wrote. We expect Dr.
Dallos’ award to be given on October 20th, 2000.
vii
vii

The meeting was held at the New Orleans Marriott Hotel and called to
order by our redoubtable Dr. Douglas Webster, who has in the past been an
exemplary Master of Ceremonies, and returned from his retirement in Ari-
zona to serve in this special capacity.
Our colleague, Nicolas Bazan, M.D., Ph.D., co-sponsored this meeting
and also gave introductory remarks to set the stage for what turned out to
be a thrilling day in auditory science. Our Department Head, Dr. Daniel W.
Nuss greeted the group, and remained throughout the day in testimony to
his interest in these important scientific issues.
The first talk was by Dr. David Corey and entitled “Dancing on the
Head of a Pin: Hair Cell Micromechanics and the Cochlea”. The frog
vestibular hair cell was the model here for an outstanding talk on the im-
portance of the transduction apparatus for adaptation. He reviewed the
two general mechanism proposed for adaptation, one involving a myosin-
powered motor that maintains tension on the channels, and another involv-
ing calcium entering through the transduction channels.
The second talk of the day was presented by Dr. Glen Watson on sea
anemones, that are essentially living hair cells.  Dr. Watson presented evi-
dence that showed how living hair bundles on hair cells are repaired fol-
lowing trauma by secretory proteins called “repair proteins”.  The recovery
induced by repair proteins is enhanced by the chemical messenger called
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) acting on ATP receptors and using calcium
as a second messenger. Because ATP receptors are found on the hair bun-
dles of mammalian hair cells, this research by Dr. Watson may have direct
implications on how human hearing recovers following noise exposure. 
Dr. Anthony Ricci, who was among the first to suggest that adaptation
of the transduction apparatus may impart a mechanical tuning to the hair
bundles, amplified the topic introduced by Dr Corey. Dr. Ricci reviewed ex-
isting data regarding fast adaptation with emphasis on the evidence that
adaptation may be a mechanical tuning mechanism. He also presented evi-
dence that there may be multiple mechanisms of adaptation.
Dr. Patricia Mire, who studies the hair bundles on tentacles of sea
anemones as a model of hair bundles on hair cells of vertebrates, discussed
the similarities and differences of these two systems. Dr. Mire presented da-
ta demonstrating that the hair bundles on the tentacles are modulated by
chemoreceptors and possess self repair mechanisms. A tip link model of
transduction with modifications for functioning in prey detection in a noisy
environment was presented. 
Dr. Allen Ryan, discussed the development of the ear and the role of
transcription factors which regulate gene expression by binding to specific
DNA sequences. Dr. Ryan presented evidence that the transcription factor
Brn-3.1 is a master gene regulatory factor required for the differentiation of
hair cells from their precursors. Studies of Brn-3.1 may lead to discoveries
of genetic mutations that underlie various forms of genetic deafness.
Dr. Paul Guth, together with colleagues Drs. Grace Athas and Adam
W. Hendricson discussed the evidence for a role of metabotropic glutamate
viii
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

receptors present on vestibular hair cells in transmitter release from these
cells. The hypothesis being tested is whether these receptors are recruited
under conditions of mechanically-evoked activity, but not at rest.
Finally, Dr. Richard Bobbin, and colleagues, presented a continuation
of their ATP story published in the previous book of this series. Additional
immunohistochemical and electrophysiological data are presented examin-
ing the role of ATP and ATP receptors on cells exposed to perilymph in
modulation of cochlear mechanics and a control of ion flow. These recep-
tors appear to have a different function than those exposed to endolymph
which act in repair of the hair bundles as discussed in an earlier chapter by
Dr. Watson.    
Dr. Nuss closed our meeting expressing his appreciation and his admi-
ration for the science presented, and urged us to continue this exciting and
useful series.
The careful reader will note that the current text was finished and pub-
lished in record time. This is due in no small part to the extraordinary ef-
forts, diligence and talents of Lillie Long, our Editorial Assistant. Ms. Long
not only reminded the busy authors of their obligations on a weekly basis,
but she personally revised and restructured references and formats to make
the book as uniform and precise as possible. She showed a genuine talent
for redaction and document preparation, and met publisher’s deadline
with remarkably satisfying regularity. Our special thanks to her for her per-
formance. 
Finally, we must acknowledge the far-sighted, thoughtful and commit-
ted munificence of Frances Barnes Bullington. Mrs. Bullington, who is a
retired speech pathologist, funded the Regents-supplemented Professor-
ship which Dr. Berlin now holds, and has made a bequest to fund a Chair
as well. At this time our Board of Regents accepts petitions to supplement
donated funds of $600,000 so that they reach the $1Million needed to sup-
port a Chair in perpetuity. It is this generosity of purse as well as spirit and
commitment to our work that will ultimately leave our Otolaryngology De-
partment with both a Professorship and a Chair funded in the names of
Kenneth and Frances Barnes Bullington.  We will be forever indebted to
her. 
Charles I. Berlin, Ph.D.
Kenneth and Frances Barnes Bullington Professor of Hearing Science
Director, Kresge Hearing Research Laboratory of the South
LSU Medical Center, Department of Otolaryngology and Biocommunication
Richard P. Bobbin, Ph.D.
Professor,
LSU Medical Center, Department of Otolaryngology and Biocommunication
PREFACE
ix


Grace B. Athas, Ph.D.
Pharmacology
Tulane University School of
Medicine
New Orleans, Louisiana
Richard P. Bobbin, Ph.D.
Professor
Department of
Otorhinolaryngology and
Biocommunication
Kresge Hearing Research
Laboratory of the South
Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center
New Orleans, Louisiana
David P. Corey, Ph.D.
Professor
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Department of Neurobiology
Harvard Medical School and
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts 
Paul S. Guth, Ph.D.
Professor of Pharmacology
Tulane University School of
Medicine
New Orleans, Louisiana
Adam W. Hendricson
Department of Pharmacology
Tulane University School of
Medicine
New Orleans, Louisiana
Christopher S. LeBlanc
Neuroscience
Graduate Student
Louisiana State University Health
Science Center
New Orleans, Louisiana
Manisha S. Mandhare
Technician in Otorhinolaryngology
Department
Louisiana State University
New Orleans, Louisiana
Patricia Mire, Ph.D.
Research Assistant Professor of
Biology
The University of Louisiana -
Lafayette
Lafayette, Louisiana 
Margarett S. Parker, Ph.D.
Department of
Otorhinolaryngology and
Biocommunication
Kresge Hearing Research
Laboratory of the South
Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center
New Orleans, Louisiana
Anthony Ricci, Ph.D.
Assistant Professor
Neuroscience Center of Excellence
Kresge Hearing Research
Laboratory of the South
xi
Contributors

Louisisana State University
Health Sciences Center
Department of Neuroscience
New Orleans, Louisiana 
Allen F. Ryan, Ph.D.
University of California, San Diego
School of Medicine
Department of Otolaryngology –
Head and Neck Surgery
La Jolla, California
Glen M. Watson, Ph.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Biology
University of Louisiana at
Lafayette
Lafayette, Louisiana 
xii
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Two of the great mysteries facing auditory physiologists of a quarter cen-
tury ago were how the mechanical stimulus of sound initiated a neural
signal in the hair cells of the cochlea, and how the organ of Corti could am-
plify the vibration of the basilar membrane in a frequency-specific way to
create the remarkably sharp tuning that characterizes auditory nerve
fibers. Since then, the first question has been largely answered, at least in
terms of a structural and biophysical model for transduction. Many details
remain to be elucidated, especially in identifying the proteins that consti-
tute the transduction apparatus, but there is strong evidence supporting
the tip-links model for transduction and essentially none in conflict with it. 
There is less understanding of mechanical amplification by the organ
of Corti. In part, this is because the most successful hair-cell organs for
physiology have come from amphibians and reptiles, which were thought
not to have amplification of the sort found in the mammalian cochlea.
That view may be changing, with the recognition that most vertebrate ears
can generate otoacoustic emissions, and that emissions may be a by-prod-
uct of a cellular amplifier that has gone into oscillation. In addition, the
amazingly large and fast electromotility of the mammalian outer hair cell
has attracted much attention—deservedly so—but while it seems like the
obvious motor to drive a cochlear amplifier, there are certain difficulties in
working it into a high-frequency amplifier.
Hair cells adapt to maintained stimuli. Several mechanisms mediate
adaptation, including mechanical relaxations in the stimulus and changes
in transmitter release, but an important one happens at the level of the
transduction apparatus, where the mechanically-activated conductance
tends to return to a resting level of 10 to 20% open, even if the mechanical
deflection of the hair bundle is maintained. Two general mechanisms have
been proposed for adaptation, one involving a myosin-powered motor
1
1
Transduction and Adaptation
by Vertebrate Hair Cells
David P. Corey, PhD

that maintains tension on the channels, and another involving calcium en-
tering though the transduction channels and binding just inside to close
the channels. Recent evidence suggests that both mechanisms may be op-
erative, perhaps in different proportions in different cells. Moreover, the
calcium-closure mechanism has characteristics that could power a me-
chanical amplification in the organ of Corti. It may be that a component of
adaptation is in fact the long-sought cochlear amplifier.
TRANSDUCTION
Bundle Structure
Hair cells are epithelial cells, and have evolved their specialized structure
from components of more generic epithelia. The mechanosensory part of
the hair cell is, of course, the hair bundle, composed of two types of cilia.
Stereocilia are elongated microvilli, and like microvilli have cores of cross-
linked actin filaments (Flock, Cheung, Flock, and Utter, 1981; Tilney,
DeRosier, and Muloy, 1980). They number between 20 and 300 in hair cells
from different vertebrate organs; an example from the bullfrog saccule is
shown in Figure 1–1, where the bundles contain about 60 stereocilia. Stere-
ocilia can range in length from a few micrometers in the high-frequency
regions of mammalian cochleas, to 80 m or more in the semicircular
canals. In all cases, their heights rise in a regular staircase from the short
edge of the bundle (the negative side) to the tall edge (positive). Each
stereocilium contains hundreds of actin filaments, perhaps 1200 in the
medium-sized stereocilia of Figure 1–1A, and these are cross linked by
fimbrin to create a stiff rod (Sobin and Flock, 1983; Shepherd, Barres, and
Corey, 1989). The actin filaments decrease in number as the stereocilium
tapers near its bottom end, so that only a few dozen filaments coalesce into
a rootlet that enters the cuticular plate to anchor the stereocilium. Thus de-
flections of the bundle cause stereocilia to pivot at their insertions in the
cuticular plate, but not bend.
The hair bundle also includes a single kinocilium in all hair cells but
those of avian and mammalian cochleas. In those organs, the kinocilium
grows out normally when the bundle grows or regenerates, but is lost in
the mature hair cell. The placement of the kinocilium at the tall edge of the
bundle, and its attachment to the tallest stereocilia (Jacobs and Hudspeth,
1990), enable it to transmit mechanical force from an overlying accessory
structure such as the otolithic membrane or cupula to the stereocilia. In
contrast to stereocilia, kinocilia have the internal structure of motile cilia,
containing a 9+2 arrangement of microtubules. Both stereocilia and
kinocilia are enclosed by the cell membrane, like fingers in a glove, so that
the actin or microtubule cores are intracellular and in electrical continuity
with the cell body.
2
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Adjacent stereocilia are connected by four sets of extracellular links:
basal connectors near the taper region, shaft connectors often extending
the length of stereocilia, horizontal tip connectors that seem to hold the
tips of stereocilia together while allowing slipping, and tip links (Pickles,
Comis, and Osborne, 1984; Goodyear and Richardson, 1992). While the
first three links extend laterally and symmetrically between stereocilia, the
tip links extend obliquely upwards from the tip of each stereocilium to the
side of the adjacent taller stereocilium, along the axis from short to tall
(Figure 1–1B). They are about ~10 nm in thickness and ~150 nm long in
nearly all vertebrate hair cells, and at each end terminate at electron-dense
plaques situated between the membrane and the outermost actin filaments
(Pickles et al., 1984, Assad, Shepherd, and Corey, 1991; Jacobs and Hud-
speth, 1990). 
Physiology
Deflection of the hair bundle towards the tallest stereocilia (a positive
stimulus) causes a depolarizing receptor potential of up to ~30 mV (Hud-
speth and Corey, 1977; Crawford and Fettiplace, 1978). The depolarization
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
3
Figure 1–1. A, Three hair cells in the sensory macula of the bullfrog saccule. The
bundle has a morphological axis of polarity defined by the graded heights of the
stereocilia (seen on the middle bundle) and the eccentric placement of the kinocili-
um (seen on the left bundle), such that the tallest stereocilia are at the positive
edge. These bundles are about 8 m tall, and contain 50-60 stereocilia. B, A tip
link (arrow) extending between two adjacent stereocilia. At each end are electron-
dense attachment plaques between the membrane and the actin cores. The tip link
is 150-200 nm in length; stereocilia are ~400 nm in diameter.

is associated with a drop in resistance of the cell membrane, indicating that
positive deflection opens ion channels. If the hair cell is voltage-clamped,
opening of these “transduction” channels is manifest as an increase in in-
ward current, at negative holding potentials, of several hundred picoam-
peres amplitude (Figure 1–2A) (Corey and Hudspeth, 1979a; Assad, Haco-
hen, and Corey, 1989). In bullfrog hair cells, positive deflection of ~0.4 (m
(around the diameter of one stereocilium) is sufficient to open all the chan-
nels, while a negative deflection of ~0.1 m closes the fraction of channels
that are open at the resting bundle position. The I(X) curve generated by
plotting receptor current against deflection (Figure 1–2B), shows the range
over which deflection can change channel open probability, and shows the
resting current of 10–20%.
Most small cations will pass through the channel, including Na+, K+,
Li+, Cs+, tetramethylammonium, and even Tris, but the channel is particu-
larly permeable to Ca2+ (Corey and Hudspeth, 1979a; Lumpkin, Marquis,
and Hudspeth, 1997; Ricci and Fettiplace, 1998). Because the bundles are
normally bathed in a high-K+ and low-Ca2+ endolymph, K+ carries the
bulk of the receptor current in vivo. However, even when Ca2+ is less than
0.1% of the cation composition, it carries as much as 10% of the current,
and plays an important role in regulation and feedback for the transduc-
tion apparatus (Ricci and Fettiplace, 1998).
The single-channel conductance of the transduction channels is about
100 pS in normal saline, so that each open channel carries a current of 6–7
pA at the resting potential (Crawford, Evans, and Fettiplace, 1991). In tur-
4
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 1–2. A, Receptor current (lower panel) evoked by movement of the hair
bundle (upper panel) in a dissociated bullfrog hair cell. Positive deflection of the
bundle increases a cation conductance and allows inward current of up to several
hundred picoamperes in these cells. B, The I(X) curve generated by plotting cur-
rent against the deflection of the tip of the hair bundle. Positive deflections of ~0.5
m open all channels; negative deflections of ~0.1 m close those channels open
at the resting position. Modified from Assad et al., 1989.

tle cochlea, healthy cells can have well over 1000 pA of receptor current,
indicating that each hair cell may have >200 functional channels, or >4
channels per stereocilium (Wu, Ricci, and Fettiplace, 1999). Transduction
channels can be blocked by a variety of larger cations, and the block is usu-
ally voltage-dependent, indicating that these compounds bind within the
pore of the channel. The best known of the blocking drugs are aminogly-
coside antibiotics such as streptomycin, which block with a Ki of ~20 µM
at the resting potential (Kroese, Das, and Hudspeth, 1989). Perhaps sur-
prisingly, curare will also block the channel at a concentration of 2–3 µM
(Glowatzki, Ruppersberg, Zenner, and Rusch, 1997). Amiloride and its
analogs such as benzamil also reduce the receptor current, with Ki near 5
M, but the voltage dependence and Hill coefficient suggest a mechanism
different from pore block (Rusch, Kros, and Richardson, 1994). 
Transduction channels are located at the tips of stereocilia, as shown
by mapping the location of current sinks around the bundle (Hudspeth,
1982). Although surprising and perhaps controversial (Ohmori, 1988), the
result has been confirmed by iontophoretic application of a channel block-
er and by calcium imaging of individual stereocilia (Jaramillo and Hud-
speth, 1991; Denk, Holt, Shepard, and Corey, 1995; Lumpkin and Hud-
speth, 1995). Thus, current entering the stereocilia must pass down their
lengths to depolarize the cell body, a process which takes just microsec-
onds in stereocilia such as those in Figure 1–1A.
Following deflection of the hair bundle, transduction channels open
in ~40 µs at room temperature, and ~10 µs at mammalian temperatures
(Corey and Hudspeth, 1979b; 1983a). Larger positive deflections cause
more rapid opening than smaller deflections. These argue against activa-
tion of channels by a diffusible second-messenger, and suggest instead
that the deflection directs a force directly onto a mechanically-sensitive
transduction channel protein. If deflection were to move one end of an
elastic “gating spring”, the other end of which pulls on the channel, then a
simple biophysical model can describe the kinetics and force sensitivity
(Corey and Hudspeth, 1983a). 
Support for this model has come from very fine measurements of the
movement of hair bundles when force is applied to them. Howard and
Hudspeth (1988) found that application of force deflected the bundle by an
amount that could be attributed to the stiffnesses of the stereocilia and the
gating springs acting in parallel. However, if the deflection moved the
bundle to a range where channels opened, then the bundle moved a bit
more. The extra movement could be attributed to the slight relaxation in
the gating springs that occurred as channels opened, and was calculated to
correspond to a movement of the channel protein upon opening of ~4 nm.
The extra movement was blocked by drugs that block the pore, suggesting
the channel’s gate can’t close if a blocker is in the pore.
Hair cells respond only to deflections directed along their morpholog-
ical axis, from the short to the tall stereocilia, while deflections perpendicu-
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
5

lar to this axis cause little if any response (Shotwell, Jacobs, and Hudspeth,
1981). Thus, a transduction apparatus must be at the tips of the stereocilia,
must involve some sort of direct linkage to the channel, and must be
anisotropic—having some characteristic appropriate to sense directional
stimuli.
Transduction Model
The discovery of tip links provided both a structure and a model for trans-
duction (Figure 1–3) (Pickles et al., 1984). They are oriented only along the
sensitive axis, and not from side to side. Moreover, their oblique orienta-
tion, unique among interstereociliary links, confers a directional sensitivi-
ty: deflection of the bundle in the positive direction will stretch the links,
and deflection in the negative direction will relax them. The “tip links
model” supposes that these links pull directly on the transduction chan-
nels to open them, and that the tip links either are the gating springs them-
selves or are mechanically in series with other elastic elements.
Two experiments support the importance of the tip links. Assad et al.
(1991) found that reduction of the extracellular Ca2+ concentration to well
below 1 µM abolished the mechanical sensitivity within seconds, in hair
cells from the bullfrog. Even when the normal Ca2+ was restored, the me-
6
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 1–3. The tip-links model for transduction. A, Stereocilia pivot at their bases
and remain touching at their tips, so that positive deflection of the bundle would
stretch the tip links. B, The tip link is imagined to be directly connected to ion
channels at each end. Stretch of the tip link (or of a different elastic element in se-
ries with it) would pull on the channels to open them. 

chanical sensitivity did not return during the duration of the experiment
(many minutes). They also found that a few seconds of low Ca2+ eliminat-
ed the tip links observed with electron microscopy, and restoration of nor-
mal Ca2+ did not restore the links. A similar correlation of tip links with
mechanical sensitivity was observed in bird hair cells (Zhao, Yamoah, and
Gillespie, 1996), but in this case the hair cell epithelia were kept in culture
for many hours after cutting tip links with low Ca2+, to allow recovery.
Both tip links and mechanical sensitivity returned over 7-10 hours, indicat-
ing a dynamic regulation and repair of the transduction apparatus.
Extensions of the Model
Although the tip-links model seems fundamentally sound, several refine-
ments have been made in recent years. 
First, the model gives no way to determine whether the transduction
channels are at the upper or lower ends of the tip links; either would work,
as current through the channels could flow down stereocilia to depolarize
the hair cell. With calcium imaging of individual stereocilia of a bundle,
Denk et al. (1995) were able to suggest an answer. They loaded hair cells
with a calcium indicator dye, and reasoned that any stereocilium that has
a functional transduction channel would increase its fluorescence when
calcium entered through the open channel. If the channels are only at the
lower end, then the tallest stereocilia could never show a fluorescence in-
crease upon bundle stimulation; if channels are at the upper end, then the
shortest would remain dim. They found that all stereocilia could increase
their fluorescence upon stimulation, indicating that transduction channels
can be at both lower and upper ends of tip links, and probably at both
ends. Moreover, the notion that channels are at both ends requires a revi-
sion of Howard and Hudspeth’s (1988) estimate of a 4-nm movement as-
sociated with channel opening. The earlier data could be refitted by a
model with two channels each moving ~2.2 nm (Denk et al., 1995).
Second, the largest transduction currents seen in bullfrog hair cells
(~400 pA) could be accounted for by about 50 channels on about 25 intact
tip links. Indeed, the calcium imaging showed many stereocilia that re-
mained dim during stimulation, as if a fraction of the 50 or so possible tip
links were missing (Denk et al., 1995). On the other hand, more recent
recordings of much larger transduction currents from turtle cochlear hair
cells can only be accounted for by supposing 5 or more channels per tip
link (Ricci and Fettiplace, 1998), a number clearly incompatible with the
idea of one at each end.
Third, a branching of the tip link at each end, long observed in trans-
mission electron micrographs, has been documented much more clearly
by quick-freeze, deep-etch electron micrographs of bullfrog hair cells
(Kachar, 1999). The tip link appears to be a helical filament with at least
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
7

two strands, two or three distinct branches appear to connect the upper
end of the tip link with the taller stereocilium’s membrane, and three or
more finer strands appear where the lower end contacts the tip of the
shorter stereocilium. Perhaps then, there is a channel at each of the fine
strands at each end of the tip link, amounting to 6 or 8 channels per tip
link. Then 3 or 4 channels at one end would be mechanically in parallel,
and together these would be mechanically in series with the 3 or 4 at the
other end. Such an arrangement makes models of channel gating quite
complex, but, then, evolution did not create hair cells with concern for the
biophysicist.
Ca2+ Metabolism in Stereocilia
Patch-clamp experiments show that calcium carries a significant fraction
of the receptor current in hair cells, and indicator dyes show that calcium
concentration rises inside stereocilia when channels open. As we shall see,
the intracellular calcium concentration near the transduction channels has
a pronounced feedback effect on the open probability of the channels, so
calcium metabolism within the stereocilia is critical in regulation of trans-
duction. Thus, we need to know how high the concentration gets near the
channel, and where the calcium goes.
Two groups have used calcium imaging together with diffusion mod-
els to determine the calcium concentration within stereocilia (Ricci and
Fettiplace, 1998; Ricci, Wu, and Fettiplace, 1998; Lumpkin and Hudspeth,
1998). These indicate that Ca2+ entering through channels can be se-
questered and removed by four mechanisms: simple diffusion down the
stereocilia, buffered diffusion of Ca2+ bound to a mobile endogenous
buffer, binding of Ca2+ to fixed endogenous buffer, and extrusion of Ca2+
by a calcium pump in the stereociliary membrane. Modeling of responses
to bundle deflections indicates that all four mechanisms must be active to
account for the fluorescence transients observed (Lumpkin and Hudspeth,
1998). Peak calcium levels depend both on the extracellular Ca2+ concen-
tration and on buffers such as EGTA or BAPTA added to the patch record-
ing solution. Under physiological conditions, the Ca2+ concentration at the
tips of the stereocilia can reach a few tenths of a micromolar, but is much
lower further from the tips. These values, however, are average concentra-
tions across the whole diameter of a stereocilium; very close to transduc-
tion channels the concentration can be much higher. For instance, 10 nm
from the channel, where Ca2+ may be acting to regulate transduction, the
concentration may reach a steady-state value of 5 to 50 µM within a few
tens of microseconds following channel opening (Ricci et al., 1998; Lump-
kin and Hudspeth, 1998).
Calcium buffers in the hair cell body have been studied, and appear
to be at a concentration of several millimolar. The buffer may be a protein
8
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

such as calbindin or calretinin (Roberts, 1993; 1994). It is not clear whether
this same buffer is in the stereocilia, but the effective endogenous mobile
buffer concentration is equivalent to 0.1-0.4 mM BAPTA (Ricci et al., 1998).
Calcium must also be extruded from the cytoplasm. Since there is little
Na+ in endolymph to drive a Na+/Ca2+ exchanger, attention has been fo-
cused on Ca2+ ATPases. Antibodies to plasma membrane calcium ATPases
(PMCA) label hair cells, especially the stereocilia, and especially the tips of
stereocilia (Crouch and Schulte, 1995; Apicella et al., 1997; Yamoah et al.,
1998). Quantitative immunoblots of purified hair bundles indicated that
each stereocilium may contain as many as 20,000 molecules of PMCA, or
2,000 molecules per µm2 (Yamoah et al., 1998). During a maintained deflec-
tion, PMCA pumps Ca2+ from the stereocilia, creating an outward current
of several picoamperes. Dialysis of hair cells with PMCA inhibitors blocks
this current, and also leads to a pronounced rise in Ca2+ concentration
within stereocilia (Yamoah et al., 1998). 
There are at least four different isoforms of PMCA, but the evidence is
that PMCA2 is the isoform in stereocilia (Furuta et al., 1998). Indeed, two
alleles of the mouse mutant deafwaddler, which is deaf and shows vestibu-
lar abnormalities, have either a point mutation or a frameshift in their PM-
CA2 genes (Street, McKee-Johnson, Fonseca, Temple, and Noben-Trauth,
1998). Similarly, a mouse with a targeted deletion of PMCA2 is deaf, has
balance problems, and has structural defects in the organ of Corti (Kozel et
al., 1998).
ADAPTATION
Most sensory systems adapt, decreasing their response even though a
stimulus is maintained (Adrian, 1928). Auditory nerve fibers decrease
their firing rate during a sustained tone (Smith, Brachman, and Goodman,
1983), and vestibular nerve fibers decrease their firing rate during a sus-
tained acceleration (Goldberg and Fernandez, 1971; Eatock, Corey, and
Hudspeth, 1987). While adaptation may occur at a variety of levels be-
tween a stimulus to the hair cell and the firing of a nerve, an important—
perhaps the dominant—part of adaptation occurs in the transduction ap-
paratus (Eatock et al., 1987; Eatock, 2000). A sustained positive deflection
of the hair bundle causes an initial increase in receptor current (channels
open), followed by a decline in current and conductance (channels close)
(Figure 1–4A,B). 
Expressed in terms of the I(X) curve, the decline in current could oc-
cur in three ways: by a broadening of the curve, so that a larger range of
deflection is needed to open or close all the channels; by a vertical com-
pression of the curve, as if inactivation reduces the number of channels
available to be opened; or by a shift of the curve along the deflection axis,
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
9

as if the cell is resetting the stimulus needed to open a certain proportion of
channels. In fact, adaptation is primarily associated with a shift of the I(X)
curve, whereby the hair cell moves the curve towards the sustained bundle
position, bringing the channel open probability back towards the resting
value (Figure 1– 4C) (Corey and Hudspeth, 1983b; Eatock et al., 1987).
10
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 1–4. Models for adaptation of the transduction apparatus in hair cells. A-C,
Physiology of adaptation. The open probability (Popen) of channels is increased by a
step deflection of the bundle, but then declines with a time course of 1-30 ms (B).
When the bundle is brought back to the rest position, Popen goes to zero, and then re-
covers to ~15% over the next 10-50 ms. Adaptation can also be seen as the Popen(X)
curve moving along the deflection axis, so that the same deflection causes a progres-
sively smaller Popen (C). D-E, Two models for adaptation. D, The slipping/climbing
model. Channels (and other associated proteins) would be tethered to the actin cores
by a few dozen motor proteins (perhaps myosin-I), which are always trying to climb
up the actin. Increased tip-link tension caused by bundle deflection would pull the
channels down the side of the taller stereocilium, so as to relax the tension on them. If
the bundle is deflected negatively to relax the tip links, then the motors would be able
to climb and restore resting tension. E, The calcium closure model. When a channel
opens, calcium passing through it would bind to a site on or near the channel, shift-
ing the relation between tension and open probability so the channel tends to close.
If channels close, the local calcium concentration rapidly dissipates and shifts the re-
lation back so channels tend to open. The models are not mutually exclusive.

Adaptation is not complete: the full shift of the I(X) curve is not as large
as the sustained bundle deflection, so the receptor current does not return
completely to the resting level. In bullfrog hair cells with 4 mM Ca2+ bathing
the bundles, the extent of adaptation is about 80%, that is, adaptation shifts
the I(X) curve by about 80% of the deflection (Shepherd and Corey, 1994). At
lower Ca2+ concentrations, it can be less complete (Ricci and Fettiplace,
1997). Thus the hair cell responds mostly to the change in bundle position,
but there is a residual response to the absolute bundle position.
Calcium inside the tips of the stereocilia speeds adaptation consider-
ably. The Ca2+ concentration inside the tips can be affected in three ways,
and each affects adaptation: Lowering the extracellular Ca2+ decreases
Ca2+ flux through the transduction channels, and slows the rate of adapta-
tion, measured either as the rate of shift of the I(X) curve or the change in
receptor current (Corey and Hudspeth, 1983b; Eatock et al., 1987; Haco-
hen, Assad, Smith, and Corey, 1989; Assad et al., 1989; Crawford, Evans,
and Fettiplace, 1989). Raising the calcium buffer concentration within the
hair cell causes Ca2+ to be more rapidly bound once it enters, and slows
the rate of adaptation (Crawford et al., 1989; Ricci and Fettiplace, 1997).
Depolarizing the hair cell reduces the driving force for Ca2+ influx, reduces
Ca2+ entry, and reduces or abolishes adaptation (Assad et al., 1989; Denk et
al., 1995). 
Ca2+ appears to affect the rate of adaptation by acting at a site very
near the transduction channel. If a hair cell is depolarized to block Ca2+ en-
try and eliminate adaptation, then repolarized to allow Ca2+ entry while
the bundle is still deflected, adaptation starts again within 1-2 ms of the re-
polarization. Since Ca2+ could only diffuse about 1 µm in that time, it must
find the adaptation control site very near the transduction channel in the
tip of the stereocilium (Assad et al., 1989). In addition, slow calcium
buffers like EGTA are not effective in slowing adaptation, whereas fast
buffers like BAPTA are, suggesting that the buffer must capture Ca2+ be-
fore it diffuses very far, if it is to prevent Ca2+ from reaching the adaptation
site (Ricci et al., 1998).
Initial studies characterized adaptation as a single exponential proc-
ess with a time constant of 10-30 ms (Eatock et al., 1987; Assad et al., 1989).
More recently, it has become clear that adaptation may have two different
components, with one as fast as 0.3 ms (Ricci et al., 1998). The fast process
tends to dominate with small deflections, but saturates with larger deflec-
tions, leaving the slower process. Moreover, some pharmacological manip-
ulations have shown differential effects on the time course of adaptation
and on the resting position of the I(X) curve, which adaptation is supposed
to regulate (Ricci and Fettiplace, 1997).
Two fundamentally different models for adaptation have been pro-
posed, one involving a mechanical adjustment of tension on the gating
spring (Howard and Hudspeth, 1987), and one involving Ca2+ binding di-
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
11

rectly to a site at or near the channel to change the relation between ten-
sion and open probability (Figure 1–4 D,E) (Crawford et al., 1989; Wu et
al., 1999). It is interesting to consider the evidence for each of these, and to
ask whether both could be operating simultaneously in the hair cell.
The Active Motor Model
Howard and Hudspeth (1987) used a flexible glass stimulus probe to mea-
sure the mechanical correlates of adaptation in bullfrog saccular hair cells.
They found that a force applied to the bundle caused a deflection of a cer-
tain amount, followed by an additional, slower deflection with the same
time course as adaptation (~30 ms). The slow deflection occurred for forces
directed in either the positive or negative direction along a cell’s physio-
logical axis, but not for forces directed perpendicular to the axis. When
adaptation of the receptor current slowed or disappeared during pro-
longed recording, the slow deflection did as well. Because adaptation was
associated with a mechanical relaxation, Howard and Hudspeth (1987)
speculated that adaptation might come about by a movement of the upper
tip-link attachment point along the side of the stereocilium. In this model,
an active motor complex in each stereocilium is continuously trying to
“climb” the stereocilium, pulling up the attachment point to increase ten-
sion in the tip link. When a positive deflection tightens the tip link (and
opens channels) the attachment slips down to relax the tension and allow
channels to close. When a negative deflection loosens the tip link (and
closes channels), the motor can climb to restore tension. At steady state,
the motor slips as fast as it climbs, and the steady state tension is just suffi-
cient to open 10-20% of the channels. The shift of the I(X) curve can then be
seen as a shift of the upper tip-link attachment point, adjusted for the geo-
metrical gain of the bundle. Thus, a positive deflection of 200 nm would
stretch the gating spring by about 24 nm (for bundle dimensions in bull-
frog saccule), and a subsequent slippage of 20 nm would allow most of the
opened channels to reclose. Howard and Hudspeth went on to suggest
that myosin would be an attractive mechanoenzyme to power the motor,
as it moved with the right speed for adaptation and in the right direction
relative to the actin polarity in stereocilia.
This short, provocative model really comprises three different ideas.
First, it supposes that adaptation is fundamentally a mechanical adjust-
ment process, moving one end of the physiologically-defined gating
spring to change tension. Second, by equating the gating spring with the
tip link, it makes the morphological prediction that the electron-dense at-
tachment of the tip link moves during adaptation. Third, it suggests a pro-
tein of the myosin family as the molecular basis for adaptation. All three
ideas have been tested in the last decade.
The mechanical basis of adaptation was studied by systematically
measuring adaptation rates for positive and negative deflections, and de-
12
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

veloping a mechanical model for adaptation based on an active, force-pro-
ducing motor and on the previously measured stiffness of hair bundles
(Assad and Corey, 1992). Reducing calcium entry (by depolarizing the hair
cell) reduced both climbing and slipping rates, but reduced slipping more.
The model predicted that depolarization would therefore increase tension
on the channels, increasing resting open probability to ~80% and shifting
the I(X) curve by ~120 nm; this was observed experimentally. Because of
the upward slant of tip links, an increase in tip-link tension should pull an
unrestrained bundle in the negative direction. The predicted position
change with depolarization was about 100 nm, which could be measured
with high-resolution video microscopy (Assad and Corey, 1992). Finally,
the bundle movement caused by depolarization was abolished when tip
links were cut with BAPTA, suggesting that tip links convey the tension
for bundle movement (Assad et al., 1991). Thus a quantitative model
based on adaptation rates accurately predicted movement of the bundle,
supporting a mechanical basis for adaptation.
Morphological correlates of adaptation have been more difficult to
obtain. Video microscopy with a resolution of 30-40 nm showed no gross
movement of the stereocilia or cuticular plate during adaptation, shifting
attention to smaller-scale molecular rearrangements (Shepherd, Assad,
Parakkal, Kachar, and Corey, 1991). Thus far, it has not been possible to see
the predicted changes in attachment plaque position, which are just tens of
nanometers, above the natural variability in plaque position. On the other
hand, cutting tip links with BAPTA should relieve tension and allow mo-
tors to climb even in an undeflected bundle. Indeed, BAPTA treatment
was followed by an upward movement of the attachments of 50-70 nm, as
measured from transmission electron micrographs. (Shepherd et al., 1991).
There is broad, but as yet circumstantial, support for myosin’s in-
volvement in adaptation. First, it has been shown that the actin cores of
stereocilia can support myosin motility. Beads coated with chicken muscle
myosin move along demembranated bullfrog stereocilia, always moving
towards the tips at 1-2 m/s (Shepherd et al., 1990). Second, blockers of
the ATPase cycle such as ADPS, which should arrest myosin while
strongly bound to actin, block adaptation when dialyzed into the hair-cell
cytoplasm (Gillespie and Hudspeth, 1993). Similarly, phosphate analogs
that arrest myosin while weakly bound should inhibit myosin force pro-
duction, and apparently cause release of resting tension on channels
(Yamoah and Gillespie, 1996).
The myosin gene superfamily contains dozens of members, organized
into fifteen classes. At least eight of these classes occur in vertebrates. A
search for hair-cell myosins has followed two paths. Gillespie, Wagner,
and Hudspeth (1993) used vanadate trapping of adenine nucleotides to
identify three putative myosins within stereocilia, of molecular weights
120, 160, and 230 kDa. The 120 kDa band was labeled with an antibody to
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
13

a myosin type I, and this antibody particularly labeled the tips of stere-
ocilia. Solc, Derfler, Duyk, and Corey (1994) used degenerate PCR to am-
plify fragments of most myosins expressed in the hair-cell epithelium, and
found ten different myosins from six different classes (I, II, V, VI, VII and
X). Interestingly, two of these myosins (VI and VIIa) cause inherited deaf-
ness in mice and/or humans when mutated (Avraham et al., 1995; Gibson
et al., 1995). The myosin-I was cloned in full, and an antibody raised
against the tail domain (Solc et al., 1994). An extensive antibody study
found that myosins-I, -VI and –VIIa are all expressed by the hair cells,
and all are in the stereocilia as well as elsewhere in the cells (Hasson et al.,
1997). These have molecular weights of approximately 120, 160, and 230
kDa, respectively. Recently, a myosin-XV has also been discovered in stere-
ocilia (Liang et al., 1999). Of all these myosins, however, only myosin-I is
concentrated in the tips of stereocilia (Figure 1–5A,B) (Hasson et al., 1997).
Because localization with light microscopy cannot determine the relation
of a myosin to the tip-link attachments, and because myosins might natu-
rally climb to the tips of stereocilia unless otherwise prevented, the loca-
tion of myosin-I was also determined with immunogold electron mi-
croscopy. This showed that myosin-I immunoreactivity was indeed
associated with both end of the tip links, where it may link the channels to
the actin cores (Figure 1–5C) (Garcia, Yee, Gillespie, and Corey, 1998).
Like most myosins, myosin-I has binding sites for regulatory light
chains such as calmodulin. Three calmodulin molecules bind to myosin-I,
and confer a calcium dependence to the myosin activity (Zhu, Sata, and
Ikebe, 1996; Burlacu, Tap, Lumpkin, and Hudspeth, 1997). Calmodulin is
in stereocilia, especially concentrated at the tips (Shepherd et al., 1989;
Walker et al., 1993), and antagonists of calmodulin block adaptation
(Corey, Smith, Barres, and Koroshetz, 1987; Walker and Hudspeth, 1996). It
may be that calmodulin mediates the Ca2+ sensitivity of adaptation (Walk-
er and Hudspeth, 1996; Gillespie and Corey, 1997).
While all these studies are consistent with a mechanoenzyme such as
myosin mediating adaptation, none specifically proves the involvement of
myosin-I. We now need physiological inhibitors or activators based on
the specific molecular sequence of myosin-I, as a definitive test of this
motor. A mutant form of myosin-I (Gillespie, Gillespie, Mercer, Shah, and
Shokat, 1999), which is more sensitive than the wild-type to a certain in-
hibitor, could provide such a test.
Ca2+-Dependent Closure Model
As mentioned, the rate of adaptation depends on the Ca2+ concentration
inside the tips of stereocilia. With high extracellular Ca2+, and low or slow
internal calcium buffer, adaptation can become quite fast, with a time con-
stant as short as 0.3 ms (Ricci and Fettiplace, 1997). This is probably too
14
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

fast to be mediated by a tension adjustment system that requires an ATPase
cycle of myosin. For instance, the calculated 1-2 m/s climbing rate of the
adaptation motor and a myosin step size of 8 nm suggest an ATPase cycle
time of 4 to 8 ms. A fast time constant is still compatible with a myosin mo-
tor if Ca2+ rapidly causes the myosin to release tension, for instance, if Ca2+
reversibly causes the lever domain of myosin to become more compliant
(Gillespie and Corey, 1997). However, such a mechanism could account
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
15
Figure 1–5. Myosin-I immunoreactivity in bullfrog hair cells. A-B, Immunofluo-
rescence of single dissociated cells shows myosin-I in the cell body, and also in
the hair bundle where it is especially concentrated at the tips of stereocilia. The
kinocilium also shows fluorescent label. Scale bar = 2 µm. C, Summary of myosin-
I distribution in the tips as seen with immunogold electron microscopy. Gold par-
ticles marking the antibody were counted and averaged over many stereocilia in six
bundles, and their density is indicated as particles/m2 of surface membrane. The
greatest density is within ~200 nm of either end of the tip link. Reprinted from Gar-
cia et al. (1998), Figures 1 and 7.

only for a limited shift of the I(X) curve—perhaps 0.1 m given the myosin
lever dimensions and the bundle geometry—and fast adaptation can
cause more shift than that.
As an alternative, Howard and Hudspeth (1988) and Crawford et al.
(1989, 1991) proposed that Ca2+ binding directly to an intracellular site on
the channel could shift the energetics of channel opening, such that the
channel with calcium bound required more force to reach the same open
probability; that is, calcium would tend to close the channel. The original
model, in which the energy of one of the closed states is affected, cannot
explain adaptation to large deflections, but a later model, in which calcium
changes the “set point” of the channel, accounts for adaptation of up to 0.8
m (Wu et al., 1999).
These two models—one in which Ca2+ relaxes tension and allows
channel closure, and the other in which Ca2+ causes the channel to shut
even with the same tension—have quite different predictions for the me-
chanical behavior of a hair bundle during adaptation. In the motor model,
a force that opens channels would quickly move the bundle a certain
amount determined by the force and the stiffness of the bundle. Bundle
stiffness is determined by two springs in parallel: the stereocilia pivot stiff-
ness and the gating spring stiffness. If myosin motors slip to allow channel
closure, the gating spring relaxes, which could be seen as a decrease in
stiffness (chord stiffness but not slope stiffness). The bundle would move
forward with the time course of adaptation. On the other hand, if adapta-
tion happens because Ca2+ causes the channel to shut, the small movement
of the channel’s gate slamming shut would tighten the gating spring (e.g.,
Figure 1–3), in essence increasing the stiffness and pulling the whole bun-
dle backward.
Which behavior is seen with adaptation? In fact, both positive and
negative going movements have been observed, with different time cours-
es (Howard and Hudspeth, 1987; Jaramillo and Hudspeth, 1993; Benser,
Marquis, and Hudspeth, 1996). Figure 1–6 shows a rapid forward move-
ment (arrowhead), followed by a quick hook back—the “twitch”—and
then a slower and larger forward relaxation. Both the twitch and the slow-
er relaxation depend on Ca2+, becoming slower and smaller when Ca2+ is
reduced. The termination of force allows the bundle to move back, but no
twitch is seen on the return, at least following large deflections. On the
other hand, a negative force evokes a slow negative relaxation of the bun-
dle, and then a twitch is seen when termination of force allows the bundle
to move forward towards the rest position
These two mechanical behaviors, which are separable by time course
and stimulus polarity, suggest that both proposed mechanisms of adapta-
tion may be occurring in hair cells. The calcium closure might be fast (1-5
ms), and cause the quick twitch; a myosin slipping would be slower (10-50
16
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

ms) and may cause the slow relaxation. A careful analysis of the time
course of adaptation in turtle hair cells has found that two time constants
are needed to fit the transduction current. Moreover, they depend differ-
ently on external Ca2+ and internal buffer concentration, further indicating
their separability (Wu et al., 1999). Comparison with a model of Ca2+ diffu-
sion in stereocilia suggests that the fast phase is controlled at a Ca2+ bind-
ing site that is 20-50 nm from the site of Ca2+ entry, and may be the channel
itself (Wu et al., 1999). The slow phase is controlled at a more distant site,
150 to 200 nm from the site of entry, which corresponds well with the loca-
tion of myosin-I. The authors were careful not to speculate about molecu-
lar mechanisms of the two components, but it will be interesting to find
which parts of the transduction complex correspond to each phase. Need-
ed also is a careful temporal correlation of the two phases of transduction
current with the two phases of mechanical response.
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
17
Figure 1–6. The “twitch”, and subsequent slow relaxations of the hair bundle dur-
ing maintained force steps. A, The positive force stimulus in this experiment caused
a quick forward deflection of ~50 nm (arrowhead), a rapid twitch back of ~10 nm,
and then a relaxation forward of ~25 nm. The receptor potential recorded simulta-
neously (middle trace) showed a transient depolarization, and then an oscillation
during and following the twitch. B, A negative force evoked a quick negative de-
flection, and slower negative relaxation. The twitch was not observed until the bun-
dle was returned to the rest position (arrowhead), and was associated with an oscil-
lation. Reprinted from Benzer et al. (1996), Figure 2.

Frequency Tuning
Ringing in a system can be caused by negative feedback with a delay. If the
feedback has a gain greater than one, the system can go into spontaneous
oscillation, at a frequency determined in part by the delay. The calcium
closure mechanism could provide such a feedback (Choe, Magnasco, and
Hudspeth, 1998; Wu et al., 1999), which can be seen by supposing a sinu-
soidal force stimulus to the bundle. The forward phase of force would
cause the bundle to move forward, opening channels. Ca2+ entry and the
subsequent closure of channels would pull back on the gating springs,
pulling the bundle back with a slight delay. If the delay was such that the
channel closure was coincident with the negative-going phase of the force
stimulus, then the negative bundle movement would be amplified by the
pullback. During the next few moments, channels would close, Ca2+
would unbind and diffuse away from the binding site, and then the next
positive-going phase of the stimulus could more easily open channels and
move the bundle forward. If the stimulus were sinusoidal, the movement,
and thus the stimulus to the channels, would be amplified by feedback
like this; if the stimulus were a step, the movement would be characterized
by ringing following the initial deflection; and if there were no stimulus,
but the feedback gain was large enough, the bundle could undergo a con-
tinuous oscillation in position.
Ringing in bundle position was first observed in turtle hair cells, when
recording the receptor potential with a single microelectrode (Crawford and
Fettiplace, 1985). Similarly, spontaneous twitches, oscillatory bursts, and
continuous oscillation were seen in the movement of unstimulated bullfrog
hair bundles (Howard and Hudspeth, 1988; Benser et al., 1996; Martin and
Hudspeth, 1999). Turtle hair cells have, in addition, a well-characterized os-
cillation of membrane potential that is distinct from the transduction and is
generated by Ca2+ and K+ channels in the basolateral membrane, so it was
not clear whether the bundle oscillation was generated within the transduc-
tion apparatus or was some sort of voltage feedback on bundle position.
However, oscillations in transducer current have been observed when the
hair cell was voltage-clamped and voltage-gated conductances could not
influence the transient current (Figure 1–7) (Ricci et al., 1998). Moreover,
ringing in transduction current was observed with a stiff stimulus probe
that would not allow mechanical feedback on bundle position (Figure
1–7), so that some part of the ringing might be generated simply by delays
in unbinding and binding of Ca2+ to the transduction channel.
Two models have been developed that describe the ringing based on
calcium closure of the transduction channel. Choe et al. (1998) suppose
two binding sites on the channel for Ca2+, which steepens the relation be-
tween Ca2+ concentration and open probability. In this model, the bundle
is allowed to move, and within a realistic range of parameters, can show
spontaneous oscillations. Close to that range, it can amplify oscillatory
18
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

stimuli, and shows the most amplification for the smallest stimuli. The
characteristic frequency can range from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. A similar model
was developed by Wu et al. (1999) to describe the two phases of adapta-
tion, but this model also shows ringing responses to step deflections of the
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
19
Figure 1–7. Damped oscillations in transducer cur-
rents from turtle cochlear hair cells. Bundles were de-
flected with a stiff stimulus probe by ±50 nm (top pan-
el). Positive deflections evoked inward receptor
currents, which oscillated during the maintained de-
flection. Negative deflections stopped the inward re-
ceptor current, but there was sometimes an oscillation
when the bundle was brought back to the rest posi-
tion. The frequency of oscillation varied among differ-
ent cells, and with different amounts of calcium buffer
in the cytoplasm; two examples are shown. Reprinted
from Ricci et al. (1998) figure 9

bundle. Although the model incorporates two mechanisms for adaptation
at different distances from the channel, the ringing seems to depend on the
closer, fast mechanism. Perhaps because the channel closure has first order
rather than second order dependence on Ca2+, the model does not show
spontaneous oscillation. The interesting point is that two models that are
similar only in basic outline both predict ringing responses to small stim-
uli, suggesting that this mechanism would work to amplify within a fairly
broad range of parameters.
At least one of the models can produce ringing at frequencies of tens
of kilohertz, so that it might work for the highest frequencies of mam-
malian hearing. On the other hand, the oscillations that have been actually
observed in lower vertebrates are much slower. Ringing in turtle occurs at
several hundred Hertz (Ricci et al., 1998), and frog bundles oscillate at tens
of Hertz (Martin and Hudspeth, 1999). It will be important to see if such
behavior occurs in animals that hear at much higher frequencies.
It is apparent that a hair bundle spontaneously oscillating in the ab-
sence of mechanical stimulus is putting energy into a mechanical system,
and that such energy could be used to amplify vibrations at the character-
istic frequency (Crawford and Fettiplace, 1985). This result has recently
been explored in more depth by estimating the viscous drag of the bundle
and a stimulus probe, to calculate the work done in each cycle of the oscil-
lation (Martin and Hudspeth, 1999). Where does the energy come from? If
driven by the Ca2+-closure mechanism (which is still hypothetical), the en-
ergy comes from the Ca2+ gradient across the stereocilium membrane,
which is in turn established by the Ca2+ ATPase in the membrane. Howev-
er, the energy in this model comes not from Ca2+ passing through the
channel and down the standing gradient, but from Ca2+ being driven onto
the binding site when it is at high concentration near an open channel, and
then unbinding when the channel closes and the concentration is low. That
is, the gradient is really temporal rather than spatial (Choe et al., 1998).
Fast intracellular buffers reduce the temporal differences, and tend to
eliminate the oscillations (Ricci et al., 1998).
Regardless of the mechanism, it seems likely that the fast component
of adaptation is associated with a negative feedback force on the bundle,
and that this may lead to mechanical ringing of the bundle. Because the
bundle puts energy into the ringing, it can amplify the vibration of a sinu-
soidal stimulus near the characteristic frequency, and nearby hair cells of
the cochlea might act together to amplify the vibration of the basilar mem-
brane. Perhaps the cochlear amplifier is in the transduction channel itself.
REFERENCES
Adrian, E. D. (1928). The basis of sensation: The action of the sense organs. New
York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.
20
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Apicella, S., Chen, S., Bing, R., Penniston, J. T., Llinas, R., & Hillman, D. E. (1997).
Plasmalemmal ATPase calcium pump localizes to inner and outer hair bundles.
Neuroscience 79, 1145–1151.
Assad, J. A., & Corey, D. P. (1992). An active motor model for adaptation by verte-
brate hair cells. Journal of Neuroscience 12, 3291–3309.
Assad, J. A., Hacohen, N., & Corey, D. P. (1989). Voltage dependence of adaptation
and active bundle movement in bullfrog saccular hair cells. Proeedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, USA 86, 2918–2922.
Assad, J. A., Shepherd, G. M. and Corey, D. P. (1991). Tip-link integrity and me-
chanical transduction in vertebrate hair cells. Neuron 7, 985–994.
Avraham, K. B., Hasson, T., Steel, K. P., Kingsley, D. M., Russell, L. B., Mooseker, M.
S., Copeland, N. G., & Jenkins, N. A. (1995). The mouse Snell’s waltzer deafness
gene encodes an unconventional myosin required for structural integrity of in-
ner ear hair cells. Nature Genetics 11, 369–375.
Benser, M. E., Marquis R. E., & Hudspeth A. J. (1996). Rapid, active hair bundle
movements in hair cells from the bullfrog’s sacculus. Journal of Neuroscience 16,
5629–5643.
Burlacu, S., Tap, W. D., Lumpkin, E. A., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1997). ATPase activity of
myosin in hair bundles of the bullfrog’s sacculus. Biophysical Journal 72, 263–271.
Choe, Y., Magnasco, M. O., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1998). A model for amplification of
hair-bundle motion by cyclical binding of Ca2+ to mechanoelectrical-transduc-
tion channels. Proeedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 95, 15321–15326.
Corey, D. P., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1979a). Ionic basis of the receptor potential in a ver-
tebrate hair cell. Nature 281, 675–677.
Corey, D. P., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1979b). Response latency of vertebrate hair cells.
Biophysical Journal 26, 499–506.
Corey, D. P., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1983a). Analysis of the microphonic potential of the
bullfrog’s sacculus. Journal of Neuroscience 3, 942–961.
Corey, D. P., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1983b). Kinetics of the receptor current in bullfrog
saccular hair cells. Journal of Neuroscience 3, 962–976.
Corey, D. P., Smith, W. J., Barres, B. A., & Koroshetz, W. J. (1987). Calmodulin in-
hibitors block adaptation in vestibular hair cells. Society of Neuroscience Abstracts
13, 538.
Crawford, A. C., Evans, M. G., & Fettiplace, R. (1991). The actions of calcium on the
mechano-electrical transducer current of turtle hair cells. Journal of Physiology
(London) 434, 369–398.
Crawford, A. C., Evans, M. G., & Fettiplace, R. (1989). Activation and adaptation 
of transducer currents in turtle hair cells. Journal of Physiology (London) 419,
405–434.
Crawford, A. C., & Fettiplace, R. (1978). Ringing responses in cochlear hair cells of
the turtle. Journal of Physiology (London) 284, 120P–122P.
Crawford, A. C., & Fettiplace, R. (1985). The mechanical properties of ciliary bun-
dles of turtle cochlear hair cells. Journal of Physiology (London) 364, 359–379.
Crouch, J. J., & Schulte, B. A. (1995). Expression of plasma membrane Ca-ATPase in
the adult and developing gerbil cochlea. Hearing Research 92, 112–119.
Denk, W., Holt, J. R., Shepherd, G. M. G., & Corey, D. P. (1995). Calcium imaging of
single stereocilia in hair cells: Localization of transduction channels at both ends
of tip links. Neuron 15, 1311–1321.
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
21

Eatock, R. A. (2000). Adaptation in hair cells. Annual Review of Neuroscience 23,
285–314.
Eatock, R. A., Corey, D. P., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1987). Adaptation of mechanoelectri-
cal transduction in hair cells of the bullfrog’s sacculus. Journal of Neuroscience 7,
2821–2836.
Flock, A., Cheung, H. C., Flock, B., & Utter, G. (1981). Three sets of actin filaments
in sensory cells of the inner ear. Identification and functional orientation deter-
mined by gel electrophoresis, immunofluorescence, and electron microscopy.
Journal of Neurocytology 10, 133–147.
Furuta, H., Luo, L., Hepler, K., & Ryan, A. F. (1998). Evidence for differential regu-
lation of calcium by outer versus inner hair cells: Plasma membrane Ca-ATPase
gene expression. Hearing Research 123, 10–26.
Garcia, J. A., Yee, A. G., Gillespie, P. G., Corey, D. P. (1998). Localization of myosin-
Ibeta near both ends of tip links in frog saccular hair cells. Journal of Neuroscience
18, 8637–8647.
Gibson, F., Walsh, J., Mburu, P., Varela, A., Brown, K. A., Antonio, M., Beisel, K. W.,
Steel, K. P., & Brown, S. D. M. (1995). A type VII myosin encoded by the mouse
deafness gene Shaker-1. Nature 374, 62–64.
Gillespie, P. G., & Corey, D. P. (1997). Myosin and adaptation by hair cells. Neuron
19, 955–958.
Gillespie, P. G., Gillespie, S. K., Mercer, J. A., Shah, K., & Shokat, K. M. (1999). Engi-
neering of the myosin-I nucleotide-binding pocket to create selective sensitivity
to n(6)-modified ADP analogs. Journal of Biological Chemistry 274, 31373–31381.
Gillespie, P. G., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1993). Adenine nucleoside diphosphates block
adaptation of mechanoelectrical transduction in hair cells. Proeedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences USA 90, 2710–2714.
Gillespie, P. G., Wagner, M. C., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1993). Identification of a 120 kD
hair-bundle myosin located near stereociliary tips. Neuron 11, 581–594.
Glowatzki, E., Ruppersberg, J. P., Zenner, H. P., & Rusch, A. (1997). Mechanically
and ATP-induced currents of mouse outer hair cells are independent and differ-
entially blocked by d-tubocurarine. Neuropharmacology 36, 1269–1275.
Goldberg, J. M., & Fernandez, C. (1971). Physiology of peripheral neurons inner-
vating semicircular canals of the squirrel monkey. I. Resting discharge and re-
sponse to constant angular accelerations. Journal of Neurophysiology 34, 635–660.
Goodyear, R., & Richardson, G. (1992). Distribution of the 275 kD hair cell antigen
and cell surface specialisations on auditory and vestibular hair bundles in the
chicken inner ear. Journal of Computational Neurology 325, 243–256.
Hacohen, N., Assad, J. A., Smith, W. J., & Corey, D. P. (1989). Regulation of tension
on hair-cell transduction channels: Displacement and calcium dependence.
Journal of Neuroscience 9, 3988–3997.
Hasson, T., Gillespie, P. G., Garcia, J. A., MacDonald, R. B., Zhao, Y., Yee, A. G.,
Mooseker, M. S., & Corey, D. P. (1997). Unconventional myosins in inner-ear
sensory epithelia. Journal of Cell Biology 137, 1287–1307.
Howard, J., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1987). Mechanical relaxation of the hair bundle me-
diates adaptation in mechanoelectrical transduction by the bullfrog’s saccular
hair cell. Proeedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 84, 3064–3068.
Howard, J., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1988). Compliance of the hair bundle associated
with gating of mechanoelectrical transduction channels in the bullfrog’s saccu-
lar hair cell. Neuron 1, 189–199.
22
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Hudspeth, A. J. (1982). Extracellular current flow and the site of transduction by
vertebrate hair cells. Journal of Neuroscience 2, 1–10.
Hudspeth, A. J. and Corey, D. P. (1977). Sensitivity, polarity, and conductance
change in the response of vertebrate hair cells to controlled mechanical stimuli.
Proceedings of the National Acedemy of Sciences, USA 74, 2407–2411.
Jacobs, R. A., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1990). Ultrastructural correlates of mechanoelectri-
cal transduction in hair cells of the bullfrog’s internal ear. Cold Spring Harbor
Symposium on Quantitative Biology 55, 547–561.
Jaramillo, F., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1991). Localization of the hair cell’s transduction
channels at the hair bundle’s top by iontophoretic application of a channel
blocker. Neuron 7, 409–420.
Jaramillo, F., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1993). Displacement-clamp measurement of the
forces exerted by gating springs in the hair bundle. Proeedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA 90, 1330–1334.
Kachar, B., Mammano, F., & Kruc, M. (1999). Structural analysis of the tip-link mol-
ecular complex. Association for Research in Otolaryngology Abstracts, #16.
Kozel, P. J., Friedman, R. A., Erway, L. C., Yamoah, E. N., Liu, L. H., Riddle, T.,
Duffy, J. J., Doetschman, T., Miller, M. L., Cardell, E. L., & Shull, G. E. (1998). Bal-
ance and hearing deficits in mice with a null mutation in the gene encoding
plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase isoform 2. Journal of Biological Chemistry 273,
18693–18696.
Kroese, A. B., Das, A., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1989). Blockage of the transduction chan-
nels of hair cells in the bullfrog’s sacculus by aminoglycoside antibiotics. Hear-
ing Research 37, 203–217.
Liang, Y., Wang, A., Belyantseva, I. A., Anderson, D. W., Probst, F. J., Barber, T. D.,
Miller, W., Touchman, J. W., Jin, L., Sullivan, S. L., Sellers, J. R., Camper, S. A.,
Lloyd, R. V., Kachar, B., Friedman, T. B., & Fridell, R. A. (1999). Characterization
of the human and mouse unconventional myosin XV genes responsible for
hereditary deafness DFNB3 and Shaker 2. Genomics 61, 243–258.
Lumpkin, E. A., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1995). Detection of Ca2+ entry through
mechanosensitive channels localizes the site of mechanoelectrical transduction
in hair cells. Proeedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 92, 10297–10301.
Lumpkin, E. A., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1998). Regulation of free Ca2+ concentration in
hair-cell stereocilia. Journal of Neuroscience 18, 6300–6318.
Lumpkin, E. A., Marquis, R. E., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1997). The selectivity of the 
hair cell’s mechanoelectrical-transduction channel promotes Ca2+ flux at low
Ca2+ concentrations. Proeedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 94,
10997–11002.
Martin, P., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1999). Active hair-bundle movements can amplify a
hair cell’s response to oscillatory mechanical stimuli. Proeedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA 96, 14306–14311.
Ohmori, H. (1988). Mechanical stimulation and fura-2 fluorescence in the hair bun-
dle of dissociated hair cells of the chick. Journal of Physiology 399, 115–137.
Pickles, J. O., Comis, S. D., & Osborne, M. P. (1984). Cross-links between stereocilia
in the guinea pig organ of Corti, and their possible relation to sensory transduc-
tion. Hearing Research 15, 103–112.
Ricci, A. J., Fettiplace, R. (1997). The effects of calcium buffering and cyclic AMP on
mechano-electrical transduction in turtle auditory hair cells. Journal of Physiology
(London) 501, 111–124.
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
23

Ricci, A. J., & Fettiplace, R. (1998). Calcium permeation of the turtle hair cell
mechanotransducer channel and its relation to the composition of endolymph
Journal of Physiology (London) 506, 159–173.
Ricci, A. J., Wu, Y. C., & Fettiplace, R. (1998). The endogenous calcium buffer and
the time course of transducer adaptation in auditory hair cells. Journal of Neuro-
science 18, 8261–8277.
Roberts, W. M. (1993). Spatial calcium buffering in saccular hair cells. Nature 363,
74–76.
Roberts, W. M. (1994). Localization of calcium signals by a mobile calcium buffer in
frog saccular hair cells. Journal of Neuroscience 14, 3246–3262.
Rusch, A., Kros, C. J., & Richardson, G. P. (1994). Block by amiloride and its deriva-
tives of mechano-electrical transduction in outer hair cells of mouse cochlear
cultures. Journal of Physiology (London) 474, 75–86.
Shepherd, G. M. G., Assad, J. A., Parakkal, M., Kachar, B., & Corey, D. P. (1991).
Movement of the tip-link attachment is correlated with adaptation in bullfrog
saccular hair cells. Journal of General Physiology 95, 25a.
Shepherd, G. M. G., Barres, B. A., & Corey, D. P. (1989). “Bundle Blot” purification
and initial protein characterization of hair-cell stereocilia. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, USA 86, 4973–4977.
Shepherd, G. M. G., & Corey, D. P. (1994). The extent of adaptation in bullfrog sac-
cular hair cells. Journal of Neuroscience 14, 6217–6229.
Shepherd, G. M. G., Corey, D. P., & Block, S. M. (1990). Actin cores of hair-cell stere-
ocilia support myosin motility. Proeedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA 87, 8627–8631.
Shotwell, S. L., Jacobs, R., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1981). Directional sensitivity of indi-
vidual vertebrate hair cells to controlled deflection of their hair bundles. Annual
New York Academy of Science 374, 1–10.
Smith, R. L., Brachman, M. L., & Goodman, D. A. (1983). Adaptation in the audito-
ry periphery. Annual New York Academy of Science 405, 79–93.
Sobin, A., & Flock, A. (1983). Immunohistochemical identification and localization
of actin and fimbrin in vestibular hair cells in the normal guinea pig and in a
strain of the waltzing guinea pig. Acta Otolaryngology (Stockholm) 96, 407–412.
Solc, C. K., Derfler, B. H., Duyk, G. M., & Corey, D. P. (1994). Molecular cloning of
myosins from the bullfrog saccular macula: A candidate for the adaptation mo-
tor. Auditory Neuroscience 1, 63–75. 
Street, V. A., McKee-Johnson, J. W., Fonseca, R. C., Tempel, B. L., & Noben-Trauth,
K. (1998) Mutations in a plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase gene cause deafness in
deafwaddler mice. Nature Genetics 19, 390–394.
Tilney, L. G., DeRosier, D. J., & Mulroy, M. J. (1980). The organization of actin fila-
ments in the stereocilia of cochlear hair cells. Journal of Cell Biology 86, 244–259.
Walker, R. G., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1996). Calmodulin controls adaptation of mecha-
noelectrical transduction by hair cells of the bullfrog’s sacculus Proeedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA 93, 2203–2207.
Walker, R. G., Hudspeth, A. J., & Gillespie, P. G. (1993). Calmodulin and calmod-
ulin-binding proteins in hair bundles. Proeedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, USA 90, 2807–2811.
Wu, Y. C., Ricci, A. J., & Fettiplace, R. (1999). Two components of transducer adap-
tation in auditory hair cells. Journal of Neurophysiology 82, 2171–2181.
24
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Yamoah, E. N., & Gillespie, P. G. (1996). Phosphate analogs block adaptation in hair
cells by inhibiting adaptation-motor force production. Neuron 17, 523–533.
Yamoah, E. N., Lumpkin, E. A., Dumont, R. A., Smith, P. J., Hudspeth, A. J., & Gille-
spie, P. G. (1998). Plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase extrudes Ca2+ from hair cell
stereocilia. Journal of Neuroscience 18, 610–624.
Zhao, Y., Yamoah, E. N., & Gillespie, P. G. (1996). Regeneration of broken tip links
and restoration of mechanical transduction in hair cells. Proeedings of the National
Academy of Sciences,USA 93, 15469–15474.
Zhu, T., Sata, M., & Ikebe, M. (1996) Functional expression of mammalian myosin
1: Analysis of its motor activity. Biochemistry 35, 513–522.
Note: This chapter is expanded from a review in press in Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA by J. R. Holt and D. P. Corey.
TRANSDUCTION AND ADAPTATION BY VERTEBRATE HAIR CELLS
25


In sea anemones, hair bundle mechanoreceptors regulate discharge of ne-
matocysts into vibrating targets. Consequently, proper functioning of hair
bundles can be inferred from a bioassay based on counting nematocysts
discharged into vibrating targets. Following trauma caused by exposure to
calcium-free seawater, hair bundle mechanoreceptors are repaired by se-
cretory proteins called “repair proteins” (RP). Exogenously supplied RP
speeds the restoration of vibration dependent discharge from 4 hr in sea-
water alone to 7–8 min in RP. In addition, the recovery is further enhanced
to 2 min by including extracellular ATP. ATPase activity is confirmed in
isolated repair proteins at the TEM level. I here present evidence that the
repair process includes an activation of purinoceptors. At modest levels of
repair proteins, PPADS, a known inhibitor of purinoceptors, blocks or de-
lays the recovery of vibration dependent discharge. Calcium imaging sug-
gests that activated purinoceptors induce calcium transients in the tentacle
epidermis. The calcium transients are blocked in the presence of PPADS,
or in the presence of anti-P2X antibodies. Furthermore, RP induces calci-
um transients in tissue previously exposed to calcium-free seawater. Re-
covery of vibration dependent discharge of nematocysts is inhibited in an-
imals preloaded with W7, an inhibitor of calcium/calmodulin, or with
nifedipine, an inhibitor of L-type calcium channels. In control animals
with healthy hair bundles, exposure to ATP causes a loss of vibration de-
27
2
How A Living Hair Cell Repairs
Itself: Involvement of
Purinoceptors in the Repair of
Hair Bundle Mechanoreceptors
of Sea Anemones
Glen M. Watson, Ph.D.

pendent discharge that requires approximately 6 hr to recover. This detri-
mental effect of extracellular ATP on vibration sensitivity is blocked in the
presence of PPADS, W7, or nifedipine. Taken together, these results sug-
gest that extracellular ATP may function in repair of hair bundles both by
serving as an energy source for ecto-ATPases in repair proteins and by
serving as a ligand for purinoceptors. Apparently, the purinoceptors are
regulated by components of RP to enhance repair without allowing dam-
age to the hair bundles. Activated purinoceptors induce a calcium influx
through cell surface channels sensitive to dihydropyridines. Elevated cal-
cium initiates a calcium/calmodulin second messenger pathway.
INTRODUCTION
Sea anemones are predominantly sessile, marine invertebrates that use
hair bundles to detect swimming movements of potential prey (Watson
and Mire, 1999). The hair bundles are strikingly similar to those of the
acousticolateralis system of vertebrates in terms of fine structure.
Anemone hair bundles consist of actin based stereocilia interconnected by
numerous linkages including tip links (Watson and Roberts, 1995; Watson,
Mire, and Hudson, 1997). Upon stimulation by vibrations at specific, key
frequencies, the hair bundles somehow predispose anemones to discharge
nematocysts into targets subsequently touched to their tentacles (Watson,
Mire, and Hudson, 1998a; see Chapter 4 by Dr. Mire for recent develop-
ments on the physiology of anemone hair bundles). Discharge of nemato-
cysts involves the forceful and rapid eversion of a tubule from the nemato-
cyst capsule into contact with the target organism (Skaer and Picken, 1965;
Holstein and Tardent, 1984). Depending on the type of nematocyst, the
everting tubule may adhere to the surface of the target or penetrate its in-
tegument to inject potent toxins (Mariscal, 1984). In the laboratory, we de-
veloped a bioassay in which vibrating test probes coated with a thin layer
of gelatin are touched to tentacles and then withdrawn. Discharged nema-
tocysts penetrating the gelatin coating are counted using phase contrast
microscopy. The bioassay consistently detects a doubling of nematocysts
discharged into test probes vibrating at specific, key frequencies as com-
pared to probes vibrating at other frequencies or not vibrating at all. The
enhancement in discharge above baseline levels is referred to as “vibration
dependent discharge” (Watson, Mire, and Hudson,1998a; Watson and
Mire, 1999). It is interesting to note that vibration dependent discharge is
inhibited by compounds known to inhibit signal transduction in hair cells
of the acousticolateralis system of vertebrates. Among these compounds
are aminoglycoside antibiotics including streptomycin. Streptomycin in-
hibits mechanotransduction of anemone hair cells (Mire and Watson, 1997)
and vibration dependent discharge (Watson, Mire, and Hudson, 1997) at
28
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

doses known to inhibit signal transduction in vertebrate hair cells (Kroese,
Das, and Hudspeth, 1989). Such inhibition is completely reversible both in
anemones and in vertebrates. Furthermore, agents thought to attack tip
links (among other linkages interconnecting stereocilia) abolish mechano-
sensitivity in vertebrate hair cells and vibration dependent discharge in
anemones. Among these are elastase (Osborne and Comis, 1990; Preyer,
Hemmert, Zenner, and Gummer, 1995) and calcium depleted buffers con-
taining such calcium chelators as EGTA or BAPTA (Assad, Shepherd, and
Corey, 1991; Crawford, Evans, and Fettiplace, 1991; Zhao, Yamoah, and
Gillespie, 1996). In anemones, the loss of vibration dependent discharge
caused by exposure to calcium-free seawater is temporary. The recovery
period increases with the duration of exposure to calcium-free seawater
(Watson, Mire, and Hudson, 1998b). After 1hr in calcium-free seawater, the
hair bundles are completely disorganized and vibration dependent dis-
charge is abolished. However, vibration dependent discharge and normal
morphology of the hair bundles are restored within 4 hr after the animals
are returned to normal seawater. Such a rapid recovery suggests that hair
bundles of anemones are repaired rather than replaced by cell division and
differentiation of new hair cells. Assuming that exposure to calcium-free
seawater damages or destroys linkages interconnecting stereocilia while
otherwise leaving the hair bundle intact, we reasoned that the repair
process involves replacing lost or damaged linkages. Even so, the process
of repair is difficult to understand because linkages are extracellular in dis-
tribution and interconnect stereocilia membranes separated by substantial
distances. Nevertheless, repair of pre-existing hair bundles was confirmed
by additional experiments in which it was shown that specific secretory
proteins called, “repair proteins” restore vibration dependent discharge
and normal morphology of the hair bundles (Watson, Mire, and Hudson,
1998b).
Exogenously supplied repair proteins restore vibration dependent
discharge within 7–8 min to anemones previously exposed to calcium-free
seawater for 1 hr. This process is further enhanced by adding ATP with the
repair proteins. In the combined presence of RP and 10–6 M ATP, vibration
dependent discharge is restored within 2 min. ATPase activity is con-
firmed at the TEM level for isolated repair proteins. Thus, it appears likely
that exogenously supplied ATP facilitates biochemical reactions carried
out by enzymatic domains of the repair proteins (Watson, Venable, Hud-
son, and Repass, 1999). These biochemical reactions are likely to be com-
ponent parts of the repair process. On the other hand, effects of ATP need
not be limited to enzymatic activity within repair proteins. It is conceiv-
able that ATP may initiate intracellular processes involved in repair by ac-
tivating purinoceptors. Purinoceptors are known to be present in verte-
brate hair cells (e.g., Housley, Raybould, and Thorne, 1998; see chapter 7
by Dr. Bobbin for additional information concerning purinoceptors in au-
HOW A LIVING HAIR CELL REPAIRS ITSELF
29

ditory systems of mammals). In the present paper, I will present data im-
plicating purinoceptors in repair of hair bundles, then discuss some details
of the second messenger pathways initiated by activated purinoceptors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The bioassay for vibration sensitivity based on nematocyst discharge into
vibrating test probes was performed as described previously (Watson and
Hudson, 1994). Calcium imaging was performed on excised tentacles
threaded with a fine, human hair. The ends of the hair were glued to the
glass slide. Tentacles were loaded with 5 µM fluo-3 AM according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR). Specimens
were anesthetized in potassium seawater (formulated as described previ-
ously, Watson et al., 1997). Excised tentacles were perfused with potassium
seawater which then was exchanged with the experimental solution in
potassium seawater by switching a valve in the supply tubing. The tissue
was examined using a LOMO Multiscope light microscope (LOMO Amer-
ica, Prospect Heights, IL ) equipped with fluorescence and a 70X water im-
mersion objective (n.a. = 1.23) (GEK, Ltd., Charlottesville, VA). Digital im-
ages were obtained using a cooled CCD camera (SBIG, Santa Barbara, CA)
and subsequently analyzed using Image Pro Plus software (Media Cyber-
netics, Silver Springs, MD). Video microscopy of hair bundles during the
repair process was performed with an IMT-2 inverted microscope (Olym-
pus, Tokyo) equipped with transmitted and reflected DIC optics.
RESULTS
Evidence that Purinoceptors are Involved in Repair
In the presence of exogenously supplied RP at 3.33 µl/ml, full recovery of
vibration dependent discharge is achieved within 10 min after adding RP
to the dish (Figure 2–1). Half maximal recovery is detected at 1.67 µl/ml
RP. Alone, 10-5 M PPADS, a known inhibitor of purinoceptors, does not
significantly affect vibration dependent discharge of nematocysts in ani-
mals having healthy hair bundles. After 1 hr exposure in calcium-free sea-
water, including PPADS in the bath with the RP gives normal recovery of
vibration dependent discharge at 3.3 µl/ml RP, but essentially no recovery
at lower RP levels (Figure 2–1). In the presence of PPADS, the half-maxi-
mal dose of RP is increased to approximately 2.88 µl/ml.
Inasmuch as purinoceptors can function as ligand gated channels (i.e.,
P2X receptors) or as typical G protein linked receptors (i.e., P2Y receptors),
inhibitors of the calcium second messenger pathway were tested. In the
presence of 3.3 µl/ml RP, the calcium calmodulin inhibitor, W7, inhibits re-
30
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

covery at 10-9 M W7 (Figure 2–2A). In animals having healthy hair bun-
dles, W7 does not affect vibration dependent discharge. In the presence of
3.3 µl/ml RP, 10-9 M nifedipine, a dihydropyridine inhibitor of L-type volt-
age gated calcium channels, inhibits recovery of vibration dependent dis-
charge of nematocysts (Figure 2–2B). Alone, nifedipine does not affect vi-
bration dependent discharge of nematocysts.
Calcium Imaging of Excised Tentacles
Dynamics of intracellular calcium ions were monitored in excised tentacles
using the calcium fluorochrome, fluo 3. Upon returning tentacles to calcium-
containing seawater after 1 hr exposure to calcium-free seawater, levels of
intracellular calcium increase as indicated by a brightening of fluorescence
intensity, in this case, to a mean of 1.28 times the initial intensity (Figure
2–3). Adding 3.3 µl/ml RP further increases levels of intracellular calcium
as indicated by brightening to 1.47 times the initial intensity, but with a de-
crease in intracellular calcium occurring by 7 min, a time when vibration
dependent discharge normally recovers. After 7 min, calcium levels again
HOW A LIVING HAIR CELL REPAIRS ITSELF
31
Figure 2–1. Effects of PPADS on recovery of vibration dependent discharge of nema-
tocysts. Anemones were exposed to calcium-free seawater for 1 hr to disrupt struc-
tural integrity and function of hair bundles. Upon returning to calcium-containing
seawater, discharge of nematocysts into test probes vibrating at 55 Hz was tested 10
min after co-adding 10-5 M PPADS, an inhibitor of purinoceptors, (or not, controls)
and repair protein concentrate at the dose indicated. Data points indicate the mean
number (± SEM) of microbasic p-mastigophore nematocysts counted per field of
view for a total of 4 test probes, each touched to a separate anemone. Data for controls
receiving RP only (triangles) are plotted alongside data for experimental animals ex-
posed to PPADS and RP (circles).

increase and remain elevated through 30 min (Figure 2–3). Recent data in-
dicate substantial rearrangements of the hair bundle continue after the
first 7 min in RP, despite the full recovery of vibration sensitivity at 7 min.
It is striking how much movement is observed in the hair bundle during
repair.
Because exposure to calcium-free seawater might alone alter resting
levels of intracellular calcium, excised tentacles from animals having
healthy hair bundles were exposed to ATP to determine whether activated
purinoceptors increase intracellular calcium. Untreated control tentacles
having healthy hair bundles exhibit relatively constant calcium levels over
32
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 2–2. Effects of W7 or nifedipine on recovery of
vibration dependent discharge. Anemones were exposed
to calcium-free seawater for 1 hr to disrupt structural in-
tegrity and function of hair bundles. Upon returning to
calcium-containing seawater, specimens were loaded
with W7, an inhibitor of calcium/calmodulin, or with
nifedipine, an inhibitor of L-type calcium channels, then
transferred to fresh seawater. 3.3 µl/ml RP was added and
discharge into test probes vibrating at 55 Hz was tested
10 min later. Mean discharge (± SEM, n = 4 for each data
point) is plotted for specimens loaded with (A) W7 or (B)
nifedipine at the dose indicated.

time as indicated by relatively stable intensity of fluo fluorescence. Mean in-
tensity over 10 min is 1.02 times the initial fluorescence intensity (Figure
2–4A). Upon perfusing 10-6 M ATP, levels of intracellular calcium increase
and remain elevated through 10 min with mean fluorescence intensity of
1.31 times the initial intensity (Figure 2–4B, 2–5). Calcium oscillations are ev-
ident in each of the individual experiments (e.g., Figure 2–5). However, be-
cause the oscillations are not synchonized between trials, they are obscured
in mean data based on four trials (Figure 2–4). At 10-12 M ATP, calcium levels
increase less dramatically as indicated by a mean fluorescence intensity of
1.18 times the initial intensity (Figure 2–4C). Commercial antibodies to P2X
purinoceptors inhibit the increase in calcium normally induced by 10-6 M
ATP (Figure 2–6A). In the combined presence of anti-P2X antibodies and 10-
6 M ATP, mean fluorescence intenstity is 0.99 that of initial intensity. Like-
wise, in the presence of 10-5 M PPADS, the increase in intracellular calcium
normally induced by 10-6 M ATP is inhibited (Figure 2–6B). In the combined
presence of 10-6 M ATP and 10-5 M PPADS, mean fluorescence intensity is
0.95 that of initial intensity. Washing out the PPADS or P2X antibodies per-
mits a modest increase in intracellular calcium (Figure 2–6).
HOW A LIVING HAIR CELL REPAIRS ITSELF
33
Figure 2–3. Relative fluorescence intensity of fluo labeled tentacles during repair of
hair bundles. Excised tentacles were mounted onto slides and then labeled with 5
µM fluo-3 AM to monitor intracellular calcium. Tentacles were exposed to calcium-
free seawater for 1 hr to disrupt hair bundles and then returned to calcium-containing
seawater fortified with 3.3 µl/ml RP. Images were collected before and after exposure
to calcium-free seawater and at intervals after exposure to RP. Data points indicate
relative fluorescence intensity with the intensity of the initial image adjusted to 1.00.
Each point plotted represents mean relative fluorescence (± SEM, n = 4).

Figure 2–4. Relative fluorescence intensity of fluo labeled tentacles following expo-
sure to extracellular ATP. Excised tentacles were mounted onto slides and then la-
beled with 5 µM fluo-3 AM to monitor intracellular calcium. Tentacles either received
no further treatment (A) controls, or were exposed to (B) 10-6 M ATP, or (C) 10-12 M
ATP. Images were collected both before the perfusion of ATP and at intervals after-
wards. Data points indicate relative fluorescence intensity with the intensity of the ini-
tial image (before perfusion) adjusted to 1.00. Each point plotted represents mean rel-
ative fluorescence (± SEM, n = 4).
34

Figure 2–5. Spatio-temporal effects of µM
ATP on fluo fluorescence. Excised tentacles
were mounted and loaded with fluo 3AM as
described above. Difference images are
shown, each obtained by subtracting the be-
fore perfusion image from a specific after
perfusion image obtained X minutes after
the perfusion was initiated. The value for X
is shown in the upper lefthand corner of
each panel. A positive difference (gray to
white areas) indicates a local increase in in-
tracellular calcium. Contrast was adjusted
comparably for the entire series so that com-
parisons between images of the panel faith-
fully represent changes in levels of intracel-
lular calcium. Scale bar = 7 µm.
35

36
Figure 2–6. Relative fluorescence intensity of fluo labeled tentacles following ex-
posure to extracellular ATP in the presence of anti-P2X antibodies or PPADS. Ex-
cised tentacles were mounted onto slides and then labeled with 5 µM fluo-3 AM to
monitor intracellular calcium. Tentacles were first incubated in (A) anti-P2X antibod-
ies or (B) 10-4 M PPADS and then perfused with the same solution fortified with 10-6
M ATP. After 5 min, both the ATP and the putative blocker were washed out and flu-
orescence monitored for an additional 11 min. Data points indicate relative fluores-
cence intensity with the intensity of the initial image (before ATP perfusion) adjusted
to 1.00. Each point plotted represents mean relative fluorescence (± SEM, n = 4).

Effects of ATP on Vibration Dependent Discharge of Nematocysts
A 5 min exposure to 10-6 M ATP is sufficient to abolish vibration depen-
dent discharge (Figure 2–7A) with recovery requiring approximately 6 hr
(Figure 2–7B). The detrimental effects of ATP on vibration dependent dis-
charge are prevented by PPADS. In the combined presence of ATP and 10-4
M PPADS, vibration dependent discharge is inhibited at ATP concentra-
tions of 10-9 M ATP or higher. However, vibration dependent discharge is
immediately restored when the ATP and PPADS are washed out (Figure
2–8). A comparable effect is observed in animals preloaded with 10-8 M W7
and then exposed to ATP, where vibration dependent discharge is inhibit-
ed at ATP concentrations of 10-7 M or higher (Figure 2–9). Vibration sensi-
tivity is fully restored upon washing out the ATP. Likewise, vibration de-
pendent discharge is protected from µM ATP by 10-7 M nifedipine (Figure
2–10). At all concentrations of nifedipine, washing out the ATP fully re-
stores vibration dependent discharge at all concentrations of nifedipine
(Figure 2–10).
DISCUSSION
It appears that purinoceptors are activated during the repair process be-
cause PPADS, a known inhibitor of purinoceptors, decreases the efficacy of
repair proteins to restore vibration dependent discharge. On the other
hand, activating purinoceptors in animals having healthy hair bundles
abolishes vibration dependent discharge of nematocysts with recovery re-
quiring approximately 6 hr. In healthy animals, vibration dependent dis-
charge is protected from ATP by PPADS, indicating an involvement of
purinoceptors in this loss of vibration sensitivity. 
Activated purinoceptors may activate calcium second messenger
pathways since W7, a known inhibitor of calmodulin, inhibits the repair
process in experimental animals exposed to RP. Likewise, W7 protects vi-
bration dependent discharge from ATP in animals having healthy hair
bundles. Nifedipine, a known inhibitor of L-type calcium channels, in-
hibits the repair process in experimental animals exposed to RP. In addi-
tion, nifedipine protects vibration dependent discharge from ATP. Thus,
the activated purinoceptors may activate calcium channels to induce calci-
um transients in the tentacle epidermis. Calcium imaging indicates calci-
um transients follow exposure to ATP except in the presence of purinocep-
tor inhibitors or P2X antibodies. Elevated intracellular calcium may
activate calcium calmodulin (CAM) to facilitate the repair process in ex-
perimental animals damaged by exposure to calcium-free seawater. In the
absence of repair proteins, CAM appears to have a destructive activity.
Thus, it would be essential to the repair process that RP arrive at the dam-
aged hair bundle before or simultaneously to extracellular ATP. Apparent-
HOW A LIVING HAIR CELL REPAIRS ITSELF
37

Figure 2–7. Effects of ATP on vibration dependent discharge of nematocysts. (A)
Animals with healthy hair bundles received no additional treatment (control) or
were exposed 5 min to ATP at the dose indicated on the X axis. After removing the
ATP, discharge of nematocysts was tested at 55 Hz, a preferred frequency. (B) Re-
covery of vibration dependent discharge after 5 min in 10-6 M ATP. Discharge was
tested at 30 min intervals after removing the ATP. Data points indicate the mean
number (± SEM) of microbasic p-mastigophore nematocysts counted per field of
view for a total of 4 test probes, each touched to a separate anemone.
38

Figure 2–8. Effects of PPADS and ATP on vibration dependent discharge. Speci-
mens with healthy hair bundles were placed in the combined presence of 10-4 M
PPADS and ATP at the concentration indicated on the X axis. Vibration dependent
discharge was assayed at 55 Hz (A) after 5 min in the combined presence of PPADS
and ATP or (B) 1 min after these reagents were washed out. Data points indicate the
mean number (± SEM) of microbasic p-mastigophore nematocysts counted per field
of view for a total of 4 test probes, each touched to a separate anemone.
39

Figure 2–9. Effects of W7 and ATP on vibration dependent discharge. Specimens
with healthy hair bundles were preloaded with 10-8 M W7 for 20 min, then trans-
ferred to fresh seawater. Nematocyst discharge into test probes vibrating at 55 Hz
was tested (A) 5 min after adding ATP to the final concentration indicated on the X
axis, or (B) 1 min after the ATP was washed out. Data points indicate the mean
number (± SEM) of microbasic p-mastigophore nematocysts counted per field of
view for a total of 4 test probes, each touched to a separate anemone.
40

Figure 2–10. Effects of nifedipine and ATP on vibration dependent discharge. Spec-
imens with healthy hair bundles were preloaded with nifedipine at the dose indi-
cated on the X axis for 20 min, then transferred to fresh seawater. Nematocyst dis-
charge into test probes vibrating at 55 Hz was tested (A) 5 min after adding 10-6 M
ATP to the dish, or (B) 1 min after the ATP was washed out. Data points indicate the
mean number (± SEM) of microbasic p-mastigophore nematocysts counted per field
of view for a total of 4 test probes, each touched to a separate anemone.
41

ly, RP triggers ATP secretion by the sensory neuron located at the center of
the hair bundle (Watson, Venable, Hudson, and Repass, 1999).The reversible
inhibition of vibration dependent discharge observed at relatively high
concentrations of ATP in animals preloaded with W7 or nifedipine is inter-
esting in that it suggests that ATP may be affecting vibration sensitivity by
at least two mechanisms, only one of which depends on CAM. Whereas
the CAM dependent inhibition requires a 6 hr recovery, the CAM indepen-
dent inhibition is rapidly reversible.
Taken together, it seems reasonable to speculate that components of
the repair protein mixture regulate purinoceptors to enhance the repair
process while also preventing the destructive potential of activated
purinoceptors. The apparent involvement of purinoceptors in repair
places at least two classes of molecules at the extracellular surface of dam-
aged hair bundles: repair proteins, several different protein complexes
each having an estimated mass of 2000 kD; and ATP. The ATP may serve
both as an energy source for ATPase domains residing in at least some of
the RP protein complexes (Watson et al., 1999), and also as a ligand for
purinoceptors which initiate calcium transients associated with the repair
process. Preliminary results from ongoing experiments suggest that ele-
vated cytoplasmic calcium activates calcium calmodulin (CAM) to reorga-
nize the actin cytoskeleton of stereocilia.
Acknowledgments: I appreciate the technical expertise of Ms. Stacy Venable-Thi-
bodeaux and the financial support from NIH R01-GM52334.
REFERENCES
Assad, J. A., Shepherd, G. M. G., & Corey, D.P., (1991) Tip link integrity and
mechanotransduction in vertebrate hair cells. Neuron, 7, 985–994.
Crawford, A. C., Evans, M. G., & Fettiplace, R., (1991) The actions of calcium on the
mechano-electrical transducer current of turtle hair cells. Journal of Physiology,
434, 369–398.
Holstein, T., & Tardent, P., (1984) An ultrahigh-speed analysis of exocytosis: nema-
tocyst discharge. Science, 223, 830–833.
Housley, G. D., Raybould, N. P., & Thorne, P. R. (1998) Fluorescence imaging of the
Na+ influx via P2X receptors in cochlear hair cells. Hearing Research, 119, 1–13.
Kroese, A. B. A., Das, A., and Hudspeth, A. J. (1989) Blockage of the transduction
channels of hair cells in the bullfrog’s sacculus by aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Hearing Research, 37, 203–218.
Mariscal, R. N., (1984) Cnidaria: Cnidae. In “Biology of the Integument, vol. I, Inverte-
brates.” (Bereiter-Hahn, J., Maltoltsy, A. G., Richards,, K. S., eds.), pp.57–67,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin/New York.
Mire, P., & Watson, G. M., (1997) Mechanotransduction of hair bundles arising
from multicellular complexes in anemones. Hearing Research, 113, 244–234.
42
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Osborne, M. P., & Comis, S. D. (1990) Action of elastase, collagenase and other en-
zymes upon linkages between stereocilia in the guinea-pig cochlea. Acta Oto-
laryngology, 110, 37–45.
Preyer, S., Hemmert, W., Zenner, H. P., & Gummer, A. W., (1995) Abolition of the
receptor potential response of isolated mammalian outer hair cells of the guinea
pig cochlea by hair bundle treatment with elastase: a test of the tip link hypoth-
esis. Hearing Research, 89, 187–193.
Skaer, R. J., & Picken, L. E. R., (1965) The structure of the nematocyst thread and
the geometry of discharge in Corynactis viridis (Allman). Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society of London, Series:B, 250, 131–164.
Watson, G. M., & Hudson, R. R., (1994) Frequency and amplitude tuning of nema-
tocyst discharge by proline. Journal of Experimental Zoology, 268, 177–185.
Watson, G. M., & Mire, P., (1999) A comparison of hair bundle mechanoreceptors in
sea anemones and vertebrate systems. Current Topics in Developmental Biology,
43, 51–84.
Watson, G. M., Mire, P., & Hudson, R. R., (1997) Hair bundles of sea anemones as a
model system for vertebrate hair bundles. Hearing Research, 107, 53–66.
Watson, G. M., Mire, P., and Hudson, R. R., (1998a) Frequency specificity of vibra-
tion dependent discharge of nematocysts in sea anemones. Journal of Experimen-
tal Zoology, 281, 582–593.
Watson, G. M., Mire, P., & Hudson, R. R., (1998b) Repair of hair bundles in sea
anemones by secreted proteins. Hearing Research, 115, 119–128.
Watson, G. M., and Roberts, J., (1995) Chemoreceptor-mediated polymerization
and depolymerization of actin in hair bundles of sea anemones. Cell Motility and
the Cytoskeleton, 30, 208–220.
Watson, G. M., Venable, S., Hudson, R. R. & Repass, J. J. (1999) ATP enhances repair
of hair bundles in sea anemones. Hearing Research, 136, 1–12.
Zhao, Y., Yamoah, E. N., & Gillespie, P. G., (1996) Regeneration of broken tip links
and restoration of mechanical transduction in hair cells. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, USA, 94, 15469–15474.
HOW A LIVING HAIR CELL REPAIRS ITSELF
43


MECHANO-ELECTRIC TRANSDUCTION
Hair cells are mechano-receptors responsible for detecting motions over a
wide frequency range. A common mechanism is thought to be responsible
for establishing the broad frequency range over which these cells operate.
This same mechanism is thought to maintain a high sensitivity over a
wide range of stimulus magnitudes (Hudspeth, 1989). An array of actin
filled stereocilia, embedded in the cuticular plate, project from the apical
end of the hair cell in increasing heights toward, in some cases, a true
kinocilium (Tilney, DeRosier, and Melroy, 1980; Slepecky and Chamber-
lain, 1982; Tilney, Egelman, DeRosier, and Saunder, 1983). Mechano-elec-
tric transducer (MET) channels are located near the tops of the stereocilia
(Hudspeth, 1982; Jaramillo and Hudspeth, 1991; Lumpkin and Hudspeth,
1995). It is hypothesized that the channels are at either or both ends of a
thin filamentous element, the tip-link, that joins stereocilia in adjacent
rows and are aligned along the hair bundle’s axis of sensitivity (Pickles et
al., 1989). Present theory suggests that deflection of the hair bundle in-
creases (toward the kinocilium) or decreases (away from the kinocilium)
tension in the tip-link which in turn is thought to directly translate this
tension to a mechanically-gated channel is tethered to either or both ends
of the link (Howard and Hudspeth, 1988; Denk, Holt, Shepherd, and
Corey, 1995; Gillespie and Corey, 1997). An adaptation process has been
described which is thought to restore the tip-links to a constant tension re-
gardless of the hair bundle’s steady-state position, in order to extend the
dynamic range of the hair bundle while maintaining sensitivity (Eatock,
45
3
Fast Transducer Adaptation,
Physiological Implications and
Underlying Mechanisms
Anthony J. Ricci, Ph.D.

Corey, and Hudspeth, 1987; Crawford, Evans, and Fettiplace, 1989; Haco-
hen, Assad, Smith, and Corey, 1989; Assad and Corey, 1992). Recently, it
has been shown that adaptation can be extremely fast, and it has been pos-
tulated that adaptation may impart a mechanical tuning to hair bundles
(Ricci and Fettiplace, 1997; Ricci, Wu, and Fettiplace, 1998). Furthermore,
evidence suggests that there may be multiple mechanisms involved in
adaptation (Ricci et al., 1998; Wu, Ricci, and Fettiplace, 1999). It may be
that the function of the fast adaptation process is to provide a tuning
mechanism to the hair bundle, while the slower adaptation process main-
tains the operating range of the hair bundle. The purpose of this review is
first to synopsize existing data regarding fast adaptation, emphasizing evi-
dence that implicates adaptation as a mechanical tuning mechanism. The
second part of the chapter will present evidence supporting the contention
that there may be multiple mechanisms of adaptation.
METHODS
The turtle auditory papilla has been a productive preparation for studying
tuning mechanisms in auditory hair cells for over twenty years (Crawford
and Fettiplace, 1978; Crawford and Fettiplace, 1980; Crawford and Fetti-
place, 1981; Art, Crawford, Fettiplace, and Fuchs, 1982; Crawford and Fet-
tiplace, 1985; Art and Fettiplace, 1987; Crawford et al., 1989; Art, Wu, and
Fettiplace, 1995; Tucker and Fettiplace, 1996). Turtle hair cells have been
employed to investigate afferent nerve tuning, electrical resonance as a
tuning mechanism, efferent regulation of tuning, activation and adapta-
tion of MET channels and mechanical properties of hair bundles. The re-
cent modification of the turtle preparation, in which patch-clamp record-
ings from the hair cell in the intact papilla could be made, has allowed for
more quantitative investigations of transducer adaptation (Ricci and Fetti-
place, 1997). Transducer currents can be recorded at a much more routine
rate, the magnitudes of the currents are much larger and adaptation is
more robust than has been previously reported.
ADAPTATION IS FAST
Adaptation manifests itself as a decrease in current amplitude during a
constant stimulus. The rate and extent of adaptation vary with stimulus
magnitude; however, as seen in Figure 3–1, the rate of adaptation remains
fast for stimuli which activate up to about 50% of the maximal current
(Hacohen et al., 1989; Ricci and Fettiplace, 1997). For small displacement
steps adaptation could be almost complete. In addition, fast adaptation
was found to be linear, being equally as fast in response to positive and
negative stimuli (Wu et al., 1999). Initially, the rates of adaptation were
46
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Figure 3–1: Mechano-electric transducer currents elicited from an auditory hair cell recorded from the intact papilla. Stimuli are
shown above the current responses. Hair cells were voltage clamped at 70 mV. The right hand panels are an expanded view of a
50 nm response showing fast adaptation. A single exponential decay is fit (heavy line) to the current giving a time constant of 0.9 ms.
47

measured by fitting a single exponential to the decay in transducer current
elicited by a small deflection of the hair bundle (Figure 3–1). The response
chosen was one eliciting less than 50% of the maximal current in order not
to obscure the measurement due to saturation or perhaps the onset of a
second component. Rates of adaptation were found to be less than 1 ms.
To date, the fastest adaptation rate measured has been ~100µs, comparable
to the stimulus rise time. Wu et. al., (1999), demonstrated that the stimulus
rise time is critical in setting the rate of adaptation. It is possible then that
the adaptation rate is being limited by the speed of the stimulus, such that
faster stimuli may lead to faster rates of adaptation. This result may also ex-
plain the variability in measured adaptation rates between investigators,
where other methods of hair bundle stimuli would be considerably slower.
TONOTOPIC VARIATIONS IN TRANSDUCTION
Plotting the time constant of adaptation against hair cell location along the
papilla showed an exponential decrease in adaptation rate (Ricci and Fetti-
place, 1997). The time constant of adaptation varied in a manner similar to
the tonotopic frequency map of the auditory papilla determined from af-
ferent nerve fiber recordings (Figure 3–2, left) (Fettiplace and Fuchs, 1999).
The solid line in Figure 3–2 (left) is the tonotopic map of the papilla de-
rived from afferent nerve recordings (Crawford and Fettiplace, 1980). The
correlation between adaptative rate and tonotopic map was the first clue
that the rate of fast adaptation might be a tuning mechanism or at least a
high pass filter for hair cells. A high pass filter had been reported previous-
ly in afferent nerve recordings, but the etiology was unknown (Crawford
and Fettiplace, 1980). A tonotopic increase in the magnitude of the trans-
ducer current has also been found (Figure 3–2, right). Since the rate of
adaptation is directly proportional to calcium entry, it has been postulated
that an increase in channels per stereocilia would increase the calcium load
per stereocilia thus speeding adaptation (Ricci and Fettiplace, 1998). In an
attempt to determine if the number of channels per stereocilia increased
tonotopically, an estimate of channel density was made. The number of
stereocilia per bundle increases tonotopically, so it would be predicted that
the magnitude of the transducer current would increase regardless of a
change in density (Hackney, Fettiplace, and Furness, 1993). The dashed
lines of Figure 3–2 illustrate this phenomenon where either 1,3 or 5 chan-
nels is multiplied by the single channel current and then by the number of
stereocilia for that position to give a theoretical maximal current (Craw-
ford et al., 1991; Hackney et al., 1993). The solid line represents a graded
change in the number of channels per stereocilia, varying linearly from 2
to 5. This line most closely matches the measured current responses. Thus,
a tonotopic increase in the number of channels per stereocilia may in part
underlie the variation in adaptation rates measured.
48
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

CALCIUM SENSITIVITY OF ADAPTATION
Calcium Buffering
It has been known for some time that adaptation is a Ca2+-dependent
process (Eatock et al., 1987; Corey and Hudspeth, 1983; Crawford et al.,
1989; Hacohen et al., 1989; Crawford, Evans, and Fettiplace, 1991). Lower-
ing external Ca2+ levels can slow and even abolish adaptation (Crawford
et. al., 1991; Ricci and Fettiplace, 1997) (Figure 3–3 bottom). This has led to
the question of whether adaptation can be maintained under normal en-
dolymph environment. Endolymph is a high potassium, low calcium solu-
tion bathing the hair bundle. Ca2+ has been measured near 60M in turtle
papilla (Crawford et al., 1991) and closer to 30M in mammalian cochlea
(Bosher and Warren, 1978).
The sensitivity to external Ca2+ is to some degree determined by the
properties and concentrations of intraciliary Ca2+ buffer (Crawford et al.,
1991; Ricci and Fettiplace, 1997; Ricci et al., 1998). By lowering the concen-
tration of the intraciliary Ca2+ chelator, it is possible to maintain adaptation
TRANSDUCER ADAPTATION, PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS & MECHANISMS
49
Figure 3–2: The left-hand panel plots adaptation time constant against location.
The solid line represents the tonotopic map of the papilla measured from primary
afferent neurons (Crawford and Fettiplace, 1980). Cells were binned in 0.1 incre-
ments of position and the maximal transducer currents averaged and plotted in the
right-hand panel (±SEM). Numbers of channels per stereocilia were estimated, as
described in the text. The dashed lines represent predicted transducer channels for
1, 3 or 5 channels per stereocilia, while the solid line represents a tonotopic increase
in channels per stereocilia, from 2 to 5.

at physiologic concentrations of Ca2+ (Ricci and Fettiplace, 1997; Ricci et
al., 1998). The sensitivity of adaptation to intraciliary buffer concentration
has allowed for the estimate of the endogenous Ca2+ buffering concentra-
tion(Ricci et al., 1998). Perforated patch recordings were compared to
whole-cell recordings using different BAPTA concentrations for these esti-
mates. It was found that a gradient existed in the endogenous buffer con-
centration with the levels increasing with frequency. The range of concen-
trations for endogenous buffer ranged from ~0.1 mM to greater than 0.5
mM (Ricci et al., 1998). Similar concentrations gradients have been estimat-
ed in mammalian cochlea. At these concentrations of Ca2+ buffer, adapta-
tion can be maintained at low external Ca2+ concentrations (Oberholtzer,
Buettger, Summers, and Matschonsky, 1988).
As an aside, the sensitivity of a particular cell to either the intraciliary
level of Ca2+ buffer or of external Ca2+ was also dependent on the magni-
50
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 3–3: Example of the response of two cells (upper and lower panels) from a
similar region of the papilla (~0.53 from apex) to lowering external calcium from
2.8 mM to 50M (left and right, respectively). The cell at the top had 0.1 mM BAP-
TA and maintains adaptation while the bottom cell had 3 mM of the calcium chela-
tor and adaptation is compromised. With BAPTA there is a similar effect on open
probability and adaptation.

tude of the transducer current (Ricci et al., 1998). The larger the transducer
current the less sensitive to either variable. This implies that there is a sum-
mation of Ca2+ within the stereocilia in cells with large currents, supporting
the hypothesis that there are increasing numbers of channels per stereocilia.
Calcium Permeability of Transducer Channel
Coupling Ca2+ imaging experiments with electrical recordings has allowed
for the demonstration of a direct relationship between Ca2+ entry and the
rate of adaptation (Ricci and Fettiplace, 1998). That is, the rate of adaptation
was directly proportional to the Ca2+ entering the stereocilia. This relation-
ship might explain in part why the rate of adaptation is sensitive to the
stimulus rise-time. The faster the rise-time, the greater the peak Ca2+
achieved in the stereocilia. Ca2+ can both block and permeate the transduc-
er channel so that lowering external Ca2+ increased the total magnitude of
the transducer current while decreasing the proportion of the current car-
ried by Ca2+ (Crawford et al., 1991; Ricci and Fettiplace, 1998). It was fur-
ther demonstrated that the monovalent ion could alter Ca2+ permeability,
presumably through an anomalous mole fraction effect, so that more Ca2+
entered the stereocilia with K+ as the monovalent ion than with Na+. These
surprising results might explain the necessity for the unusual composition
of endolymph. Having a solution of high K+ and low Ca2+ will maximize
the total current through the transducer channels while maintaining a high
Ca2+ permeability for regulating adaptation (Ricci and Fettiplace, 1998). In
addition, the positive endocochlear potential will increase the driving
force for Ca2+ through the channel, thus speeding adaptation even further
(Ricci and Fettiplace, 1998). Interestingly, similar types of ionic interactions
have been described in saccule hair cells using a macroscopic measuring
technique (Lumpkin, Marquis, and Hudspeth, 1997). However, quantita-
tively the reported Ca2+ permeabilities were quite different between end
organs. These data might suggest variations in transducer channel perme-
ability properties between hair cells operating over different frequency
ranges. This type of mechanism is frequently used in other sensory sys-
tems such as the visual and olfactory as a means of regulating adaptation.
A variation in transducer channel Ca2+ permeability might be a mecha-
nism underlying the tonotopic changes in adaptation rate.
Ca2+ Feedback Predicted by Ca2+ Gradients
How then do Ca2+ buffers alter adaptation? Increasing the concentration of
the Ca2+ chelator BAPTA decreases the rate of adaptation and shifts the
channel activation curve leftward, suggesting that less free Ca2+ is avail-
able for binding at the intraciliary site that triggers adaptation. Since Ca2+
is lower at this site, adaptation responds by opening more channels in or-
der to restore Ca2+ to some set level. In this way, adaptation acts as a feed-
back loop regulating the intraciliary Ca2+ concentration. For this to occur,
TRANSDUCER ADAPTATION, PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS & MECHANISMS
51

the adaptation trigger site must be at a distance away from the source of
Ca2+ where the buffer can be effective. If this idea of Ca2+ feedback is accu-
rate, then there is a position within the stereocilia where at steady state the
Ca2+ remains constant regardless of the buffer concentration or the exter-
nal Ca2+ concentration. Naraghi and Neher (1997) have demonstrated that
a length constant can be defined for a given Ca2+ buffer. The length con-
stant represents the distance from a source at which a buffer can be effec-
tive. The length constant is determined by several factors including, the
forward rate constant (how fast it binds), the affinity (Kd) (how tightly it
binds) and by its concentration (Naraghi and Neher, 1997). BAPTA is a fast
high affinity buffer. Increasing BAPTA concentration will effectively short-
en its length constant, making it more effective at altering adaptation. In a
nonfeedback situation, a plot of Ca2+ concentration against distance from
the source would have steeper profiles as the buffer concentration is ele-
vated, so steady state levels would be achieved closer to the source. How-
ever, in a perfect feedback system, it would be predicted that the plots
would intersect near the Ca2+ binding site position (see Figure 3–4). That
is, the feedback system would operate to maintain Ca2+ at a constant level
at the Ca2+ sensor, despite the difference in steepness of the gradient.
A three-dimensional model of Ca2+ diffusion within the stereocilia
was developed in order to test the feedback model and to predict the loca-
tion of the Ca2+ binding site (Ricci et al., 1998). Having measured the shift
in transducer activation curves caused by either changing external Ca2+ or
by altering internal Ca2+ buffering, and having directly determined Ca2+
entry under different external Ca2+ conditions, allowed us to estimate the
Ca2+ gradient down the stereocilia. Measured values for the dimensions of
the stereocilia as well as for Ca-ATPases levels were used in the model
(Sneary, 1988; Hackney et al., 1993; Tucker and Fettiplace, 1995; Yamoah et
al., 1998). The model was capable of predicting the gradients in intraciliary
Ca2+, demonstrating an intersection between gradients of different buffer
concentrations at points between 20 to 40nm from the channel (see Figure
3–4). This supports the hypothesis that adaptation can be described as a
feedback system, and also serves to define a region very close to the trans-
ducer channel for the Ca2+ binding domain.
ADAPTATION AS A MECHANICAL TUNING MECHANISM
While investigating the effects of external Ca2+ and internal Ca2+ buffering
on adaptation it was found that a proportion of cells demonstrated oscilla-
tions in the transducer currents that were Ca2+-dependent (Ricci et al.,
1998) (Figure 3–5). The frequency of the oscillations varied with the initial
fast time constant of adaptation and with characteristic frequency of the
hair cell. This tonotopic variation in transducer oscillations suggests that
52
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

adaptation may provide an as yet uncharacterized tuning mechanism for
hair cells (Ricci et al., 1998). The oscillations are also predicted by a Ca2+
feedback system regulating fast adaptation (Wu et al., 1999).
Thus far we have demonstrated that the rate of fast adaptation is dic-
tated by several factors including the size of the transducer current, the
stimulus rise time, the intraciliary Ca2+ buffer, the extracellular Ca2+ con-
centration and the position along the papilla from which the cell was
recorded. The tonotopic variations in adaptation rate led to the suggestion
that adaptation may be a mechanical tuning mechanism for hair cells. This
was supported by the observation of Ca2+-dependent oscillations in the
transducer current. Manipulations of Ca2+ homeostasis has also allowed for
the estimate of the endogenous Ca2+ buffer concentration as well as a pre-
diction for the location of the Ca2+ binding site, between 20 to 40nm from
TRANSDUCER ADAPTATION, PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS & MECHANISMS
53
Figure 3–4: Estimation of Ca2+ gradient down a single stereocilia for different
buffer concentrations. The intersection site predicts the location of the Ca2+ sensor.
That the profiles intersect supports the idea of a Ca2+-dependent feedback system
regulating fast adaptation. This Figure is modified from Ricci et. al. (1998).

the channel. Adaptation responses to alterations in Ca2+ homeostasis are
consistent with the hypothesis that fast adaptation can be depicted as a
Ca2+-dependent feedback system that is tightly coupled to channel opening.
MULTIPLE MECHANISMS OF ADAPTATION
Present theories regarding the mechanism of transducer adaptation in-
volve active motors, thought to be myosin isozymes, being attached to the
transducer channels (Hacohen et al., 1989; Assad and Corey, 1992; Gille-
spie and Hudspeth, 1993; Gillespie et al., 1993; Hudspeth and Gillespie,
1994; Metcalf, Chelliah, and Hudspeth, 1994; Hasson, Heintzelman, San-
tos-Sacchi, Corey, and Mooseker, 1995; Gillespie, 1996; Gillespie, Hasson,
54
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 3–5: Example of mechanical oscillations of a transducer current elicited
by application of 50M external Ca2+. 1 M EGTA was the internal Ca2+ buffer.
No oscillation was observed in higher concentrations of external Ca2+. These os-
cillations may underlie a mechanical tuning mechanism in hair cells. Imax for
this cell was 1.3 nA.

Garcia, and Corey, 1996; Burlacu, Tap, Lumpkin, and Hudspeth, 1997;
Gillespie, 1997; Gillespie and Corey, 1997; Steyger, Gillespie, and Baird,
1998). The motors move the channel up and down the stereocilia in a Ca2+-
dependent manner, increasing or decreasing tension on the channel and
thus resetting the operating range of the transducer channels. Data in sup-
port of this model come from a variety of sources; however, direct evi-
dence is limited largely due to the technical difficulties of the experiment
(see Chapter 1 by Dr. Corey in this book). One basic problem with this
model is that the kinetics of fast adaptation are too fast to be dictated by a
myosin cycle. Previous measures of adaptation rates on which the myosin
model is based are 1 to 2 orders of magnitude slower than those reported
here for fast adaptation. This discrepancy has led us to investigate whether
multiple adaptation processes might be involved. To date, there are several
lines of data suggesting there might be multiple mechanisms of adapta-
tion. None of the present data is direct or conclusive, nor does this body of
data directly refute the myosin hypothesis. However, the growing body of
data suggest the mechanisms involved in adaptation are more complex
than previously thought.
Kinetics
The decay of the transducer current during a longer test pulse is best fit by
a double exponential, one having a time constant near 1 ms and the sec-
ond with a time constant in the tens of milliseconds (Wu et al., 1999) (Fig-
ure 3–6). The relative proportion of slow to fast components increases as
the magnitude of the stimulus grows, perhaps suggesting different operat-
ing ranges. This result is appealing because the second time constant is
similar to that reported in other preparations and could be driven by a mo-
tor system. A single Ca2+ binding site model cannot predict this decay.
Ca2+ Buffers
Another line of evidence supporting multiple mechanisms for adaptation
is that particular Ca2+ buffers can differentially alter the rate of adaptation
as compared to the steady-state open probability of the channel. As men-
tioned earlier, Naraghi and Neher (1997) have demonstrated that a length
constant can be assigned to a given mobile buffer based upon the concen-
tration, the forward rate constant (how fast it binds) and the affinity (how
tightly it binds). For example, NitroBAPTA is a low affinity buffer with a
forward rate constant similar to BAPTA. It would be predicted to be an ef-
fective buffer close to the Ca2+ source but ineffective farther away from the
source. Comparing the effectiveness of this buffer with BAPTA showed
that NitroBAPTA could alter the rate of adaptation but was ineffective at
altering the activation curve for the channels, thus uncoupling these two
TRANSDUCER ADAPTATION, PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS & MECHANISMS
55

processes (Ricci et al., 1998). This means perhaps that there are two sites
regulating adaptation with the close site governing the rate of fast adapta-
tion and the distant site dictating the open probability. Another test is to
use a high affinity buffer with a slower rate constant. This buffer will be ef-
fective further from the channel but would be ineffective close to the chan-
nel. EGTA is such a buffer. Comparison of EGTA with BAPTA showed that
EGTA was ineffective at altering the adaptation rate but was as effective as
BAPTA at shifting the transducer activation curve (Ricci et al., 1998). This
result is consistent with the notion that there are at least two processes in-
volved in regulating adaptation, one close to the channel dictating the rate
of adaptation and the other located farther away from the channel and
regulating the activation curve. Alone the data are not conclusive. One
drawback is that the two measurements are inherently different. The rate
of adaptation is influenced by the dynamic change in Ca2+, while the posi-
tion of the activation curve is a steady-state measurement. This difference
56
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 3–6: Adaptation to larger stimuli induces a double exponential decay in
the transducer current. The thicker solid line indicates the fit. Ca2+ buffer was
0.1 mM BAPTA. Imax was 1.5 nA. The second component increases as larger
deflections of the hair bundle are employed (Wu et al., 1999).

may in part be responsible for the differential buffer sensitivity, where a
difference in the Kd, a steady-state buffer property, alters the activation
curve, not the rate of adaptation and the forward rate constant, a dynamic
variable, alters the rate of adaptation and not the activation curve. Either
interpretation is valid and important for understanding mechanisms in-
volved in regulating adaptation.
PHARMACOLOGICAL EVIDENCE
Phosphate Analogs Alter Slow but Not Fast Adaptation
Several pieces of pharmacological data support the hypothesis of multiple
adaptation mechanisms. Phosphate analogs interfere with the myosin cy-
cle preventing the power stroke (Yamoah and Gillespie, 1996). Phosphate
analogs have been used to block adaptation, in fact shifting the transducer
activation curve to the right (Yamoah and Gillespie, 1996). In an effort to
separate two components of adaptation, vanadate, a phosphate analog,
and butyldiene monoxamine (BDM), a myosin antagonist, were used to
try to block adaptation. Both compounds shifted the activation curve to
the right; however, neither altered the fast component of adaptation (Wu
et al., 1999). In addition, a single exponential curve better fit the current
decay as compared to a double exponential, supporting the idea that mul-
tiple mechanisms of adaptation exist. These data suggest that myosin is
not involved in fast adaptation but may be involved in a second slower
component of adaptation.
Cyclic Nucleotides
Cyclic nucleotides can alter the position of the transducer activation curve
(Ricci and Fettiplace, 1997). Cyclic AMP shifts the activation curve to the
right, requiring larger stimuli to activate the transducer channels. No effect
was found on the rate of adaptation. The actions of cAMP were also found
to be independent of Ca2+ (Ricci and Fettiplace, 1997). This suggests the
cyclic nucleotide effect might be on the second component of adaptation.
Calmodulin
And finally, calmodulin antagonists block the rate of adaptation but do not
shift the transducer activation curve (Walker et al., 1993; Walker and Hud-
speth, 1996). Together these data suggest that multiple mechanisms may
be involved in adaptation. One mechanism appears to be tightly coupled
to the transducer channel, located very close to the channel, while a sec-
ond mechanism appears to be more distant.
TRANSDUCER ADAPTATION, PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS & MECHANISMS
57

TWO-SITE FEEDBACK MODEL OF ADAPTATION
Recently, we have developed a model of transducer adaptation that is
meant to serve as a template in which to further investigate possible mech-
anisms involved in adaptation (Wu et al., 1999). The model is a two-site
Ca2+ feedback model that uses the three-dimensional Ca2+ diffusion model
as the starting point (Ricci et al., 1998). No assumptions regarding the me-
chanical properties or mechanisms underlying adaptation are included;
rather, two simple generic Ca2+ regulated processes are described. Three
simple reactions underlie the basic model.
K1
Ca2+ + Bs ======= Ca2+Bs
K-1
Here B is the binding site regulating adaptation, the subscript (s) referring
to either the first or second site. Ca2+ entry through the transducer chan-
nels binds at the adaptation trigger sites (Bs). The concentration of Ca2+B
regulates the kinetics of the conformational change of a modulating pro-
tein (M):
(Ca2+ B)ka
M ======= M*
kb
The position of the activation curve is dictated by the concentration of M*
and scaled linearly as:
Xa = I * M*I + I
I
where:  and  are constants and the M* concentration is integrated over
each specified binding site region. Each of the two binding sites is set up
similarly. The sum of the two sites controls the set point of Xa. Differences
between the first and second site include:
1. The forward rate constant, ka, of the conformational change is
set to match the difference in adaptation rates so that the first
site is two orders of magnitude faster than the second site.
2. The Kd of the Ca2+ binding, k-1/k1, is dictated by the gradient
of Ca2+ down the stereocilia and the location of the binding site
within this gradient (Ricci et. al 1998).
3. The first site is located 20 to 40nm from the Ca2+ source, as indi-
cated by the intersection of the Ca2+ gradients described earlier.
58
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

The second site is located 150 to 200nm from the source and
was set somewhat arbitrarily to give the best match to the data.
4. The operating range for each site overlapped but was set based
on the relative proportion of slow vs. fast components, deter-
mined from the double exponential fit to the current decay for
a series of different magnitude displacements.
This relatively simple feedback model was capable of reproducing
many of the characteristics of transducer adaptation. Figure 3–7 is an ex-
ample of current responses produced by the model in response to increas-
ing stimulus magnitude where 0.1 mM BAPTA was the buffer. These
traces show a single exponential decay to small steps, with a slower sec-
ond component becoming predominant when larger magnitude stimuli
were used. The model was capable of reproducing a variety of properties
previously measured for transducer adaptation including:
1. Double exponential decay of the current.
2. Sensitivity to Ca2+ buffer concentration, with increasing buffer
concentrations slowing the rate of adaptation and shifting the
activation curve leftward.
TRANSDUCER ADAPTATION, PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS & MECHANISMS
59
Figure 3–7: Two site Ca2+ feedback model current responses. Using a three dimen-
sional profile of Ca2+ diffusion down the stereocilia predicts many of the measured
properties of transducer adaptation. These traces illustrate that the model can repro-
duce the set of current responses to increasing displacement steps in a very similar
manner to experimental data. Figure 7 is modified from Wu et. al. (1999).

3. Sensitivity to external Ca2+, again lowering external Ca2+
slowed the rate of adaptation and shifted the plot of transducer
activation leftward.
4. Sensitivity to the stimulus rise-time, so that slowing the rise-
time of stimulus slowed the rate of adaptation and shifted the
activation curve.
5. Asingle site would not reproduce the measured responses. Inter-
estingly, the model produced current traces remarkably similar
to the vanadate experiments when the second site was removed.
6. Capable of generating oscillations in the transducer current
that were Ca2+-dependent. Altering the kinetics of the fast com-
ponent varied the frequency of the oscillations.
Implications Regarding a Mammalian Cochlea
The ability of adaptation to work on the microsecond time scale suggests
that it is capable of working at frequencies used in mammalian systems.
That the stimulus rise time alters the rate of adaptation suggests that adap-
tation can be a tunable filter. The hair bundle and the transducer channels
are not limited by the membrane time constant and so can provide high
frequency input to hair cells. Is there a mechanical correlate to fast adapta-
tion? Mechanical oscillations have been reported in hair cells (Crawford
and Fettiplace, 1985; Benser et al., 1996). Also, movements correlating to
adaptation have been described (Howard and Hudspeth, 1987; Howard
and Hudspeth, 1988; Assad and Corey, 1992). Hair bundles would be re-
quired to move much smaller distances in order to alter transducer prop-
erties than would the cell body. These properties make fast adaptation a
possible candidate to be the active process in mammalian cochlea. It does
not rule out the importance of outer hair cell motility, but it does provide
an alternative or additional hypothesis that does not have either the me-
chanical or electrical limitations of outer hair cell motility. One possibility,
though completely speculative, is that the outer hair cell motility provides
a bias for the hair bundle either pressing the bundle into the tectorial
membrane or moving it away from the membrane, thereby providing a
tonic offset to the hair bundle position. This role being slower would by-
pass the constraints outlined above.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
As our knowledge regarding transduction and adaptation increases, so do
the complexities of the system. The realization that so little is really under-
60
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

stood about the mechanisms regulating adaptation and transduction is
both exciting and humbling. What are the mechanical correlates of fast
adaptation? Is fast adaptation intrinsic to the channel, a conformational
change in the channel or a separate molecule tightly coupled to the chan-
nel? Are there synergistic interactions between transducer channels?
Might adaptation underlie some component of the active process in the
mammalian ear? The molecular nature of the channel is still unknown.
How the channel is tethered to the cytoskeleton or the membrane is un-
known. Is there a biochemical regulation of transduction or adaptation?
Cyclic nucleotide experiments suggest there is some modulation, but what
is the mechanism of this response and where is the site of action?
The list of hair cell properties that vary tonotopically is continually
growing. Hair bundles vary in number and height of stereocilia. The size
of the transducer current increases tonotopically, presumably by increas-
ing the number of channels per stereocilia. The adaptation rate decreases
tonotopically, presumably at least in part due to the change in number of
channels per stereocilia. The concentration of endogenous Ca2+ buffer in-
creases tonotopically both in the stereocilia and in the soma. The number
of Ca2+ channels and Ca2+-activated potassium channels increases tono-
topically. The number of Ca2+ hot-spots, presumably representing the
number of synaptic release sites increases tonotopically. The distribution of
 subunits of the Bk-channel varies tonotopically (Jones et al., 1999). The
presence of inward rectifying channels as well as delayed rectifying chan-
nels varies tonotopically as well (Art and Goodman, 1996; Goodman and
Art, 1996b; Goodman and Art, 1996a). What are the signals dictating these
numerous tonotopic variations found in so many aspects of signal process-
ing in the ear? Are similar variations found in mammalian systems? At
what point in development is the tonotopic template established? What are
the signaling mechanisms? Can it be restored with new hair cell formation?
Recent investigations regarding adaptation of the mechano-electric
transducer channels have revealed a variety of new and exciting findings.
Most importantly, adaptation may provide a mechanical tuning mecha-
nism for hair cells. Secondly, it appears that multiple mechanisms may be
involved in generating adaptation. Uncovering these mechanisms and un-
derstanding how these properties are varied tonotopically are issues for
future research.
Acknowledgments: The data presented in this review were obtained in collabora-
tion with Robert Fettiplace. Yu-Cherng Wu programmed the modeling experi-
ments both for the Ca2+ gradients as well as for the two-site model. This work was
supported by NIH grants DC-01362 to RF and DC-03896 to AJR as well as a Deaf-
ness Research Award to AJR.
TRANSDUCER ADAPTATION, PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS & MECHANISMS
61

REFERENCES:
Art, J. J., Crawford, A. C., Fettiplace R., & Fuchs P. A. (1982). Efferent regulation of
hair cells in the turtle cochlea. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series: B
Biological Sciences, 216, 377–384.
Art, J. J., & Fettiplace, R. (1987). Variation of membrane properties in hair cells iso-
lated from the turtle cochlea. Journal of Physiology (London), 385, 207–242.
Art, J. J., & Goodman, M. B. (1996). Ionic conductances and hair cell tuning in the
turtle cochlea. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 781, 103–122.
Art, J. J., Wu, Y. C., & Fettiplace, R. (1995). The calcium-activated potassium chan-
nels of turtle hair cells. Journal of General Physiology, 105, 49–72.
Assad, J. A., & Corey, D. P. (1992). An active motor model for adaptation by verte-
brate hair cells. Journal of Neuroscience, 12, 3291–3309.
Benser, M. E., Marquis, R. E., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1996). Rapid, active hair bundle
movements in hair cells from the bullfrog’s sacculus. Journal of Neuroscience, 16,
5629–5643.
Bosher, S. K., & Warren, R. L. (1978). Very low calcium content of cochlear en-
dolymph, an extracellular fluid. Nature, 273, 377–378.
Burlacu, S., Tap, W. D., Lumpkin, E. A., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1997). ATPase activity of
myosin in hair bundles of the bullfrog’s sacculus. Biophysical Journal, 72,
263–271.
Corey, D. P., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1983). Kinetics of the receptor current in bullfrog
saccular hair cells. Journal of Neuroscience, 3, 962–976.
Crawford, A. C., Evans, M. G., & Fettiplace, R. (1989). Activation and adaptation of
transducer currents in turtle hair cells. Journal of Physiology (London). 419,
405–434.
Crawford, A. C., Evans, M. G., and Fettiplace, R. (1991). The actions of calcium on
then mechano-electrical transducer current of turtle hair cells. Journal of Physiol-
ogy (London), 434, 369–398.
Crawford, A. C., & Fettiplace, R. (1978). Ringing responses in cochlear hair cells of
the turtle (proceedings). Journal of Physiology (London), 284, 120P–122P.
Crawford, A. C., & Fettiplace, R. (1980). The frequency selectivity of auditory nerve
fibres and hair cells in the cochlea of the turtle. Journal of Physiology (London),
306, 79–125.
Crawford, A. C., & Fettiplace, R. (1981). An electrical tuning mechanism in turtle
cochlear hair cells. Journal of Physiology (London), 312, 377–412.
Crawford, A. C., & Fettiplace, R. (1985). The mechanical properties of ciliary bun-
dles of turtle cochlear hair cells. Journal of Physiology (London), 364, 359–379.
Denk W., Holt J. R., Shepherd, G. M., & Corey, D. P. (1995). Calcium imaging of sin-
gle stereocilia in hair cells: localization of transduction channels at both ends of
tip links. Neuron, 15, 1311–1321.
Eatock, R. A., Corey, D. P., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1987). Adaptation of mechanoelectri-
cal transduction in hair cells of the bullfrog’s sacculus. Journal of Neuroscience, 7,
2821–2836.
Fettiplace, R., & Fuchs, P. A. (1999). Mechanisms of hair cell tuning. Annual Review
of Physiology, 61, 809–834.
Gillespie, P. G. (1996). Deaf and dizzy mice with mutated myosin motors. Nature
Medicine, 2, 27–29.
62
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Gillespie, P. G. (1997). Multiple myosin motors and mechanoelectrical transduction
by hair cells. Biological Bulletin. 192, 186–190.
Gillespie, P. G., & Corey, D. P. (1997). Myosin and adaptation by hair cells. Neuron,
19, 955–958.
Gillespie, P. G., Hasson, T., Garcia, J. A., & Corey, D. P. (1996). Multiple myosin
isozymes and hair-cell function. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative
Biology, 61, 309–318.
Gillespie, P. G., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1993). Adenine nucleoside diphosphates block
adaptation of mechanoelectrical transduction in hair cells. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Science, USA, 90, 2710–2714.
Gillespie, P. G., Wagner, M. C., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1993). Identification of a 120 kd
hair-bundle myosin located near stereociliary tips. Neuron, 11, 581–594.
Goodman, M. B., & Art, J. J. (1996a). Positive feedback by a potassium-selective in-
ward rectifier enhances tuning in vertebrate hair cells. Biophysical Journal, 71,
430–442.
Goodman, M. B., & Art, J. J. (1996b). Variations in the ensemble of potassium cur-
rents underlying resonance in turtle hair cells. Journal Physiology (London), 497,
395–412.
Hackney, C. M., Fettiplace, R., & Furness, D. N. (1993). The functional morphology
of stereociliary bundles on turtle cochlear hair cells. Hearing Research, 69,
163–175.
Hacohen, N., Assad, J. A., Smith, W. J., & Corey, D. P. (1989). Regulation of tension
on hair-cell transduction channels: displacement and calcium dependence. Jour-
nal of Neuroscience, 9, 3988–3997.
Hasson, T., Heintzelman, M. B., Santos-Sacchi, J., Corey, D. P., & Mooseker, M. S.
(1995). Expression in cochlea and retina of myosin VIIa, the gene product defec-
tive in Usher syndrome type 1B. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 92, 9815–9819.
Howard, J., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1987). Mechanical relaxation of the hair bundle me-
diates adaptation in mechanoelectrical transduction by the bullfrog’s saccular
hair cell. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 84, 3064–3068.
Howard, J., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1988). Compliance of the hair bundle associated
with gating of mechanoelectrical transduction channels in the bullfrog’s saccular
hair cell. Neuron, 1, 189–199.
Hudspeth, A. J. (1982). Extracellular current flow and the site of transduction by
vertebrate hair cells. Journal of Neuroscience, 2, 1–10.
Hudspeth, A. J. (1989). How the ear’s works work. Nature 341, 397–404.
Hudspeth, A. J., & Gillespie, P. G. (1994). Pulling springs to tune transduction:
adaptation by hair cells. Neuron, 12, 1–9.
Jaramillo, F., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1991). Localization of the hair cell’s transduction
channels at the hair bundle’s top by iontophoretic application of a channel
blocker. Neuron, 7, 409–420.
Jones, E. M. C., Gray-Keller, M., and Fettiplace, R. (1999). The role of Ca2+ activates
K+ channel splice variants in the tonotopic organization of turtle cochlea. Journal
Physiology, 518, 653–665.
Lumpkin, E. A., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1995). Detection of Ca2+ entry through
mechanosensitive channels localizes the site of mechanoelectrical transduction
in hair cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 92,
10297–10301.
TRANSDUCER ADAPTATION, PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS & MECHANISMS
63

Lumpkin, E. A., Marquis, R. .E., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1997). The selectivity of the hair
cell’s mechanoelectrical-transduction channel promotes Ca2+ flux at low Ca2+
concentrations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 94,
10997–11002.
Metcalf, A. B., Chelliah, Y., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1994). Molecular cloning of a myosin
I beta isozyme that may mediate adaptation by hair cells of the bullfrog’s inter-
nal ear. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 91, 11821–11825.
Naraghi, M., & Neher, E. (1997). Linearized buffered Ca2+ diffusion in mi-
crodomains and its implications for calculation of Ca2+ at the mouth of a calci-
um channel. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 6961–6973.
Oberholtzer, J. C., Buettger, C., Summers, M. C., & Matschinsky, F. M. (1988). The
28k-Da calbindin-D is a major calcium-binding protein in the basilar papilla of
the chick. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 85, 3387–3390.
Pickles, J. O., Brix, J., Comis, S. D., Gleich, O., Koppl, C., Manley, G. A., & Osborne,
M. P. (1989). The organization of tip links and stereocilia on hair cells of bird and
lizard basilar papillae. Hearing Research, 41, 31–41.
Ricci, A. J., & Fettiplace, R. (1997). The effects of calcium buffering and cyclic AMP
on mechanoelectrical transduction in turtle auditory hair cells. Journal of Physiol-
ogy (London), 501, 111–124.
Ricci, A. J., & Fettiplace, R. (1998). Calcium permeation of the turtle hair cell
mechanotransducer channel and its relation to the composition of endolymph
(published erratum appears in Journal of Physiology (London) 1998, Mar. 15, 507
(Pt 3): 939), 506, 159–173.
Ricci, A. J., Wu, Y. C., & Fettiplace, R. (1998). The endogenous calcium buffer and
the time course of transducer adaptation in auditory hair cells. Journal of Neuro-
science, 18, 8261–8277.
Slepecky, N., & Chamberlain, S. C. (1982). Actin in cochlear hair cells-implications
for stereocilia movement. Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 234, 131–134.
Sneary, M. G. (1988). Auditory receptor of the red-eared turtle: I. General ultra-
structure. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 276, 573–587.
Steyger, P. S., Gillespie, P. G., & Baird, R. A. (1998). Myosin  is located at tip link
anchors in vestibular hair bundles. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 4603–4615.
Tilney, L. G., DeRosier, D. J., & Mulroy, M. J. (1980). The organization of actin fila-
ments in the stereocilia of cochlear hair cells. Journal of Cell Biology, 86, 244–259.
Tilney, L. G., Egelman, E. H., DeRosier, D. J., & Saunder, J. C. (1983). Actin fila-
ments, stereocilia, and hair cells of the bird cochlea. II. Packing of actin fila-
ments in the stereocilia and in the cuticular plate and what happens to the orga-
nization when the stereocilia are bent. Journal of Cell Biology 96, 822–834.
Tucker, T., & Fettiplace, R. (1995). Confocal imaging of calcium micordomains and
calcium extrusion in turtle hair cells. Neuron, 15, 1323–1335.
Tucker, T., & Fettiplace, R. (1996). Monitoring calcium in turtle hair cells with a cal-
cium-activated potassium channel. Journal of Physiology (London), 494, 613–626.
Walker, R. G., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1996). Calmodulin controls adaptation of mecha-
noelectrical transduction by hair cells of the bullfrog’s sacculus. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 93, 2203–2207.
Walker, R. G., Hudspeth, A. J. & Gillespie, P. G. (1993). Calmodulin and calmod-
ulin-binding proteins in hair bundles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, USA, 90, 2807–2811.
64
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Wu, Y. C., Ricci, A. J., & Fettiplace, R. (1999). Two components of transducer adap-
tation in auditory hair cells. Journal of Neurophysiology, 82, 2171–2181.
Yamoah, E. N., & Gillespie, P. G. (1996). Phosphate analogs block adaptation in hair
cells by inhibiting adaptation-motor force production. Neuron, 17, 523–533.
Yamoah, E. N., Lumpkin, E. A., Dumont, R. A., Smith, P. J., Hudspeth, A. J., & Gille-
spie, P. G. (1998). Plasma membrane Ca2+ -ATPase extrudes Ca2+ from hair cell
stereocilia. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 610–624.
TRANSDUCER ADAPTATION, PHYSIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS & MECHANISMS
65


Hair bundles on tentacles of sea anemones, primitive marine inverte-
brates, are similar in many respects to hair bundles in the acousticolater-
alis system of vertebrates. In both systems, hair bundles are composed of
actin-based stereocilia interconnected distally by tip links and proximally
by other linkages. The hair bundles are mechanoelectric transducers with
an asymmetric sigmoidal response to graded stimuli. Transduction cur-
rents adapt during sustained hair bundle deflection and are sensitive to
aminoglycoside antibiotics and calcium-free buffers. Anemone mechano-
transduction also differs in some respects from that in vertebrates. Hair
bundles in anemones arise from a multicellular complex and are radially
symmetrical. Mechanoelectric responses are less sensitive to small deflec-
tions and completely adapt during sustained deflection. Hair bundles in
anemones are morphodynamically modulated by chemoreceptors and self
repair following damage. In this chapter, a model of signal transduction
for anemone hair bundles is discussed. The model is a modification of the
tip link model of transduction for vertebrate hair bundles that incorpo-
rates the atypical features of anemone hair bundles. Unique features of
anemone hair bundles are presented as adaptations for functioning in prey
detection in a noisy environment.
INTRODUCTION
Sea anemones are primitive marine invertebrates that use hair bundles to
detect potential prey (reviewed in Watson and Mire-Thibodeaux, 1994;
Watson and Mire, 1999). At first glance, sea anemones appear to be unlike-
ly subjects for research into hearing (Figure 4–1A). The tubular body col-
67
4
“Hearing” in a
Primitive Animal
Patricia Mire, Ph.D

umn has a mouth surrounded by one or more whorls of tentacles at one
end and an adhesive foot attached to the substrate at the opposite end. The
tentacles are used for capturing prey that is then ingested whole (Shick,
1991). Upon closer inspection, one finds numerous hair bundles located on
the surface of the tentacles (Figure 4–1B). Protruding into the seawater, the
hair bundles are poised to receive vibrations traveling through the water
column. Of obvious significance to the anemone’s survival, is the detection
of vibrations produced by nearby swimming prey.
Anemone hair bundles are intriguing mechanoreceptors both in form
and function. On the one hand, they are similar in many respects to hair
bundles of the acousticolateralis system of vertebrates (Watson, Mire, and
Hudson, 1997). On the other hand, they possess unique attributes that set
them apart from typical vertebrate hair bundles (Mire and Watson, 1997).
This chapter attempts to reconcile these similarities and differences into a
working model of signal transduction in anemone hair bundles.
SIMILARITIES BETWEEN ANEMONE AND
VERTEBRATE HAIR BUNDLES
Actin-based Stereocilia
Hair bundles in anemones are composed of actin-based stereocilia as are
vertebrate hair bundles (Mire-Thibodeaux and Watson, 1994a; Watson and
Roberts, 1995). Within stereocilia, most of the actin is in the filamentous
form (F-actin), as demonstrated by confocal microscopy of tentacles incu-
bated in fluorescently-tagged phalloidin, a compound that binds to the fil-
amentous form of actin (Figure 4–2A). Within the apical cytoplasm of cells
beneath hair bundles are pools of globular or monomeric actin (G-actin) as
visualized in confocal micrographs of tentacles incubated with DNAse 1,
which binds to the globular form of actin (Figure 4–2B). Filaments of ap-
proximately 7 nm diameter, consistent with F-actin, are routinely observed
in TEM micrographs of anemone hair bundle stereocilia (Figure 4–2C).
Treatment with cytochalasin, a compound that destabilizes F-actin (Coop-
er, 1987), obliterates hair bundles on anemone tentacles and renders the
animals insensitive to vibrations (Watson and Hessinger, 1992). The find-
ing that hair bundles of anemones and those of their relatives within the
phylum Cnidaria are composed of an actin cytoskeleton is surprising for
two reasons. Cnidarians are considered to be the simplest animals to pos-
sess a nervous system and are therefore phylogenetically far removed
from vertebrates (Barnes, Calow, and Olive, 1993). Moreover, hair bundles
in other invertebrate phyla are composed of microtubule-based kinocilia
(Budelmann, 1988). Although the evolutionary significance of actin-based
versus microtubule-based hair bundles is unclear, the fact that anemone
68
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Figure 4–1: Close-up photograph and FESEM micrograph of an anemone. (A)
Living sea anemone, Haliplanella lineata, in side view. (B) FESEM micrograph of
the tentacle surface featuring numerous hair bundles. Scale bars = 2 mm in A
and 10 µm in B.
69

Figure 4–2: Micrographs showing actin in the tentacle epidermis.
(A) Confocal image of phalloidin labeled hair bundles protruding
from the tentacle surface. (B) Confocal optical section taken be-
neath the hair bundles of DNAse labeled tentacle epidermis. (C)
TEM micrograph of hair bundle stereocilia in oblique section.
Scale bar = 10 µm for A, B and 0.1 µm for C.
70

hair bundles are actin-based makes anemone hair bundles all the more in-
teresting for comparison to vertebrate hair bundles.
Extracellular Linkages
Within hair bundles of anemones, stereocilia are interconnected by a vari-
ety of extracellular linkages similar to those seen interconnecting stereocil-
ia of vertebrate hair bundles (discussed in detail in Watson et al., 1997).
The linkages include a basal network of filaments, distal long lateral links
and short cross links, and tip links (Figure 4–3). The tip links interconnect
the tops of shorter stereocilia to the sides of adjacent longer stereocilia.
Anemone tip links are of the approximate dimensions of vertebrate tip
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
71
Figure 4–3: High resolution FESEM micrograph of hair bundle in side view. Black
arrowheads indicate extracellular linkages interconnecting stereocilia. Scale bar =
1 µm.

links, but are bifurcated at the insertion to the shorter stereocilium instead
of to the longer stereocilium as is the typical vertebrate case. Both in
anemones and in vertebrates, distal linkages are better preserved with
ruthenium red in the fixative, indicating that they are likely composed of
glycosaminoglycans, at least in part (Slepecky and Chamberlain, 1985;
Watson et al., 1997). The precise composition of linkages is not known for
either anemones or vertebrates.
Mechanotransduction
Hair cells in anemone tentacles are mechanoelectric transducers as are hair
cells in vertebrate hearing organs (Mire and Watson, 1997). When
anemone hair bundles are deflected with puffs of seawater delivered from
a nearby pipette, transients in membrane currents are detected during
loose-patch recording from hair cells. The current transients are graded
with stimulus strength and either positively or negatively directed (Figure
4–4A). The positive currents are relatively small in amplitude, ranging
from approximately 5 to 30 pA, and saturate abruptly to large deflections.
The negative currents are larger in amplitude, ranging from approximate-
ly 10 to 150 pA, and require larger deflections to saturate. Thus, anemone
mechanoelectric responses are asymmetrically sigmoidal in relation to
stimulus strength as are other known mechanotransducers (Figure 4–4B).
Anemone mechanotransducer currents also adapt to prolonged step de-
flection of the hair bundles as do vertebrate mechanotransducer currents.
However, adaptation in anemones differs in some respects from adapta-
tion in vertebrates and will be discussed in more detail below.
Pharmacology
Pharmacological experiments indicate that mechanotransduction in
anemones and in vertebrates exhibits similar sensitivities to several agents
(Mire and Watson, 1997: Watson et al., 1997). Among the inhibitory agents
are the aminoglycoside antibiotics, streptomycin and gentamicin, which
reversibly abolish mechanotransduction at 10-4 M antibiotic (Figure 4–5A).
Investigations in vertebrate hair cells suggest that these drugs inhibit
mechanotransduction by plugging the transduction channels (reviewed in
Hudspeth, 1992). Other treatments, such as brief exposure to elastase or to
calcium-free buffers, also cause a loss of signal transduction both in
anemones (Figure 4–5B) and vertebrates (Osborne and Comis, 1990; As-
sad, Shepherd, and Corey, 1991; Crawford, Evans, and Fettiplace, 1991;
Preyer, Hemmert, Zenner, and Gummer, 1995; Watson, Mire, and Hudson,
1998); however, these treatments are thought to act on the linkages be-
tween stereocilia, specifically by severing tip links.
72
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Figure 4–4: Mechanoelectrical response of hair cells to stimuli of graded
strength. (A) Family of membrane currents obtained from loose-patch, in situ
recording of hair cells during step deflections of the hair bundles. (B)
Stimulus/response plot based on data from n=5–25 hair cells. Data points indi-
cate mean peak current ± SEM.
73

Figure 4–5: Loose-patch, in situ recordings of membrane currents from
hair cells subjected to deflection of their hair bundles. Continuous
traces are stacked with the sequence indicated by the number at the left
margin. Seawater puff stimuli to deflect hair bundles are indicated by
vertical bars superimposed onto the traces. (A) Effects of streptomycin
on membrane currents. Puff stimuli containing streptomycin are indicat-
ed with an “S” placed beneath the bar. (B) Effects of calcium-free sea-
water on membrane currents. Calcium-free seawater perfusion begins at
the arrow.
74

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ANEMONE AND
VERTEBRATE HAIR BUNDLES
Multicellular Complex
Perhaps the most striking difference between anemone and vertebrate
hair bundles is that each anemone hair bundle arises from a multicellular
complex instead of arising from a single hair cell (Peteya, 1975). In the
anemone case, a central sensory neuron is surrounded by 2 to 4 support-
ing cells (Figure 4–6A). The sensory neuron contributes 4 to 6 large diam-
eter stereocilia and a single kinocilium to the center of the hair bundle
(Figure 4–6B). Each supporting cell contributes approximately 50 to 100
small diameter stereocilia to the hair bundle periphery (Watson and
Roberts, 1995). Although the sensory neuron makes afferent contact with
the underlying nerve net (Figure 4–6C), the supporting cells are not
thought to be in direct communication with the nerve net (Mire-Thi-
bodeaux and Watson, 1994a).
Radial Symmetry
Unlike vertebrate hair bundles which are bilaterally symmetrical,
anemone hair bundles are radially symmetric (Figure 4–7). Stereocilia of
each supporting cell are arranged in a staircase array with the shortest
ones at the bundle periphery and the tallest ones near the center of the hair
bundle. The tallest stereocilia of the supporting cells converge onto the
large diameter stereocilia of the sensory neuron. Hence, supporting cells
on opposite sides of the sensory neuron are mirror images of each other.
The situation is complicated further by a twist superimposed onto the ra-
dial symmetry. Electrophysiological evidence suggests that the so-called
“supporting cells” are the transducers of the primary receptor current
(Mire and Watson, 1997). Indeed, it is from these “supporting cells” that
the mechanically-induced, streptomycin-sensitive membrane currents de-
scribed above are derived. Hence, although the name “supporting cell”
has historical precedence, these cells appear to function in an analogous
fashion to hair cells in vertebrate hearing organs. Like vertebrate hair cells,
anemone “supporting cells” are non-neuronal in nature. Thus far, the sen-
sory neurons of anemone hair bundles have eluded electrophysiological
investigations. The location of the sensory neuron in the center of the hair
bundle precludes loose-patch recording of membrane currents from these
cells without simultaneously interfering with hair bundle displacement.
Intracellular recording has not yet been successful due to the fragility and
small size of the sensory neurons.
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
75

Sensitivity and Adaptation
Electrophysiological data indicate that anemone mechanotransduction dif-
fers in at least two respects from vertebrate mechanotransduction. One dif-
ference is in sensitivity of the response. In anemone hair bundles step de-
flections of less than 1µm give no measurable responses (Mire and Watson,
1997). The mechanosensitive range of anemone hair bundles is from 1µm
to 4 to 7 µm depending on whether the response is positive or negative (re-
fer to Figure 4–4B). In vertebrate hair bundles, the entire mechanosensitive
76
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 4–6: Micrographs of multicellular complexes from which hair bundles arise.
(A) TEM micrograph of complex in longitudinal section showing the sensory neuron
(sn) surrounded by supporting cells (sc). (B) TEM micrograph of hair bundle in
oblique section showing kinocilium (k) and large diameter stereocilia (ls) from the
sensory neuron and small diameter stereocilia (ss) from supporting cells. (C)
Stacked confocal optical sections of DiI labeled tentacle showing a sensory neuron
(sn) with hair bundle apically and long processes basally extending to other neu-
rons. Scale bar = 0.6 µm for A, B and 10 µm for C.

range is less than a micrometer (reviewed in Hudspeth, 1989). The second
difference is in adaptation of the response. Both in vertebrates and in
anemones, transduction currents begin to return to baseline levels even
while the hair bundle is deflected during prolonged stimulation (Figure
4–8A). However, in anemones, adaptation is complete such that the cur-
rent reaches baseline (Figure 4–8B) and actually overshoots baseline (Fig-
ure 4–8C) when the hair bundle is deflected for 1 sec or more. In the verte-
brate case, transduction currents incompletely adapt to prolonged hair
bundle displacement such that the current does not fully return to baseline
until cessation of the stimulus (reviewed in Corey and Assad, 1992; Hud-
speth and Gillespie, 1994) .
Cell-cell Communication Within the Complex
A dilemma presented by the multicellular nature of anemone hair bundles
is how signaling by the cells is coordinated so that the complex functions
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
77
Figure 4–7: FESEM micrograph of hair bundle viewed from above. Scale bar = 1 µm.

as a mechanoreceptive unit during vibration detection. Part of the answer
may be that the cells of the complex communicate through gap junctions.
Preliminary evidence using a modification of the FRAP (Fluorescence Re-
covery After Photobleaching) approach indicates that epidermal cells direct-
ly below hair bundles are dye coupled (Figure 4–9). Moreover, dye coupling
appears to be enhanced when the overlying hair bundle is deflected with a
puff of seawater from a nearby pipette. For these experiments, whole tenta-
cles are loaded with Calcein, a gap junction permeable fluorescent dye,
threaded onto fine human hair strands, and then viewed microscopically.
78
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 4–8: Loose patch, in situ recordings of membrane currents from a hair cell
during hair bundle deflections of equal strength but increasing duration. Durations
of stimuli indicated by the black bars beneath the corresponding current traces.

Using transmitted light, a hair bundle is centered in the field of view of a
cooled CCD camera. Using epifluorescence, a first image is taken of the epi-
dermal area before photobleaching. A second image is taken after the area
has been photobleached for approximately 5 min, at which point gray levels
have been reduced by approximately 50 %. A third, fourth, and fifth image
are taken at 1 min intervals to monitor passive recovery of fluorescence. The
hair bundle protruding from the epidermis is then deflected with a puff of
seawater from a nearby micropipette. A sixth image is taken immediately af-
ter the deflection, then a seventh and an eighth image at 1 min intervals. Pre-
liminary cytochemical evidence suggests that the gap junctions are com-
posed of a connexin 43-like protein. Using a commercially available
antibody to a mouse connexin 43 protein and a fluorescently-labeled 
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
79
Figure 4–9: Photomicrographs of the tentacle epidermis during a FRAP experiment
monitoring Calcein fluorescence. (A) Transmitted light and (B–F) epifluorescence
images after photobleaching. (A1) Contour plot of initial fluorescence before photo-
bleaching. (B1–F1) Corresponding contour plots after photobleaching showing the
upper 20 % of gray levels indicated in white. Arrowheads indicate the position of
the base of a hair bundle that is deflected immediately before image E in the series.
Scale bar = 15 µm.

secondary antibody, immunofluorescence is detected in cells giving rise to
hair bundles (Figure 4–10). Although gap junctions are known to occur in
vertebrate hearing and balance organs, including junctions between sup-
porting cells and hair cells, the precise function of the gap junctions in
these organs is not yet understood (Dunn and Morest, 1975; Oesterle, Cun-
ningham, and Rubel, 1992; Kikuchi, Kimar, Paul, and Adams, 1995; Masu-
da, Yamazaki, Kanzaki, and Hosoda, 1995). However, gap junctions are
obviously crucial to hearing in humans as certain forms of nonsyndromic
deafness have been linked to mutations in connexin genes (reviewed in 
Simon and Goodenough, 1998; Simon, 1999).
Chemoreceptor-induced Morphodynamics
A remarkable feature of anemone hair bundles is that they are morphody-
namically tunable (Watson and Hessinger, 1989, 1992, 1994; Mire-Thi-
bodeaux and Watson, 1994a). Morphological adjustments to the hair bun-
dles are regulated by the activity of two classes of chemoreceptor located
on the apical surface of supporting cells. When receptors for N-acetylated
sugars are activated, the hair bundles elongate from 1 to 2 µm and vibra-
tion sensitivity shifts to lower frequencies and smaller amplitudes. Subse-
quent activation of receptors for certain amino acids results in shortening
of the hair bundles to control lengths and a shifting of vibration sensitivity
to higher frequencies and larger amplitudes (Watson and Hudson, 1994).
Sugar-induced elongation of the hair bundles involves activation of a
cAMP second messenger pathway resulting in polymerization of actin
(Watson and Hessinger, 1992; Mire-Thibodeaux and Watson, 1994b; Wat-
son and Roberts, 1995).
Recent evidence suggests that chemoreceptor activation may induce
more widespread adjustments to the hair bundle in addition to the known
effects on actin dynamics. Loose-patch recordings show an absence of me-
chanically induced membrane current transients from a previously re-
sponsive cell within 5 min perfusion of 10-7 M N-acetylneuraminic acid
(NANA) to the bath (Figure 4–11). The hair cell is still unresponsive at 15
min in NANA alone. However, if repair proteins (RP, see the following
paragraph) are added to the bath, spontaneous transients in membrane
current are detected at 5 min, even though no mechanically-induced re-
sponses occur at this time point. At 25 min after the addition of RP, me-
chanically-induced membrane current transients are restored, but, surpris-
ingly, the transients have reversed polarity. Upon washout of NANA and
RP, the hair cell once again becomes mechanically unresponsive, although
small spontaneous transients occur both before and after addition of RP.
At 20 min after addition of RP, mechanically-induced transients are re-
stored but have returned to their original polarity. Line profiles of gray
values taken across live hair bundles imaged with video-enhanced light
80
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Figure 4–10: Confocal micrographs of connexin 43 im-
munofluorescence in the tentacle epidermis. (A) Optical
section showing hair bundles (arrowheads) in profile. (B)
Apical optical section of epidermal cells beneath hair
bundles. Double arrowhead indicates one of many exam-
ples of punctate fluorescence. (C) Deeper optical section
showing patch of labeled cells at the region of nerve net.
Double arrowhead indicates a string of fluorescent dots
which appear to lie at the periphery of the soma. Scale
bar = 5 µm in A, B and 7 µm in C.
81

Figure 4–11: Loose patch, in situ recordings of membrane currents from a hair cell
during hair bundle deflections of equal strength and duration. Continuous traces are
stacked within the bold horizontal lines with the sequence indicated at the left mar-
gin. Treatments (indicated at the right margin) included perfusion of seawater alone
(sw controls), after the perfusion of N-acetylneuraminic acid (NANA) alone at times
indicated, after the perfusion of N-acetylneuraminic acid with added repair proteins
(NANA RP) at times indicated, washout with seawater (sw washout), and after perfu-
sion of seawater with added repair proteins (sw RP) at the times indicated.
82

microscopy indicate that sugar stimulation induces reorientation of the
hair bundles in addition to inducing elongation. The NANA induced re-
orientation appears to be especially pronounced at the middle and bases of
the hair bundles (Figure 4–12). We recently began using FESEM to look
more closely at the morphological changes to the hair bundles associated
with activation of the NANA receptor. Our preliminary FESEM evidence
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
83
Figure 4–12: Line profiles of morphological changes in a live hair bundle with
chemoreceptor activation. Plots show gray levels across the diameter (in pixels) of
a hair bundle viewed from the side at the tip (top), middle (center), and base (bot-
tom) in seawater alone (left) and 5 min after addition of N-acetylneuraminic acid
(NANA) (right).

supports our observations with light microscopy on live hair bundles that
substantial reorientation of the hair bundle occurs with NANA stimula-
tion. In particular, there appear to be changes in the positions of small di-
ameter stereocilia relative to the long axis of the hair bundle (Figure 4–13).
Obviously, chemoreceptor modification of hair bundle structure and func-
tion is more complicated than previously appreciated and will be the focus
of further investigation.
Protein-mediated Repair Following Trauma
Structural integrity of hair bundles can be disrupted by a variety of treat-
ments including exposure to calcium-free buffers in both anemones and
vertebrate hearing systems (Watson et al., 1997, 1998). In chickens, some
function is restored to damaged hair cells within 12 hours following a mild
trauma, i.e., 10 min exposure to calcium-free buffer (Zhao, Yamoah, and
Gillespie, 1996). In this case, the hair bundles are thought to be repaired by
utilizing pre-existing linkages because the process does not require the
synthesis of new proteins. In anemones that have been exposed to calci-
um-free seawater for 1 hr to cause extensive damage to hair bundles, nor-
mal hair bundle morphology and vibration sensitivity recover after 4 hr of
returning the animals to calcium-containing seawater (Watson et al., 1998).
In the anemone case, repair of hair bundles requires the synthesis of new
proteins (refer to Chapter 2 by G.M. Watson for details and an update of
the repair process in anemone hair bundles).
THE WORKING MODEL
Modification of the “Tip Link Model” to Anemone Hair Bundles
One model for how vertebrate hair bundles transduce mechanical signals
into electrical responses is the “tip link model” (Pickles, Comis, and Os-
borne, 1984; Howard, Roberts, and Hudspeth, 1988). According to this
model, fine linkages connecting the tips of shorter stereocilia to the sides of
adjacent, longer stereocilia called tip links are directly connected at one or
both ends to transduction channels embedded in the membrane of one or
both stereocilia. When hair bundles are deflected in the positive direction,
that is, toward the taller stereocilia, tip links are strained and pull open the
transduction channels. The transduction channels allow a cation influx
that leads to depolarization of the hair cell. When hair bundles are deflect-
ed in the negative direction, toward the shorter stereocilia, tip links are
slack allowing transduction channels to close. Closure of all transduction
channels results in a small hyperpolarization of the hair cell. The hair cell
hyperpolarizes because there is a slight amount of tension exerted on tip
links even when the bundle is at rest, such that approximately 15 % of the
84
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Figure 4–13: FESEM micrographs of hair bundles viewed
from the side. (A) A hair bundle from an anemone fixed af-
ter exposure to seawater alone. (B) A hair bundle from an
anemone fixed after 5 min exposure to N-acetylneuraminic
acid. Arrows indicate the general orientation of distal re-
gions of small diameter stereocilia. Scale bar = 1 µm.
85

transduction channels are open resulting in a slight leak current. Lateral
deflections of the hair bundle, that is, perpendicular to a line bisecting the
bundle, have no measurable effect on transduction current.
We have developed a model for mechanotransduction of anemone
hair bundles that borrows from the tip link model while also incorporating
both the similarities and differences to vertebrate hair bundles (Figure
4–14). In our model, “supporting cells” on opposite sides of the complex
are oppositely polarized hair cells (Mire and Watson, 1997). When the hair
bundle is deflected, tip links on one side of the bundle are stretched
pulling open transduction channels while tip links on the opposite side of
the bundle are slack allowing transduction channels to close. Thus, on one
side of the complex, the hair cell depolarizes due to cation influx while on
the opposite side of the complex the hair cell hyperpolarizes due to cessa-
tion of the leak current.
Since the hair bundles are free standing, they resonate to vibrations of
particular frequencies, which is determined in part by their lengths. When
86
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 4–14: Cartoon diagram of the model for signal transduction in the multi-
cellular complex of a hair bundle. When the hair bundle is at rest (middle), the
cells are at resting membrane potential (white). As the hair bundle oscillates, hair
cells on opposite sides of the complex alternately depolarize (black) and hyper-
polarize (gray). During the depolarization phase, cations (small black dots) pass
through gap junctions from the hair cells to the sensory neuron.

a hair bundle oscillates to vibrations at stimulatory frequencies, the hair
cells of the complex alternately depolarize and hyperpolarize. The depo-
larization component is larger than the hyperpolarization component re-
sulting in a net depolarization of the hair cells. Cations pass from the hair
cells to the sensory neuron through gap junctions. The sensory neuron in-
tegrates the signal and eventually fires an action potential to send the mes-
sage through the nerve net to effector cells downstream.
Special Mechanisms for Dealing With a Noisy
Environment and Dynamic Nature
In contrast to the relatively quiet and protected environment of cochlear or
saccular hair bundles, anemone hair bundles function in an extremely
noisy and volatile environment. The seawater into which the hair bundles
protrude contains many living and nonliving sources of vibrations. The
anemones typically live in the intertidal zone and therefore are exposed to
substantial wave action. The water column contains vibrations from a va-
riety of moving, living creatures some of which are significant to the
anemone, such as potential prey. The anemones themselves generate
“noise”. The tentacle epidermis contains a diverse array of cells in addition
to the multicellular complexes giving rise to hair bundles. Interspersed
with hair bundles are motile cilia that arise from certain epidermal cells.
These cilia frequently contact hair bundles in whip-like fashion with suffi-
cient force to cause small deflections.
Many of the ways in which hair bundle mechanotransduction in
anemones differs from that in vertebrates may be adaptations to their
noisy environment. Reduced sensitivity of the hair bundle response is ob-
viously beneficial if it is to function in the presence of background vibra-
tions. For example, reduced sensitivity would be advantageous when a
hair bundle is being “whipped” by nearby beating cilia. The deflections
produced from contact with the motile cilia are periodic, but relatively
small, and thus could go undetected by the hair bundle. In theory, multi-
cellularity may allow the hair bundle to filter out random, inconsistent sig-
nals. In this case, primary signals coming from alternately depolarizing
hair cells of the complex would have to be of sufficient periodicity and du-
ration to depolarize the sensory neuron before signals would be propagat-
ed through the nerve net. However, the anemones have an acute detection
of specific frequencies. Previous studies indicate that if vibrations occur at
stimulatory frequencies, very few cycles of vibration are necessary to elicit
an organismal response (Watson, Venable, and Mire, 2000).
Adaptation of the transduction current would be beneficial to reset
the hair cells when hair bundles are deflected for prolonged durations by
stimuli that ultimately may be ignored. For anemones, such stimulation
could come in the form of objects pressing against the hair bundles, such
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
87

as pieces of rocks or shells carried by the water currents. Complete adapta-
tion of the transduction current would not only diminish the signal from
prolonged deflections, as is the case with incomplete adaptation, but actu-
ally negate the signal. Although the mechanism behind complete adapta-
tion is unknown at this time, it may be due, at least in part, to the relatively
high calcium concentration in seawater (on the order of 12 mM in seawa-
ter compared to approximately 50 µM in endolymph of the cochlea). In
vertebrate hair cells, adaptation is sensitive to extracellular calcium con-
centration. For example, increasing the calcium concentration 0.1 to 1 mM
increases the rate and extent of adaptation in turtle hair cells (reviewed in
Fettiplace, 1992). However, more recent studies indicate that the mecha-
nism behind adaptation is likely to be more complicated than a simple, di-
rect calcium regulation (see Chapters 1 and 3 contributed by D.P. Corey
and A. Ricci respectively, for recent progress on adaptation mechanisms).
Some of the differences between anemone hair bundles and verte-
brate hair bundles are probably due to differences in the physiological
function of the hair bundles. Anemone hair bundles detect vibrations pro-
duced by swimming prey. Radial symmetry likely bestows multidirection-
al sensitivity to the hair bundle. This ability would be especially crucial in
the detection of vibrations produced by swimming prey, which could ap-
proach from any direction in the water column. Hair bundles possessing
radial symmetry and arising from a multicellular complex could have the
added benefit of detecting direction while at the same time being multidi-
rectionally sensitive. When the hair bundle oscillates, the positions of the
signaling hair cells could supply information to the complex about the loca-
tion of the vibrational source. The multicellular complex of anemone hair
bundles must work at a frequency relevant to detecting meaningful vibra-
tions. Gap junctional communication between the hair cells and the sensory
neuron affords an efficient and rapid method of signal transmission.
Critical to the detection and capture of prey is an elegant modulation
of the hair bundles by chemoreceptors. The sugars that tune hair bundles
to lower frequencies are found coating the surface of prey. Swimming prey
produce vibrations corresponding to the lower frequencies to which the
hair bundles tune upon activation of the sugar receptor. Hence, as prey ap-
proaches the anemone, sugars that diffuse from the prey surface activate
chemoreceptors that in turn cause the hair bundles to elongate. The longer
hair bundles oscillate to vibrations produced by swimming prey. Signaling
by the complexes is communicated to effector cells downstream to predis-
pose nematocysts to discharge if the prey contacts the tentacle. Nemato-
cysts are large (approximately 15 by 5 µm) secretory products consisting of
a capsule and an eversible tubule. During discharge the tubule rapidly
everts (Holstein and Tardent, 1984) penetrating the prey to inject potent
toxins that cause paralysis. In addition to their effects on prey, discharging
nematocysts may also damage nearby hair bundles (P. Mire, personal ob-
88
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

servation). Thus, during tuning of hair bundles and nematocyst discharge
the hair bundles are likely in peril of structural damage. The degree of
twisting of the hair bundles may be a mechanism to minimize destruction
of linkages during elongation. In addition, the ability to self-repair may
rescue damaged hair bundles from what would otherwise be fatal, struc-
tural damage both during the detection and capture of prey.
Acknowledgments: I thank Jason Nasse for assistance with FESEM and Glen Wat-
son for assistance with TEM. This work is supported by The National Science
Foundation, Grant number IBN9807782.
REFERENCES
Assad, J. A., Shepherd, G. M. G., & Corey, D. P. (1991). Tip link integrity and
mechanotransduction in vertebrate hair cells. Neuron, 7, 985–994.
Barnes R. S. K., Calow P., & Olive P. J. W. (1993). The Invertebrates: A New Synthe-
sis. (p. 488). Cambridge, MA; Blackwell Science.
Budelmann, B. U. (1988). In J. Atema, R. R. Fay, A. N. Popper, & W. N. Tavolga
(Eds.), Sensory Biology of Aquatic Animals (pp. 757–782). New York: Springer.
Cooper, J. A. (1987). Effects of cytochalasin and phalloidin on actin. Journal of Cell
Biology, 105, 1473–1478.
Corey, D. P., & Assad, J. A. (1992). In D. P. Corey & S. D. Roper (Eds.), Sensory
Transduction, (pp. 325–342). New York: Rockefeller University Press.
Crawford, A. C., Evans, M. G., & Fettiplace, R. (1991). The actions of calcium on
the mechano-electrical transducer current of turtle hair cells. Journal of Physiol-
ogy, 434, 369–398.
Dunn, R. A., & Morest, D. K. (1975). Receptor synapses without synaptic ribbons
in the cochlea of the cat. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA,
72, 3599–3603.
Fettiplace, R. (1992). In D. P. Corey, & S. D. Roper (Eds.), Sensory Transduction (pp.
341–356). New York: Rockefeller University Press.
Holstein, T., & Tardent, P. (1984). An ultrahigh-speed analysis of exocytosis: ne-
matocyst discharge. Science, 223, 830–833.
Howard, J., Roberts, W. M., & Hudspeth A. J. (1988). Mechanoelectrical transduc-
tion by hair cells. Annual Review of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry. 17,
99–124.
Hudspeth, A. J. (1989). How the Ears Work. Nature, 341, 397–404.
Hudspeth, A. J. (1992). In D. P. Corey & S. D. Roper (Eds.), Sensory Transduction
(pp 357–370). New York: Rockefeller University Press.
Hudspeth, A. J., & Gillespie, P. G. (1994) Pulling strings to tune transduction:
adaptation by hair cells. Neuron 12, 1–9.
Kikuchi, T., Kimar, R. S., Paul, D. L., & Adams, J. C. (1995). Gap junctions in the
rat cochlea: immunohistochemical and ultrastructural analysis. Anatomical
Embryology, 191, 101–118.
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
89

Masuda, M., Yamazaki, K., Kanzaki, J., & Hosoda, Y. (1995). Ultrastructural evi-
dence of cell communication between epithelial dark cells and melanocytes in
vestibular organs of the human inner ear. Anatomical Record, 242, 267–277.
Mire, P., & Watson, G. M. (1997). Mechanotransduction of hair bundles arising
from multicellular complexes in anemones. Hearing Research, 113, 224–234.
Mire-Thibodeaux, P., & Watson, G. M. (1994a). Morphodynamic hair bundles
arising from sensory cell/ supporting cell complexes frequency-tune nemato-
cyst discharge in sea anemones. Journal of Experimental Zoology, 268, 282–292.
Mire-Thibodeaux, P., & Watson, G. M. (1994b). Cyclical morphodynamics of hair
bundles in sea anemones: second messenger pathways. Journal of Experimental
Zoology, 270, 517–526.
Oesterle, E. C., Cunningham, D. E., & Rubel, E. W. (1992). Ultrastructure of hya-
line, border, and vacuole cells in chick inner ear. Journal of Comparative Neurol-
ogy, 318, 64–82.
Osborne, M. P., & Comis, S. D. (1990). Action of elastase, collagenase and other
enzymes upon linkages between stereocilia in the guinea pig cochlea. Acta
Otolaryngology, 110, 37–45.
Peteya, D. J. (1975). The ciliary-cone sensory cell of anemones and cerianthids.
Tissue and Cell, 7, 243–252.
Pickles, J. O., Comis, S. D., & Osborne, M. P. (1984). Cross-links between stereocil-
ia in the guinea pig organ of Corti, and their possible relation to sensory trans-
duction. Hearing Research, 15, 103–112.
Preyer, S., Hemmert, W., Zenner, H. P., & Gummer, A. W. (1995). Abolition of the
receptor potential response of isolated mammalian outer hair cells by hair-
bundle treatment with elastase: a test of the tip-link hypothesis. Hearing Re-
search, 89, 187–193.
Shick, J. M. (1991). A Functional Biology of Sea Anemones. New York: Chapman and
Hall.
Simon, A. M. (1999). Gap junctions: more roles and new structural data. Trends in
Cell Biology, 9, 169.
Simon, A. M., & Goodenough, D. A. (1998). Diverse functions of vertebrate gap
junctions. Trends in Cell Biology, 8, 477–483.
Slepecky, N., & Chamberlain, S. C. (1985). The cell coat of inner ear sensory and
supporting cells as demonstrated by ruthenium red. Hearing Research, 17,
281–288.
Watson, G. M., & Hessinger, D. A. (1992). Receptors for N-acetylated sugars may
stimulate adenylate cyclase to sensitize and tune mechanoreceptors involved
in triggering nematocyst discharge. Experimental Cell Research, 198, 8–16.
Watson, G. M., & Hessinger, D. A. (1989). Cnidocyte mechanoreceptors are tuned
to the movements of swimming prey by chemoreceptors. Science, 243,
1589–1591.
Watson, G. M., & Hessinger, D. A. (1994). Antagonistic frequency tuning of hair
bundles by different chemoreceptors regulates nematocyst discharge. Journal
of Experimental Biology, 187, 57–73.
Watson, G. M., & Hudson, R. R. (1994). Frequency and amplitude tuning of ne-
matocyst discharge by proline. Journal of Experimental Zoology, 268, 177–185.
90
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Watson, G. M., & Mire, P. (1999). A comparison of hair bundle mechanoreceptors
in sea anemones and vertebrate systems. Current Topics in Developmental Biolo-
gy, 43, 51–84.
Watson, G. M., & Mire-Thibodeaux, P. (1994). The cell biology of nematocysts. In-
ternational. Review of Cytology, 156, 275–300.
Watson, G. M., Mire, P., & Hudson, R. R. (1997). Hair bundles of sea anemones as
a model system for vertebrate hair bundles. Hearing Research, 107, 53–66.
Watson, G. M., Mire, P., & Hudson, R. R. (1998). Repair of hair bundles in sea
anemones by secreted proteins. Hearing Research, 115, 119–128.
Watson, G. M., & Roberts, J. (1995). Chemoreceptor-mediated polymerization
and depolymerization of actin in hair bundles of sea anemones. Cell Motility
and Cytoskeleton, 30, 208–220.
Watson, G. M., Venable, S., & Mire, P. (2000). Rhythmic sensitization of nemato-
cyst discharge in response to vibrational stimuli. Journal of Experimental Zoolo-
gy, 286 (in press).
Zhao, Y., Yamoah, E. N. & Gillespie, P. G. (1996). Regeneration of broken tip links
and restoration of mechanical transduction in hair cells. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Science, USA, 94, 15469–15474.
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
91


Brn-3.1 is Required for
Development and Survival 
of the Hair Cell
Allen F. Ryan, Ph.D.
TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS AND
DEVELOPMENTAL CONTROL
The development of individual cell types is determined by selective ex-
pression of different combinations of genes. Critical to this selective con-
trol are transcription factors (TFs), which regulate gene expression by
binding to specific DNA sequences present in the regulatory elements of
each gene, in a combinatory code. Different combinations of TFs lead to
differences in gene expression. Of particular interest in developmental bi-
ology are TFs encoded by so-called “master regulatory genes.” These
genes control major aspects of the development of different cells, tissues or
organs. Many such master regulatory elements have been identified. They
are exemplified by the factors MyoD and Myf5, that play major roles in the
development of muscle cells (Rudnicki et al., 1993).
The POU-domain TFs contain several family members that have been
identified as master regulatory factors for different cell types (Ryan and
Rosenfeld, 1997). This TF family is identified by a homeodomain (HD)
similar to that encoded by other homeobox genes, paired with a second
homologous domain, the POU-specific domain, that is unique to this fami-
ly. The POU-HD is necessary for high-affinity DNA binding, while the
POU-specific domain appears to required for the sequence specificity of
DNA binding. A member of the POU-domain TF family, Pit- 1, is associat-
ed with the development of a small number of cell types in the anterior pi-
tuitary, and mutations in this gene are responsible for several forms of pi-
tuitary dwarfism (Li et al., 1990).
93
5

UNC-86: ANCESTOR OF A HAIR 
CELL REGULATORY FACTOR? 
The POU-domain factor Unc-86 serves as a master regulator for the devel-
opment of a number of neuronal phenotypes in the nematode C. elegans.
These include the mechanosensory neurons responsible for the sense of
touch (Gu, Caldwell, and Chalfie, 1996). This is of particular relevance for
the development of the inner ear. Via an intermediary LIM-HD factor,
Mec-3, Unc-86 controls the expression of two proteins that are thought to
be elements of the mechanosensory receptor channel of these neurons
(Tavernarakis and Driscoll, 1997). Moreover, mechanoreceptor neurons
similar to those of C. elegans have been proposed as possible evolutionary
ancestors of hair cells (Jorgensen, 1989). It therefore seemed possible that
related TFs are involved in the development of the hair cell.
Three orthologues of Unc-86 have been identified in mammals: Brn-3.0,
Brn-3.1 and Brn.3.2 (also known as Brn-3a, Brn-3c and Brn-3b, respectively).
Initial studies of Brn-3.0 found that it was expressed in developing inner ear
ganglion cells, but not hair cells (Ryan, Simmons, and Crenshaw, 1991).
When the additional orthologues Brn-3.1 and Brn-3.2 were cloned, hy-
bridization histochemistry revealed that while Brn-3.2 was also expressed
in inner ear ganglion cells, Brn-3.1 expression in the inner ear was limited
to hair cells (Ryan, Luo, McEvilly, Erkman, and Rosenfeld, 1996).
BRN-3.1 EXPRESSION IN HAIR CELLS: 
BIRTH TO DEATH 
Developmentally, Brn-3.1 expression was first noted in vestibular hair cell
precursors of the mouse on embryonic day 12.5 (e 12.5) and in the rat on
embryonic day 16.5. In the cochlea, expression was first seen in the mouse
basal turn on e 14.5 (Ryan, 1997), and in the rat on embryonic day 17.5
(Erkman et al. 1996). In e 14.5 mouse and e 17.5 rat cochlea, hair cell pre-
cursors cannot be distinguished from adjacent cells based on morphologi-
cal or positional characteristic. However, at the earliest stages of expres-
sion, Brn-3.1 mRNA appeared to be present only in hair cell precursors,
since the inner and outer hair cell precursors were clearly separate, and
other nearby cells fated to become supporting cells were not labeled with
Brn-3.1 probes. However, at this earliest stage, weaker label sometimes ap-
peared between the hair cell precursor cell body, in the upper organ of
Corti, and the basilar membrane (Figure 5–1). This observation may mean
that expression of Brn-3.1 is initiated prior to separation of the hair cell
precursor from the basement membrane, although brief expression in an
underlying supporting cell cannot be ruled out.
94
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Unlike the temporal expression pattern of many developmental genes,
strong expression of Brn-3.1 continued in auditory and vestibular hair cells
into adulthood (Figure 5–2). While Brn-3.1 was expressed in a few other
neurons during embryonic development, hair cells were the only postnatal
cells that expressed this factor. The timing of hair cell expression, and the
specific and continued production in hair cells throughout life, suggested
that Brn-3.1 might represent a master regulatory gene for this cell type.
DELETION OF BRN-3.1 PREVENTS 
HAIR CELL DEVELOPMENT
A targeted deletion of Brn-3.1 was performed by Erkman et al. (1996) and
Xiang et al. (1997, 1998) using homologous recombination. When bred to
homozygosity, animals null for Brn-3.1 were characterized by failure of
hair cell development. Hair cell precursors never exhibited cuticular
plates, stereocilia, or other morphological characteristics of this cell type.
By birth, the precursor cells had largely lost their position in the upper half
of the organ of Corti, and were virtually indistinguishable from other cells
BRN-3.1 IS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT AND SURVIVAL OF THE HAIR CELL
95
Figure 5–1. In situ hybridization showing expression of Brn-3.1 mRNA in
the organ of Corti of the e18.5 rat. In the basal turn (Base), expression is
seen in both inner and outer hair cell precursors. In the lower middle turn
(Mid) only one precursor is labeled, while none is labeled in the apex
(Apex). In the middle turn, weaker expression extends in a band from the
labeled hair cell precursor to the basilar membrane (arrow). This suggests
that the cell has not yet released from the epithelial basement membrane,
or that expression occurs in an underlying cell.

in the sensory epithelium. At postnatal day 7, the organ was highly disor-
ganized, and the supporting cells of the organ of Corti had failed to devel-
op their characteristic morphologies. It was not possible to identify hair
cell or supporting cell types in the organ of Corti of Brn-3.1 null mice (Fig-
ure 5–3). In the vestibular sensory epithelia, failure of hair cell differentia-
tion was similarly absent. However, accessory structures such as the cupu-
lae, otolithic membrane and otoconia appeared normal. The inner ear
defect was the only abnormality noted in Brn-3.1 null mice.
Spiral ganglion neurons were normal in Brn-3.1 null mice at birth.
However, they exhibited rapid degeneration, especially in the middle
96
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 5–2. Expression of Brn-3.1 mRNA in hair cells of the utricular (Ut)
and sacular (Sa) maculae of the adult mouse.

cochlear turn, until most spiral ganglion neurons were lost by 14 days after
birth. Similarly, vestibular sensory neurons were initially present but were
lost in the perinatal period.
THE HUMAN HOMOLOGUE OF 
BRN-3.1 IS A DEAFNESS GENE
When the deletion of Brn-3.1 was performed, the genomic locus of the
Brn-3.1 gene in mice suggested that it might be a candidate for the human
nonsyndromic hereditary deafness DFNA 1, at 5q3I (Erkman et al., 1996).
However, subsequent fine mapping indicated that the Brn-3.1 (POU4F3)
locus in humans was about 2 cm away from DFNA 1, which was subse-
quently identified as a mutation in the diaphanous gene. However, this lo-
cation allowed Vahava et al. (1998) to identify another form of nonsyn-
dromic deafness (DFNA 15), that also mapped to 5q3I but did not involve
diaphanous, as a mutation in the human Brn-3.1 gene locus (POU4F3).
This dominant mutation, which produces a late onset, progressive deaf-
ness, results in a truncated molecule lacking the POU-HD.
Since the POU-HD is required for high-affinity DNA binding of
POU-domain TFs, and since unlike many other TFs POU-domain factors
BRN-3.1 IS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT AND SURVIVAL OF THE HAIR CELL
97
Figure 5–3. Disorganization in the organ of Corti (oC) of a mouse null for
Brn-3.1 at postnatal day 14. While the tectorial membrane (TM), basilar
membrane (BM), spiral limbus (SLim) and spiral ligament (SLig) are nor-
mal, none of the cell types normally present in the sensory epithelium is
recognizable.

do not appear to form dimers, it seemed unlikely that the mutation in DF-
NA 15 would result in a molecule with dominant negative properties. It
seemed more likely that the mutation produced a non-functional mole-
cule, and that the phenotype in DFNA 15 patients was the result of
haplo-insufficiency. To examine this hypothesis, the hearing of mice with
only a single copy of the Brn-3.1 gene (Brn-3.1 +/-) was evaluated at sever-
al ages. No difference was found in the hearing of wild-type (Brn-3.1 +/+)
and heterozygous (Brn-3.1 +/- up to 24 months of age, inconsistent with
haplo-insufficiency. This suggests that either the short life span of mice
does not allow haplo-insufficiency to manifest, or that the DFNA 15 muta-
tion results in a dominant negative mutation, perhaps due to competitive
protein binding with another nuclear factor (Keithley, Erkman, Bennett,
Luo, and Ryan, 1999).
CONCLUSIONS
The data reviewed above indicate that the POU-domain TF Brn-3.1 is re-
quired for the differentiation of hair cells from their precursors in the sen-
sory epithelia of the inner ear. Because Brn-3.1 appears to occur only in
cells that are destined to become hair cells, it is unlikely to be responsible
for fate determination of this cell type. However, the initial expression of
Brn-3.1 occurs within one day of the final division of cells destined to be-
come hair cells (Ruben, 1967). Brn-3.1 expression also appears to begin be-
fore hair cell precursors lose contact with the basement membrane of the
sensory epithelium. Taken together, these observations suggest that com-
mitment to the hair cell fate and expression of Brn-3.1 are tightly linked. It
is even possible that the same signals that mediate commitment to the hair
cell fate initiate expression of Brn-3.1. The upstream regulation of POU-do-
main genes is not well understood. However, factors that control Brn-3.1
expression may be involved in the determination of hair cell fate. Brn-3.1
expression continues in hair cell throughout life, and a mutation in the hu-
man Brn-3.1 gene produces late onset, progressive deafness. These obser-
vations suggest that Brn-3.1 also serves as a maintenance factor for hair
cells.
Unc-86 is expressed in C. elegans mechanoreceptor precursors and
neurons, while Brn-3.1 is expressed in murine hair cell precursors and hair
cells. In addition, mutations in both genes have severe effects upon the de-
velopment of the corresponding cell type (Erkman et al., 1996; Tav-
ernarakis and Driscoll, 1997). These similarities support the hypothesis
that an evolutionary relationship may exist between primitive mechanore-
ceptor neurons and vertebrate hair cells.
The downstream genes that are targets of Brn-3.1 in hair cells are un-
known at the present time. However, given the lack of hair cell differentia-
98
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

tion seen in Brn-3.1 null mice, this TF appears to control, either directly or
indirectly, the expression of many of the genes that are required for the
normal structure and function of these cells. Supporting a more direct role
for Brn-3.1 is the observation that, in other systems, Brn-3 family TFs have
been shown to interact with the promoters of a wide variety of neuronal
genes, including those encoding synaptic proteins (Lakin et al., 1995; Mor-
ris et al., 1996)), neurotransmitters (Miltone, Bessis, Changeux, and Latch-
man, 1995, 1996) and neurofilaments (Smith et al., 1997). In addition, this
TF family contributes to the regulation of other genes whose expression
might be expected to vary during development, including Bcl-2 (Smith et
al., 1998), genes containing hormone response elements (Budhram-Ma-
hadeo, Parker, and Latchman, 1998), and iNOS (Gay, Dawson, Murphy,
Russell, and Latchman, 1998). Brn-3 family members have also been
demonstrated to regulate the promoters of genes in viruses that show pref-
erences for neurons (Brownlees et al., 1999).
Brn-3.1 appears to function as a master regulatory factor during hair
cell differentiation. Other factors have recently been shown to make major
contributions to hair cell development, incuding Notch/Delta signaling
proteins (Lanford et al., 1999) and the TF Math I (Bermingham et al., 1999).
As the relationships between these factors, Brn-3. 1, and other develop-
mental regulators are elucidated, a more complete picture of the molecular
control of hair cell development will doubtless emerge.
Acknowledgments: Supported by NIH/NIDCD Grant DC00139, by the Research
Service of the Veterans Administration, and by the Duaei Hearing Research Fund.
REFERENCES
Bermingham, N.A., Hassan, B.A., Price, S.D., Vollrath, M.A., Ben-Arie, N., Eatock,
R.A., Bellen, H.J., Lysakowski, A., & Zoghbi, H.Y. (1999). Math I: an essential
gene for the generation of inner ear hair cells. Science, 284, 1837–1841.
Brownlees, J., Gough, G., Thomas, S., Watts, P., Cohen, J., Coffin, R., & Latchman,
D.S. (1999). Distinct responses of the herpes simplex virus and varicella zoster
virus immediate early promoters to the cellular transcription factors Brn-3a and
Brn-3b. International Journal of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, 31, 451–461.
Budhram-Mahadeo, V., Parker, M., & Latchman, D.S. (1998). POU transcription
factors Brn-3a and Brn-3b interact with the estrogen receptor and differentially
regulate transcriptional activity via an estrogen response element. Molecular Cell
Biology, 18, 1029–1041.
Erkman, L., McEvilly, R.J., Luo, L., Ryan, A.E., Hoosmand, F., O’Connell, S.M.,
Keithley, E.M., Rappaport, D.H., Ryan, A.F., & Rosenfeld, M.G. (1996). Require-
ment for Brn-3.1 and Brn-3.2 in auditory and visual system development. Na-
ture, 381, 603–606.
BRN-3.1 IS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT AND SURVIVAL OF THE HAIR CELL
99

Gay, R.D., Dawson, S.J., Murphy, W.J., Russell, S.W., & Latchman, D.S. (1998). Acti-
vation of the iNOS gene promoter by Brn-3 POU family transcription factors is
dependent upon the octamer motif in the promoter. Biochimica et Biophysica Ac-
ta, 1443, 315–322.
Gu, G., Caldwell, GA, Chalfie, M. (1996). Genetic interactions affecting touch sensi-
tivity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 93, 6577–6582.
Jorgensen, J.M. (1989). Evolution of octavolateralis sensory cells. In S. Coombs, P.
Goerner, H. Muenz (Eds) The Mechanosensory Lateral Line: Neurobiology and Evo-
lution. (115–145) New York: Springer Verlag.
Keithley, E.M., Erkman, L., Bennett, T., Luo, L., & Ryan, A.F. (1999). Effects of a hair
cell transcription factor, Brn-3.1, deletion on homozygous and heterozygous
mouse cochleas in adulthood and aging. Hearing Research, 134, 71–76,
Lakin, N.D., Morris, P.J., Theil, T., Sato, T.N., Mèorèoy, T., Wilson, M.C., & Latch-
man, D.S. (1995). Regulation of neurite outgrowth and SNAP-25 gene expres-
sion by the Brn-3a transcription factor. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 270,
15858–15863.
Lanford, P.J., Lan, Y., Jiang, R., Lindsell, C., Weinmaster, G., Gridley, T., & Kelley,
M.W. (1999). Notch signalling pathway mediates hair cell development in
mammalian cochlea. Nature Genetics, 21, 289–292.
Li, S., Crenshaw, E.B., Rawson, E.J., Simmons, D.M., Swanson, L.W. & Rosenfeld,
M.G. (1990). Dwarf locus mutants lacking three pituitary cell types result from
mutations in the POU-domain gene Pit-1. Nature, 347, 528–533.
Milton, N.G., Bessis, A., Changeux, J.P., & Latchman, D.S. (1995). The neuronal
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha 2 subunit gene promoter is activated by
the Brn-3b POU family transcription factor and not by Brn-3a or Brn-3c. Journal
of Biological Chemistry, 270, 15143–15147.
Milton, N.G., Bessis, A., Changeux, J.P., & Latchman, D.S. (1996). Differential regu-
lation of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit gene promoters by
Brn-3 POU family transcription factors. Biochemical Journal, 317, 419–423.
Morris, P.J., Lakin, N.D., Dawson, S.J., Ryabinin, A.E., Kilimann, M.W., Wilson,
M.C., & Latchman, D.S. (1996). Differential regulation of genes encoding synap-
tic proteins by members of the Brn-3 subfamily of POU transcription factors.
Molecular Brain Research, 43, 279–285.
Ruben, R.J. (1967). Development of the inner ear of the mouse: a radioautographic
study of terminal mitoses. Acta Otolaryngology, Supplement, 220, 1–44.
Rudnicki, M.A., Schnegelsberg, P.N., Stead, R.H., Braun, T., Arnold, H.H., &
Jaenisch, R. (1993). MyoD or Myf-5 is required for the formation of skeletal
muscle. Cell, 75, 1351–1359.
Ryan, A.F. (1997). Transcription factors and the control of inner ear development.
Seminar in Cell and Developmental Biology, 8, 249–256.
Ryan, A.F., Luo, L., McEvilly, R., Erkman, L., & Rosenfeld, M.G. (1996). A transcrip-
tion factor specific for mammalian hair cells is expressed throughout life. Ab-
stract Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 19, 575.
Ryan, A.K., & Rosenfeld, M.G.. (1997). POU domain family values: flexibility, part-
nerships and developmental codes. Genes and Development, 11, 1207–1225.
Ryan, A.F., Simmons, D.M., & Crenshaw, E.B. (1991). Gene expression in normal
and abnormal inner ears. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 630,
129–132.
100
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Smith, M.D., Ensor, E.A., Coffin, R.S., Boxer, L.M., & Latchman, D.S. (1998). Bcl-2
transcription from the proximal P2 promoter is activated in neuronal cells by
the Brn-3a POU family transcription factor. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 273,
16715–16722.
Smith M.D., Morris, P.J., Dawson, S.J., Schwartz, M.L., Schlaepfer, W.W., & Latch-
man, D.S.(1997). Coordinate induction of the three neurofilament genes by the
Brn-3a transcription factor. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 272, 21325–21333.
Tavernarakis, N., & Driscoll, M. (1997). Molecular modeling of mechanotransduc-
tion in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Annual Review of Physiology, 59,
659–689.
Vahava, 0., Morell, R., Lynch, E.D., Weiss, S., Kagan, M.E., Ahituv, N., Morrow, J.E.,
Lee, M.K., Skvorak, A.B., Morton, C.C., Blumenfeld, A., Frydman, M., Fried-
man, T.B., King, M.C., & Avraham, K.B. (1998). Mutation in transcription factor
POU4F3 associated with inherited progressive hearing loss in humans. Science,
279, 1950–1954
Xiang, M., Gan, L., Li, D., Chen, Z.Y., Zhou, L., O’Malley, BW., Klein, W., &
Nathans, J. (1997). Essential role of POU-domain factor Bm-3c in auditory and
vestibular hair cell development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 94, 9445–9450.
Xiang, M., Gao, W.Q., Hasson, T., & Shin, J.J. (1998). Requirement for Bm-3c in mat-
uration and survival, but not in fate determination of inner ear hair cells. Devel-
opment, 125, 3935–3946.
BRN-3.1 IS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT AND SURVIVAL OF THE HAIR CELL
101


Vestibular afferent fibers produce action potentials at rest. The generation
of these action potentials requires their activation by the hair cell transmit-
ter, for the afferents are silent in the absence of transmitter release from the
hair cells (Guth, Aubert, Ricci, Norris, 1991). The release of transmitter
from resting hair cells is made possible by a steady, depolarizing K+ cur-
rent which flows into the stereocilia from the endolymph through trans-
duction channels. This depolarizing current causes the opening of voltage-
gated Ca2+ channels, which in turn leads to transmitter release. The tonic
release of transmitter from hair cells, and its activation of afferents, means
that afferent synapses in the vestibular periphery are “on” at rest. Thus,
motion-induced signals need only modulate the ongoing activity, without
having to turn the network of synapses “on” or “off.” This motif—graded
transmitter release—is also found at the photoreceptor-bipolar cell
synapse in the retina (Tessier-Lavigne, 1991). Such a system is more closely
attuned to minute changes in transmitter release than an ordinary
synapse, which can only be modulated in a positive direction (i.e., above
“rest”, the absence of transmitter release).
Assuming that baseline discharge is rest, the hair cell-afferent synapse
can be modulated above and below its set point, making the conveyance
into the brain of information about the position and velocity of the head a
far more spatially sensitive operation. This seemingly efficient arrange-
103
6
Enhancing Signal Discrimination
by Means of a Metabotropic
Glutamate Receptor
Adam W. Hendricson
Grace Athas, Ph.D.
Paul S. Guth, Ph.D.

ment comes with a price, however. The price is that the ongoing activity
presents a background against which mechanically-evoked signals must
be discriminated. We propose that the solution selected by vertebrate evo-
lution to this problem of signal discrimination may take the shape of a
presynaptic metabotropic receptor for glutamate (mGluR). The hypothesis
under consideration is that mGluRs on vestibular hair cells (VHCs) are recruited
under conditions of mechanically-evoked activity, but not at rest. When recruited,
the mGluRs provide positive feedback enhancement of hair cell transmitter
release and thus enhanced afferent firing, but in the evoked mode only.
BACKGROUND
The amino acid glutamate is arguably the most important excitatory neu-
rotransmitter of the vertebrate nervous system, implicated in functions
ranging from the long term potentiation which precedes learning
(Balschun, Manahan-Vaughn, Wagner, Behnisch, Reymann, & Wetzel,
1999; Morris, Knevett, Lerner, & Bindman, 1999) to the excitotoxic neu-
ronal damage which succeeds stroke (Pizzi, Fallacara, Arrighi, Memo, and
Spano, 1993; Chen, Surmeier, & Reiner, 1999; Pizzi, 1996). Its receptors are
both ionotropic (iGluRs; ion-channel linked) and metabotropic (G-protein
linked) (Conn & Pin, 1997). The metabotropic family of glutamate recep-
tors is divided into three groups (I, II, and III) whose various agonists and
antagonists have been extensively described (Pin, DeColle, Bessis, &
Acher, 1999). It is generally accepted that group I mGluRs enhance the ac-
tivity of phospholipase C, and that Group II and III mGluRs decrease the
activity of adenylyl cyclase (Conn et al., 1997). First characterized in the
mid-1980s (Sladeczek, Pin, Recasens, Bockaert, & Weiss, 1985; Sugiyama,
Ito, & Hirono, 1987), these neuromodulatory receptors are ubiquitous in
distribution, varied in function, and complex in pharmacology. Their dis-
tribution in the CNS includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the hip-
pocampus (Nicolle, Columbo, Gallagher, & McKinney, 1999; Schools, &
Kimelber, 1999), hypothalamus (Schrader & Tasker, 1997), cerebellum
(Pizzi et al., 1993; Vetter, Garthwaite, & Batchelor, 1998; Pizzi, 1996), cere-
bral cortex (Beaver, Ji, & Daw, 1999; Strasser, Lobner, Behrens, Canzoniero,
& Choi, 1998), striatum (Sladeczek et al., 1985; Mao & Wang, 1999), olfacto-
ry bulb (Schoppa & Westbrook, 1999; Wada, Shigemoto, Kinoshita, Ohishi,
& Mizuno, 1998), neural retina (Gafka, Vogel, & Linn, 1999; Linn & Gafka,
1999), and auditory (Kleinlogel, Oestreicher, Arnold, Ehrenberger, & Felix,
1999) and vestibular hair cells (Guth et al., 1998). Metabotropic glutamate
receptors have also been reported to exist in the mammalian myocardium
(Gill, Pulido, Mueller, & McGuire, 1999) and may exist at the Drosophila
neuromuscular junction (Peterson, Fetter, Noordermeer, Goodman, &
DiAntonio, 1999). The best characterized neuronal phenomena mediated
104
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

by mGluRs are excitotoxicity (Colwell & Levine, 1999) and long-term po-
tentiation (Morris et al., 1999; Balschun et al., 1999). 
The role of mGluRs in the vestibular system came under scrutiny as
the result of a series of observations concerning the relationship between
resting and mechanically- or electrically-evoked discharge at VHC-affer-
ent nerve synapses (Guth et al., 1991). Under a variety of conditions, the
release of neurotransmitter from unstimulated hair cells (the so-called
“tonic” release made possible by an inward K+ current at the apical end of
the cells) displays different kinetics than does transmitter release evoked
by mechanical, chemical, or electrical stimuli. This led to the concept of a
presynaptic (i.e., hair cell) autoreceptor which is activated solely by
evoked discharge of neurotransmitter from hair cells, and thus modulates
evoked phenomena while having no effect on tonic release of transmitter.
Contemporaneous observations of the responsiveness of VHCs to drugs,
such as quisqualic acid, known to activate mGluRs led to the concept that
this hair cell autoreceptor might be glutamatergic (Prigioni, Russo, Valli, &
Masetto, 1990; Valli, Prigioni, Zucca, Botta, & Guth, 1985).
The evidence that mGluRs exist on VHCs, and that they may mediate
a differential release of glutamate in resting versus mechanically stimulated
mode is derived from pharmacology, molecular biology, and immunocyto-
chemistry (ICC). Administered alone, the mGluR antagonists (RS)-1-
aminoindan-1,5-dicarboxylic acid (AIDA) and (S)-4-carboxyphenylglycine
(4CPG) do not alter ampullar afferent firing rates (Guth et al., 1998). An-
tagonists of the mGluRs are effective at reducing transmitter release
evoked by mGluR agonists, which have been shown pharmacologically to
act at presynaptic receptors (Guth et al., 1998; Prigioni et al., 1990; Valli et
al., 1985). Messenger RNA expression profiling studies from our lab have
shown mGluR1 to be localized to VHCs from the SCC (Guth et al., 1998),
results which have recently been confirmed and expanded by ICC experi-
ments showing both mGluR1a and 5 to exist on SCC hair cells.
The above data are the foundation for our hypothesis that presynapti-
cally located mGluRs may mediate positive feedback loops in afferent neu-
rotransmission from the vestibular apparatus to the brain. By this model,
mechanically-evoked release of glutamate from hair cells activates presy-
naptic mGluRs, which increase transmitter release via a mechanism which
remains speculative (Guth, Perin, Norris, & Valli, 1998), but which based on
evidence from other systems may involve modulation of K+ channels
(Sharon, Vorobiov, & Dascal, 1997), Ca2+ channels (Guatteo, Mercuri, Bernar-
di, & Knopfel, 1999), intracellular Ca2+ metabolism (Bianchi, Young, &
Wong, 1999), PKC activation (Hori, Takai, & Takahashi, 1999), or, specula-
tively, the transmitter release apparatus itself. In this way, a mechanical sig-
nal transduced by the vestibular neuroepithelium is elevated above the ton-
ic release of transmitter from resting VHCs. Positive feedback of glutamate
on its own release via presynaptic group I mGluRs has been documented in
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
105
105

cerebral cortex (Herrero, Miras-Portugal, & Sanchez-Prieto, 1992) and hypo-
thalamus (Schrader et al., 1997). In brain, activation of group I mGluRs can
lead to Ca2+ influx through voltage-dependent channels which is readily
discernible via electrophysiological (patch or voltage clamping of neurons)
or photochemical (imaging the fluorescence of calcium-sensitive dyes such
as fura-2) recording techniques (Guatteo et al., 1999).
METHODS
Whole Labyrinth Preparation (Guth, Norris, Guth, Quine, &
Williams, 1986) 
Leopard frogs (Rana pipiens) are anesthetized by chilling to 40° F, sacrificed
by decapitation, and caudally pithed. The roof of the mouth is cut into two
halves, and the tissues overlying the bone and cartilage of the otic capsule
are cut away. The ventral portion of the otic capsule and the melanophore-
covered membranes which ensconce the labyrinth itself are removed, ex-
posing the ampullar nerve. The nerve is severed near the point at which it
delves between the auditory papillae. The remainder of the soft tissue and
bone surrounding the otic capsule are cut away and the labyrinth is trans-
planted into a 20 ml tissue bath superfused with frog Ringer’s solution
(104.6 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCL, 13 mM NaHCO3, 1.7 mM NaH2PO4·H20,
1.8 mM CaCl2, 1mM MgCl2·H20, 5mM glucose in ddH20 ((double-distilled
water)), adjusted to pH 7.18-7.22) at a continuous rate of 5 ml/min. The
nerve stump is pulled via gentle suction into a glass pipette filled with
Ringer’s solution and connected to a Ag/AgCl electrode. Action potentials
recorded from the severed nerve are amplified 100–fold by a differential
amplifier (WPI), converted into an analog measure of frequency by a
slope/height window discriminator, and collected in 1sec bins by a
rate/interval monitor (Frederick Haer and Co). The rate/interval analyzer
discharges an analog measure of frequency once per second into an ana-
log-to-digital-converter board (Axon Instruments), which in turn dis-
charges into a microcomputer (Gateway Computing) running the Axo-
scope 7.0 electrophysiological recording suite (Axon Instruments), where a
linear representation of action potential frequency is displayed and simul-
taneously written onto hard media for offline analysis. Drugs dissolved in
Ringer’s are applied either by introduction into the reservoir of Ringer’s
(bath exchange) or by close microinjection onto the neuroepithelium at a
rate of 50 µl/min via a single-port pipette fed by four separate lines. Con-
trol injections of Ringer’s alone are given to ascertain that they do not alter
the discharge rate, and Ringer’s is run through the common injection port
for 30 sec after every drug injection to flush the remnants of the drug out
of the port in preparation for the next injection. (See Figure 6–1)
106
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

In order to evoke increases in transmitter release via mechanical
movement of stereocilia bundles, a bimetallic strip coupled to a glass
pushrod is exposed via voltage amplifier (ThorLabs) to a set voltage which
reverses itself in phase with a sine wave from a function generator (Tek-
tronix). The resulting inward and outward flexion of the bimetallic strip
causes the tip of the pushrod to gently indent the duct of the inferior SCC.
This perturbation of the canal wall causes a concomitant movement of the
gelatinous cupula, which overlays the hair-cell studded crista, both of
which reside inside the ampulla of the canal. Movement of the cupula
causes deflection of the hair cell stereocilia bundles which project into it,
leading to changes in hair cell membrane voltages and thus, transmitter re-
lease. These upward and downward oscillations in transmitter release can
be discerned on a physiograph configured (as described above) to reflect
frequency of action potentials in the afferent nerve (see Figure 6–9 in Re-
sults section).
Isolation of Vestibular Hair Cells (Housley, Norris, & Guth, 
1989; Hudspeth & Lewis, 1988; Lewis & Hudspeth, 1983).
Leopard frogs (Rana pipiens) are chilled, pithed, and sacrificed by decapita-
tion. The superior portion of the head, sectioned sagitally, is placed in 
external medium (119mM NaCl, 3 mM KCL, 8mM Na2HPO4· 2 H20, 2mM
NaH2PO4· 2H20, 2mM CaCl2· 2H20, 1mM MgCl2·H2O, and 3mM glucose,
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
107
S
L
U
AC
HC
PC
Amp
FRC
Figure 6–1. Schematic of isolated vestibular organ
preparation. Nerve in suction elecrode innervates poste-
rior semi-circular canal. Amp: AC amplifier. FRC: fre-
quency to rate converter. AC: Anterior canal. HC: Hori-
zontal canal. PC: Posterior canal. S: Saccule. L: Lagena

adjusted to pH 7.25). After exposing the inner ear by removing the ventral
portions of the otic capsule, the whole labrynth is removed and placed in
dissociation medium (122mM NaCl, 3mM KCl, 8mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM
NaH2PO4 • H20, 0.02 mM CaCl2 • 2H2O, and 3mM glucose, pH adjusted to
7.25). The cristae of the SCCs are dissected from the remainder of the
labyrinth and trimmed of excess tissue. The tissue is next moved via fine
forceps (A. Dumont Instruments) to a glass well plate (Pyrex) filled with
dissociation medium containing the proteolytic enzyme trypsin (0.05%;
Sigma) for 30 minutes. Next, the cristae are transferred for 1 minute into a
well containing FBS, then into a final well containing bovine serum albu-
min (500 µg/µl; Sigma) for 15 minutes. The cristae are removed and
placed on a Sylgard platform designed to fit the stage of an inverted mi-
croscope (Nikon). Under the scope, gentle agitation with a fine glass wisp
is used to separate the hair cells from their tissue substrate. After allowing
the cells to settle to the bottom of the dish for 5 minutes, a 500µl/min per-
fusion of external medium is begun which will persist for the duration of
the experiment. Patch clamping may now be performed. In the case of im-
munocytochemical (ICC) experiments, cells are isolated as described, except
they are wisped from the cristae onto glass slides coated with con-
canavalin-A (Sigma) instead of onto a Sylgard platform. 
Amplification of mRNA (Eberwine, Yeh, Miyasharo, Cao, Nair, 
& Finnel, 1999; Eberwine, Spencer, Miyasharo, Mackler, & Finnel,
1992; Mackler, Brooks, & Eberwine, 1992; Van Gelder, vonZastrow,
Yool, Dement, Barchas, Eberwine, 1993). 
Under stringent RNAse precautions (latex gloves, molecular grade
reagents, diethylpyrocarbonate-treated and autoclaved ddH20, autoclaved
plasticware and baked glassware), the cytoplasm of SCC hair cells are as-
pirated into a patch pipette, then transferred into a 600 µL microcentrifuge
tube containing 15.5 µL ddH20, 2 µL 10X electrode buffer, 2.5 mM each of 4
deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs), and 10U avian myeloma virus re-
verse transcriptase (Seikagaku). After 2 min of centrifugation, the pipette
and its contents are incubated at 37° C for 60–90 min, then precipitated
with ethanol and centrifuged for 15 min at 4°C. Upon aspiration of the
ethanol, the pellet is air-dried and resuspended in 20µL ddH20. The cD-
NA/mRNA complex is heat-denatured at 95° C for 3 min, and cooled
rapidly over ice. Upon transfer, 1µL ddH20, 4µL 10X 2nd strand buffer, 2.5
mM of 4 dNTPs, 1U/1µL T4 DNA polymerase, and 1U/1µl Klenow frag-
ment are added to catalyze the formation of 2nd strand cDNA. After 5
hours of incubation at 14° C, 48 µL ddH20, 10 µL S1 buffer, and 1 U/µL S1
nuclease (Boehringer) are added and the solution is incubated again at 37°
C for 5 hours to remove hairpin loops. The pellet is extracted using phenol-
108
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

chlorophorm extraction followed by ethanol precipitation and centrifuga-
tion. Following air-aspiration of the ethanol, the pellet is resuspended in 20
µL ddH20. Blunt ends are obtained by the addition of 2.5 µL 10X KFI buffer,
.5 µL of each of 4 dNTPs (from a 10µM stock), and .5 U/0.5 µL Klenow
fragment. After incubation, phenol-chloroform extraction and transfer,
ethanol precipitation, and centrifugation, the pellet is aspirated, air-dried,
and resuspended in 20 µL ddH20. Drop dialysis is then employed to re-
move unincorporated nucleotides. Double-stranded cDNA has now been
isolated, and can be used to make aRNA. Nine µl ddH20, 2 µL 10X amplifi-
cation buffer, 1µL DTT (100mM), 2 µL each ATP, GTP, UTP (2.5 mM), 1µL
CTP (1mM), 15 µCi alpha-32-P-CTP, .5 RNAsin (ribonuclease inhibitor),
and 1µL T7 RNA polymerase are added to 2 µL of the dialyzed cDNA ex-
tract and allowed to incubate at 37° C for 4 hours. Phenol-chloroform ex-
traction and ethanol precipitation follow, as described above. An aliquot of
RNA product is run on a denaturing 1% agarose gel in 1X MOPS to ascer-
tain the extent of RNA degradation as well as the amount of incorporated
radiolabel. A 103 fold amplification of the mRNA in the starting material
has now been obtained. RNA is next reamplified by repeating the above
steps, starting with 1st strand cDNA synthesis. The 2nd round of amplifica-
tion yields a 106 fold increase in mRNA, and the radiolabelled, amplified
mRNA is ready to be used as a probe for expression profiling. 
Expression Profiling (Mackler et al., 1992) 
Following treatment with restriction enzymes (37° C, 2 hours), the cDNA
clones are linearized. Equimolar amounts of the linearized clones are de-
natured (95° C for 5 min), transferred to nitrocellulose paper, and UV-
crosslinked in a slot blot apparatus (Bio-Dot ST, Bio Rad). The individual
slot blots are placed in hybridization bottles with 50% formamide, 5X SSC,
5X Denhardt’s solution, and 100 µg/ml salmon sperm DNA, for 3 hours at
42° C. Next, the amplified aRNAs from VHCs are heat denatured (5 min at
95° C), cooled (ice), and added to the bottle containing the slot blot. After
48 hours at 40° C in a hybridization oven (Bellco), the slot blot filters are
washed (RNAse-free), first under low stringency conditions (twice, 2xSSC
and 0.1% SDS for 40 min at 42° C), and then under high stringency
(0.1xSSC and 0.1 % SDS for 30 min at 42° C). After air-drying of the slot
blots, autoradiography is performed with an exposure time of 16 to 96
hours. Intensity of the hybridization signal as compared to controls allows
for the determination of relative levels of expression. Also, densitometry
or phosphoroimaging analysis can be used to quantify expression profiles.
Vector cDNA (pUC18) is used as a negative control and to provide a back-
ground level, while housekeeping genes such as GAPDH, Fra-1, or Fra-2
can be used as positive controls. (See Figure 6–2)
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
109

110
Figure 6–2. Flow Diagram for
Single-Cell mRNA Amplifica-
tion (aRNA®)
AA
AA
A
5'
AAAAA
5'
AA
AA
A
5'
AAAAA
5'
Patch Pipette

IMMUNOCYTOCHEMISTRY
Immunocytochemistry was performed on SCC (semicircular canal) hair
cells enzymatically isolated as described in Probe-clip press-seal incuba-
tion chambers (Sigma) coated with a 2mg/ml solution of Concanavalin-A
(Sigma) in standard frog Ringer’s. The chambers are rinsed with PBS for
10 minutes after the cells are isolated. Next, a fixative consisting of 1.08 ml
paraformaldehyde, 1.40 ml saturated picrid acid 2.0 ml concentrated PBS,
and ddH20 up to a 10 ml total volume is added to the wells and allowed to
sit for 20 minutes. The wells are rinsed with PBS three times at the end of
the fixative incubation period. After rinsing, 2 blocking solutions (A and B)
are added sequentially for 30 minutes each. Blocking solution A consists of
PBS + 0.02% Triton X-100 (Sigma) + 1% BSA + 0.01% NaN3. Blocking solu-
tion B consists of PBS + 0.4% Triton X-100 + 1% BSA + 1% goat serum +
0.01% FCS + 0.1% FCS + 0.01% NaN3. Primary antibodies (mGluR1a and
mGluR5, rabbit polyclonal, Pharmingen Corp.) diluted 1:100 in PBS + 0.4%
Triton X-100 + 1% BSA + 1% goat serum + 0.1% FCS + 0.01 % NaN3 are
added to the chambers for 40 hours at 4°C in a humid atmosphere. After
incubation of the hair cells with the primary antibody, the chambers are
washed three times with a solution of ice-cold PBS + 0.2% Triton X-100, 5
minutes per wash. The secondary antibody (fluorescine isothiocyanate-
tagged, goat anti-rabbit) is diluted 1:165 in a solution consisting of PBS +
0.2% Triton X-100 + 1% BSA + 1% goat serum + 0.1% FCS + 0.01% NaN3.
This solution is added to the incubation chambers for 60 minutes at room
temperature in a humid atmosphere. The chambers are then rinsed 3 times
with PBS, 5 minutes per wash. Finally, the incubation chambers are rinsed
once with ddH20, mounted on glass slides using Biomedia Gelmount, and
visualized under a fluorescence microscope (Nikon). Slides are stored in
the dark at 4°C. Negative controls are performed by following the above
procedure with the exception of the addition of the primary antibody, in
order to ensure that the secondary antibody is not binding to the cells in a
non-specific manner, leading to false positive results. 
RESULTS
The Effects of mGluR Agonists in the SCC
ACPD is a non-selective mGluR agonist. Application of ACPD to the neu-
roepithelium of the posterior SCC produced increases in firing rates of am-
pullar afferents (see Figure 6–3A). Figure 6–3B depicts the relationship be-
tween concentrations of ACPD applied and its facilitatory effects on
afferent firing. The EC50 is approximately 40 µM. Quisqualate, a poorly se-
lective glutamatomimetic, is a group I mGluR agonist (Littman, Chase,
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
111

Renzi, Garlin, Koerner, Johnson, 1995). It causes an increase in afferent fir-
ing in the SCC (Annoni, Cochran, & Precht, 1984; Prigioni et al., 1990). t-
ADA, weakly selective for mGluR5 over mGluR1, produced modest facili-
tation of afferent firing at 1 to 3 mM (data not shown). The group III
agonist L-AP4 had no effect on afferent firing.
112
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 6–3. A: Resting firing rate, multiunit record-
ing from ampullar nerve, frog posterior SCC. Dose-
dependently, the mGluR agonist t-ACPD increased
resting multi-unit afferent discharge. Arrows mark
start of drug injections; response to 100µM t-ACPD
lasted 7 1.5 min (n8). B: Dose-response curve for
t-ACPD facilitation of afferent discharge. Sponta-
neous firing rate reversibly increased to 182 8.9%
(n8) of control values upon 100µM t-ACPD admin-
istration (in the absence of agonist, baseline noise
was 8 2.9%). EC50 for t-ACPD action was 35.4
8.5 µM; the dose-response saturated above 300µM
(n4). Nfr: nerve firing rate. Con: artificial perilymph
control injection.

Site of action of ACPD
In an attempt to determine the site of action of ACPD, the whole
labyrinth was bathed in artificial perilymph (AP) containing 0.1 mM
Ca2+ and 10 mM Mg2+. This alteration in ionic composition of the
bathing medium is designed to inhibit hair cell transmitter release (An-
noni, Cochran, & Precht, 1984; Bobbin, Bledsoe, Winbery, & Jenison,
1985; Soto & Vega, 1988; Valli, Zucca, Prigioni, Botta, Casella, & Guth,
1985). Under these conditions, resting afferent activity ceased, under-
scoring the idea that the afferents themselves are silent unless stimulated
by the hair cell transmitter (Guth et al., 1991). ACPD was now incapable
of causing increases in ampullar afferent activity, indicating that its site
of action was probably the hair cell, and not the afferent neurons per se.
To demonstrate that the afferent neurons were still capable of respond-
ing, injections of AP with 1 mM Glu were made. These produced a rapid
and dramatic rise in afferent firing rates (Figure 6–4). High potassium (15
mM) AP also produced increases in afferent firing under these condi-
tions (data not shown). This concentration of potassium is capable of de-
polarizing the afferents past their threshold for action potential dis-
charge.
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
113
5 min
125 Hz
Low Ca , high Mg
ACPD
100 µM
Con
ACPD
100 µM
Glu
1 mM
ACPD
100 µM
Glu
1mM
Figure 6–4. Resting discharge from the whole ampullar nerve in the presence of a
high-Mg2, low-Ca2 Ringer’s solution, which has been shown to block afferent
transmission by impeding transmitter release (Valli et al., 1985). While 1mM gluta-
mate increased discharge rate, the response to 100µM t-ACPD was negligible com-
pared to control. These findings indicate that the receptor for t-ACPD may be pre-
synaptic. 
2+                            2+

Testing the Possibility that ACPD Could be Acting at Non-mGluR Sites
Acetylcholine receptors
Acetylcholine (ACh), the primary efferent transmitter, has been shown to
cause an increase in ampullar afferent firing rates by an action on hair cell
ACh receptors (Bernard, Cochran, & Precht, 1985; Guth, Dunn, Kronomer,
& Norris, 1994; Guth et al., 1986; Guth, Dunn, Kronomer, & Norris, 1994;
Guth & Norris, 1996; Housley, Norris, & Guth, 1990; Norris, Housley,
Williams, Guth, & Guth, 1988). Since ACPD has been shown to increase
transmitter release (Schrader et al., 1997), and mimics ACh in the SCC in
causing facilitation of afferent firing, it seemed reasonable to test whether
ACPD was acting indirectly through ACh (i.e., by stimulating the release
of ACh from efferent endings). In the SCC, it is the activation of muscarinic
receptors that is responsible for the facilitation caused by ACh (Guth et al.,
1998). In the SCC, atropine at low concentrations (e.g., 3 µM) antagonizes
the facilitatory effect of applied ACh (Guth et al., 1998). Therefore, atropine
(3 µM) was applied by bath substitution. The responses to ACh and ACPD
on ampullar nerve afferent activity before and after atropine were com-
pared (Figure 6–5). While this concentration of atropine blocked the effect
of ACh, no interaction between atropine and ACPD was seen. This sug-
gests that in the SCC, ACPD neither acts by releasing ACh from efferent
endings, nor by acting on muscarinic receptors.
Non-mGluR glutamate receptors
Other so-called selective agonists for mGluRs, such as quisqualate and 2,3
dicarboxycyclopropylglycine, have been seen to have measurable activities
114
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
ACPD
100 µM
ACh
300 µM
ACh
300 µM
ACPD
100 µM
ACPD
100 µM
ACh
300 µM
3 µM Atropine
Con
5 min
125 Hz
Figure 6–5. A 3µM concentration of atropine reduced the facilitation of afferent fir-
ing caused by 300µM ACh. Atropine had no effect on the response to 100µM t-
ACPD, however. This indicates that the receptor activated by t-ACPD is pharmaco-
logically distinct from the muscarinic receptor.

at AMPA and NMDA receptors (Wilsch, Pidoplichko, Opitz, Shinozaki, &
Reyman, 1994). Both AMPA and NMDA receptors appear to exist in the
SCC (Cochran & Correia, 1995; Devau, Lehouelleur, & Sans, 1993; Guth et
al., 1998; Prigioni et al., 1990; Prigioni, Russo, & Masetto, 1994; Soto, Flores,
Erostegui, & Vega, 1994; Zucca, Akoev, Maracci, & Valli, 1993). To eliminate
the possibility that ACPD, used as an mGluR test-probe, was acting on
NMDA receptors, either directly or in concert with the transmitter (Conn et
al., 1997) the NMDA selective antagonist D(-)-2-amino-5-phosphono pen-
tanoic acid (AP-5) was employed. Figure 6–6 depicts the antagonism of
NMDA-induced facilitation of SCC afferent firing by AP-5. Note that the
ACPD-induced facilitation is unaffected. This suggests that at the concen-
trations used in these studies, ACPD is not acting on or influencing an NM-
DA-type receptor. The enhancement of the responses to ACh and ACPD af-
ter AP-5 was unexpected but is reproducible and as yet, unexplained.
Antagonism of ACPD by mGluR antagonists
Two different mGluR antagonists, (S)-4-carboxyphenyl glycine (4CPG)
and (RS)-1-aminoindan-1,5 dicarboxylic acid (AIDA), were pitted against
the facilitatory effect of ACPD. Both are said to be group I-selective, com-
petitive mGluR antagonists. 4CPG antagonized ACPD in a dose-depen-
dent manner, and at 1 mM completely blocked the effect of 100 µM ACPD
(Figure 6–7A and 6-7B). AIDA was partially effective at 1 mM and com-
pletely effective at 3 mM against 100 µM ACPD (data not shown). These re-
sults suggest, if the reported selectivity of these antagonists is to be trusted,
that ACPD may be activating group I mGluRs. When applied alone, neither
4CPG (Figure 6–7A) nor AIDA (not shown) affected resting activity.
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
115
1 mM AP-5
ACh
300 µM
ACh
300 µM
ACPD
100 µM
ACPD
300 µM
Con
Con
NMDA
100 µM
NMDA
100 µM
5 min
125 Hz
Figure 6–6. A continuous recording from a single SCC. The NMDA blocker AP-5,
applied by bath substitution, reduced the response to NMDA, while having no ef-
fect on the responses to ACh and t-ACPD.

Antagonism of Mechanically Evoked Activity by 4CPG
As shown, 4CPG appears to block group I mGluRs at their site of interac-
tion with ACPD. The definitive test of our hypothesis concerning the
physiological role of mGluRs is to assess their role in modulating mechani-
116
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 6–7. A. The facilitation of SCC afferent discharge caused
by 100µM t-ACPD is blocked entirely by co-injection of 100µM
t-ACPD with 1mM 4CPG, a selective, competitive, group I
mGluR antagonist. B. 4CPG dose-dependently reduces the effect
of t-ACPD on afferent discharge. Note that 4CPG alone does not
reduce firing rate, indicating that group I mGluRs may not be ac-
tivated in the absence of evoked discharge (n8; IC50217.3
73.8 µM). Data normalized to the effect of 100µM t-ACPD (red
circle).

cally-evoked activity at the hair cell-afferent synapse. To this end, we em-
ploy a peizo-electric bimorph device which, coupled to a glass pushrod, in-
duces a gentle, sinusoidal perturbation of the duct of the inferior SCC. This
perturbation displaces hair cell stereocilia in the hair cell-studded cristae of
the canal, causing repetitive increases and decreases in transmitter release,
resulting in sinusoidal oscillation of afferent discharge (Figure 6–8). 
Preliminarily, we have observed a dampening of the increase in affer-
ent activity evoked in this manner following the application of 4CPG (Fig-
ure 6–9). Findings such as these, if valid, strongly support our hypothesis
that group I mGluRs on vestibular hair cells function to amplify mechani-
cally evoked activity at the hair cell efferent synapse, while having little to
no effect on resting discharge.
Expression profiling of individual vestibular hair cells 
Using expression profiling, we have investigated the phenotype of
metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR1-4) from SCC, saccular, and utric-
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
117
S
L
U
AC
HC
PC
Voltage amplifier
Function generator
Bimorph
device
Figure 6–8. Schematic of the mechanically-evoked activity preparation. 

ular hair cells. Figure 6–10 displays representative slot blots using radioac-
tive amplified RNA (aRNA) from the three cell types as probes (SCC and
saccule; n=3, utricle; n=1). Note the strong hybridization signal for mGluR1.
Since the blots were subjected to a high stringency wash and the negative
control plasmid (pUC18) showed no signal, we can be confident that the
strong signal for mGluR1 is valid. No probe for mGluR5 was available at the
time of this study. The mGluR subtypes 2 and 3 are members of the group II
mGluRs and subtype 4 is a member of the Group III mGluRs. This assay
failed to detect the mRNA for any of these receptors. Thus evidence is pre-
sented only for the presence of Group I mGluRs in type II vestibular hair
cells (the only type of hair cells found in frog vestibular organs).
Immunocytochemistry
ICC experiments using antibodies for mGluR1a and mGluR5 showed im-
munoreactivity to be concentrated at the basal poles of SCC hair cells (Fig-
ure 6–11). These findings suggest a concentration of these receptor pro-
teins at the transmitter release site. 
DISCUSSION
The SCCs provide the brain with constant information about movement of
the head, irrespective of which way the head turns, and which way the
118
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
AP
CPG
1mM
100Hz
5 min.
(bimorph stimulus)
CPG 
1mM
Figure 6–9. Mechanically evoked activity is reduced by blockade of group I
mGluRs by 4-CPG. AP: artificial perilymph control. Bimorph stimulus: sine wave
corresponding to the inward and outward movement of the bimorph pushrod
against the canal duct. All injections were 60 seconds in length.

hair cell stereocilia are bent. This is accomplished by having hair cells re-
lease their transmitter continuously at rest so that the afferents fire under
non-stimulated conditions, thus allowing bi-directional modulation of the
resting activity by the graded release (or inhibition of release) of hair cell
transmitter in response to graded mechanical stimulation. However, a
problem arises precisely from this continuous resting activity. When an
important excitatory stimulus is to be transmitted to the afferents, discrim-
ination of this signal may be compromised by the constant background ac-
tivity. If, however, a mechanically-evoked signal of importance could
cause a disproportionately large release of hair cell transmitter, then signal
discrimination could be maintained or enhanced. This function could be
served by a group I mGluR acting as a positive feedback autoreceptor, as it
does in the central nervous system (Herrero et al., 1992; Schrader et al.,
1997).
Group I mGluRs are coupled negatively to K+ channels (Sharon et al.,
1997), which would produce depolarization, activation of Ca2+ channels,
and increased transmitter release. They are also coupled positively to L-
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
119
CaCC      Blank        fra1          fra2        P.Ctrl (1)      pUC18
GluH1    mGluR1   mGluR2   mGluR3    mGluR4       Blank
SCC
Utr
Sac
Blank(2,3)
Figure 6–10. Slot blots containing cDNA hybridized to radioactively labeled aRNA
from isolated SCC, utricular, and saccular VHCs. Strong hybridization signals are
seen for the positive controls (fra-1 and fra-2) and for mGluR1. Faint to no hy-
bridization signals are seen for the AMPA receptor (GluH1), mGluRs 1–4, and the
negative control (pUC18).

type Ca2+ currents in cerebellar granule cells (Chavis, Fagni, Bockaert, &
Lansman, 1995), which could lead directly to increased transmitter release.
In addition, there is an mGluR coupled to phosphoinositide hydrolysis
whose activation leads to increased intracellular Ca2+, and increased gluta-
mate release (Herrero et al., 1992). Lee and Boden (1997) adduced evidence
that ACPD causes depolarization by activating a Ca2+-Na+ exchanger. 
Logic predicates that the recruitment of hair cell mGluRs in the
evoked but not resting mode could be accomplished in two ways: either
the mGluRs could be located extrasynaptically, as occurs in some brain
120
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
A
B
Figure 6–11. Immunocytochemistry con-
firmed the presence of (A) mGluRs 1a and
(B) 5 on VHCs. Column A, top: Representa-
tive SCC hair cell shows heavy mGluR1a
immunoreactivity at apical and basal poles,
respectively. Middle: phase-contrast micro-
graph of SCC hair cells used in negative
control (no primary antibody; see Meth-
ods). Bottom: fluorescence micrograph of
cells from middle panel. Negligible fluores-
cence confirms validity of top panel. Col-
umn B, top: mGluR5 immunoreactivity is
concentrated primarily at basal pole. Mid-
dle and bottom panels: same as column A.

glutamatergic synapses (Baude, Nusser, Molnar, McIlhinney, & Somogyi,
1995; Lujan, Nusser, Roberts, Shigemoto, & Somogyi, 1996), or they could
have low affinities for glutamate. Extrasynaptic mGluRs would not re-
spond to the lower concentrations of transmitter released in the resting
mode, because at this slow rate of release, the diffusion distance between
synapse and receptor would degrade the transmitter concentration to a
level below the threshold concentration for significant mGluR activation.
Similarly, mGluRs with low affinities would require a higher concentration
of transmitter than that provided by the resting mode in order to undergo
significant activation. Because the affinity of glutamate for the mGluRs is
about an order of magnitude greater than for the AMPA receptor (the dom-
inant glutamate receptor on vestibular afferents) (Guth et al., 1998), the for-
mer possibility seems most likely. The work of Lujan et al (1997) in hip-
pocampus also favors the former possibility, in that group I mGluRs were
localized to an annulus approximately 60 nm away from the synapse.
These authors suggest that “the distinct patterns of mGluR distribution
may reflect specific spatial requirements for different...effector mecha-
nisms” (Author note - such as resting and evoked activity). Thereby, the
distant mGluRs would not be stimulated by the limited transmitter release
of the resting mode, but only when synaptic transmitter concentrations
reached levels sufficient for diffusion to mGluRs spatially distinct (perhaps
60 nm) from the transmitter release site. This view is supported by the
work of Scanziani et al (1997) in brain, who demonstrated activation of
mGluRs only when the release of glutamate was enhanced by increased
frequency of stimulation. In our preparation, the mGluRs are probably not
involved in resting mode activity, as attested by the inability of the selective
group I mGluR antagonists, 4CPG and AIDA, to affect resting firing rates.
As shown, ACPD clearly increases afferent firing rates of the SCC in a
dose-dependent manner. Its site of facilitatory action is the hair cell, as
shown by its lack of effect when hair cell transmitter release is inhibited in
low Ca2+-high Mg2+ solution. ACPD does not seem to work indirectly
through ACh or NMDA receptors. Finally, ACPD’s effect is blocked by the
group I mGluR antagonist 4CPG, a drug which appears capable of reduc-
ing mechanically-evoked activity in the isolated vestibular organ prepara-
tion. These findings strongly support the hypothesis of an mGluR on hair
cells of the SCC which may be exclusively involved in the evoked-mode
activation of the afferents. It bears mentioning that even though the
mGluRs may be recruited physiologically only in the evoked mode, they
are still available for activation by exogenous mGluR agonists in the rest-
ing mode, as in the present research.
The question arises: are these results, obtained in an amphibian, gen-
eralizable to the mammalian inner ear? Transmitters and their functions
seem to be conserved throughout vertebrate evolution. The underpinnings
of this assertion come from the writings of Florey (1967, 1972) and Michel-
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
121

son (1974). Both authors agree that, although transmitters themselves are
unchanged throughout the animal kingdom, their functions may change
from phylum to phylum but within any one phylum (e.g., vertebrate), their
functions are the same. Therefore, it may be assumed that results concern-
ing transmitters obtained in amphibians may be applied to all vertebrates.
To reiterate, the hypothesis under consideration is that there are func-
tional, positive-feedback autoreceptors on vestibular hair cells which are
active when hair cells are mechanically stimulated, and inactive when they
are not. The use of pharmacological agents alone rarely provides incisive
testing of such hypotheses, largely because the incisiveness of drugs as hy-
pothesis testers depends upon their selectivities (or lack thereof). Early on,
pharmacologists learn the sometimes painful lesson that a substance’s se-
lectivity is inversely proportional to the number of publications in which it
appears—only rarely does a drug influence only one receptor or enzyme,
and the selectivity is always dose-dependent. All of the above notwith-
standing, drugs are often very useful guideposts and easily used hypothe-
sis-testing tools. The results of pharmacological experiments encourage or
dissuade the investigator from more incisive tests of the hypothesis. The
present case in a classic example. With confidence in our hypothesis
buoyed by pharmacological investigations, we further compiled molecu-
lar and immunocytochemical evidence which seems to paint a clear pic-
ture of the phenotype, disposition, and function of mGluRs on vestibular
hair cells. Based on these results, further electrophysiological, immunohis-
tochemical, and molecular biological tests are underway to provide a more
detailed description of the distribution and functional significance of
mGluRs in the vestibular periphery.
Finally, it seems worth mentioning that neurotransmission at the hair
cell-afferent synapse is unusual in that there is tonic transmitter release
which is modulated up or down according to the extent of membrane de-
polarization (and other factors) (Guth et al., 1998). Thus, transmitter re-
lease in the hair cell is graded primarily according to the transductional
signal, and not dependent on action potential arrival at the release site (in
any case, hair cells generally do not generate action potentials). It may be
that the positive feedback autoreceptor will turn out to be a general feature
of such graded synapses.
Acknowledgements: This research was supported by NIH grant DC-00303 and the
PhRMA Foundation. The authors wish to thank Samara Shipon and Nieka Harris
for technical assistance.
REFERENCES
Annoni, J. M., Cochran, S. L., & Precht, W. (1984). Pharmacology of the Vestibular
hair cell-afferent fiber synapse in the frog. Journal of Neuroscience, 4, 2106–2116. 
122
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Balschun, D., Manahan-Vaughn, D., Wagner, T., Behnisch, T., Reymann, K. G., &
Wetzel, W. (1999). A specific role for group I mGluRs in hippocampal LTP and
hippocampus-dependent spatial learning. Learning and Memory, 6(2), 138–152.
Baude, A., Nusser, Z., Molnar, E., McIlhinney, R.A., & Somogyi, P. (1995). High res-
olution immunogold localization of AMPA-type glutamate receptor subunits at
synaptic and non-synaptic sites in rat hippocampus. Neuroscience, 69(4),
1031–1055. 
Beaver, C. J., Ji, Q., & Daw, N. W. (1999). Effect of the Group II metabotropic gluta-
mate agonist, 2R, 4R-APCD, varies with age, layer, and visual experience in the
visual cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 82(1), 86–93. 
Bernard, C., Cochran, S.L., & Precht, W. (1985). Presynaptic actions of cholinergic
agents upon the hair cell-afferent fiber synapse in the vestibular labyrinth of the
frog. Brain Research, 338, 225–236
Bianchi, R., Young, S.R., & Wong, R.K. (1999). Group I mGluR activation causes
voltage dependent and independent Ca2+ rises in hippocampal pyramidal cells.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 81(6), 2903–2913. 
Bobbin, R.P., Bledsoe, S.L., Winbery, G.L., & Jenison, S.C. In D.G. Drescher (Ed.),
Auditory Biochemistry, (p.102). Springfield, IL: Thomas. 
Chavis, P, Fagni, L, and Bockaert, J, & Lansman, J. B. (1995). Modulation of calcium
channels by metabotropic glutamate receptors in cerebellar granule cells. Neu-
ropharmacology, 34, 929–937. 
Chen, Q., Surmeier, D. J., & Reiner, A. (1999). NMDA and non-NMDA receptor-me-
diated excitotoxicity are potentiated in cultured striatal neurons by prior chron-
ic depolarization. Experimental Neurology, 159(1), 283–296. 
Cochran, S. L., & Correia, M. J. (1995). Functional support of glutamate as a
vestibular hair cell transmitter in an amniote. Brain Research, 670, 321–325.
Colwell, C. S., & Levine, M. S. (1999). Metabotropic glutamate receptor modulation
of excitotoxicity in the neostriatum: role of calcium channels. Brain Research,
833(2), 234–241.
Conn, P. J., & Pin, J. P. (1997). Pharmacology and functions of metabotropic gluta-
mate receptors. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 37, 205–237.
Devau, G., Lehouelleur, J., & Sans, A. (1993). Glutamate receptors on type I
Vestibular hair cells of guinea-pig. European Journal of Neuroscience, 5(9), 1210—
1217. 
Eberwine, J. H., Spencer, C., Miyasharo, K., Mackler, S., & Finnel, R. (1992). Com-
plementary DNA synthesis in situ: methods and applications. Methods in Enzy-
mology, 216, 80–100.
Eberwine, J. H., Yeh, H., Miyasharo, K., Cao, Y., Nair, S., Finnel, R. H., Zettel, M., &
Coleman, P. (1999). Analysis of gene expression in single live neurons. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 89, 3010–3014. 
Florey, E. (1967). Neurotransmitters and modulators in the animal kingdom. Feder-
ation Proceedings, 26, 1164–1178. 
Florey, E. (1972). Comparative physiology: Transmitter substances. Journal of Evolu-
tionary Biochemistry and Physiology, 7, 3–7. 
Gafka, A. C., Vogel, K. S., & Linn, C. L. (1999). Evidence of metabotropic glutamate
receptor subtypes found on catfish horizontal and bipolar retinal neurons. Neu-
roscience, 90(4), 1403–1414.
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
123

Gill, S. S., Pulido, O. M., Mueller, R. W., & McGuire, P. F. (1999). Immunochemical
localization of the metabotropic glutamate receptors in the rat heart. Brain Re-
search, 48(2), 143–146.
Guatteo, E., Mercuri, NB., Bernardi, G., & Knopfel, T. (1999). Group I Metabotropic
glutamate receptors mediate an inward current in rat substantia nigra
dopamine neurons that is independent from calcium mobilization. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 4, 1974–1981. 
Guth, P. S., Aubert, A., Ricci, A. J., & Norris, C. H. (1991). Differential modulation of
spontaneous and evoked neurotransmitter release from hair cells: some novel
hypotheses. Hearing Research, 56, 69–78.
Guth, P. S., Dunn, A., Kronomer, K., & Norris, C. H. (1994). The cholinergic phar-
macology of the frog saccule. Hearing Research, 75, 225–232. 
Guth, P. S., Holt, J. C., Perin, P., Athas, G., Garcia, M., Puri, A., Zucca, G., Botta, L.,
& Valli, P. (1998). The metabotropic glutamate receptors of the vestibular or-
gans. Hearing Research, 125, 154–162. 
Guth, P. S., Norris, C. H., Guth, S. L., Quine, D. B., & Williams, W. H. (1986). Choli-
nomimetics mimic efferent effects on semicircular canal afferent activity in the
frog. Acta Otolaryngology (Stockholm), 102, 194–203.
Guth, P. S. & Norris, C. H. (1996). The hair cell acetylcholine receptors: a synthesis.
Hearing Research, 98(1–2), 1–8.
Guth, P. S., Perin, P., Norris, C. H., & Valli, P. (1998). The vestibular hair cells: post-
transductional signal processing. Progress in Neurobiology, 54, 193–247. 
Herrero, I., Miras-Portugal, M. T., & Sanchez-Prieto, J. (1992). Positive feedback of
glutamate exocytosis by metabotropic presynaptic receptor stimulation. Nature,
360, 163–165.
Hori, T., Takai, Y., & Takahashi, T. (1999). Presynaptic mechanism for horbol ester-
induced synaptic potentiation. Journal of Neuroscience, 19(17), 7262–7267.
Housley, G. D., Norris, C. H., & Guth, P. S. (1989). Electrophysiological properties
and morphology of hair cells isolated from the semicircular canal of the frog.
Hearing Research, 38, 259–276. 
Housley, G. D., Norris, C. H., & Guth, P. S. (1990). Cholinergically-induced changes
in outward currents in hair cells isolated from the semicircular canal of the frog.
Hearing Research, 43, 121–133. 
Hudspeth, A. J., & Lewis, R. S. (1988). Kinetic analysis of voltage- and ion-depen-
dent conductances in saccular hair cells of the bullfrog Rana catesbeiana. Journal
of Physiology (London), 400, 237–274. 
Kleinlogel, S., Oestreicher, E., Arnold, T., Ehrenberger, K., & Felix, D. (1999).
Metabotropic glutamate receptors group I are involved in cochlear neurotrans-
mission. Neuroreport, 10(9), 1879–1882.
Lee, K., & Boden, PR. (1997). Characterization of the inward current induced by
metabotropic glutamate receptor stimulation in rat ventromedial hypothalamic
neurones. Journal of Physiology (London), 504(3), 649–663. 
Lewis, R. S., & Hudspeth, A. J. (1983). Voltage- and ion-dependent conductances in
solitary vertebrate hair cells. Nature, 304, 538–541. 
Linn, C.L. & Gafka, A.C. (1999). Activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors
modulates the voltage-gated sustained calcium current in a teleost horizontal
cell. Journal of Neurophysiology, 81, 425–434. 
Littman, L., Chase, L. A., Renzi, M., Garlin, A. B., Koerner, J. F., Johnson, R. L., &
Robinson, M. B. (1995). Effects of quisqualic acid on metabotropic glutamate re-
124
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

ceptors coupled to phosphoinositide hydrolysis in rat hippocampus. Neurophar-
macology, 34, 829–841.
Lujan, R., Nusser, Z., Roberts, J.D., Shigemoto, R., & Somogyi, P. (1996). Perisynap-
tic location of metabotropic glutamate receptors mGluR1 and mGluR5 on den-
drites and dendritic spines in the rat hippocampus. European Journal of Neuro-
science, 8(7), 1488–1500. 
Lujan, R., Roberts, J.D., Shigemoto, R., Ohishi, H., & Somogyi, P. (1997). Differential
plasma membrane distribution of metabotropic glutamate receptors mGluR1al-
pha, mGluR2 and mGluR5, relative to neurotransmitter release sites. Journal of
Chemical Neuroanatomy, 13(4), 219–241. 
Mackler, S. A., Brooks, B. P., & Eberwine, J. H. (1992). Stimulus-induced changes
coordinate changes in mRNA abundance in single postsynaptic hippocampal
CA1 neurons. Neuron, 9, 539–548.
Mao, L., & Wang, J. Q. (1999). Protection against acute amphetamine-induced be-
havior by microinjection of a group II metabotropic glutamate receptor agonist
into the dorsal striatum of rats. Neuroscience Letters, 270(2), 103–106.
Michelson, M. J. (1974). Some aspects of evolutionary pharmacology. Biochemical
Pharmacology, 23, 2211–2224.
Morris, S. H., Knevett, S., Lerner, E. G., & Bindman, L. J. (1999) Group I mGluR ag-
onist DHPG facilitates induction of LTP in rat prelimbic cortex in vitro. Journal
of Neurophysiology, 82(4), 1927–1933.
Nicolle, M. M., Columbo, P. J., Gallagher, M., & McKinney, M. (1999). Metabotropic
glutamate receptor-mediated hippocampal phosphoinositide turnover is blunt-
ed in spatial learning-impaired aged rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 19(21),
9604–9610.
Norris, C.H., Housley, G.D., Williams, W.H., Guth, S.L., & Guth, P.S. (1988). Drugs
affecting the inner ear. A review of their clinical efficacy, mechanisms of action,
toxicity, and place in therapy. Hearing Research, 32, 197–206.
Peterson, S. A., Fetter, R. D., Noordermeer, J. N., Goodman, C. S., & DiAntonio,
A.(1999). Genetic analysis of glutamate receptors in Drosophila reveals a retro-
grade signal regulating presynaptic transmitter release. Neuron, 19(6), 1237–
1248.
Pin, J. P., DeColle, C., Bessis, A., & Acher, F. (1999). New perspectives for the devel-
opment of selective metabotropic glutamate receptor ligands. European Journal
of Pharmacology, 375, 277–294.
Pizzi, M. (1996). Metabotropic and ionotropic transducers of glutamate signal in-
versely control cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration and excitotoxicity in cultured
cerebellar granule cells: pivotal role of protein kinase C. Molecular Pharmacology,
49(4), 586–594. 
Pizzi, M., Fallacara, C., Arrighi, V., Memo, M., & Spano, PF. (1993). Attenuation of
excitatory amino acid toxicity by metabotropic glutamate receptor agonists and
aniracetam in primary neuronal cultures of cerebellar granule cells. Journal of
Neurochemistry, 61(2), 683–689. 
Prigioni, I., Russo, G., & Masetto, S. (1994). Non-NMDA receptors mediate gluta-
mate induced depolarization in frog crista ampullaris. Neuroreport, 5, 516–518.
Prigioni, I., Russo, G., Valli, P., & Masetto, S. (1990). Pre- and postsynaptic excitato-
ry action of glutamate agonists on frog vestibular receptors. Hearing Research,
46, 253–259. 
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
125

Scanziani, M., Salin, P.A., Vogt, K.E., Malenka, R.C., & Nicoll, R.A. (1997). Use-de-
pendent increases in glutamate concentration activate presynaptic metabotropic
glutamate receptors. Nature, 385(6617), 630–634. 
Schools, G. P., & Kimelber, H. K. (1999). mGluR3 and mGluR5 are the predominant
metabotropic glutamate receptor mRNAs expressed in hippocampal astrocytes
acutely isolated from young rats. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 58(4), 533–543. 
Schoppa, N. E., & Westbrook, G. L. (1999). Modulation of mEPSCs in olfactory bulb
mitral cells by metabotropic glutamate receptors. Journal of Neurophysiology,
78(3), 1468–1475.
Schrader, L. A., & Tasker, J. G. (1997). Presynaptic modulation by metabotropic glu-
tamate receptors of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs to hypothalamic
magnocellular neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 77, 527– 536.
Sharon, D., Vorobiov, D., & Dascal, N. (1997). Positive and negative coupling of the
metabotropic glutamate receptors to a G-protein-activated K+ channel, GIRK, in
Xenopus oocytes. Journal of General Physiology, 109(4), 477–490. 
Sladeczek, F., Pin, J. P., Recasens, M., Bockaert, J., & Weiss, S. (1985). Glutamate
stimulates inositol phosphate formation in striatal neurones. Nature, 317(6039),
717–719. 
Soto, E., Flores, A., Erostegui, C., & Vega, R. (1994). Evidence for NMDA receptor in
the afferent synaptic transmission of the vestibular system. Brain Research, 633,
289–296.
Soto, E., & Vega, R. (1988). Actions of excitatory amino acid acid agonists and an-
tagonists on the primary afferents of the vestibular system of the axolotl Am-
bystoma mexicanum). Brain Research, 462(1), 104–111.
Strasser, U., Lobner, D., Behrens, M. M., Canzoniero, L. M., & Choi, D. W. (1998).
Antagonists for group I mGluRs attenuate excitotoxic neuronal death in cortical
cultures. European Journal of Neuroscience, 10(9), 2848–2855.
Sugiyama, H., Ito, I., & Hirono, C. (1987). A new type of glutamate receptor linked
to inositol phospholipid metabolism. Nature, 325, 531–533.
Tessier-Lavigne, M. (1991). In E.R. Kandel, J.H. Schwarz, and T.M. Jessel (Eds.),
Principles of Neural Science, (p. 401). Norwalk, Conn: Appleton and Lange.
Valli, P., Prigioni, I., Zucca, G., Botta, L., & Guth, P. S. (1985). Pre- and post-synaptic
activity of glutamate on preparations of the frog semicircular canal. Bolletino del-
la Societa Italiana Biologiche Sperimentale, 61, 403–409. 
Valli, P., Zucca, G., Prigioni, I., Botta, L., Casella, C., & Guth, P. S. (1985). The effect
of glutamate on the frog semicircular canal. Brain Research, 330, 1–9. 
Van Gelder, R., von Zastrow, M., Yool, A., Dement, W., Barchas, J., & Eberwine,
J.(1993). Amplified RNA synthesized from limited quantities of heterogenous
cDNA. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 87, 1663–1667.
Vetter, P., Garthwaite, A. M., & Batchelor, A. M. (1998). Regulation of synaptic
transmission in the mossy fibre-granule cell pathway of rat cerebellum by
metabotropic glutamate receptors. Neuropharmacology, 38, 805–815. 
Wada, E., Shigemoto, R., Kinoshita, A., Ohishi, H., & Mizuno, N. (1998).
Metabotropic glutamate receptor subtypes in axon terminals of projection fibers
from the main and accessory olfactory bulbs: a light and electron microscopic
immunohistochemical study in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 393(4),
493–504.
126
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Wilsch, V. W., Pidoplichko, V. I., Opitz, T., Shinozaki, H., & Reyman, K. G. (1994).
Metabotropic glutamate receptor agonist DCG-IV as NMDA receptor agonist in
immature rat hippocampal neurons. European Journal of Pharmacology, 262,
387–391.
Zucca, G., Akoev, G. N., Maracci, A., & Valli, P. (1993). NMDA receptors in frog
semicircular canals. Neuroreport, 4, 403–404.
ENHANCING SIGNAL DISCRIMINATION BY METABOTROPIC GLUTAMATE
127


The function of various chemicals in the cochlea are slowly being defined.
For example, there is no doubt that acetylcholine (ACh) functions as the
major neurotransmitter of the medial olivocochlear neurons at the outer
hair cells (OHCs) and that glutamate functions as the primary neurotrans-
mitter released by the inner hair cells (IHCs) onto the primary auditory
nerve dendrites (Bledsoe, Bobbin, and Puel, 1988; Bobbin, Bledsoe, Win-
bery, and Jenison, 1985; Eybalin, 1993; Puel, 1995). On the other hand, the
neurotransmitter role of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in the cochlea re-
mains to be elucidated. 
Receptors for ATP are present on a large number of cells in the organ
of Corti of the cochlea (Bobbin et al., 2000). This is demonstrated with im-
munohistochemistry in Figure 7–1. An antibody was used that binds to an
intracellular segment of the ATP receptor protein called P2X2 and a chemi-
cal that is converted to a blue precipitate at the binding site. As shown in
Figure 7–1A, the blue precipitate (ATP receptor protein) is present in
OHCs, Hensen’s cells, Deiters’ cells, inner and outer pillar cells, IHCs and
inner sulcus cells. The darkest staining was observed in Hensen’s cells and
in Deiters’ cells. Reisner’s membrane was also stained but it is not shown
in the Figure. Figure 7–1A shows staining on the stereocilia indicating that
receptors may be present on these structures as suggested by Housley,
Greenwood, and Ashmore (1992) and Housley et al. (1999). However,
staining of the stereocilia and the surface of the reticular lamina in the con-
trol (antigen mixed with primary antibody), although lighter than the
staining with primary antibody alone, makes it difficult to definitively
129
7
Additional Studies on the Role
of ATP as a Neuromodulator 
in the Organ of Corti
Richard P. Bobbin, Christopher S. LeBlanc,
Manisha Mandhare, and Margarett S. Parker

Figure 7–1. Results of immunohistochemistry of guinea pig cochlea in toto to detect
P2X2 protein. A: A P2X2 antibody ( Product # 1APR-003; Alomone labs, Jerusalem, Is-
rael) to an intracellular portion of the ATP receptor subunit was used as a primary an-
tibody that was subsequently detected using Vectastain ABC-AP kit that yields a blue
precipitate at the receptor sites (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA). The tissue was then de-
hydrated and imbedded for sectioning. Mid-modiolar sections through turn three of
the cochlea demonstrate that P2X2 protein is present in OHCs, Deiters’ cells,
Hensen’s cells, pillar cells, IHCs and inner sulcus cells. Staining of the stereocilia was
also observed. Cells in Reisner’s membrane were also stained but are not shown. B:
Cells of a control cochlea (P2X2 primary antibody mixed with antigen) from approxi-
mately the same turn as shown in A. Light non-selective staining was observed in the
stereocilia and in some of the fat globules in Hensen’s cells. Non-selective staining
was observed in the tectorial membrane (not shown) and this staining was also ob-
served when the primary antibody was absent. Staining was absent from the IHCs,
OHCs, Deiters’ cells, pillar cells, the cytoplasm of Hensen’s cells, inner sulcus cells
and Reisner’s membrane.
130

state whether or not the receptors are present or absent on the stereocilia.
The tectorial membrane and the lipid globules in Hensen’s cells exhibited
non-specific staining, that is, staining in the absence of primary antibody
(i.e., P2X2 antibody) (Figure 7–1B). Overall, our results confirm and extend
the immunohistochemistry results of Housley et al. (1999) in guinea pig
and Xiang, Bo, and Burnstock (1999) in rat and the in situ hybridization re-
sults of Housley, Luo, and Ryan (1998) in rat and Parker, Larroque, Camp-
bell, Bobbin, and Deininger (1998) in guinea pig. 
The role of ATP at these receptors in the physiological functioning of
the cochlea is currently still very speculative (see reviews: Bobbin, 1996,
1997; Bobbin, Chen, Nenov, and Skellett, 1998; Bobbin et al., 2000; Housley,
1997). There are ATP receptors on cell surfaces exposed to endolymph and
ATP receptors on cell surfaces exposed to perilymph. There is no doubt that
the ATP receptors exposed to endolymph are involved in fluid and ion
transport (Bobbin et al., 2000). Our laboratory has focused on ATP receptors
exposed to perilymph and their possible roles in ion movement and as neu-
romodulators of cochlear mechanics (Bobbin et al., 1998; Chen, Skellett, Fal-
lon, and Bobbin, 1998; Skellett, Chen, Fallon, Nenov, and Bobbin, 1997). This
chapter discusses additional experiments aimed at exploring the roles of ex-
tracellular ATP and its receptors exposed to perilymph in the organ of Corti. 
A WORKING HYPOTHESIS: ATP AND ATP RECEPTORS
LOCATED ON DEITERS’ CELLS MODULATE
COCHLEAR MECHANICS
Research into the mechanics of individual cells in the organ of Corti has fo-
cused on the outer hair cells (OHCs) and their somatic motility in response
to voltage alterations (Brownell, 1996; Bobbin, 1996; Xue, Mountain, and
Hubbard, 1995). Little attention has been given to Deiters’ cells, the only
additional cell type in the organ of Corti that has been reported to move in
response to a stimulus. Dulon, Blanchet, and Laffon (1994) demonstrated
that Deiters’ cells move and alter their tension in response to an increase in
internal calcium levels. Since ATP induced activation of P2X2 ATP recep-
tors results in an inward current of Na+ and Ca2+ in Deiters’ cells (Ash-
more and Ohmori, 1990; Dulon, Moataz, and Mollard, 1993), ATP may also
induce a stiffness change in Deiters’ cells. A model on how a change in the
stiffness of Deiters’ cells may alter cochlear mechanics has been presented
by Kolston and Ashmore (1996). 
By puffing ATP onto the Deiters’ cell and measuring the response,
Dulon (1995) suggested that the P2X2 ionotropic ATP receptors were local-
ized near where the Deiters’ cell “cups” the OHC at the base of the OHC
and so the receptors are exposed to perilymph. Definitive evidence for a
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
131

perilymph exposed location is shown in Figure 7–2. Figure 7–2 shows an
ATP-evoked response in a patch of Deiters’ cell membrane removed from
a location near the nucleus [and so exposed to perilymph]. The ATP in-
duced a large inward current typical of the P2X2 receptors (Chen, Parker,
Barnes, Deininger, and Bobbin, 2000; Chen and Bobbin, 1998; Chen,
LeBlanc, and Bobbin, 1997; and Chen et al., 1998). Thus, there is no doubt
that P2X2 ionotropic ATP receptors are localized on the perilymph surface
of Deiters’ cells.
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR AND
AGAINST THE HYPOTHESIS
Agonists on Distortion Product Otoacoustic Emissions (DPOAEs)
The DPOAEs reflect the mechanical motion of the cochlear partition
(Kemp, 1998; Mills, 1998). When placed in perilymph, agonists that acti-
132
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 7–2. Current trace of an ATP induced response recorded
from an outside-out patch of membrane removed from an area
of Deiters’ cell located near the nucleus at a holding potential
of -70 mV (Bobbin, R. P. and Ricci, A., unpublished data). The
upward deflection at the onset and the downward deflection at
the offset of the delivery of the ATP is an electrical artifact due
to the switching of the ATP delivery system.

vate ATP receptors decrease the magnitude of the cubic DPOAE and in-
crease the magnitude of the quadratic DPOAE (Bobbin et al., 2000; Ku-
jawa, Erostegui, Fallon, Crist, and Bobbin, 1994). In addition, these agents
alter cochlear sensitivity as monitored by changes in the summating po-
tential (SP), the compound action potential of the auditory nerve (CAP),
and N1 latency (Bobbin and Thompson, 1978; Kujawa, Erostegui et al.,
1994). Thus, the tentative conclusion was reached that these drugs when
placed in perilymph acted on P2X2 ATP receptors to alter cochlear me-
chanics. Although an action of these drugs at other cell types in the cochlea
[such as pillar cells or Hensen’s cells which posses ATP receptors] cannot
be excluded (Chen et al., 1998), the data are consistent with the effects be-
ing due, at least in part, to activation of ATP receptors exposed to peri-
lymph and located on Deiters’ cells (Bobbin et al., 1998). Current evidence
suggests that the OHCs and their motility may be the structural and me-
chanical basis for the cochlear amplifier (active process) that provides the
low level sensitivity to the function of the cochlea (Brownell, 1996). Deit-
ers’ cells, through their anatomical support at the base and apex of the
OHCs, provide a direct means for controlling the force against which the
OHCs must move. In this manner, the Deiters’ cells may adjust the set
point and the operating range of the OHCs (Bobbin et al., 2000). 
Antagonists on the Quadratic DPOAE
Both suramin and PPADS, ATP antagonists, reversibly affect the quadratic
DPOAE when placed in the perilymph compartment (Chen et al., 1998;
Kujawa, Fallon, and Bobbin, 1994; Skellett et al., 1997). Frank and Kossl
(1996) suggested that the quadratic DPOAE is a sensitive indicator of the
“set point” of the cochlear amplifier. Thus, the effects of these drugs on the
quadratic DPOAE may be evidence that endogenous ATP alters the set
point of the cochlear amplifier. 
After a period of silence, turning on the primaries results in a slow in-
crease followed by a decrease in the magnitude of the quadratic DPOAE
over time (Figure 7–3; Brown, 1988; Kirk and Johnstone, 1993; Whitehead,
Lonsbury-Martin, and Martin, 1991; Kujawa, Fallon, and Bobbin, 1995;
Kujawa, Fallon, Skellett, and Bobbin, 1996; Lowe and Robertson, 1995). As
shown in Figure 7–3, this change in the magnitude of the quadratic over
time is dramatically affected by PPADS (Chen et al., 1998). In the presence
of PPADS immediately upon turning on the primaries, the magnitude of
the quadratic DPOAE is reduced more than 10 dB. During continuous ex-
posure to the primaries, the quadratic DPOAE remains suppressed (0.3
M PPADS) or it is suppressed and then slowly increases in magnitude re-
turning to near control values over about a 10 min period (1 mM, PPADS;
Chen et al., 1998; Bobbin et al., 2000). 
Our premise is that PPADS is acting by blocking the actions of en-
dogenous extracelluar ATP, although the actions of PPADS may also be in
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
133

part due to its ability to prevent the breakdown of ATP by inhibiting an ec-
toATPase (Bobbin et al., 1998). In any case, the effects of PPADS on the
quadratic DPOAE are supportive of the hypothesis that the magnitude of
the quadratic DPOAE is greatly affected by endogenous extracellular ATP
possibly acting on Deiters’ cells (Bobbin et al., 1998; Chen et al., 1998; Skel-
134
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 7–3. Effect of PPADS on quadratic f2 -f1 DPOAE (f2 - f1 = 1.25 kHz) am-
plitude alterations during continuous primary stimulation (f1 =6.25 kHz, f2 = 7.5
kHz, L1 = L2 = 60 dB SPL). Response amplitude as recorded following the sec-
ond control perfusion (AP2), following increasing concentrations of PPADS (a,
0.033 mM; b, 0.1 mM; c, 0.33 mM; d, 1.0 mM) and a post drug wash (e, W1).
The AP2 trace is repeated in each frame for reference. Pooled errors are shown in
the upper right hand corner of each frame. Each data point represents a 10-spec-
tra average and required 5 sec to complete. The break in response amplitude
trace (C-D) represents 1 min during which the primaries were turned off. Points A
- F (a) were used to calculate magnitudes of component amplitude changes for
statistical analysis. Symbols represent means of n = 6. Noise floor averaged about
-12 dB. (From “Additional pharmacological evidence that endogenous ATP mod-
ulates cochlear mechanics,” by C. Chen, R. A. Skellett, M. Fallon, and R. P. Bob-
bin, 1998. Hearing Research, 118, 47–61. Copyright 1998 by Hearing Research.
Reprinted with permission.)

lett et al., 1997). In addition, the quadratic DPOAE may be affected by ef-
ferent activity. It is a well known fact that the efferent nerve fibers enervat-
ing the organ of Corti affect cochlear mechanics (Mountain, 1980; Siegel
and Kim, 1982; Puel and Rebillard, 1990; Kujawa, Glattke, Fallon, and Bob-
bin, 1993; Kujawa, Glattke, Fallon, and Bobbin, 1994; Lieberman, Puria,
and Guinan, 1996). Kirk and Johnstone (1993) suggested that the activity of
the efferent nerve fibers totally accounts for the change in the magnitude
of the quadratic DPOAE over time that is shown in Figure 7–3. 
Do the Efferent Nerve Fibers Have a Role in the Changes in the
Quadratic DPOAE Magnitude? 
There is no doubt that the efferent nerve fibers entering the cochlea are ac-
tive during sound exposure to the ipsilateral or contralateral ear. Mountain
(1980) and Siegel and Kim, (1982) demonstrated that electrical activation of
the efferent nerve fibers affects the magnitude of both the quadratic and
cubic DPOAE and the effects were blocked by curarae. Puel and Rebillard
(1990) demonstrated the suppression of the cubic DPOAE with noise pre-
sented to the contralateral ear. Kujawa, Glattke et al. (1993 and 1994) con-
firmed these results and showed they were due to acetylcholine acting on
a receptor similar to the nicotinic receptor studied at the single OHC by
Erostegui, Norris, and Bobbin (1994). These effects are blocked by strych-
nine, an antagonist of the acetylcholine receptor on the OHCs (i.e., the al-
pha 9 containing nicotinic receptor; for review see Bobbin, 1996 and 1997;
Bobbin and LeBlanc, 1999). The transmitter of the efferent nerve endings
synapsing on the OHCs is well known to be acetylcholine (Bobbin, 1996
and 1997). Kirk and Johnstone (1993) demonstrated that contralateral
sound suppressed the quadratic DPOAE and the effects were blocked by
strychnine. While monitoring the cubic DPOAE in cat, turning on the pri-
maries activated the ipsilateral efferent nerve fibers within one second pro-
ducing approximately a 3 dB suppression of the cubic DPOAE (Liberman
et al., 1996; Liberman and Kujawa, 1999). Contralateral sound stimulation
activated additional efferent nerve fibers to induce an additional 2 dB of
suppression for a total efferent suppression of the cubic DPOAE of about 5
dB (Liberman et al., 1996; Liberman and Kujawa, 1999). 
Conflicting data have been presented as to whether ipsilateral activa-
tion of efferent nerve fibers can alter the quadratic DPOAE. Kirk and John-
stone (1993) presented compelling evidence that the ipsilateral efferent
nerves acting via the neurotransmitter GABA, and not acetylcholine, play
a large role in the decrease in the magnitude of the quadratic DPOAE that
was illustrated in Figure 7–3. They reported that strychnine had no effect
whereas tetrodotoxin, a neuronal sodium channel blocker, and bicuculline,
a GABA antagonist, abolished the decrease in the quadratic DPOAE. In
contrast, both Lowe and Robertson (1995) and Kujawa et al. (1995) failed
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
135

to detect an effect of sectioning the efferent nerve fibers in the brain stem
on the decrease in the quadratic DPOAE. Kujawa et al. (1995) did report a
significant lessening of the decrease in the quadratic DPOAE over time
with curarae, an acetylcholine antagonist, and a non-significant lessening
with bicuculline. Bicuculline has been shown to block the effects of acetyl-
choline at the alpha 9 containing nicotinic receptor on the OHCs (Kujawa,
Glattke et al., 1993 and 1994; Erostegui et al., 1994). Since sectioning the ef-
ferent nerve fibers in the brain stem had no effect, Kujawa et al. (1995) at-
tributed the lessening of the decrease to nonselective effects of the curarae
and bicuculline and not due to block of the action of the ipsilateral activat-
ed efferent nerve fibers (Kujawa et al., 1995). 
We reasoned that if the lessening of the decrease in the quadratic
DPOAE over time by curarae and bicuculline reported by Kujawa et al.
(1995) was actually due to blockade of the efferent neurotransmitter acetyl-
choline, then strychnine, a more selective blocker of the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine at the OHCs, should act just like curarae and bicuculline.
Figure 7–4 illustrates preliminary results indicating that strychnine (10
M) does act like curarae and bicuculline in that it lessened the decrease
occurring in the magnitude of the quadratic DPOAE over time. This time
course and magnitude of the strychnine effect is very similar to the results
that Kujawa et al. (1995) obtained with curarae and bicuculline. Both in the
Kujawa et al. (1995) and in the Lowe and Robertson (1995) studies large
differences were found between runs within the same animal. Because of
these large variations, the data were normalized by assigning zero to the
initial value for each run. To extract the strychnine sensitive component
from the total quadratic DPOAE change over time, the values obtained af-
ter strychnine perfusion were subtracted from the average values obtained
after artificial perilymph perfusions (before and after strychnine). This
strychnine sensitive component in the magnitude of the quadratic DPOAE
is given in Figure 7–5. The magnitude approaches 3 dB similar to the ipsi-
lateral suppression of the cubic DPOAE magnitude reported by Lieber-
man et al. (1996). The change appears to be composed of two phases, an
early phase and a late phase. Figure 7–5 illustrates that an early strychnine
sensitive enhancement of the quadratic DPOAE (about 0.5 dB) is followed
by a late phase of strychnine sensitive suppression that appears to start at
about 3 min after primary onset and slowly increases in magnitude until it
reaches a maximum at about 9 min. A similar late onset for ipsilateral sup-
pression of the quadratic DPOAE is seen in a few of the figures shown by
Kirk and Johnstone (1993). Whether the early and late phases observed in
Figure 7–5 are related to the slow and fast components of efferent suppres-
sion described by Sridhar, Liberman, Brown, and Sewell (1995) remains to
be determined. Based on the pharmacology with three drugs, curarae,
strychnine and bicuculline, an efferent component in the time varying al-
terations in the magnitude of the quadratic DPOAE has been conclusively
demonstrated.
136
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Given that there is an effect of efferent nerve fiber activity on the mag-
nitude of the quadratic DPOAE in response to ipsilateral sound stimula-
tion, then efferent nerve fiber activation must play a role in the response of
the quadratic over time following administration of PPADS (Chen et al.,
1998; Bobbin et al., 2000). This is certainly possible given that PPADS has
little influence on the afferent portion of the loop, as indicated by the slight
effect on the CAP (Chen et al., 1998). Future experiments such as combining
strychnine with PPADs will be carried out to help in determining this role. 
Antagonists and Agonists Action on Cochlear Microphonics
Cochlear microphonics (CM) reflect the current passing through the trans-
duction channels in the stereocilia of the IHCs and OHCs. If the ATP re-
Figure 7–4. Effect of strychnine (stry) on quadratic f2 -f1 DPOAE (f2 - f1 =
1.25 kHz) amplitude alterations during continuous primary stimulation
(f1 =6.25 kHz, f2 = 7.5 kHz, L1 = L2 = 70 dB SPL). Response amplitude
as recorded following 15 min perfusions of a control (AP), strychnine (10
M free base) and a post drug wash (wash). The primaries were off dur-
ing the perfusions and turned on approximately 2 min following termina-
tion of the perfusions. The break in response amplitude trace (9 – 10.5
min) represents 1.5 min during which the primaries were turned off.
Noise floor averaged about -12 dB. For additional methodology see
Chen, Skellett, et al., (1998).
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
137

ceptors on Deiters’ cells were activated and Deiters’ cell processes moved
then this might be expected to alter the distances between the basilar
membrane, reticular lamina and the tectorial membrane. These changes in
distances should alter the orientation of the stereocilia at rest and possibly
alter the transduction current passing through the stereocilia (i.e., CM). 
Based on this model, blockade of endogenous ATP might be expected
to alter the current passing through the stereocilia or CM magnitude. To
date, studies indicate that the ATP antagonists, PPADs and suramin, when
placed in perilymph have no effect on the CM intensity function recorded
single ended from the scala vestibuli in the basal turn of the cochlea (Ku-
jawa, Fallon, et al., 1994; Skellett et al., 1997; Chen et al., 1998 ; LeBlanc and
Bobbin, 1999). To counter the argument that these single ended recordings
138
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 7–5. Ipsilateral efferent induced change in the quadratic f2 -f1
DPOAE (f2 - f1 = 1.25 kHz) amplitude during continuous primary stimula-
tion (f1 =6.25 kHz, f2 = 7.5 kHz, L1 = L2 = 70 dB SPL) as indicated by the
strychnine sensitive component. Response amplitude was normalized by
assigning zero to the first value recorded in each run. To generate the graph
the strychnine values were subtracted from the average of the AP and wash
values for each set of runs and then these subtracted strychnine values were
averaged (n = 4 strychnine perfusions in 3 animals). The break in response
amplitude trace (9–10.5 min) represents 1.5 min during which the pri-
maries were turned off. Noise floor averaged about -12 dB.

do not reflect near threshold values, the 1 V CM was recorded using an
electrode on the round window or an electrode in scala vestibuli of the
basal turn before and after administration of artificial perilymph and
PPADs to the perilymph compartment. Subtracting the dB values neces-
sary to evoke a 1 V CM after artificial perilymph from those dB values af-
ter PPADS administration demonstrates no effect (± 1 dB) of the drug (da-
ta not shown). Consistent with this lack of effect of antagonists, only high
concentrations of agonists had an effect on CM and the effect was slight
(Kujawa, Erostegui et al., 1994). The failure to detect a change in the CM
induced by ATP antagonists placed in perilymph probably means that en-
dogenous ATP acting on receptors exposed to perilymph has no effect on
the transduction current. On the other hand, the results may be evidence
for the hypothesis that ATP has an action on Deiters’ cells. For any possible
effect of Deiters’ cells on stereocilia position will most likely be negated by
adaptation and result in an unchanged CM.
Antagonists Action on the Tonotopic Distribution Along the
Cochlear Partition
An alteration in tension or length of Deiters’ cells may not affect transduc-
tion current but it may alter the mechanics of the cochlear partition. If this
occurs then the place of maximal stimulation on the basilar membrane or
the tonotopic organization will be shifted. To test this hypothesis, the tech-
nique previously described by Bobbin, Fallon, Li, and Berlin (1991) was
utilized. Briefly, the dB level necessary to record a 1 V CM utilizing a
wire on the round window was compared to the dB necessary to record a
one microvolt CM utilizing a differential recording from wires inserted in-
to holes made in the basal turn in the scala vestibuli and scala tympani in
response to a range of frequencies of sound. The dB difference between the
intracochlear electrodes and the round window electrode isoresponse
functions was calculated and defined as sensitivity. Thus, a negative num-
ber indicates greater sensitivity (lower sound pressure level) at the intra-
cochlear recording site. The high frequency slope of this CM difference
function is used as an indication of the characteristic frequency of that
place (18–20 kHz in Figure 7–6). As shown in Figure 7–6, PPADS 1 mM
perfused through the perilymph compartment had no detectable influence
on this function when compared to that obtained after artificial perilymph
perfusion. Thus, it was concluded that if endogenous ATP affects the tono-
topic distribution of frequency along the partition, the technique used was
not sufficiently sensitive to detect the change. For example, lowering body
temperature 10°C has been reported to induce only a 250 Hz basal shift of
the excitation pattern along the cochlear partition (deBrey and Eggermont,
1978), which is well below our sensitivity. However, the negative results
are consistent with a model suggesting that altering the tension or stiffness
of Deiters’ cells will not alter the position of the tuning along the basilar
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
139

membrane (Kolston and Ashmore, 1996). Likewise, Murugasu, and Rus-
sell (1996) demonstrated that efferent nerve transmitter action at the OHCs
does not alter the stiffness of the cochlear partition or position of the tun-
ing of the basilar membrane. Therefore, the lack of effect of PPADS on the
tonotopic distribution may be consistent with our hypothesis regarding
the role of extracellular ATP.
ATP Antagonists Action on N1 Latency
PPADS applied to the perilymph compartment decreases CAP magnitude
and increases N1 latency (Figure 7–7; Chen et al., 1998; LeBlanc and Bob-
140
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 7–6. Lack of change in the sensitivity of a location in the basal
turn of the guinea pig cochlea (18–20 kHz) after perfusion of artificial per-
ilymph (AP) and PPADS (1 mM) through the perilymph compartment of
the cochlea for 15 min. The dB necessary to evoke a 1 V RMS CM in re-
sponse to various frequencies of sound, isoresponse function, was record-
ed from the round window and an intracochlear set of electrodes (differ-
ential: scala tympani-scala vestibuli) placed about 1 mm from the round
window niche. The dB difference between the intracochlear electrodes
and the round window electrode isoresponse functions was calculated
and defined as sensitivity. A negative number indicates greater sensitivity
(lower sound pressure level at the intracochlear recording site).

bin, 1999). In terms of dB sound pressure equivalents (i.e., the dB change
in the intensity of the sound necessary to achieve the predrug value),
PPADS increases N1 latency about 30 dB (Chen et al., 1998) compared to a
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
141
Figure 7–7. Effect of PPADS on CAP, N1 latency, negative SP and CM
as a function of stimulus intensity. Shown are functions recorded after
pre-drug artificial perilymph perfusion #2 (AP2; 15 min), after perfusion
with increasing concentrations (0.033 - 1.0 mM; 15 min each) of
PPADS, and after a second post-drug wash with artificial perilymph
(W2; 15 min). Functions recorded after 0.033 and 0.1 mM PPADS and
wash 1 are not shown for clarity. Data are represented as means ± S.E.
across 5 animals. (From “Additional pharmacological evidence that en-
dogenous ATP modulates cochlear mechanics,” by C. Chen, R. A. Skel-
lett, M. Fallon, and R. P. Bobbin, 1998. Hearing Research, 118, 47–61.
Copyright 1998 by Hearing Research. Reprinted with permission.)

Figure 7–8. Effects of altering body temperature on cochlear poten-
tials evoked by 10 kHz tone pips. Shown are peak-to-peak values ob-
tained by a single electrode in scala vestibuli of the basal turn. For
methods of recording see Chen et al., 1998.
6 dB change in the peak-to-peak magnitude of the CAP (Chen et al., 1998;
LeBlanc and Bobbin, 1999). This result contrasts with the effects observed
with most drugs. For example, salicylate (Puel, Bledsoe, Bobbin, Ceasar,
and Fallon, 1989; Puel, Bobbin, and Fallon, 1989), glutamate antagonists
(Litmann, Bobbin, Fallon, and Puel, 1989) and nimodipine (Bobbin, Jastre-
boff, Fallon, and Littman, 1990) suppress CAP magnitude to a greater or
equal dB equivalent than they increase N1 latency. 
It is well documented that a change in body or cochlear temperature
(Brown, Ian Smith, and Nuttall, 1983) and occasionally intense sound ex-
posure (Puel, Bobbin and Fallon, 1988a; Puel, Bobbin and Fallon, 1988b)
will alter N1 latency more than CAP magnitude. As shown in Figure 7–8,
lowering the body temperature of a guinea pig to 31°C from the standard
38°C resulted in about a 30 dB equivalent shift in N1 latency compared to
about a 5 dB equivalent shift in CAP magnitude. Similarly after exposure
to a 6 kHz 95 dB intense tone, a 6 kHz evoked CAP was affected less than
N1 latency (Puel et al., 1988a). 
The mechanisms contributing to any change in N1 latency could be
extensive (Brown et al., 1983). In general, the global effect of lowering
body temperature is to slow all biological processes, for example, synaptic
142
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
38°C
31°C

transmission and nerve conduction. Lowering body temperature slows
basilar membrane travel time (deBrey and Eggermont, 1978). In the in-
tense tone study, Puel et al. (1988a) speculated that the 6 kHz traveling
wave evoking the N1 latency was “slowed” as it passed through the dam-
aged area at the 8 kHz place (1⁄2 octave shift of the 6 kHz intense tone) and
once it reached the 6 kHz place it evoked a nearly normal CAP. Therefore,
it is tempting to speculate that PPADS, which also affects N1 latency more
than CAP magnitude, does so by slowing basilar membrane travel time.
ATP Antagonist Interaction with Intense Sound Exposure
To further test the hypothesis that endogenous ATP affects the function of
the cochlea, PPADS was administered to the perilymph compartment dur-
ing an exposure to a moderately intense sound (95 dB SPL; 15 min; 6.7
kHz). This level of intense sound apparently induces only a temporary
loss in cochlear mechanics (Puel et al., 1988a; Puel et al., 1995). Therefore, it
was reasoned that if endogenous ATP has an action on Deiters’ cells to al-
ter their stiffness then PPADS by blocking the action of ATP may alter the
effects of this intense sound on cochlear mechanics.
The methods used were very similar to those used previously (Puel et
al., 1988a and 1988b; Puel et al., 1995). Animals were exposed to a moder-
ately intense sound (95 dB SPL; 15 min; 6.7 kHz) 10 min after the start of a
perfusion with artificial perilymph (intense sound group) or 1 mM PPADS
(intense sound plus PPADS group) and the tone was terminated 10 min
before the end of perfusion. A third group received PPADS alone (PPADS
alone group). Cochlear potentials evoked by 10 kHz tone bursts were
recorded from an electrode in basal turn scala vestibuli. 
As shown in recordings of the cochlear microphonics (Figure 7–9) and
N1 latency (Figure 7–10), the effects of the moderately intense sound com-
bined with PPADS were larger than the effects induced by intense sound-
alone or PPADS alone. This is especially interesting since the intense tone
by itself induced no significant shift in CM or N1 latency. In addition, the
enhancing effect was readily reversed by washing out the drug (Figures 7-
9 and 7-10). 
Why No Effect of the Intense Sound on CM?
The lack of effect of the intense 6.7 kHz tone on CM requires discussion.
There is no doubt that intense sound reduces the magnitude of the CM
(e.g., Nakajima, Hubbard, and Mountain, 2000). The CM in the LeBlanc
and Bobbin (1999) study (Figure 7–9) was recorded with an electrode in
the perilymph scala at the same place as the CM was recorded in Figure
7–6. According to Figure 7–6, the place of maximal stimulation for that
recording site was about 18–20 kHz. Thus, if the 6.7 kHz intense tone dam-
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
143

aged the place one-half octave above the exposure frequency, then the
damage occurred at the 10kHz place (9.4 kHz) or remote (apical ward)
from the electrode position, and so the recording site of 18–20 kHz. An ex-
periment was conducted to emphasize this point. In the experiment, the
CM from the 18–20 kHz place was recorded in a differential manner be-
tween scala vestibuli and scala tympani before and after exposure to the
6.7 kHz, 95 dB, 15 min tone. As shown in Figure 7–11, the exposure had no
detectable effect on either the CM recorded in response to a 10 kHz tone
pip (Figure 7–11A) or a 1 kHz tone pip (Figure 7–11B) recorded differen-
144
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 7–9. Effects of treatment with (a) an intense sound alone (6.7
kHz, 95 dB SPL, 15 min), ( b ) a combination of the intense sound
with 1 mM PPADs, and (c) 1 mM PPADS alone, on 56 dB SPL sound-
evoked CM. Shown are values obtained after pre-treatment artificial
perilymph perfusion (AP), after treatment (treatment) and after washes
with artificial perilymph (wash). Data are displayed as means ± S.E.
across n = 5 animals per treatment. The * indicates a significant (P <
0.05) difference from AP and # indicates a significant (p<0.05) differ-
ence from wash within each treatment group. (From “An interaction
between PPADS, an ATP antagonist, and a moderately intense sound
in the cochlea,” by C. LeBlanc and R. P. Bobbin, 1999. Hearing Re-
search, 138, 192–200. Copyright 1999 by Hearing Research. Reprint-
ed with permission.)

tially across the scala. On the other hand, an exposure to a 12 kHz, 95 dB,
15 min tone did shift the CM at both frequencies (Figure 7–11A and 7-11B).
This latter result is consistent with the one-half of an octave basal ward
shift of the 12 kHz tone exposure, which is approximately 17 kHz (12  1.4
= 16.8) and close enough to the recording site to be detected. Thus, we con-
clude that the reduction in CM evoked by the 6.7 kHz, 95 dB, 15 min tone
in the LeBlanc and Bobbin (1999) study was not recorded because the
recording electrode was too far basal ward of the place of damage (i.e., 1⁄2
octave of 6.7 kHz = 9.4 kHz). In addition, the combination of the 6.7 kHz
tone with PPADS reduced the CM at a place (i.e., 18–20 kHz) basal ward
from the place of maximal damage (i.e., 1⁄2 octave of 6.7 kHz = 9.4 kHz). 
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
145
Figure 7–10. Effects of treatment with (a) an intense sound alone
(6.7 kHz, 95 dB SPL, 15 min), ( b ) a combination of the intense
sound with 1 mM PPADs, and (c) 1 mM PPADS alone, on 56 dB SPL
sound-evoked N1 latency. Shown are values obtained after pre-treat-
ment artificial perilymph perfusion (AP), after treatment (treatment)
and after washes with artificial perilymph (wash). Data are displayed
as means ± S.E. across n = 5 animals per treatment. The * indicates a
significant (P < 0.05) difference from AP and # indicates a significant
(p<0.05) difference from wash within each treatment group. (From
“An interaction between PPADS, an ATP antagonist, and a moderate-
ly intense sound in the cochlea,” by C. LeBlanc and R. P. Bobbin,
1999. Hearing Research, 138, 192–200. Copyright 1999 by Hearing
Research. Reprinted with permission.)

Figure 7–11. Effects of exposure to a 6.7 kHz, 95 dB SPL, 15 min in-
tense tone, followed by a 12 kHz, 95 dB SPL, 15 min intense tone on:
(A) a 10 kHz CM, (B) a 1 kHz CM and (C) a 10 kHz evoked SP.
Shown are peak-to-peak values obtained by a differential recording
using electrodes in scala tympani and scala vestibuli of the basal turn
placed about 1 mm from the round window niche. For methods of
recording see Chen et al., 1998.
In contrast to the CM, the SP evoked by a 10 kHz tone pip and record-
ed with differential electrodes across the scala at the 18–20 kHz place was
reduced by both the 6.7 kHz exposure and the 12 kHz exposure (Figure
7–11C ). This is consistent with the suppression of the SP by the 6.7 kHz in-
tense tone obtained in the LeBlanc and Bobbin (1999) study. This result
with SP probably indicates that a greater area of the cochlear partition is
represented in the SP recording than in the CM recording because of the
larger number of in-phase generators in the SP as compared to the CM
(Dallos, 1973). The area contributing to the SP probably includes hair cells
that were damaged at the 9.4 kHz place by the 6.7 kHz tone. 
What Mechanisms May Account for the Shift in CM (and N1
Latency) by the PPADS/Intense Tone Combination?
Given that the 6.7 kHz intense tone did not result in a detectable change in
CM at the recording place of (18–20 kHz) and the drug PPADS also does
146
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

not result in a change in CM, then the change induced by the drug/intense
sound combination becomes very intriguing. Enhancing this curiosity is
the fact that the effect on the CM was reversible. Because both the reduc-
tion in CM and the enhanced N1 latency were reversible, it is tempting to
speculate that the mechanisms underlying the changes in each are the
same. One working hypothesis is that the intense tone/PPADs combina-
tion results in a reversible change in the cells at 18–20 kHz place that is not
observed by either treatment alone. The change in CM is proof that the
change occurred at the 18–20 kHz place. The change in N1 latency ob-
served in response to the 10 kHz tone pip may then be due to a delay in-
duced in the traveling wave as it passed through this 18–20 kHz place on
the way to the 10 kHz place.
Until additional experiments are conducted, the cellular mechanisms
underlying this putative reversible damage at the 18–20 kHz place will re-
main unexplained. In previous papers, we speculated that this damage
may be due to either mechanical changes brought about by alterations in
calcium levels in Deiters’ cells or due to potassium ion concentrations out-
side the hair cells (LeBlanc and Bobbin, 1999). Whatever the mechanism,
the changes in N1 latency and CM in the presence of both drug and in-
tense tone appear to be evidence for a role of ATP on cochlear mechanics
during the intense tone presentation.
What Is the Effect of PPADS on Intense Sound Induced Reduction
in DPOAE?
Others have demonstrated that moderately intense pure tone exposures
will result in a reversible reduction in the magnitude of the cubic DPOAE
(Puel et al., 1995). Therefore, the effect of PPADS on intense sound induced
changes in cubic DPOAEs was examined to test whether endogenous ATP
has a role in noise induced alterations in cochlear mechanics. 
Preliminary results indicate that PPADS and intense sound interact in
a complex fashion. For example, Figure 7–12 shows the effect of a 6 kHz,
95 dB SPL, 15 min tone on the cubic DPOAE (2f1-f2 = 7.7 kHz) that moni-
tors the function of the cochlear partition at f2 = 10.8 kHz. This is on the
proximal side of the place of maximal damage (8.4 kHz) induced by the 6
kHz tone (Puel et al., 1995). The intense tone significantly reduced the
DPOAE, a result consistent with results of Puel et al. (1995). No significant
reversal occurred after wash period. As reported by us previously, PPADS
(1 mM) had no effect on the cubic DPOAE magnitude, unlike the suppres-
sion it induces in the quadratic DPOAE (Chen et al., 1998; Bobbin et al.
2000). The PPADS/intense tone combination induced a greater suppres-
sion of the cubic DPOAE at 70 dB primaries than observed in the intense
tone treatment alone (p<0.05). After the wash period, the values in the 6
kHz/PPADs group were not significantly different from pretreatment val-
ues (i.e., AP). This indicates that, after the wash period when presumably
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
147

the drug is washed out, cochlear mechanics appear to be “protected” from
the damaging effect of the intense tone, whereas in the presence of the
drug there is a larger effect of the intense tone. 
These effects of intense sound combined with PPADS on cubic
DPOAE are similar to the effects observed in the cochlear potential study
of LeBlanc and Bobbin (1999) and the data shown in Figure 7–9 and 7-10.
In the cochlear potential study, the reversible potentiation of intense sound
by PPADS was observed in the CM and the N1 latency, but the “protec-
148
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING
Figure 7–12. The ATP blocker, PPADS, both enhances and
lessens the effects of intense sound on the cochlea. Shown are
the effects of treatment with (a) intense sound alone (6 kHz, 95
dB SPL, 15 min), (b) a combination of the intense sound with 1
mM PPADs and (c) 1 mM PPADS alone on the magnitude of cu-
bic distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE; 2f1-f2 = 7.7
kHz; f2 = 10.8 kHz; f1 = 9.250 kHz; L1 = L2). In each frame are
shown functions recorded after pre-treatment with artificial peri-
lymph perfusion (AP), after treatment (treatment) and after wash-
es with artificial perilymph (wash). Data are represented as
means across 5 animals per group. * Significant (P<0.05) differ-
ence from AP within each treatment group. # Significant (P<0.05)
difference from the wash values within each group.

tion” after the wash period was not. The absence of the protection in the
N1 latency measure may have been due to the large, non reversible effect
of PPADS on N1 latency that may have prevented the detection of any
protection from the effects of the intense tone. The protection was not ob-
served in the CM probably because the CM was not monitored from the
appropriate place along the cochlear partition. Thus, the results obtained
with the cubic DPOAE measures are probably consistent with the results
obtained with the cochlear potential measures. 
In summary, in the presence of PPADS, an ATP antagonist, the effects
of intense sound on cochlear potentials such as CM and N1 latency and on
the cubic DPOAE basal ward of the area of maximum damage, are in gen-
eral reversibly potentiated. After a wash period, the potentiation is re-
versed and a protection from the intense tone by PPADS is revealed in the
cubic DPOAE. It appears that the actions of PPADS during the exposure to
the intense tone are complex and will require additional research before its
actions can be explained. However, the results do suggest that blocking
the effects of endogenous ATP with a drug like PPADS may provide par-
tial protection from the effects of intense sound on cochlear mechanics.
Do the Efferents Play a Role in the Effect of PPADS on the Effects
of Intense Sound?
As discussed above, there is no doubt that the efferent nerve fibers enter-
ing the cochlea are activated by ipsilateral and contralateral sound expo-
sure. Results from various laboratories indicate that the efferent nerve
fibers do reduce the effects of intense sound on the cochlea (Liberman and
Kujawa, 1999; Puel et al., 1988b). Thus, one must assume that the efferent
nerve fibers are active during sound exposure in the presence of PPADS.
The role of the efferent nerve fibers in the potentiation and protection ob-
served with the PPADS intense sound combination will be explored in the
future.
SUMMARY
It appears that endogenous ATP released from undefined cochlear struc-
tures has affects on cochlear mechanics during many levels of sound expo-
sure. During low and moderate levels of sound it induces a change in
cochlear mechanics that appears to be reflected in traveling wave travel
time and production of the quadratic DPOAE but not in the tonotopic dis-
tribution of sound along the cochlear partition. It also appears to play a
role in the changes in cochlear mechanics induced by a moderately intense
sound exposure. 
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
149

Acknowledgments: Thanks to Julie M. Campbell and Everett Robert for technical
assistance. This work was supported in part by a National Science Foundation
grant IBN-9817165, the American Hearing Research Foundation, Kam’s Fund for
Hearing Research, and the Louisiana Lions Eye Foundation.
REFERENCES
Ashmore, J. F., & Ohmori, H. (1990). Control of intracellular calcium by ATP in iso-
lated outer hair cells of the guinea-pig cochlea. Journal of Physiology (London),
428, 109–131.
Bledsoe, S. C., Jr., Bobbin, R. P., & Puel, J.-L. (1988). Neurotransmission in the inner
ear. In A. F. Jahn, and J. R. Santos-Sacchi (Eds.), Physiology of hearing (pp.
385–406). New York: Raven Press.
Bobbin, R. P. (1996). Chemical receptors on outer hair cells and their molecular
mechanisms. In C. I. Berlin (Ed.), Hair cells and hearing aids. (pp. 29–55). San
Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group.
Bobbin, R. P. (1997). Transmitters in the cochlea: The chemical machinery in the ear.
In C. I. Berlin (Ed.), Neurotransmission and hearing loss: Basic science, diagnosis, and
management (pp. 25–46). San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group.
Bobbin, R. P., Barnes, P. A., Chen, C., Deininger, P., LeBlanc, C. S., & Parker, M. S.
(2000). Transmitters in the cochlea: ATP as a neuromodulator in the organ of
Corti. In C.I. Berlin, C.I. and B. Keats (Eds.), Genetics and hearing loss. (pp.
87–110). San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group.
Bobbin, R. P., Bledsoe, S. C., Jr., Winbery, S. L., & Jenison, G. L. (1985). Actions of
putative neurotransmitters and other relevant compounds on Xenopus laevis lat-
eral line. In D. G. Drescher (Ed.), Auditory biochemistry (pp. 102–122). Spring-
field, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Bobbin, R. P., Chen, C., Nenov, A. P., & Skellett, R. A. (1998). Transmitters in the
cochlea: The quadratic distortion product and its time varying response may re-
flect the function of ATP in the cochlea. In C. I. Berlin (Ed.), Otoacoustic emissions
(pp. 61–83). San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group.
Bobbin, R. P., Fallon, M., Li, L., & Berlin, C. I (1991). Guinea pigs show post-natal
stability in frequency mapping at the basal turn. Hearing Research 51, 231–234.
Bobbin, R. P., Jastreboff, P. J., Fallon, M., & Littman, T. (1990). Nimodipine, an L-
channel Ca+2 antagonist, reverses the negative summating potential recorded
from the guinea pig cochlea. Hearing Research, 46, 277–288.
Bobbin, R. P., & LeBlanc, C. S. (1999). Apamin reduces but does not abolish the ef-
fects of contralateral suppression of cubic DPOAEs. In C. I. Berlin (Ed.), The ef-
ferent auditory system (pp. 61–71). San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group.
Bobbin, R. P., and Thompson, M. H. (1978). Effects of putative transmitters on affer-
ent cochlear transmission. Annals of Otology, Rhinology, and Laryngology, 87,
185–190.
Brown, A. M. (1988) Continuous low level sound alters cochlear mechanics: An ef-
ferent effect? Hearing Research, 34, 27–38.
Brown, M. C., Ian Smith, D., & Nuttall, A. L. (1983). The temperature dependency
of neural and hair cell responses evoked by high frequencies. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 73, 1662–1670.
150
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Brownell, W. E. (1996). Outer hair cell electromotility and otoacoustic emissions. In
C. I. Berlin (Ed.), Hair cells and hearing aids (pp. 3–27). San Diego, CA: Singular
Publishing Group.
Chen, C., & Bobbin, R. P. (1998). P2X receptors in cochlear Deiters’ cells. British
Journal of Pharmacology, 124, 337–344.
Chen, C., LeBlanc, C., & Bobbin, R. P. (1997). Differences in the distribution of re-
sponses to ATP and acetylcholine between outer hair cells of rat and guinea pig.
Hearing Research, 110, 87–94.
Chen, C., Parker, M. S., Barnes, P. A., Deininger, P., & Bobbin, R. P. (2000). Function-
al expression of three P2X2 receptor splice variants from guinea pig cochlea.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 83, 1502–1509.
Chen, C., Skellett, R. A., Fallon, M., & Bobbin, R. P. (1998). Additional pharmaco-
logical evidence that endogenous ATP modulates cochlear mechanics. Hearing
Research, 118, 47–61.
Dallos, P. (1973). The Auditory periphery, Biophysics and physiology (p. 548) New York:
Academic Press. 
deBrey, H. B., & Eggermont, J. J (1978). The influence of cochlear temperature on
the electrical traveling wave pattern in the guinea pig cochlea. Acta Otolaryngol-
ogy, 85, 363–371.
Dulon, D. (1995). Ca2+ signaling in Deiters cells of the guinea-pig cochlea active
process in supporting cells? In A. Flock, D. Ottoson, and M. Ulfendahl (Eds.),
Active hearing (pp. 195–207). London: Elsevier Science Ltd.
Dulon, D., Blanchet, C., & Laffon, E. (1994). Photo-released intracellular Ca2+
evokes reversible mechanical responses in supporting cells of the guinea-pig or-
gan of Corti. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 201,
1263–1269.
Dulon, D. Moataz, R., & Mollard, P. (1993). Characterization of Ca2+ signals gener-
ated by extracellular nucleotides in supporting cells of the organ of Corti. Cell
Calcium 14, 245–254.
Erostegui, C., Norris, C. H., & Bobbin, R. P. (1994). In vitro pharmacologic charac-
terization of a cholinergic receptor on outer hair cells. Hearing Research, 74,
135–147.
Eybalin, M. (1993). Neurotransmitters and neuromodulators of the mammalian
cochlea. Physiological Reviews, 73, 309–373.
Frank, G., & Kossl, M. (1996). The acoustic two-tone distortions 2f1-f2 and f2-f1 and
their possible relation to changes in the operating point of the cochlear amplifi-
er. Hearing Research, 98, 104–115.
Housley, G. D. (1997). Extracellular nucleotide signaling in the inner ear. Molecular
Neurobiology, 16, 21–48.
Housley, G. D., Greenwood, D., & Ashmore, J. F. (1992). Localization of cholinergic
and purinergic receptors on outer hair cells isolated from the guinea-pig
cochlea. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B: Biological Sciences (Lon-
don), 249, 265–273.
Housley, G. D., Luo, L., & Ryan, A. F. (1998). Localization of mRNA encoding the
P2X2 receptor subunit of the adenosine 5'-triphosphate-gated ion channel in the
adult and developing rat inner ear by in situ hybridization. Journal of Compara-
tive Neurology, 393, 403–414.
Housley, G. D., Kanjhan, R., Raybould, N. P., Greenwood, D., Salih, S. G., Jarlebark,
L., Burton, L. D., Setz, V. C. M., Cannell, M. B., Soeller, C., Christie, D. L., Usami,
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
151

S., Matsubara, A., Yoshie, H., Ryan, A. F., & Thorne, P. R. (1999). Expression of
the P2X2 receptor subunit of the ATP-gated ion channel in the cochlea: Implica-
tions for sound transduction and auditory neurotransmission. Journal of Neuro-
science, 19, 8377–8388.
Kemp, D. T. (1998). Otoacoustic emissions: distorted echos of the cochlea’s travel-
ing wave . In C. I. Berlin (Ed.), Otoacoustic emissions: Basic science and clinical ap-
plications (pp. 1–60). San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group.
Kirk, D. L., & Johnstone, B. M. (1993). Modulation of f2-f1: Evidence for a GABA-
ergic efferent system in apical cochlea of the guinea pig. Hearing Research, 67,
20–34.
Kolston, P. J., & Ashmore, J. F. (1996). Finite element micromechanical modeling of
the cochlea in three dimensions. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 99,
455–467.
Kujawa, S. G., Erostegui, C., Fallon, M., Crist, J., & Bobbin, R. P. (1994). Effects of
Adenosine 5'-triphosphate and related agonists on cochlear function. Hearing
Research, 76, 87–100.
Kujawa, S. G., Fallon, M., & Bobbin, R. P. (1994). ATP antagonists cibacron blue,
basilen blue and suramin alter sound-evoked responses of the cochlea and au-
ditory nerve. Hearing Research, 78, 181–188.
Kujawa, S. G., Fallon, M., & Bobbin, R. P. (1995). Time-varying alterations in the f2-
f1 DPOAE response to continuous primary stimulation. I. Response characteri-
zation and contribution of the olivocochlear efferents. Hearing Research, 85,
142–154.
Kujawa, S. G., Fallon, M., Skellett, R. A., & Bobbin, R. P. (1996). Time-varying alter-
ations in the f2-f1 DPOAE response to continuous primary stimulation. II. Influ-
ence of local calcium-dependent mechanisms. Hearing Research, 97, 153–164.
Kujawa, S. G., Glattke, T. J., Fallon, M., & Bobbin, R. P. (1993). Contralateral sound
suppresses distortion product otoacoustic emissions through cholinergic mech-
anisms. Hearing Research, 68, 97–106.
Kujawa, S. G., Glattke, T. J., Fallon, M., & Bobbin, R. P. (1994). A nicotinic-like re-
ceptor mediates suppression of distortion product otoacoustic emissions by
contralateral sound. Hearing Research, 74, 122–134.
LeBlanc, C., & Bobbin, R. P. (1999). An interaction between PPADS, an ATP antago-
nist, and a moderately intense sound on the cochlea. Hearing Research, 138,
192–200.
Lieberman, M.C., & Kujawa, S. G. (1999). The olivocochlear system and protection
from acoustic injury: acute and chronic effects. In C. I Berlin (Ed.), Efferent audi-
tory system. (pp. 1–30). San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group.
Lieberman, M. C., Puria, S., & Guinan, Jr., J. J (1996). The ipsilateral evoked olivo-
cochlear reflex causes rapid adaptation of the 2f1-f2 distortion product otoa-
coustic emission. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 99, 3572–3584. 
Littman, T., Bobbin, R. P., Fallon, M., & Puel, J.-L.(1989). The quinoxalinediones
DNQX, CNQX and two related congeners suppress hair cell-to-auditory nerve
transmission. Hearing Research, 40, 45–54.
Lowe, M., & Roberston, D. (1995). The behaviour of the f2-f1 acoustic distortion
product: Lack of effect of brainstem lesions in anaesthetized guinea pigs. Hear-
ing Research, 83, 133–141.
Mills, D. M. (1998). Origin and implications of two “components” in distortion
product otoacoustic emissions. In C. I. Berlin (Ed.), Otoacoustic emissions: Basic
152
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

science and clinical applications (pp. 85–104). San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing
Group.
Mountain, D. C. (1980). Changes in endolymphatic potential and crossed olivo-
cochlear bundle stimulation alter cochlear mechanics. Science, 210, 71–72. 
Murugasu, E., & Russell, I. J. (1996). The effect of efferent stimulation on basilar
membrane displacement in the basal turn of the guinea pig. Journal of Neuro-
science, 16, 325–332.
Nakajima, H. H., Hubbard, A. E., & Mountain, D. C. (2000). Effects of acoustic trau-
ma on acoustic enhancement of electrically evoked otoacoustic emissions. Jour-
nal of the Acoustical Society of America, 107, 2603–2614.
Parker, M. S., Larroque, M. L., Campbell, J. M., Bobbin, R. P., & Deininger, P. L.
(1998). Novel variant of the P2X2 ATP receptor from the guinea pig organ of
Corti. Hearing Research, 121, 62–70.
Puel, J. L. (1995). Chemical synaptic transmission in the cochlea. Progress in Neuro-
biology, 47, 449–476.
Puel, J. L., Bledsoe, S. C., Jr., Bobbin, R. P., Ceasar, G., & Fallon, M. (1989). Compara-
tive actions of salicylate on the amphibian lateral line and the guinea pig
cochlea. Journal of Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology, 93C, 73–80.
Puel, J. L., Bobbin, R. P., & Fallon, M. (1988a). The active process is affected first by
intense sound exposure. Hearing Research, 37, 53–64.
Puel, J. L., Bobbin, R. P., & Fallon, M. (1988b). An ipsilateral cochlear efferent loop
protects the cochlea during intense sound exposure. Hearing Research, 37, 65–70.
Puel, J. L., Bobbin, R. P., & Fallon, M. (1989). Salicylate, mefenamate, meclofena-
mate, and quinine on cochlear potentials. Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery,
102, 66–73.
Puel, J. L., Durrieu, J., Rebillard, G., Vidal, D., Assie, R., & Uziel, A. (1995) Compari-
son between auditory brainstem responses and distortion products otoacoustic
emissions after temporary threshold shift in guinea pig. Acta Acustica, 3, 75–82.
Puel, J. L., & Rebillard, G. (1990). Effect of contralateral sound stimulation on the
distortion product 2f1-f2: Evidence that the medial efferent system is involved.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 87, 1630–1635.
Siegel, J. H., & Kim, D. O. (1982). Efferent neural control of cochlear mechanics?
Olivocochlear bundle stimulation affects cochlear biomechanical nonlinearity.
Hearing Research, 6, 171–182.
Skellett, R. A., Chen, C., Fallon, M., Nenov, A. P., & Bobbin, R. P. (1997). Pharmaco-
logical evidence that endogenous ATP modulates cochlear mechanics. Hearing
Research, 111, 42–54.
Sridhar, T. S., Liberman, M. C., Brown, M. C., & Sewell, W. F. (1995). A novel cholin-
ergic “slow effect” of efferent stimulation on cochlear potentials in the guinea
pig. Journal of Neuroscience, 15, 3667–3678.
Whitehead, M.L., Lonsbury-Martin, B. L., & Martin, G. K. (1991). Slow variation of
the amplitude of acoustic distortion at f2-f1 in awake rabbits. Hearing Research,
51, 293–300.
Xue, S., Mountain, D. C., & Hubbard, A. E. (1995). Electrically evoked basilar mem-
brane motion. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 97, 3030–3041.
Xiang, Z., Bo, X., & Burnstock, G. (1999). P2X receptor immunoreactivity in the rat
cochlea, vestibular ganglion and cochlear nucleus. Hearing Research, 128,
190–196.
HEARING IN A PRIMITIVE ANIMAL
153


A
ACPD
antagonism of by mGluR
antagonists, 115–116
site of action of, 113
testing possibility that ACPD could
be acting at non-mGluR sites,
114–115
Actin-based stereocilia, 68–71
Active motor model, 12–14
Adaptation of vertebrate hair cells,
9–20
active motor model, 12–14
Ca2+-dependent closure model, 14–17
fast transducer, see Fast transducer
adaptation
frequency tuning, 18–20
multiple mechanisms of, 54–57
Adjacent stereocilia, 3
Agonists 
action on N1 latency, 140–143
and antagonists action on cochlear
microphonics, 137–138
on distortion product otoacoustic
emissions (DPOAEs), 132–133
Amino acid glutamate, 104–105
Amplification of mRNA, 108–109, 110
Anemone, FESEM micrograph of, 69
Anemone hair bundles, modification
of tip link model to, 84–87
Antagonism 
of ACPD by mGluR antagonists,
115–116
of mechanically evoked activity by
4CPG, 116–117
Antagonist interaction with intense
sound exposure, 143
Antagonists action on tonotopic
distribution along cochlear
partition, 139–140
Antagonists and agonists action on
cochlear microphonics, 137–139
Antagonists on quadratic DPOAE,
133–135
Anti-P2X antibodies, 33
ATP, effect of on vibration dependent
discharge of nematocysts, 
37, 38, 40, 41, 42
ATP, role of as neuromodulator in
organ of Corti
experimental evidence for and
against hypothesis
agonists action on N1 latency,
140–143
agonists on distortion product
otoacoustic emissions
(DPOAEs), 132–133
antagonist interaction with
intense sound exposure, 143
antagonists action on tonotopic
distribution along cochlear
partition, 139–140
antagonists and agonists action
on cochlear microphonics,
137–139
antagonists on quadratic
DPOAE, 133–135
effect of intense sound on CM,
143–146
155
I
Index

effect of PPADS on intense sound
induced reduction in DPOAE,
147–149
efferent nerve fibers, role in
changes in quadratic DPOAE
magnitude, 135–137
efferents, role of in effect of
PPADS on effects of intense
sound, 149
mechanisms that may account
for shift in CM and N1 latency
by PPADS/intense tone
combination, 146–147
receptors for, 129–131
receptors located on Deiter’s cells
that modulate cochlear
mechanics, 131–132
summary, 149
B
BAPTA, 55-56
Brn-3.1, required for development
and survival of hair cell
conclusions, 98–99
deletion of Brn-3.1 to prevent hair
cell development, 95–97
expression in hair cells, birth to
death, 94–95
human homologue of Brn-3.1 as
deafness gene, 97–98
transcription factors and
developmental control, 93
Unc-86 as possible ancestor of hair
cell regulatory factor, 94
Bullfrog hair cells
immunoreactivity in, 15
transduction currents in, 7
Bundle structure, 2–3
C
C. elegans, Unc-86 expressed in, 98
Ca2+
affect of, 11
feedback by Ca2+ gradients, 51–52
metabolism in stereocilia, 8–9
Ca2+ buffers, 55–57
sensitivity to external Ca2+, 49
Ca2+ feedback model, two-site, 58
Ca2+ gradient, 53
Ca2+-dependent closure model, 14–17
Calcium buffering, 49–51
Calcium buffers in hair cell body, 8
Calcium calmodulin (CAM), 37, 42
Calcium concentration within
stereocilia, 8
Calcium imaging of excised tentacles,
31–36
Calcium permeability of transducer
channel, 51
Calcium sensitivity of adaptation
Ca2+ feedback by Ca2+ gradients,
51–52
calcium buffering, 49–51
calcium permeability of transducer
cell, 51
Calmodulin, 57
Cell-cell communication within the
complex, 77–80
Chemoreceptor-induced
morphodynamics, 80–84
CM, see Cochlear microphonics
Cochlear mechanics, receptors located
on Deiter’s cells that modulate
cochlear mechanics, 131–132
Cochlear microphonics (CM)
agonists and antagonists action on,
137–138
and N1 latency, shift in by
PPADS/intense tone
combination, 146–147
effect of intense sound on, 143–146
Cochlear partition, tonotopic
distribution along, antagonists
action on, 139–140
4CPG, antagonism of mechanically
evoked activity by, 116–117,
121–122
Cyclic nucleotides, 57
Cytoplasm, calcium extruded from, 9
D
Deafness gene, human homologue of
Brn-3.1 as, 97–98
Deiter’s cells, receptors located on
that modulate cochlear
mechanics, 131–132
156
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Diaphanous gene, 97
Distortion product otoacoustic
emissions (DPOAEs)
agonists on, 132–133
effect of PPADS on intense sound
induced reduction in, 147–149
magnitude, quadratic, role of
efferent nerve fibers in changes
in, 135–137
Dynamic nature, special mechanisms
for dealing with, 87–89
E
Efferent nerve fibers, role in changes
in quadratic DPOAE
magnitude, 135–137
Efferents, role of in effect of PPADS on
effects of intense sound, 149
EGTA, comparison with BAPTA, 56
Endogenous ATP, blockade of, 138–139
Enhancing signal discrimination, see
Signal discrimination,
enhancing
Excised tentacles, calcium imaging of,
31–36
Experimental evidence for and against
hypothesis on ATP and ATP
receptors
agonists action on N1 latency,
140–143
agonists on distortion product
otoacoustic emissions
(DPOAEs), 132–133
antagonist interaction with intense
sound exposure, 143
antagonists action on tonotopic
distribution along cochlear
partition, 139–140
antagonists and agonists action on
cochlear microphonics,
137–139
antagonists on quadratic DPOAE,
133–135
effect of intense sound on CM,
143–146
effect of PPADS on intense sound
induced reduction in DPOAE,
147–149
efferent nerve fibers, role in changes
in quadratic DPOAE
magnitude, 135–137
efferents, role of in effect of PPADS
on effects of intense sound, 149
mechanisms that may account for
shift in CM and N1 latency 
by PPADS/intense tone
combination, 146–147
Expression in hair cells, birth to death,
94–95
Expression profiling, 109
of individual vestibular hair cells,
117–122
Extracellular linkages, 71–72
F
Fast transducer adaptation
adaptation, fast, 46–48
adaptation as mechanical tuning
mechanism, 52–54
calcium sensitivity of adaptation,
49–52
Ca2+ feedback by Ca2+ gradients,
51–52
calcium buffering, 49–51
calcium permeability of
transducer cell, 51
future directions, 60–61
mechano-electric transduction, 45–46
methods, 46
multiple mechanisms of
adaptation, 54–57
Ca2+ buffers, 55–57
kinetics, 55
pharmacological evidence, 57
calmodulin, 57
cyclic nucleotides, 57
phosphate analogs after slow but
not fast adaptation, 57
tonotopic variations in
transduction, 48–49
two-site feedback model of
adaptation, 58–60
implications regarding
mammilian cochlea, 60
INDEX
157

FESEM, use of to look at morphological
changes to hair bundles
associated with activation of
NANA receptor, 83–84
FRAP approach, 78
Frequency tuning, 18–20
G
Glutamate, see mGluR
Guinea pig cohclea, detection of P2X2
protein in, 129,130
H
Hair bundle of sea anemone, FESEM
micrograph of, 71, 77
Hair cell, living, repair of
discussion, 37–42
materials and methods, 30
repair proteins, 27–28
results, 30–37
calcium imaging of excised
tentatcles, 31–36
effects of ATP on vibration
dependent discharge of
nematocysts, 37
evidence that purinoceptors are
involved in repair, 30–31
sea anemones, hair bundles of, 27, 28
Hair cell, vestibular, isolation of,
107–108
Hair cells
expression in birth to death, 94–95
and hearing, 1–2
vestibular, expression profiling of,
117–122
Hearing and hair cells, 1–2
Hearing in primitive animal, see Sea
anemones
Hereditary deafness DFNA 1, 97–98 
Human homologue of Brn-3.1 as
deafness gene, 97–98
I
Immunocytochemistry, performed on
SCC hair cells, 111
Intense sound 
on CM, effect of, 143–146
induced reduction in DPOAE,
effect of PPADS on, 147–149
role of efferents in effect of PPADS
on effects of, 149
Intense sound exposure, antagonist
interaction with, 143
Intense tone/PPADS combination,
shift in by, 146–147
Isolated vestibular organ preparation,
107
Isolation of vestibular hair cells,
107–108
K
Kinetics of transducer adaptation, 55
Kinocilium 2
L
Leopard frogs, use of in whole
labyrinth preparation, 106
Live hair bundle, line profiles of
morphological changes in, with
chemoreceptor activation, 83
Loose-patch in situ recordings of
membrane currents from hair
cells, 74, 78, 82
M
Mammilian cochlea, implications
regarding, 60
Mechanical oscillations of tranducer
current, 54
Mechanical tuning mechanism,
adaptation as, 52–54
Mechanical basis of adaptation, 12–13
Mechanically evoked activity by
4CPG, antagonism of, 116–118
Mechanisms that may account for
shift in CM and N1 latency 
by PPADS/intense tone
combination, 146–147
Mechano transduction, 72, 73
Mechano-electric transduction, 45–46
transducer, 47
Mechanoelectrical response of hair
cells to stimuli, 73
158
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

Metabotropic glutamate receptor,
enhancing signal discrimination
by means of, 103–122
mGluR agonists in SCC, effect of,
111–113
mGluR antagonists, ACPD
antagonims by, 115–116
mGluRs
group I, 119–120
role of in vestibular system, 105
Model of transducer adaptation, 58
Model of transduction of vertebrate
hair cells, 6–7
extensions of, 7–8
Models for adaptation of transduction
apparatus in hair cells, 10
Morphodynamics, chemoreceptor-
induced, 80–84
Morphological correlates of
adaptation, 13
mRNA, amplification of, 108–109, 110
Multicellular complex, sea anemone,
75, 76
Multiple mechanisms of adaptation,
54–57
Ca2+ buffers, 55–57
kinetics, 55
Myosin, involvement of in
adaptation, 13
Myosin gene superfamily, 13–14
Myosin IBeta, 14
immunoreactivity in bullfrog hair
cells, 15
N
N-acetylneuraminic acid (NANA), 80
NANA-induced reorientation, 83
N1 latency
agonists action on, 140–143
and CM latency, shift in by
PPADS/intense tone
combination, 146–147 
Nematocysts, effects of ATP of on
vibration dependent discharge
of, 37
Neuromodulator, role of ATP as in
organ of Corti, 129–149
NitroBAPTA, 55
Noisy environment, special
mechanisms for dealing with,
87–89
Non-mGluR sites, testing possibility
that ACPD could be acting at,
114–115
acetylcholine receptors, 114
antagoism of CPD by mGluR
antagonists, 115–116
non-GluR glutamate receptors,
114–115
Nonsyndromic deafness (DFNA15), 97
Nucleotides, cyclic, 57
O
Olivocochlear neurons at outer hair
cells (OHCs), 129
Organ of Corti, 1
role of ATP as neuromodulator in,
129–149
upper, 94–95, 96
Outer hair cells (OHCs), olivocochlear
neurons at, 129
P
P2X2 ionotropic ATP receptors,
131–132, 133
Phalloidin, confocal image of, 70
Pharmacological evidence, 57
calmodulin, 57
cyclic nucleotides, 57
phosphate analogs after slow but
not fast adaptation, 57
Pharmacology of sea anemone and
vertebrates, 72, 74
Phosphate analogs after slow but not
fast adaptation, 57
Physiology of hair bundle, 3–6
PMCA, isoforms of, 9
POU domain factor Unc-86, 94
POU-domain TFs, 93
POU-HD, 93
required for high affinity DNA
binding, 97–98
PPADS
action of, 133–134
effect of on intense sound induced
reduction in DPOAE, 147–149
INDEX
159

as inhibitor of purinoceptors, 30–31,
33, 36, 37, 39
role of efferents in effect of, 149
PPADS/intense tone combination,
shift in CM and N1 latency by,
146–147
Primitive animals, sea anemones as,
67–68
Protein-mediated repair following
trauma, 84
Proteins, repair, 27–28
Purinoceptors involvement of in
repair of hair bundle
mechanoreceptors of sea
anemones, 30–31
Q
Quadratic DPOAE
antagonists on, 133–135
decrease in over time, 136
role of efferent nerve fibers in
changes in, 135–137
R
Radial symmetry of sea anemone hair
bundles, 75
Receptor current evoked by
movement of hair bundle, 4
Receptors 
for ATP, 129–131
located on Deiter’s cells that
modulate cochlear mechanics,
131–132
Repair, purinoceptors involved in,
30–31
Repair proteins (RP), 27, 28
exogenously supplied, 29
Ringing in bundle position in turtle
hair cells, 18
S
SCC, effect of mGluR agonists in,
111–113
Sea anemones
hair bundles of, 27, 28
purinoceptors involved in repair of
hair bundle mechnoreceptors
of, 30–31
Sea anemones, hair bundles on
tentacles of
differences between anemone and
vertebrate hair bundles, 75–84
cell-cell communication within
the complex, 77–80
chemoreceptor-induced
morphodynamics, 80–84
multicellular complex, 75
protein-mediated repair
following trauma, 84
radial symmetry, 75
sensitivity and adaptation, 76–77
sea anemones as primitive animals,
67–68
similarities between anemone and
vertebrate hair bundles
actin-based stereocilia, 68–71
extracellular linkages, 71–72
mechano transduction, 72, 73
pharmacology, 72, 74
working model
modification of tip link model to
anemone hair
bundles, 84–87
special mechanisms for dealing
with noisy environment 
and dynamic nature, 87–89
Seawater, calcium-free, exposure to,
32–33
Sensitivity and adaptation, 76–77
Signal discrimination, enhancing by
means of metabotropic
glutamate receptor
background, 104–106
immunocytochemistry, 111
methods, 106–110
amplification of mRNA, 108–109,
110
expression profiling, 109
isolation of vestibular hair cells,
107–108
whole labyrinth preparation,
106–107
results, 111–122
antagonism of ACPD by mGluR
antagonists, 115–116

antagonism of mechanically
evoked activity by 4CPG,
116–117
effects of mGluR agonists in SCC,
111–113
expression profiling of individual
vestibular hair cells, 117–122
site of action of ACPD, 113
testing possibility that ACPD
could be acting at non-mGluR
sites, 114–115
vestibular afferent fibers, 103–104
Simple feedback model, 59
Single-cell mRNA amplification, flow
diagram for, 110
Single-channel conductance of
transduction channels, 4–5
Sound exposure, intense, antagonist
interaction with, 143
Special mechanisms for dealing with
noisy environment and
dynamic nature, 87–89
Spiral ganglion neurons, 97
Stereocilia, 2, 3
actin-based, 68
calcium concentration within, 8
Stimuli, hair cells adapt to
maintained, 1
T
Tentacle epidermis,
photomicrographs of, 79
Tentacles, calcium imaging of excised,
31–36
Three dimensional model of Ca2+
diffusion with stereocilia, 52
Tip link model, modification of to
anemone hair bundles, 84–87
Tip links model for transduction, 6
discovery of, 6
Tone, intense, 146–147
Tonotopic distribution along cochlear
partition, antagonists\action
on, 139–140
Tonotopic variations in transduction,
48–49
Transcription factors (TF) and
developmental control, 93
Transducer channel, calcium
permeability of, 51
Transduction and adaptation by
vertebrate hair cells
adaptation, 9–20
hair cells and hearing, 1–2
transduction, 2–9
Transduction of vertebrate hair cells
bundle structure, 2–3
Ca2+ metabolism in stereocilia, 8–9
extensions of model, 7–8
model, 6–7
physiology, 3–6
Trauma, protein-medaited repair
following, 84
Turtle hair cells, ringing in bundle
positions in, 18
Turtle auditory papilla, 46
Two-site feedback model of
adaptation, 58–60
current responses, 59
U
UNC-86 as possible ancestor of hair
cell regulatory factor, 94
Upper organ of Corti, 94–95, 96
V
Vertebrate and anemone hair bundles,
differences between, 75–84
cell-cell communication within the
complex, 77–80
chemoreceptor-induced
morphodynamics, 80–84
multicellular complex, 75
protein-mediated repair following
trauma, 84
radial symmetry, 75
sensitivity and adaptation, 76–77
Vertebrate and anemone hair bundles,
similarities between
actin-based stereocilia, 68–71
extracellular linkages, 71–72
mechano transduction, 72, 73
pharmacology, 72, 74
Vertebrate hair cells, transduction and
adaptation by
INDEX
161

adaptation, 9–20
active motor model, 12–14
Ca2+-dependent closure model,
14–17
frequency tuning, 18–20
hair cells and hearing, 1–2
transduction, 2–9
bundle structure, 2–3
Ca2+ metabolism in stereocilia,
8–9
extensions of model, 7–8
model, 6–7
physiology, 3–6
Vestibular afferent fibers, 103–104
Vestibular hair cells (VHC)
expression profiling of, 117–122
isolation of, 107–108
Vibration, effects of ATP on, 37
W
Whole labyrinth preparation, 106–107
Working model for tip link model
modification of tip link model to
anemone hair bundles, 84–87
special mechanisms for dealing
with noisy environment and
dynamic nature, 87–89
162
HAIR CELLS MICROMECHANICS AND HEARING

