
Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 4 
British Logic 
in the Nineteenth Century

Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 4 
British Logic 
in the Nineteenth Century 
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier

Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 4 
British Logic 
in the Nineteenth Century
Edited by 
Dov M. Gabbay 
Department of Computer Science 
King’s College London 
Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK 
and 
John Woods 
Philosophy Department 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, BC Canada, V6T 1Z1
and 
Department of Computer Science 
King’s College London 
Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK 
and 
Department of Philosophy
University of Lethbridge
Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada, T1K 3M4
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier

North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier
Radarweg 29, PO Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK 
First edition 2008 
Copyright © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher 
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights 
Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333; 
email: permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively you can submit your request online by 
visiting the Elsevier web site at http://elsevier.com/locate/permissions, and selecting 
Obtaining permission to use Elsevier material 
Notice 
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons 
or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use 
or operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas contained in the material 
herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent 
verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN:
978-0-444-51610-7 
For information on all North-Holland publications
visit our website at books.elsevier.com 
Printed in Hungary 
08 09 10 11  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

CONTENTS
vii
Preface
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods
xiii
List of Contributors
1
Bentham’s Logic
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
33
Coleridge’s Logic
Tim Milnes
75
Richard Whately and Logical Theory
James Van Evra
93
The Logic of Sir William Hamilton: Tunnelling through Sand to
Place the Keystone in the Aristotelic Arch
Ralph Jessop
163
“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of
Induction
229
The Logic of John Stuart Mill
Fred Wilson
283
De Morgan’s Logic
Michael E. Hobart and Joan
Richards
331
Boole’s Logic
Dale Jacquette
Maria Panteki
457
Lewis Carroll’s Logic
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
L.
de Morgan’s Early Logical Enquiries, 1805–1835
Laura J. Snyder
French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic : On the Origins of Augustus381
’

vi
507
John Venn and Logical Theory
James Van Evra
515
William Stanley Jevons and the Substitution of Similars
Bert Mosselmans and Ard van Moer
533
Hugh McColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
605
The Idealists
David Sullivan
663
Bradley’s Logic
William J. Mander
719
Index
Contents

PREFACE
The nineteenth century is widely and rightly held to be the century in which
the mathematical revolution in logic achieved its breakthrough. W.V. Quine once
remarked that logic is an ancient discipline, but since 1879 it has been a great one.
Of course, 1879 marks the publication of Gottlob Frege’s Begriﬀsschrift, and 1870
and 1883 the appearance of Charles Peirce’s “Description of a Notation for the
Logic of Relatives” and “Note B: The Logic of Relatives”. Frege and Peirce are
the independent co-founders of modern quantiﬁcation theory. Frege (1848–1925)
was a German and Peirce (1839–1914) an American (their contributions are chron-
icled in volume three of this Handbook, The Rise of Mathematical Logic: Leibniz
to Frege). Although Frege’s work was little recognized and little appreciated by
British logicians of the period — Russell was a late exception — important steps
toward the mathematicization of logic were taken in Britain. Augustus De Mor-
gan (1806–1871) made signiﬁcant contributions to the logic of relatives, of which
Peirce took respectful heed, and also to probability theory, an interest in which
he did much to revive. Until 1847, De Morgan was virtually the lone force in the
algebraicization of logic. Then George Boole (1815–1864) published The Mathe-
matical Analysis of Logic which appeared on the same day as De Morgan’s Formal
Logic and in which he gives to logic a somewhat diﬀerent algebraic twist.Boole also
did valuable work on probability theory. Even the lesser ﬁgure, William Hamilton
(1788–1856), had pertinent things to say about predicate quantiﬁers. But the fact
remains that the revolution in logic was not put “over the top” by British logicians
of the nineteenth century. Why, then, does the Handbook of the History of Logic
make a place for an entire volume on this subject? The answer is that there is no
better place than Britain to witness the demise of the old logic and the beginnings
of the new.
Aristotle’s logic — the old logic — was an immense achievement.
Aristotle
originated the logic of syllogisms, he gave some expression to a separate logic of
immediate inference, and he made a number of attempts to extend the syllogistic
to modal contexts. The syllogistic was Aristotle’s most complete logic. Indeed the
perfectability proof of the Prior Analytics is an almost sound demonstration of
something like the completeness (in the modern sense) of syllogistic logic. Over the
centuries, the syllogistic has had its critics. The Megarians and Stoics expressed
reservations, as did legions of smart mediaeval logicians. The Renaissance was not
a good time for logic, and Aristotle’s supremacy was tested (or at least questioned)
by the likes of Descartes and the Port Royal logicians, by Locke and Leibniz, by
Kant and Hegel.
All the same, the theory of syllogisms was logic’s paradigm

viii
Preface
for over two millennia. It provided the essential framework which others would
attempt to reinterpret or supplement with additional insights.
All this ended in the 19th century. This was the century in which the hegemony
of the syllogistic fell apart like a collapsing empire. It was not, however, a clean
death. It was a lingering demise. Some of the century’s more original logicians
still paid their obeisances to the syllogistic even while they were in fact giving it no
role, or no central role, in their own work. A case in point is J.S. Mill (1806–1873),
who plights his great admiration for the syllogistic in his Autobiography, and who
in A System of Logic, pretty much concedes deductive logic to Richard Whately
(1887–1963), who in turn concedes it to Aristotle. But everything else in that
signiﬁcant work was directed to issues in which it can only have been obvious that
the syllogistic would have no place. What makes the 19th century interesting is
that while the syllogism is losing its paramouncy, logic launches itself in genuinely
new ways, not all of which ﬂow directly to the waters that create the Peircean-
Fregean tsunami of mathematical logic. An important additional development is
the logic of science.
Squarely in the idealist tradition was the great Romantic poet, Samuel Taylor
Coleridge (1772–1834). Hegel had taught that the absolute could be fully artic-
ulated, that everything worth knowing is knowable within a dialectical system
in which truth is immanent.
Coleridge developed a logic which deviated from
Hegel’s in two principal ways. His logic is foundationalist rather than coherentist;
and the knowing subject is beyond conceptualization, and hence ineﬀable. Lest it
be thought that Coleridge’s logic is largely an historical curiosity, to say nothing
of its being an eccentricity on its author’s part, idealism was philosophically dom-
inant in 19th century Britain, and idealism retains a broadly Hegelian orientation
not only in philosophy, but in logic as well.
George Bentham (1800–1884), a nephew of Jeremy, was a botanist of note,
who took an interest in jurisprudence and logic. His Outline of a New System of
Logic (1827) is a work of considerable importance. It expressly formulated for the
ﬁrst time the idea of predicate-quantiﬁcation, the priority of which over Hamilton
would in due course be established by Herbert Spencer, and is described by W.S.
Jevons (1835–1882) somewhat breathlessly as the most important discovery in
formal logic since Aristotle.
Whately’s Elements of Logic (1826) is a solid and formally correct re-telling of
deductive logic in the Aristotelian tradition to which Bentham’s book was intended
to be a critique, and which Whately ignored in subsequent editions.
Whately
played a large role in restoring logic to Oxford’s curriculum after a period of
shameful neglect. In his review of Whately, Mill defended the syllogistic against
what he considered encroachments of Scottish philosophers who had proposed its
displacement by inductive logic. Mill took this position notwithstanding that A
System of Logic (1843) itself made a substantial contribution to inductive logic,
and was the originator of the deductive-nomological model of explanation. We
see in this a blend of something old and something new. In matters deductive,
Mill sought no quarrel with the syllogistic.
In matters non-deductive, he was

Preface
ix
in the descendent class of Francis Bacon, as was Mill’s contemporary William
Whewell (1794–1866), and A System of Logic brims with eﬀorts to get at the
logic of those inductions that underpin the experimental sciences.
Despite his
satisfaction with Whately’s treatment of the old logic of deduction, Mill was in
process of empiricizing it. He sought for deduction the only certitude and the only
objectivity that a serious and deep commitment to empiricism could consistently
allow. And, in the spirit of the Stoic skeptics, Mill would allow to syllogisms no
non-circular place in human cogitation. Deductive logic would impose consistency
constraints on consequence-drawing, but it would not give us positive principles
of reasoning.
Whewell’s approach to the logic of science diﬀered signiﬁcantly from Mill’s.
Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, founded upon Their History (1840) expressly
rejects the hypothetico-deductive claim that scientiﬁc hypotheses are discovered
by mere guesswork, and argues that hypothetical entities lie properly in the ambit
of induction.
The new work in deductive logic — the work of Boole, De Morgan, and Hugh
MacColl (1837–1909) — facilitated the drift away from the syllogistic towards
mathematical treatments the newly emerging symbolic logic. We see in this the
convergence of three factors: the erosion of the syllogistic paradigm, the mathe-
maticization of deduction, and the rise of inductive logic, not excluding the theory
of probability.
Arguably Britain’s leading idealist, F.H. Bradley’s The Principles of Logic ap-
peared in the same year (1883) as Frege’s Grundlagen and Peirce’s “Note B: The
Logic of Relatives”. One might be forgiven for thinking that, next to Frege and
Peirce, Bradley is a backwards looking museum-piece. Bradley, the idealist, like
Mill, the empiricist, has a principled aversion to the formalization of reasoning,
but he also vigorously attacks the traditional syllogistic’s analysis of propositions
as a necessary composition of three elements or ideas — the subject-idea, the at-
tribute, and the joining of these two ideas. In so doing, he anticipates diﬃculties
Russell was to have in analyzing propositions as unities of mutually independent
constituents, diﬃculties which crop up in Frege’s attempt to preserve a sharp dis-
tinction between concepts and objects. Bradley also anticipates Russell’s theory
of descriptions, and Quine’s extension of it to names, arguing that logically proper
names are disguised general terms. Russell credits Bradley with the idea of an-
alyzing general propositions as conditionals. Bradley himself thought a further
reason to reject the traditional syllogistic was its failure to accommodate the logic
of relations. It is therefore simply a misconception to think of Bradley’s logic as
hide-bound to the old ways.
Hugh MacColl was born in 1837, the ﬁrst year of Victoria’s long reign. In a
number of papers he fostered developments that would take hold in the century
to come, in Boolean algebra, modal, free and paraconsistent logic, as well as di-
alogue logic. Notwithstanding that these papers were vigorously — some would
say unfairly — condemned by Russell, it is clear that MacColl anticipates the
analysis of strict implication, whose precedence C.I. Lewis had the characteristic

x
Preface
grace to acknowledge. More generally, it is now clear that MacColl’s modal logic
is equivalent to the system T of Robert Feys (1937) and the equivalent system of
Georg von Wright (1951).
W.S. Jevons (1835–1882), best known as a pioneer of mathematical economics,
published in 1874 a substantial and important monograph on logic under the title
The Principles of Science. Its main achievement was the extension and clariﬁ-
cation of the theory of induction developed by Whewell (and criticized by Mill).
It knitted together a general theory of probability with the analysis of induction,
and is arguably the single most important contribution to logical theory in 19th
century Britain.
Virtually every student of logic is familiar with Venn diagrams.
They have
an even wider currency than the De Morgan equivalences of propositional logic.
In this, John Venn (1835–1882), a student of De Morgan’s, was anticipated by
the ﬁgures of Euler a century earlier and of Leibniz in the century before that,
and was rivaled by those of his contemporary Lewis Carroll. Of arguably greater
originality is Venn’s The Logic of Chance. Venn was concerned to ﬁnd a conception
of probability that would leave room for freedom of human action. This was the
frequentist conception which, among other things, exercised a benign inﬂuence on
the development of mathematical statistics. His writings on deductive logic are
also important, containing early investigations of mechanized proofs.
Lewis Carroll (1832–1898), author of the Alice stories, was an accomplished
puzzler and paradoxer. His Achilles paradox convincingly demonstrates the neces-
sity of not requiring principles of inference to appear as premisses in deductions
that they themselves validate. He is also thought by some commentators to have
originated the method of semantic tableaux.
Before the passing of the century, Bertrand Russell (1872–1970), whose contri-
butions are described in detail in our companion volume, Logic From Russell to
Church, was largely innocent of developments in mathematics that would shortly
shape his and A.N. Whitehead’s (1861–1947) logical programme in the next cen-
tury.
It is true that Russell reviewed for Mind Louis Courtarat’s De l’inﬁni
math´ematique (1896), and thus became acquainted with set theory. He also knew
Whitehead’s Universal Algebra (1898), which contains a version of Boole’s logic.
Russell’s conversion to the new logic appears to have occurred one August morn-
ing in 1900 at the First International Congress of Philosophy. Guiseppe Peano
(1858–1932) read a paper on forms of deﬁnition in mathematics, and bested Ernst
Schr¨oder in subsequent discussion. For the remainder of 1900, Russell developed
the ideas that would animate Principles of Mathematics (1903).
It hardly wants saying that the three themes of British logic in the 19th century
– the abandonment of the syllogistic paradigm, the mathematization of deduction,
and the advancement of inductive logic – are not all expressly present in the works
of most of the logicians of that country and time, although the ﬁrst two are clearly
in Boole. These broad thematic developments were the products of a collective
eﬀorts not always graced by individual clarity. But in their net aﬀect these were
eﬀorts that made the logic of the period something to sit up and take notice of,

Preface
xi
both then and now.
Once again the Editors are deeply and most gratefully in the debt of the vol-
ume’s superb authors.
The Editors also warmly thank the following persons:
Professor Margaret Schabas, Head of the Philosophy Department and Professor
Nancy Gallini, Dean of the Faculty of Arts, at the University of British Columbia;
Professor Michael Stingl, Chair of the Philosophy Department and Christopher
Nicol, Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Science, at the University of Lethbridge;
Jane Spurr, Publications Administrator in London; Carol Woods, Production As-
sociate in Vancouver, and our colleagues at Elsevier, Senior Acquisitions Editor,
Lauren Schultz and Mara Vos-Sarmiento, Development Editor. For their excel-
lent advice and support the Editors also owe a special debt of gratitude to Ivor
Grattan-Guiness and Fred Wilson.
Dov M. Gabbay
King’s College London
John Woods
University of British Columbia
and
King’s College London
and
University of Lethbridge

This page intentionally left blank 

CONTRIBUTORS
Dov M. Gabbay
King’s College London, UK.
dov.gabbay@kcl.ac.uk
Michael E. Hobart
Western Washington University, USA.
hobartme@earthlink.net
Dale Jacquette
The Pennsylvania State University, USA.
dlj4@psu.edu
Ralph Jessop
University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK.
r.jessop@crichton.gla.ac.uk
Gordon R. McOuat
University of King’s College, Halifax, Canada.
gmcouat@dal.ca
William J. Mander
Oxford University, UK.
william.mander@hmc.ox.ac.uk
Tim Milnes
University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
tmilnes@staﬀmail.ed.ac.uk
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
IRIST (Strasbourg) and Archives Poincar´e (Nancy), France.
amirouche.mokteﬁ@gersulp.u-strasbg.fr
Bert Mosselmans
Roosevelt Academy, The Netherlands.
b.mosselmans@roac.nl
Maria Panteki
Thessaloniki, Greece.
nioka@math.auth.gr
Shahid Rahman
University of Lille, France.
shahid.rahman@univ-lille3.fr
Juan Redmond
Univesity of Lille, France.
juanredmond@yahoo.fr

xiv
Joan L. Richards
Brown University, USA.
Joan Richards@brown.edu
Laura J. Snyder
St. John’s University, USA.
snyderl@stjohns.edu
David Sullivan
The Metropolitan State College of Denver, USA.
sullivad@mscd.edu
James van Evra
University of Waterloo, Cananda.
vanevra@watarts.uwaterloo.ca
Ard van Moer
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium.
Ard.Van.Moer@vub.ac.be
Charissa S. Varma
University of Toronto, Canada.
charissa.varma@utoronto.ca
Fred Wilson
University of Totonto, Cananda.
fwilson@chass.utoronto.ca
John Woods
University of British Columbia, Cananda.
jhwoods@interchange.ubc.ca
Contributors

BENTHAM’S LOGIC
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
At the grand age of 71, celebrated English botanist George Bentham (1800–1884)
found himself in an uncomfortable position during what should have been his rest-
ful retirement years. George Bentham’s successful botanical career, exempliﬁed
by the canonical Handbook of the British Flora (1858) and with J. D. Hooker,
the Genera Plantarum (1862–1883), was grounded in pre-evolutionary taxonomic
styles and practices. These styles and practices valued careful descriptions and
deﬁnitions of taxonomic groups based on personal observations, and the care-
ful assessment the relevant taxonomic relationships that brought into sharp relief
species and genera boundaries. The source of George Bentham’s intellectual anx-
iety in early 1870s was the popular new theory of evolution by natural selection,
proposed by Charles Darwin (1809–1882) in his Origin of Species (1859) — a
theory that seemed to be settling into the taxonomic thinking of British natural-
ists, and politely ushering out the pre-evolutionary taxonomic styles and practices
that underpinned George’s work. Darwin’s theory replaced relations of similar-
ity with descent with modiﬁcation, challenging the idea that species groups are
ﬁxed and unchanging and threatening to undermine centuries of taxonomic tra-
dition. In his 1871 presidential address to the Linnean Society, George Bentham
voiced his concerns with Dawin’s new theory and its relationship to natural his-
tory: “. . . systematic biology has to a certain degree been cast into the background
by the great impulse to the more speculative branches of the science by the pro-
mulgation of the Darwinian theory”.1
There was a revolution afoot in natural
history, and George Bentham soon realised he was on the losing side.
These pre-evolutionary taxonomic styles and practices formed George Ben-
tham’s “distinctive attitude” regarding the kind of data a botanist could use in
establishing valid taxonomic groups (such as choice of external morphological fea-
tures versus internal features of cell-level anatomy), as well as broader issues on
the nature of groups and the epistemological status of the types of relationships
between taxonomic groups.2 Throughout his botanical career, George Bentham
believed in sharply circumscribed and suﬃciently recognisable natural groups.3 In
June of 1827, he drew a tentative connection between species and genera bound-
aries and genealogical relationships, and by 1856 he was prepared to maintain that
1George Bentham, “Presidential Address” Proceedings of the Linnean Society of London
1870–1871 (1817): xxxv.
2P. F. Stevens, The Development of Biological Classiﬁcation: Antoine-Laurent de Jussieu,
Nature, and the Natural System. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994): 105.
3P. F. Stevens, The Development of Biological Classiﬁcation: Antoine-Laurent de Jussieu,
Nature, and the Natural System. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994): 121.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

2
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
because genealogical relationships could be demonstrated for only a few genera-
tions, any emphasis on ancestral relationships in discussions of species and genera
boundaries were necessarily speculative.4 The theory of evolution by natural se-
lection, it seemed, challenged George Bentham’s view on the distinctiveness of
groups (and consequently the way taxonomists deﬁne taxonomic groups), and its
emphasis on descent with modiﬁcation challenged the traditional taxonomically
relevant relationships.
But this was not the only revolution in which George Bentham found himself.
Shortly after his ﬁrst botanical publication — Catalogue des Plantes Indigenes
des Pyrenees et du Bas Languedoc (1825) — George Bentham wrote his Outline
of a New System of Logic (1827). Written during an 1826–1827 stay in London,
the Outline hit the press during a transitional period in a tumultuous chapter
of British logic, between the last years of Scholastic syllogistic logic and the early
years of algebraic logic. On the surface, the Outline appeared to be little more than
a punchy chapter-by-chapter critique of Richard Whately’s popular and polemi-
cal defence of Scholastic logic, Elements of Logic (1826). However, but beneath
the surface lay George Bentham’s preliminary work on deﬁnition, division, and
relations, work that reﬂected the caution and concern George had consistently
exercised in discussing all manner of theoretical or hypothetical matters.5
The fact that issues involving deﬁnition, division, and relations ﬁgured in many
of the botanical debates around the time George Bentham was writing the Out-
line certainly played a role in determining which logical issues he would address.
However, it was the two subversive reform movements that employed logic in their
plan — the role of logic educational reform and the role of logic in the legal re-
form — that shaped his radical response. Surprisingly, it was not the connection
to these reform movements that propelled George Bentham’s contributions to the
history of logic into the spotlight.
His logical contributions gained recognition
somewhat circuitously and many years after the Outline’s publication, largely as
a consequence of a priority dispute between Scottish philosopher William Hamil-
ton (1788–1856) and British mathematician Augustus De Morgan (1806–1871)
concerning the quantiﬁcation of the Scholastic predicate.
This priority dispute began in the late 1840s with the announcement that the
origins and innovations of algebraic logic were found in De Morgan’s lecture “On
the Structure of the Syllogism”, given 9 November 1846 to the Cambridge Philo-
sophical Society. In this lecture, De Morgan proposed a structure for a new form
of logic that included the quantiﬁcation of the Scholastic predicate. Shortly there-
after, Hamilton and his supporters challenged De Morgan’s priority, claiming that
Hamilton had been teaching this new form of logic, including the quantiﬁcation
of the predicate, in his Edinburgh classes as early as 1845. As the priority battle
raged on (mostly from Hamilton’s pen), English philosopher and political theorist
Herbert Spencer (1820–1903) and English economist and logician William Stanley
4See Bentham Papers, University College London Library ci. 83–87(14–15 June 1827).
5P. F. Stevens, “Bentham, George (1800–1884),” in Oxford Dictionary of National Biography,
ed. H. C. G. Matthew and Brian Harrison (Oxford: OUP, 2004).

Bentham’s Logic
3
Jevons (1835–1882) complicated matters further by not only announcing in 1873
in the Contemporary Review that this new system of logic had been spelled out
some time earlier by a young botanist by the name of George Bentham, but that
Hamilton had reviewed George Bentham’s Outline in the Edinburgh Review in
1833.6 Our retiring old botanist, it seemed, found himself an unwitting and early
participant in a second revolution, this time in logic.
George Bentham’s presentation of the quantiﬁcation of the predicate years be-
fore Hamilton, may have given him his ticket into the history of logic. However,
because histories of logic covering this period tend to structure their narratives on
the development of algebraic logic and the relationship between mathematics and
logic, a quick review of George Bentham’s life makes it is easy to appreciate why
even though he had a ticket, he took a back row seat.7
Unlike the usual suspects cited in this logical revolution, George Bentham did
not run in mathematical circles and George’s lack of a strong connection to math-
ematical or logical circles makes it hard to establish him as a precursor to the in-
novations that could characterise algebraic logic. His interest in logic was sparked
when he was a teenager, at the industrious hands of his utilitarian uncle, the
formidable Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832). George Bentham’s aﬀair with logic was
decidedly brief, and more often than not, logic played the handmaiden to George’s
botanical thought. Moreover, George Bentham’s ﬁrst (and last) original logical
publication, Outline of a New System of Logic (1827), did little to establish his
reputation as a logician in logic and mathematical circles. The Outline sold a mere
sixty copies before the press went bankrupt and the remaining copies destroyed.8
For the most part, the Outline was not widely read, and its reviews were at best
lukewarm. Perhaps more importantly, George Bentham did not see his major log-
ical innovations as stemming from mathematical problems or puzzles. Instead, he
followed in the footsteps of the educational, legal, and botanical reformers, seeing
his innovations in logic as helping to solve more general problems in classiﬁcation.
George Bentham believed his new logic would be more consonant with what peo-
ple — be they educators, lawyers, or naturalists — needed to do in the business
of organising knowledge.
This English botanist, and for a time promising logician, spent a lifetime holding
fast to ideals of clarity and precision in language and cautioning against speculation
in science. It was these ideals and cautions that placed him on wining and losing
6See T. S. Baynes, “Mr. Herbert on Sir Wm. Hamilton and the quantiﬁcation of the predi-
cate” Contemporary Review 21 (1873): 796-798; W. S. Jevons, “Who discovered the quantiﬁca-
tion of the predicate?” Contemporary Review 21 (1873): 821-824.; and H. Spencer, “The study
of sociology IX — the bias of patriotism” Contemporary Review 21 (1873): 475-502. For the
debate see G. McOuat “The Logical Systematist: George Bentham and His Outline of a New
System of Logic.” Archives of Natural History 30 (2003): 206, M. Filipiuk, ed. George Bentham,
Autobiography 1830-1834. (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1997), 484–485.
7For example, Kneale and Kneale do not mention George, Styazhkin and Bochenski mention
only his quantiﬁcation of the predicate.
8The press went bankrupt and Bentham was not inclined to rescue the remaining copies.
M. Filipiuk, ed. George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834. (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1997), 271.

4
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
sides of two revolutions. The tale of his life, his inﬂuences, and his innovations
may perhaps shed some light on the connections between logic and natural history,
and logic in legal and educational reform in Britain during the ﬁrst half of the
nineteenth century.
Born 22 September 1800 in Stoke, Plymouth, to Samuel Bentham (1757–1831)
and Mary Sophia Fordyce (1765–1858), George was second son, and third of ﬁve
children. George spent the ﬁrst years of his life in England, and the Benthams
moved frequently between 1805 and 1814, eventually settling in France in 1814,
citing reasons of health, ﬁnance, and their children’s education.9 Although none of
the Bentham children had formal schooling, their parents took their education very
seriously. His mother Mary assumed the bulk of this responsibility and completely
supervised their education.10 Both parents encouraged the study of mathematics,
in addition to Latin and Greek.
George’s most intense period of mathematical study was likely during the ﬁrst
few years in France. George recalled that his father’s “ﬁrst care” upon arriving in
France was to ﬁnd George and Samuel junior a tutor to continue their education.
Samuel secured the services of a Monsieur Chiron “one of the professors at the
college of Saumur, who was at once a good mathematician, and Latin and to
some extent Greek scholar”.11 George recalled happily working through Laplace’s
arithmetic and algebra with his older brother during the winter of 1814, and fancied
himself “pretty well advanced in mathematics, having gone through Euclid and
plane trigonometry, and simple and quadratic equations in Algebra, . . ., spherical
trigonometry, conic sections and ﬂuxions.”12
After only two years in France, tragedy struck the Bentham household. Samuel
junior died just after his seventeenth birthday, as a result of blood clot triggered
by a fall from a swing in their garden. Though separated by about two years, the
Bentham boys had been inseparable in almost everything else. George recollected
later in his life that “until [Samuel junior’s] illness, I had always slept in the same
room, taken all my lessons with him, gone through the same exercises with the
same books”.13 Not surprisingly, after his brother’s death, George lost the desire
to engage in those activities they once shared, studies in classics and mathematics
were the hardest aﬀected.14
9See Catherine Pease-Watkin, “Bentham, Samuel (1757–1831),” in Oxford Dictionary of Na-
tional Biography, ed. H. C. G. Matthew and Brian Harrison (Oxford: OUP, 2004)
10See Catherine Pease-Watkin, “The Inﬂuence of Mary Bentham on John Stuart Mill,” Journal
of Bentham Studies 8 (2006).
11M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), 17.
12M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830-1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), 18.
13M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), 29.
14Pease-Watkin notes that “The Benthams suspected this outcome for some months, but choice
to hide their suspicions from the children. Samuel wrote to Jeremy stating that ‘till all was over
we concealed all apprehensions from the other children as well as from himself”’ Catherine Pease-
Watkin, “Jeremy and Samuel Bentham — The Private and the Public,” Journal of Bentham
Studies 5 (2002).

Bentham’s Logic
5
Rather than force George to pursue classics and mathematics during this diﬃ-
cult period, his parents encouraged him to turn attention to other subjects that
had once brought him pleasure, speciﬁcally history and geography.15 George im-
mersed himself in history and geography, using of his “natural taste for method
and arrangement” to organise geographical and statistical information into ta-
bles.16 George later credited Jeremy with encouraging and developing his interest
in method and arrangement. And their shared interest in tabulations during this
period did not pass unrecognised. Prussian naturalist, romantic philosopher, and
friend of Samuel Bentham, Alexander von Humboldt (1769–1859) recalled:
it was his [George Bentham’s] own “natural taste for method and ar-
rangement, stimulated by uncle’s example and the perusal of some of
his works” that made him enjoy “tabulating the geographical and sta-
tistical information . . . as to physical geography, mountain elevations,
river courses and their basins, etc...17
Before long, George’s interest in tabulation and classiﬁcation shifted away from
history and geography, and towards botany.
In 1817, the same year Jeremy’s work on education reform, the Chrestomathia
(1817), was published, Mary Bentham purchased the third edition of the popular
Flore Fran¸caise (1815) by French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744–1829)
and French botanist Augustus Pyrasmus de Candolle (1778–1841). George’s in-
terest was immediately piqued.18 He later wrote:
I was struck by the analytical tables for the determination of plants,
which fell in with the methodical and tabulate ideas I had derived from
the study of some of my uncle’s works and from what I had attempted
in geography and statistics. . . 19
It was not simply the presence of tables in this botanical work that struck him.
George noted that the tables were arranged according to a methodology he had
15George wrote:
Samuel realised the impact that his brother’s death would have on George, writing
of ‘poor George’ and ‘the loss of a brother to whom the attachment was as strong
as can be’.
Indeed many years later, in 1827, George was to write to his elder
sister Mary Louisa: ‘It is a sad thing to think how those whom I have most loved
and conﬁded in have been separated from me, my poor brother whom I had never
quitted a single day till his last fatal illness’
See also pages 29 and 33 of M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834.
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1997), 262.
16M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), 30.
17M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), xxiv.
18M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), 36.
19M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830-1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), 36.

6
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
come to recognise in his uncle’s legal and educational reform writing. What Jeremy
was doing with legal terms, George saw Lamarck and de Candolle doing with
plants. George would later include this observation in his translation of the ap-
pendix to Jeremy’s Chrestomathia.20
George’s reading of Flore Fran¸caise led to a small ﬂurry of reading in more
philosophical issues in botany, including de Candolle’s Th´eorie ´el´ementaire de la
botanique (1813) — a work that tackled questions of the theoretical status of
classiﬁcation systems. His reading of Th´eorie ´el´ementaire de la botanique led to
his reading of the work of de Candolle’s teacher, Pierre Prevost (1751–1839). De
Candolle credited his “logical turn of mind” to Prevost and saw this as leading
to the success of the Th´eorie ´el´ementaire.21 In his lectures, Prevost stressed the
importance of forming the genera in accordance with the real value of relations,
a view Prevost felt could easily apply to the life sciences.22 Attempts by Prevost
and others to put classiﬁcation on a solid theoretical foundation resonated with
what George was reading in the Chrestomathia. Speciﬁcally, what George saw
in Jeremy’s work was an attempt to model educational reform on natural his-
tory. Jeremy’s interest in logical relations, and the relationship Jeremy assumed
between classiﬁcation and knowledge came out most clearly in his appendix on
nomenclature and classiﬁcation.
In 1819, George began what would become an almost four year project — the
French translation the appendix in Jeremy Bentham’s Chrestomathia. For the ﬁrst
few years, George dedicated little time to this project, perhaps because in 1820,
the Benthams bought the chˆateau de Restincli`eres, near Montpellier. The plan was
to cultivate the land for proﬁt, and Samuel gave George most of the responsibility
of the management of the operation. However, in addition to managing the estate,
George read Scottish philosopher Dugald Stewart’s (1753–1828) scathing attack
on Aristotelian logic and French philosopher Jean le Rond d’Alembert’s (1717–
1783) encyclopaedia, the latter being a work praised by Jeremy, with regard to
the classiﬁcation systems presented.23 By 1822, George’s work on the translation
picked up speed and he was able to have it ready in time for his visit to London
in 1823. George published his translation of Jeremy’s Appendix, titled “Essai sur
la nomenclature et classiﬁcation”, en route to London at the Bossanges Press in
Paris. Delighted with his nephew’s eﬀorts, Jeremy encouraged George to expand
on what he felt were substantial and signiﬁcant additions.
In spite of his uncle’s encouragements, George was more eager to pursue botany
20George would also include Dum´eril’s Zoologie philosophique (1808) in his list of those that
use bifurcating divisions.
21J. M. Drouin, “Principles and Uses of Taxonomy in the Works of Augustin-Pyramus de
Candolle.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biology and Biomedical Sciences 32 (2001):
258.
22J. M. Drouin, “Principles and Uses of Taxonomy in the Works of Augustin-Pyramus de
Candolle.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biology and Biomedical Sciences 32 (2001):
258.
23M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), 213.

Bentham’s Logic
7
and spent more time meeting up with old friends and botanists than expanding
on his uncle’s logic during this visit.24 Upon returning to France, George resumed
his duties as estate manager and devoted almost all of his time to botany, and by
1825, he deemed himself “thoroughly botanical.”25 His botanical eﬀorts centred on
building up the collection he had begun ﬁve years earlier, a collection from which
he wrote the book that would establish his reputation as a serious botanist — Cat-
alogue des plantes indigenes des Pyrenees et du Bas Languedoc.26 Unfortunately,
bad luck befell the Benthams in 1826, George found himself seeking assistance
from his inﬂuential uncle, a situation that would direct his attention once more to
issues in logic.27
In the ﬁrst week of August 1826, George travelled to London with his sisters,
with the hope of securing his uncle’s ﬁnancial support. When it became clear that
he was not going to get ﬁnancial support from Jeremy and would have to earn a
living, George decided to enrol in Lincoln’s Inn and train as a lawyer — a decision
that infuriated Jeremy.28 Partly to pacify his irate uncle, George agreed to defer
his legal studies and become his uncle’s amanuensis. And so began George’s work
on Jeremy’s unruly unpublished logic papers.29
Perhaps as an incentive and perhaps to incite interest in these papers, Jeremy
intimated that both James Mill (1773–1836) and his son John Stuart Mill (1806–
1873) had studied these papers and expressed an interest in editing them. George,
however, suspected that the real reason his uncle gave him this particular task was
as an alternative means of compensating him. George reported to his sister that:
[M]y uncle has imagined that he makes my fortune in giving me his
logical papers to make a book of; . . .
if I succeed in putting it into
intelligible French, Bossanges [the publisher] may give me something
for it — but as for a fortune, if I get any from my Uncle it must be in a
more direct way than through the medium of his manuscripts. Besides,
he wishes me to do them in English.30
However, it is just as likely that George’s “Essai” proved to Jeremy that his
nephew’s training as a botanist coupled with his appreciation of the theoretical
24See M. Filipiuk, ed. George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834. (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1997), 98–153.
25M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834.
(Toronto : University of
Toronto Press, 1997), 97 and 455.
26M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), xxx.
27The cultivation of Restincli`eres was reasonably successful for a time, but in the end for
various reasons, the family returned to England. One factor was the threat of a lawsuit from
neighbouring residents, who objected to Samuel’s irrigation system, which, they claimed, was
diverting the local water supply. See M. Filipiuk, ed. George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–
1834. (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1997), 234.
28For George’s account of Jeremy’s anger, see M. Filipiuk, ed. George Bentham, Autobiography
1830-1834. (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1997), 246–7.
29In addition, George worked on his uncle’s papers on Codiﬁcation and other legal subjects.
30M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830-1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), xxxi.

8
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
problems would make George an ideal candidate to champion a Benthamite logic.
And Jeremy Bentham was right.
While struggling to ﬁnd some order in Jeremy’s logic papers, helping his own
father, and pursuing a legal career, George began the Outline — a brief and biting
Benthamite critique of Richard Whately’s Elements of Logic (1826). By March
1827, George Bentham had completed his Outline, and his proud uncle assumed
the printing costs.31
The object of George’s criticism — Whately’s Elements — was the ﬁrst signif-
icant logic textbook to grace the British University system since Aldrich’s 1691
Logicae Artis Compendium. Up until Whately’s Elements, the two main textbooks
used at Oxford and Cambridge were Sanderson’s 1615 Logicae Artis Compendium
and Aldrich’s 1691 Logicae Artis Compendium. As it turned out, the Elements
was far more than a textbook. Whately was clear about the polemical nature of
his book right from the start. Whately had a religious agenda to push — wanting
to encourage and promote sound reasoning in religious men to counteract religious
scepticism. Whately wrote: “The adversaries of our Faith would, I am convinced,
have been . . . more satisfactorily answered . . . had a thorough acquaintance with
logic been more common than it is”.32 Whately also had an educational reform
agenda to push. Whately saw logic as an agent of university reform and argued
that logic should be compulsory for candidates at Oxford for academic honours.
In her biography of her father, Whately’s daughter Jane reﬂected on the role of
the Elements in his educational reform. She writes:
The task undertaken by [Whately] was one of no ordinary diﬃculty; it
was not the originating of a new science, but the resuscitation of an
old and half-defunct one. The study of logic, formerly pursued with
great and credible devotion, had, in later years, fallen into disrepute
among the more intellectual class in the University. It was pursued in
schools in Oxford merely by committing to heart the technical rules
of the compendium of Dr. Aldrich. These were by no means without
their utility as a tough mental exercise, and many an Oxonian might
remember with gratitude the edge which it gave to his powers of rea-
soning, particularly if unacquainted with the more valuable discipline
of mathematics. It was Whately’s great and eminently successful eﬀort
to raise the study from this inferior condition to something approaching
a scientiﬁc character.33
The impact of Whately’s Elements was immediate, and its eﬀects were enduring.
In his Historical Sketch of Logic (1851), published less than twenty-ﬁve years after
the Elements, Blakey recounted the inﬂuence of Whately’s book:
31M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830-1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), xxi.
32R. Whately, Elements of Logic, Comprising the Substance of the Article in the Encyclopaedia
Metropolitana; with Additions, &c, (London, B. Fellowes 1831), xxviii.
33E. J. Whately, Life and correspondence of Richard Whately, D.D., 2 vols. (1866), 49.

Bentham’s Logic
9
Archbishop Whately’s Elements of Logic, is one of the most important
and inﬂuential logical publications of modern times. It is an able and
popular exposition of the scholastic logic; and has, in fact, been the
main instrument in producing the revival of the syllogistic system in
Great Britain. The work has gone through many editions, and is used,
more or less, in several seats of learning, as an ordinary text-book for
logical students.34
In many respects, the Elements owed its existence to the encouragement of
Whately’s friend, teacher, and mentor Edward Copleston, on whose advice Whately
launched his ﬁrst spirited defence of traditional syllogistic logic in an 1823 article
in the Encyclopaedia Metropolitana. This article was later expanded considerably
and republished in 1826 as Elements of Logic.
The Elements was regarded as the last successful attempt to breathe life into
a dying discipline.
The area of Scholastic logic that beneﬁted the most from
Whately’s pen was the syllogism. Until Whately, the syllogism had not been far-
ing well. Since the seventeenth-century, students educated in the British system
were taught that the syllogism was a better instrument of enquiry and proof than
induction (the syllogism to remain safely on the bookshelves of Oxford and Cam-
bridge), by the close of the eighteenth century, it was becoming clear syllogistic
logic was not ﬂourishing — it was festering.
Some claim the decline of logic during this period reﬂects the poor quality of
the logic compendiums in England used in the universities.35 At least one recent
explanation for the poor quality compendiums during this period argued that it
languished because it was not yet a “science”, not yet having a clear theoretical
framework. Van Evra wrote in his “The Development of Logic as Reﬂected in the
Fate of the Syllogism 1600-1900.” (2000):
In the early portion of the seventeenth century, logic displayed features
commonly found in disciplines prior to the emergence of a dominant
theoretical framework.
At the time, the common logic had neither
a secure theoretical structure externally imposed by pure tradition,
nor the stabilizing inﬂuence of a strong internal theory.
In such a
vacuum, all features of the subject become, potentially at least, equally
relevant.36
Other histories emphasise the “silencing” of professors and replacing them with
college fellows as being responsible for logic’s decline, claiming that although tutors
became more popular, they lacked the expertise or skill of logic professors and did
34R. Blakey, Historical Sketch of Logic: From the Earliest Times to the Present Day (Bailli`ere,
1851), 454.
35See E. J. Ashworth, “Some Notes on Syllogistic in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries”,
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, XI, no. 1 (1970) 17-33.
36Van-Evra James, “The Development of Logic as Reﬂected in the Fate of the Syllogism 1600-
1900.” History and Philosophy of Logic 21 (2000): 118.

10
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
not produce original works during this period, thus causing of the decline of logic.37
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, logic also came under attack.
Many Renaissance and humanist thinkers of the seventeenth century began to
raise concerns about Scholastic logic’s status as an art and its monopoly on truth.
Promoters of the empirical science of the Scientiﬁc Revolution, such as Bacon
and Locke, questioned the application of syllogistic logic to the sciences. One of
their chief concerns was the ability of logical demonstrations to enable discoveries.
Backing the concerns raised by Bacon and Locke, were the “Common Sense”
School of Philosophers in Edinburgh that rose to prominence in the eighteenth
century. These philosophers began to call for educational reform and logic was
one of the subjects on the chopping block. Dugald Stewart in particular, called
for the abolishment of syllogistic logic in the curriculum.
For Whately, the ﬁrst step in restoring the logic to its proper place involved re-
sponding to the objections raised from the seventeenth century onwards concerning
logic’s purpose. One of his goals involved debunking the Scholastic assumption
that logic was the art of thinking. Whately’s argument that logic was not simply
an art, but also a science, served two purposes. First, it provided Whately with a
new and powerful response to the seventeenth-century objections to the usefulness
of logic. For Whately, the objections of Bacon, Locke, the Scottish Common Sense
School, and Watts have at least one thing in common — they targeted not the
tools of logic, but their use. Logic was not used to investigate nature (speaking
to Bacon and Locke), it was not the instrument of truth (the Scholastic version),
and it was not the art of rightly employing the rational faculties. Second, the
claim that logic is also a science marks the beginning of a new approach to logic.38
Although Whately was not the ﬁrst to claim logic as science, his was the ﬁrst
inﬂuential British logic textbook to defend this claim explicitly.39
Whately’s claim that logic’s goal as a science involved providing “the gener-
alised and abstract representation of all demonstration”, was also the ﬁrst step
in Whately’s new account of the syllogism. The Scholastics understood the syl-
logism as kind of argument. On Whately’s account, the syllogism was a purely
formal device. Once axiomatized, Whately believed that syllogisms would serve as
a canonical test of the validity of actual arguments, making the syllogism the theo-
retical core of the science of logic.40 From this perspective, Whately’s redeﬁnition
of logic and his re-evaluation of the role of the syllogism have been credited as
37Blakey credits this history to Hamilton in his 1833 Edinburgh Review. R. Blakey, Historical
Sketch of Logic: From the Earliest Times to the Present Day (Bailli`ere, 1851), 424.
38See J. Van Evra, “Richard Whately and the rise of Modern Logic”, History and Philosophy
of Logic 5, (1984), 1-18; and C. Jongsma, Richard Whately and the Revival of Syllogistic Logic
in Great Britain in the early Nineteenth Century (unpublished dissertation, Toronto 1982).
39Blakey notes that Kirwan, in his 1807 “Logic” volume 1 page 1 makes this same claim, see
R. Blakey, Historical Sketch of Logic : From the Earliest Times to the Present Day (Bailli`ere,
1851), 449. Also see J. Van Evra, “Richard Whately and the rise of Modern Logic”, History and
Philosophy of Logic 5, (1984) 1-18.
40See J. Van Evra, “Richard Whately and the rise of Modern Logic”, History and Philosophy
of Logic 5, (1984) 1–18.

Bentham’s Logic
11
inspiring the direction of the pioneers of algebraic logic.41 The syllogism, thanks
to Whately, was given a whole new lease on life.
On the new deﬁnition of logic, George agreed wholeheartedly with Whately. In
fact, George began his Outline by claiming:
In reading the elegant exposition of his views, which Dr. Whately has
preﬁxed to his Elements of Logic, I felt that I generally concurred in his
observations on the utility of Logic, in his refutation of the arguments
of its detractors — of those who set up Common Sense in opposition to
Logic, — and in his remarks on the erroneous system proceeded upon
with regard to this subject in our University Education. The absurdity
of comprehending, within the province of Logic, every branch of art or
science to which it may be applicable, will readily be admitted by any
reader.42
George continued this discussion of the deﬁnition of logic as both an art and science
in the beginning of chapter two, where he noted that his uncle had presented a
similar deﬁnition of logic in his Chrestomathia a few years before Whately. On
Jeremy’s view:
[e]very art had a correspondent science: it was a mistake to think
that the ﬁeld of thought and action could be divided into a series of
distinct compartments, some containing an art, some a science, and
some containing neither the one nor the other.
The fact was that,
‘Whatsoever spot is occupied by either, is occupied by both: it is
occupied by them in joint-tenancy.’ The distinction was founded on the
distinction between practice and knowledge: ‘Practice, in proportion as
attention and exertion are regarded as necessary to due performance,
is termed art: knowledge, in proportion as attention and exertion are
regarded as necessary to attainment, is termed science’. There was no
‘determinate line of distinction’ between an art and its correspondent
science, but where ‘that which is seen to be done’ was regarded as being
more prominent than ‘that which is seen or supposed to be known’,
the more likely it was that it would be considered an art, and in the
opposite case a science.43
The accolades for this new deﬁnition of logic in the Outline, did not last long. By
annexing logic to “every branch of human knowledge” George felt Jeremy provided
too broad deﬁnition, and by restricting the science aspect of logic to “mere correct
reasoning”, George felt Whately provided too narrow a deﬁnition. By recasting
41See J. Van Evra, “Richard Whately and the rise of Modern Logic”, History and Philosophy
of Logic 5, (1984) 1-18.
42G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 1.
43J. Bentham, Chrestomathia. ed M. J. Smith and W. H. Burston. (Oxford: Clarendon Press
1983), 59–60.

12
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
the deﬁnition of logic as “the branch of art-and-science which has for its object
the advantageous application of the human mind to the study of any other branch
of art-and-science” George felt his attempt to make logic entirely general, like a
universal grammar, would be just right.44
By page ﬁve of his introductory remarks, George identiﬁed another serious ﬂaw
in Whately’s logic, and his reaction provides the ﬁrst real taste of a Benthamite
logic. George charged Whately with the failure to distinguish between diﬀerent
types of entities. Though he raised the concern on page ﬁve, George developed
this criticism in Chapter Three, titled “Analytical Outline”. George claimed:
The remainder of this Analytical Outline is devoted to the deﬁnition
of the processes of abstraction and generalization, which are here very
aptly distinguished, and to the very useful exposure of the common er-
ror of ascribing reality to generic terms. This should have been carried
still farther; he should have exhibited the pernicious eﬀects resulting
from the realization of those subject matters which D’Alembert ﬁrst
called ˆetres ﬁctifs, and what Mr. Bentham has described under the
name of ﬁctitious entities. He should have pointed out the constant
but unavoidable ﬁction which must enter into the composition of any
discourse, and should have been given some indications by which error,
in this respect, may be guarded against.45
A signiﬁcant part of this chapter (ﬁfteen of the twenty-one pages) was dedicated
to presenting a Benthamite classiﬁcation of entities. George’s account of entities,
as well as his critique of Whately’s discussion of exposition in chapter six, came
straight from Jeremy’s reform work and his unpublished logic papers.
George was quick to recognise that Whately had fallen into the same trap that
Jeremy claimed snared other signiﬁcant thinkers. George followed Jeremy in his
claim that explorations into the processes of “abstraction” and “generalization”
were useful in uncovering the error of ascribing reality to generic terms, but such
investigations should have been pushed further to include a distinction between
real and ﬁctitious entities.46
Jeremy’s distinction between real and ﬁctitious entities marked his ﬁrst decisive
break from Scholastic logic, one that came early in his career and underpinned some
of his objections in his legal reform work. One of Jeremy’s ﬁrst targets during his
campaign for legal reform was Oxford’s ﬁrst Vinerian Professor of Common Law
and Jeremy’s teacher, Sir William Blackstone (1723–1780) and part of Jeremy’s
attack made use of this distinction between real and ﬁctitious entities.47In his
44G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 14.
45G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 29.
46G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 29.
47Blackstone is remembered for, among other things, establishing English law as an academic
discipline. He presented course of private lectures on law at Oxford, which Jeremy attended,

Bentham’s Logic
13
Comment on the Commentaries and A Fragment on Government (1776), Jeremy
ﬁxed his radical eye on Blackstone’s Commentaries on the Laws of England (1765-
9), aiming to expose what he saw as a two-fold problem: Blackstone’s application of
the Scholastic method of deﬁnition to the terms of jurisprudence, which prompted
Jeremy to present his new classiﬁcation of entities and his new modes of exposition;
and Blackstone’s conﬂation of the role of censor and expositor in discussions of
law, which prompted Jeremy to present his new account of methodization.48
Jeremy identiﬁed the ﬁrst mistake in Blackstone’s discussion of terms of ju-
risprudence, speciﬁcally his concept of a “natural right”, was to deﬁne the terms
of jurisprudence using the Scholastic method of deﬁnition — per genus et diﬀer-
entiam. Deﬁnition, on this account, involved ﬁrst identifying the group to which
the entity in question belongs (or determining the entity’s logical genus), and then
distinguishing the entity under investigation from the others in the group by spec-
ifying the property that makes it what it is and not something else in the group
(or identifying the object’s logical diﬀerentia). Blackstone followed the Scholastic
belief that by assigning the logical genus and diﬀerentia, a deﬁnite meaning is
conveyed, giving “a clear idea of the thing it signiﬁes.”49 The Scholastic method
of deﬁnition may be ﬁne for terms like “turnip” and “table”, but for terms such
as “obligation”, Jeremy saw a problem.
Following Locke, Jeremy claimed that to obtain a “clear idea,” involved ei-
ther having direct sense experience of the entity (a Lockean “simple idea” of a
substance) or by constructing “artiﬁcial groupings of sensory ideas” (a Lockean
“complex idea” of a substance).
The problem is that even though terms such
as “obligation”, hold the subject position in a proposition, they do not refer to
an entity accessible by direct sense experience, or for which an artiﬁcial grouping
could be constructed. Language, for Jeremy, obscured a fundamental distinction
between entities that are real and entities that are ﬁctitious.50
To help with the exposition of tricky terms, like those of jurisprudence, Jeremy
believed we ﬁrst needed to recognise that they are ﬁctitious entities and that
ﬁctitious entities cannot be exposited by the method per genus et diﬀerentiam.
He states this clearly in the Fragment on Government:
The common method of deﬁning — the method per genus et diﬀer-
entiam, as logicians call it, will, in many cases, not at all answer the
purpose. Among abstract terms we soon come to such as have no su-
perior genus. A deﬁnition, per genus et diﬀerentiam, when applied to
and these lectures were later published as Commentaries on the Laws of England (1765–1769).
Blackstone would later to be a justice of the Court of Common Pleas. See Wilfrid Prest, “Black-
stone, Sir William (1723–1780),” in Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, ed.
H. C. G.
Matthew and Brian Harrison (Oxford: OUP, 2004).
48Blackstone’s confusion of the roles of expositor and censor, see P. Schoﬁeld “Jeremy Bentham,
The Principle of Utility, and Legal Positivism,” Current Legal Problems 56 (2003): 1–39.
49J. Bentham, ‘A Fragment on Government’, in A Comment on the Commentaries and A
Fragment on Government, ed. J.H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart (London, 1977), 587.
50See P. Schoﬁeld “Jeremy Bentham, The Principle of Utility, and Legal Positivism,” Current
Legal Problems 56 (2003): 14.

14
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
these, it is manifest, can make no advance: it must either stop short,
or turn back, as it were, upon itself, in a circulate or a repetend.51
Because the names of real entities refer to entities accessible by sense perception
and can be arranged hierarchically (that is, they can be arranged in descending
orders of generality according to a principle of division of aggregate masses), they
can be deﬁned according to the Scholastic method of deﬁnition. In contrast, be-
cause the names of ﬁctitious entities, such as “obligation”, do not refer to entities
accessible by sense perception, and have no superior genus (they cannot be organ-
ised hierarchically according to a principle of division of aggregate masses), they
demand a diﬀerent method.
To help appreciate Jeremy’s argument, consider applying the method per genus
et diﬀerentiam to the term “obligation”. The ﬁrst step would involve determining
the superior genus of “obligation”. The only superior genus, according to Jeremy,
for a term like “obligation”, is the universal genus “ﬁctitious entity”. Because we
have identiﬁed a superior genus, it appears that we can proceed using the method
per genus et diﬀerentiam. However, Jeremy argues that because the species of
the genus “ﬁctitious entities” are so many and so comprehensive, any attempt to
provide a character by which “obligation” can be distinguished from all others,
would lead to an enumeration of properties that may never reach completion.
Later, in the Chrestomathia, Jeremy presented his new classiﬁcation of entities,
dividing them into ﬁve types: Real entities (perceptible by the senses), Inferential
entities (we believe to have real existence, but imperceptible to our senses, like
God), Fabulous entities (believed by others, but to the existence of which we
can attach no belief, heathen gods), Collective entities (the result of operations
of abstraction and generalisation, forming a class), and Fictitious entities (neither
have, nor is supposed to have any real existence, but which is grammatically spoken
of as real, for example, obligation). George presented this classiﬁcation of entities
in Chapter Three of the Outline.
In light of the problem faced when expositing ﬁctitious entities, Jeremy pro-
posed a new method of exposition called “paraphrases”. Jeremy’s ﬁrst step in
paraphrases rested on a controversial and decidedly unLockean assumption. The
logic of Aristotle and the Scholastics, as well as Locke, was a logic of terms. On the
Scholastic and Lockean account, propositions are the result of combining terms —
terms are fundamental. Jeremy turned this assumption on its head, believing that
propositions came ﬁrst, and it is by methods of abstraction and analysis, that we
arrive at terms.52 Jeremy’s method of paraphrases brings this controversial as-
51J. Bentham, “A Fragment on Government” in A Comment on the Commentaries and A
Fragment on Government, ed. J.H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart (London, 1977), 181n.
52Recent scholars have commented on this aspect of Jeremy’s work. See Ogden, in his “Theory
of Fictions”; H.L.A. Hart Essays on Bentham (Oxford: Clarendon Press 1982), 43, and especially
W. O. Quine in his Theories and Things (Cambridge, Belknap Press 1981), “Five Milestones
of Empiricism” in From a Logical Point of View (1961) p. 67-72, and “Russell’s Ontological
Development” The Journal of Philosophy 63, No. 21 (1966), 657-667. Quine, for example, saw
this focus on propositions in Jeremy’s theory of ﬁctitious entities as foreshadowing an innovation
that would gain popularity near the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the

Bentham’s Logic
15
sumption into the spotlight. For ﬁctitious terms to serve any instructive purpose,
they need to be resolved into Lockean simple ideas, that is, they need raise images
either of perceived substances or emotions. Rather than simply trying to reduce
a ﬁctitious entity to a real entity by a chain of synonyms, paraphrases begins
with a proposition that contained the name of the ﬁctitious entity and translates
that proposition to an equivalent one that uses the names of only real entities.
For Jeremy, if a ﬁctitious entity can be replaced in a proposition by a real entity,
without any loss of meaning, then the ﬁctitious entity is meaningful.
Take, for example, the application of paraphrases on the term “obligation”. We
begin by combining the name of the ﬁctitious entity “obligation” with other words
to create a proposition, such as “A man is under an obligation to do X”. Then,
we ﬁnd another proposition equivalent to “A man is under an obligation to do
X”, such as “A man is liable to punishment if he does not do X”. The sentence
“A man is liable to punishment if he does not do X” is equivalent to “A man
is liable to pain if he doesn’t do X”, provided we adopt the Jeremy’s notion of
punishment, namely that punishment is “pain annexed to an act, and accruing on
a certain account, and from a certain source”.53 The idea associated with the word
“pain” is, in Lockean terms, a “simple” idea, and the method of paraphrases has
resolved the sentence containing the term “obligation” into a sentence containing
the simple idea, namely “pain”. So, in the case of obligation, unless an obligation
can be enforced with sanctions and pain, an obligation can be dismissed as “absurd
in logic”.
Getting back to Blackstone and natural rights, for Jeremy, to see why a “natural
right” is a nonsense term, we must compare the analysis a “natural right” with
a “legal right”. Applying paraphrases, both can be analysed in terms of corre-
sponding duties, but only a legal duty can be analysed further into a simple idea.
Propositions that include legal duty can be translated to propositions that laws
that include the notion of punishment. Legal rights are real rights because they
are produced by existing legal systems. Because there is no corresponding law
with respect to natural duties, claimed Jeremy, natural rights are just imaginary
rights.
In George’s eyes, Whatley and Sanderson were behaving much like Blackstone,
in placing an undue emphasis in discussions of exposition on one particular mode,
twentieth century with Russell. Quine, however, qualiﬁed the historical signiﬁcance of Jeremy’s
idea:
Bentham was perhaps the ﬁrst to see the sentence thus as the primary vehicle of
meaning. Frege took up the tale. But Russell, in his theory of singular description,
was the ﬁrst to put this insight to precise and eﬀective use. Frege and Peano had
allowed singular description the status of a primitive notation; only with Russell did
it become an “incomplete symbol deﬁned in use.” What suggested the expedient
to Russell was not in fact Bentham’s work, it seems, but a use of operators in the
diﬀerential Calculus.”
53J. Bentham, ‘A Fragment on Government’, in A Comment on the Commentaries and A
Fragment on Government, ed. J.H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart (London, 1977), 495 in 95n.

16
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
namely deﬁnition.54 Chapter six of the Outline, titled “Exposition”, George pre-
sented the issues with exposition by framing it in terms of teaching and learn-
ing concepts (an approach Jeremy took in his discussion of exposition in the
Chrestomathia) and outlined Jeremy’s method of paraphrases, in addition to eleven
other Benthamite forms of exposition.
Like Jeremy, George did not see the problems with the tactical aspect of logic
ending with new classiﬁcations of entities and new modes exposition, and he moved
quickly to what he took to be one of the most important subjects in the reform of
the tactical aspect of logic — methodization.
George began chapter seven, titled “Methodization” with a discussion of the two
operations of methodization — collocation and distribution — but spent the bulk
of this chapter on distribution. According to George, distributive methodization
is performed by three operations:
1. Dividing an entity into parts: in the case of individuals, this is analysis, and
in the case of collective entities, this is logical division.
2. Uniting entities into a whole: In the case of individuals, this is synthesis,
and in the case of collective entities, this is generalization.
3. Distribution: “for the performance of this operation, a number of wholes,
as well as parts, are supposed to be already given; but, as in the case of
real entities, the exhibiting of wholes and parts might appear to constitute
the while of this operation, the ﬁgure is now changed, the aggregate ideas
as receptacles into which the several given partial ideas are supposed to be
placed or distributed.”55
What George referred to as “distribution” is similar to what Jeremy referred
to as “arrangement” in his critique of Blackstone. For Jeremy, the Benthamite
expositor needed to do more than deﬁne entities properly:
The function of the Expositor may be conceived to divide itself into
two branches: that of history, and that of simple demonstration. The
business of history is to represent the Law in the state it has been in,
in past periods of its existence: the business of simple demonstration
in the sense in which I will take leave to use the word, is to represent
the Law in the state it is in for the time being.56
It is important to note that Jeremy did not borrow the term “demonstration” from
logicians and mathematicians, but from naturalists. Jeremy explained his use of
the word “demonstration” in the footnote to this passage:
54George organised Whately’s ﬁve kinds of deﬁnition on a table on pg 95 of G. Bentham,
Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr Whately’s “Elements of
Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827).
55G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 101-2.
56J. Bentham, ‘A Fragment on Government’, in A Comment on the Commentaries and A
Fragment on Government, ed. J.H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart (London, 1977), p. 414.

Bentham’s Logic
17
The word demonstration may here seem, at ﬁrst sight, to be out of
place. It will be easily perceived that the sense here put upon it is not
the same with that in which it is employed by Logicians and Mathe-
maticians. In our own language, indeed, it is not very familiar in any
other sense than theirs: but on the Continent it is currently employed
in many other sciences. The French, for example, have their demon-
strateurs de botanique, d’anatomie, de physique experimentale, &c. I
use it out of necessity; not knowing of any other that will suit the
purpose.57
What Jeremy referred to as “demonstration”, George called “methodization”.
For Jeremy, there are three kinds of demonstration: arrangement, narration and
conjecture. Jeremy’s notion of “arrangement” seems to correspond roughly with
George’s notion of “distribution”. Of the three kinds of demonstration, Jeremy
saw arrangement as the most diﬃcult:
Among the most diﬃcult and the most important of the functions of
the demonstrator is the business of arrangement. In this our Author
has been thought, and not, I conceive, without justice, to excel; at least
in comparison of any thing in that way that has hitherto appeared. ‘Tis
to him we owe such an arrangement of the elements of Jurisprudence,
as wants little, perhaps, of being the best that a technical nomencla-
ture will admit of. A technical nomenclature, so long as it is admitted
to mark out and denominate the principal heads, stands an invincible
obstacle to every other than a technical arrangement. For to denomi-
nate in general terms, what is it but to arrange? and to arrange under
heads, what is it but to denominate upon a large scale? A technical
arrangement, governed then in this manner, by a technical nomencla-
ture, can never be otherwise than confused and unsatisfactory. The
reason will be suﬃciently apparent, when we understand what sort of
an arrangement that must be which can be properly termed a natural
one.58
Arrangement consists of three tasks: distributing the entities into diﬀerent groups,
for the purpose of a general survey; determining the order in which those groups
will be brought to view; and ﬁnding a name for each of them. Jeremy’s discussion
of arrangement in his legal and his education reform revealed the inﬂuence of
methodology articulated by Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus (1707–1778).
Jeremy worried that the language of jurisprudence was corrupt — diﬀerent ob-
jects grouped under one name, and similar objects under diﬀerent names. This
corruption resulted in poor systems.59 Concerns about naming and the problem
57J. Bentham, ‘A Fragment on Government’, in A Comment on the Commentaries and A
Fragment on Government, ed. J. H. Burns and H. L. A. Hart (London, 1977), 414 footnote 21.
58J. Bentham, ‘A Fragment on Government’, in A Comment on the Commentaries and A
Fragment on Government, ed. J.H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart (London, 1977), 414.
59S. Jacobs “Bentham, Science and the Construction of Jurisprudence” History of European
Ideas 12 (1990): 585.

18
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
of synonymy was a not just a problem for jurisprudence. Many eighteenth-century
naturalists raised this type of concern, and both Jeremy and George saw in the
work of these naturalists, especially the botanists, a solution.60 For Jeremy, nat-
uralists knew that in order for their objects of investigation to be understood and
useful, they must be classiﬁed and speciﬁcally deﬁned. Natural history provided
the model for Jeremy’s reform.61
Although not the botanist George was, Jeremy was no stranger to natural his-
tory and natural history classiﬁcation systems. Jeremy shared a practical interest
in botany with George’s mother Mary, who was a rather accomplished botanist
herself. Jeremy and Mary exchanged letters and botanical specimens for many
years, and Jeremy himself kept a small garden.62 In addition to botanical classi-
ﬁcations, Jeremy Bentham refers in his writings to the Linnaean inspired nosolo-
gies of French botanist and Professor of Medicine, Fran¸cois Boissier de Sauvages
(1706–1767) and Scottish Professor of Chemistry and Medicine, William Cullen
(1710–1790). Jeremy’s introduction to nosology was likely due to another mem-
ber of the Fordyce family — George’s maternal grandfather, Scottish physician,
George Fordyce (1736–1802). George Fordyce was a student of Cullen’s, and lec-
tured in London.63 Fordyce’s lectures drew from the work of Cullen, and Jeremy
attended some of those lectures.
Jeremy suggested using Linnaeus’s botanical classiﬁcation system — the sexual
system of plants — as a guide to arrangement or classiﬁcation.64 As a teenager,
Linnaeus was fascinated with the sexuality of plants, and after many years of
observing the great diversity of sex organs of plants, he decided to make this
the basis of his botanical classiﬁcation system in Systema Naturae (1735).65 Lin-
60See L. Daston, “Type Specimens and Scientiﬁc Memory.” Critical Inquiry 31(2004): 153–
182.
61The following three papers suggest this reading of Jeremy’s legal and educational reform
work: W. C. Mitchell “Bentham’s Feliciﬁc Calculus” Political Science Quarterly 33 no.2 (1918):
161–183.; S. Jacobs “Bentham, Science and the Construction of Jurisprudence” History of Eu-
ropean Ideas 12 (1990): 583–594.; A. Perreau-Saussine, “Bentham and The Boot-Strappers of
Jurisprudence: The Moral Commitments of a Rationalist Legal Positivist” Cambridge Law Jour-
nal, 63 no.2 (2004): 346–383.
62M. Filipiuk, ed.
George Bentham, Autobiography 1830–1834.
(Toronto:
University of
Toronto Press, 1997), xx.
63N. G. Coley, “Fordyce, George (1736–1802),” in Oxford Dictionary of National Biography,
ed. H. C. G. Matthew and Brian Harrison (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004).
64Jeremy mentions Linnaeus in many of his writings. Jacobs notes, for example Jeremy Ben-
tham, The Correspondence of Jeremy Bentham, 1, 1752 −76.
ed.T. L. S. Sprigge (London:
Athlone Press, 1968), p. 105; also A Comment on the Commentaries and A Fragment on Gov-
ernment, ed. J. H. Burns and H. L. A. Hart (London, 1977), 415, 416, 418–419; and in Principles
of Morals, p. 273 note yl. There are also many references to Linnaeus in the Chrestomathia.
65For more on Linnaeus, see W. Blunt The Compleat Naturalist ; A Life of Linnaeus (New
York, Viking Press 1971); G. Eriksson, “Linnaeus the Botanist.” in Linnaeus: The Man and his
Work, ed. F. Fr¨angsmyr. (Berkley, University of California Press, 1985); S. Lindroth, “The Two
Faces of Linnaeus” in Linnaeus: The Man and his Work, ed. F. Fr¨angsmyr (Berkley, University
of California Press 1985); J. Larson Reason and Experience: The Representation of Natural
Order in the Work of Carl von Linn´e. (Berkeley, University of California Press 1977); E. Mayr,
The Growth of Biological Thought: Diversity, Evolution, and Inheritance (Cambridge, Belknap

Bentham’s Logic
19
naeus divided all ﬂowering plants into twenty-three classes (the twenty-fourth being
Cryptogamia that included ﬂowerless plants like mosses) according to the number,
relative length, arrangement, etc., of the male organ or stamen. These classes were
then divided into orders based on the female parts, or pistils. That Jeremy would
have been familiar with Linnaeus’s work comes as no surprise. Linnaeus’s system
was widely regarded as the most practical system available from 1737-1810, and
was the most widely used.66
Like Linnaeus, Jeremy saw the practical beneﬁt of singling out a particular
character to use as a division principle in an artiﬁcial system. Jeremy believed that
the consistent use of an established principle of division would result in meaningful
groups organised in a coherent way. Borrowing a page from Linnaeus, Jeremy
organised all oﬀences hierarchically according to his principle of utility.
Jeremy also saw the merit of arranging entities hierarchically. Linnaeus was
not the only example to which Jeremy appealed on the topic of hierarchical ar-
rangements. Jeremy drew attention to d’Alembert, who famously organising his
ˆetres ﬁctifs hierarchically in his “tree of knowledge”.67 Jeremy maintained that
the hierarchical tree structure eﬀectively organised the terms according to three
relations: logical identity, logical diversity, and practical dependence. This ar-
rangement provides the reader, or in the case of the organisation of the terms
of jurisprudence, the Legislator, with “an insight — the more clear, correct, and
extensive the better, - into the matter of every [...] branch of art and science.”68
A closer inspection of Jeremy Bentham’s classiﬁcation systems in his legal work,
however, demonstrates a far more consistent application of a division principle
based on a single character than that found in Linnaeus’s systems. But this is
not the only diﬀerence between Linnaeus and Jeremy. Jeremy seemed to posit
a stronger relationship between the division principle employed and the essence
of the group when he claimed that a strict adherence to a fundamental division
principle would provide a “natural” arrangement for his classiﬁcation systems:
That arrangement of the materials of any science may, I take it, be
termed a natural one, which takes such properties to characterize them
by, as men in general are, by the common constitution of man’s na-
ture, disposed to attend to: such, in other words, as naturally, that is
readily, engage, and ﬁrmly ﬁx the attention of any one to whom they
are pointed out. The materials, or elements here in question, are such
actions as are the objects of what we call Laws or Institutions.69
Press of Harvard University Press 1982).
66At least part of the reason for its popularity was because “the information necessary for the
construction of more natural systems had not yet been assembled for synthesis” W. Blunt The
Compleat Naturalist; A Life of Linnaeus (New York, Viking Press 1971), 244.
67See J. Bentham, Chrestomathia. ed M. J. Smith and W. H. Burston. (Oxford: Clarendon
Press1983), 257.
68See J. Bentham, Chrestomathia. ed M. J. Smith and W. H. Burston. (Oxford: Clarendon
Press1983), 218–220.
69J. Bentham, ‘A Fragment on Government’, in A Comment on the Commentaries and A
Fragment on Government, ed. J. H. Burns and H. L. A. Hart (London, 1977), p. 415.

20
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
It is possible that Jeremy’s understanding of a natural system is more a
ves-
tige of Locke than a modiﬁcation of Linnaeus. Locke agreed with Aristotle and
the Scholastics that essences serve two distinct purposes: a classiﬁcatory pur-
pose, that is, the essences of entities should help classifying entities into kinds;
and an explanatory purpose, that is, the essence of entities should help explain
the properties and behaviours of the entities we observe in the world. However,
Locke maintained that each purpose is served by a distinct type of essence, the
explanatory purpose by real essences70 and the classiﬁcatory purpose by nominal
essences.71 For Locke, nominal essences are nothing more than the criteria that
we create and use to mark oﬀthe members of a group. Nominal essences are the
boundaries set by us, not by reality. Reality can supply phenomenal resemblances,
but for Locke, resemblances do not constitute natural, real boundaries. At best,
phenomenal resemblances indicate underlying structural resemblances.72 Jeremy’s
principle of utility provided a “natural” classiﬁcation of oﬀences, and this principle
alone can “render satisfactory and clear any arrangement.” In contrast, Linnaeus,
like many naturalists during this period, called arrangements based on a single
character, “artiﬁcial” systems. Artiﬁcial systems stood in contrast to “natural”
systems, systems that group organisms according to many characters.
A further point George stressed in his discussion of methodization was that both
distribution (arrangement) and generalisation are needed for the construction of a
70Locke deﬁnes real essences in the following way in An Essay Concerning Human Under-
standing:
Real essences . . . may be taken for the very being of anything, whereby it is what it
is. And thus the real internal, but generally (in substances) unknown constitution
of things, whereon their discoverable qualities depend, may be called their essence.
This is the proper original signiﬁcation of the word, as is evident from the formation
of it; essentia, in its primary notation, signifying properly, being. And in this sense
it is still used, when we speak of the essence of particular things, without giving
them any name. [3:3:15]
In other words, something is a real essence just in case it provides the suﬃcient condition(s) for
the explanation of the properties of entities, whether the entities in question are substances or
not, so deﬁned.
71Locke deﬁnes nominal essences in the following way An Essay Concerning Human Under-
standing:
Nominal essences . . . [have] been almost wholly applied to the artiﬁcial constitution
of genus and species. It is true, there is ordinarily supposed a real constitution of
the sorts of things; and it is past doubt there must be some real constitution, on
which any collection of simple ideas co-existing must depend. But, it being evident
that things are ranked under names into sorts or species, only as they agree to
certain abstract ideas, to which we have annexed those names, the essence of each
genus, or sort, comes to be nothing but that abstract idea which the general, or
sortal (if I may have leave so to call it from sort, as I do general from genus), name
stands for. And this we shall ﬁnd to be that which the word essence imports in its
most familiar use. [3:3:15]
In other words, something is a nominal essence just in case it sets a boundary to the class in
such a way as to justify our application of a name.
72For a more detailed discussion of this claim see Mackie, J., L., Problems From Locke, (Oxford
University Press, London 1976), 134–6.

Bentham’s Logic
21
successful system. He provided the following example to help appreciate how these
operations work together, as well as to show his distinction between division and
distribution. George’s example began with the naturalist’s use of generalization:
A botanist visits a country with whose productions he is as yet unac-
quainted; he sees a number of plants which resemble one another very
strongly, and which diﬀer considerably from any other plants which he
has seen or heard of; he discovers successively several of these sets of
plants, and by generalization he forms as many new species, charac-
terized by the properties he has observed in these several individual
plants.73
Then George moved on to a naturalist’s use of distribution:
On referring to his books, he compares the several properties there
given as characteristics of general classes, which those which are pos-
sessed by his several new species, and thus decides to which of these
general classes the species in question belong. This many be termed
distributing those species under their superordinate genera.
Suppose that by the addition of these new species, some one class (or
logical genus) may now consist of so many, as to render it diﬃcult
to compare them or to retain their distinctive properties without the
help of some intermediate classes; these classes may be formed either
by dividing the genus into subclasses, or by distributing the species
into groups. In this case division and distribution appear so closely
allied, as scarcely to be distinguishable otherwise than by the form of
expression.74
By emphasising the necessity of both generalization and distribution, this passage
reﬂects the impact George’s training as a botanist had on his logical thinking.
That he would have emphasised both operations and used such an example is not
surprising, given his experience as a botanist. Historian of biology M¨uller-Wille
argued that Linnaeus discussed a division of labour in natural history, between
the “ ‘collectors (collectores)’ who ‘primarily cared for the number of species’ by
collecting, describing and drawing plant specimens, and ‘taxonomists (methodici)’,
who ‘primarily cared for the classiﬁcation and denomination of plants’.”75
For George, a great deal of confusion surrounded the tools used in constructing
a classiﬁcation system. For Jeremy, the principal tool for arrangement or distri-
bution of real entities was bifurcation (sometimes referred to as “bipartition” or
73G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 102–3.
74G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 103.
75S. M¨uller-Wille, “Gardens of paradise” Endeavour 25 No. 2 (2001), 49. See also S. Lindroth,
“The Two Faces of Linnaeus” in Linnaeus: The Man and his Work, ed. F. Fr¨angsmyr (Berkley,
University of California Press 1985) and J. Larson Reason and Experience: The Representation
of Natural Order in the Work of Carl von Linn´e. (Berkeley, University of California Press 1977).

22
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
“exhaustive division”). Jeremy traced this tool back to Porphyry’s commentary
on Aristotle’s logic, but also saw this tool wielded by some late eighteenth-century
naturalists. George too found instances of bifurcate divisions in natural history. As
mentioned earlier, George saw the dichotomous key typiﬁed in the Flore Fran¸caise
of Lamarck and de Candolle as an instance of distribution using bifurcate divisions.
In the chapter titled “M´ethode Analytique” of the Flore Fran¸caise, Lamarck began
with the following division: Fleurs dont les ´etamines & pistils peuvent ais´ement
se distinguer (ﬂowers whose stamen and pistils are distinguishable) or Fleurs dont
les ´etamines & pistils sont nuls, ou ne peuvent se distinguer (ﬂowers whose sta-
mens and pistils are absent or indistinguishable). Amateur naturalists (as George
was when he ﬁrst read the Flore) were quick to praise dichotomous identiﬁcation
keys, as they had the virtue of allowing anyone to identify plants with relative
ease, as compared to the artiﬁcial system of Linnaeus76 (a system that organised
plants based on their sexual characters) or the natural systems of Michel Adan-
son, Bernard de Jussieu, and Antoine Laurent de Jussieu.77 This is because with
bifurcation, large groups are eliminated at each stage by using mutually exclusive
characteristics, making it easy to ﬁnd the name of a plant, provided the reader
can identify the requisite parts. This method stands in contrast to the methods of
many of the natural systems during the eighteenth century, systems that required
the reader to have a great deal of prior botanical knowledge under their belt.
Both Jeremy and George understood bifurcation as taking a class and subjecting
it to progressive dichotomous divisions. In other words, every member of class A
has the character X in common, and can be divided into two subclasses, B and C,
depending on if the member of the class A has the character Y or not (so all the
members of B have Y in common and all the members of C do not), then every
member of class B has the character Y , and can be divided into two subclasses,
D and E, depending on if the member of the class B has the character Z or not
(so all the members of D have Z in common and all the members of E do not),
and so on. The primary virtue of this method is that results in a classiﬁcation
that is both exclusive and exhaustive. Jeremy continued by claiming that if, when
analysing classes and assigning them to divisions to which names are then applied,
bifurcation will complement deﬁnition by giving a precise deﬁnition of a name in
relation to the properties that distinguish the class it designates. Jeremy discussed
the virtues of bifurcation in Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation
(1781):
When a number of objects, composing a logical whole, are to be con-
sidered together, all of these possessing with respect to one another a
certain congruency or agreement denoted by a certain name, there is
but one way of giving a perfect knowledge of their nature; and that
76Although Lamarck didn’t adopt Linnaeus’s artiﬁcial system, his Flore was one of the ﬁrst
French works to include the Linnaean nomenclature.
77J. M. Drouin, “Principles and Uses of Taxonomy in the Works of Augustin-Pyramus de
Candolle.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biology and Biomedical Sciences 32 (2001):
264-5.

Bentham’s Logic
23
is, by distributing them into a system of parcels, each of them a part,
either of some parcel, or, at any rate, of the common whole. This can
only be done in the way of bipartition. . . 78
While Jeremy encouraged the use of bifurcation whenever possible in arrangement
(since classiﬁcation was designed to assist the logical operation of exposition),
George was very careful to outline the limits of bifurcation in his chapter on
methodization.79
George’s careful discussion of the restricted use of bifurcation began by draw-
ing a connection between Whately’s and Sanderson’s emphasis on deﬁnition and
Whately’s and Sanderson’s general rules for division in his discussions of method-
odization. The problem, as George saw it, was that Whately’s and Sanderson’s
sets of rules apply only to bifurcate divisions, and many things that cannot be
eﬀectively organised by bifurcation. Bifurcation, for example, cannot be applied
to ﬁctitious entities for the same reason the method of deﬁnition cannot be ap-
plied ﬁctitious entities — ﬁctitious entities lack a common genus and so cannot be
organized according to “any exhaustive plan of arrangement, but must be picked
up here and there as they happen to occur”.80 George also mentioned two further
restrictions on bifurcation. First, George reminds us that a second purpose of
classiﬁcation was to aid retention, often times this purpose is best served by mul-
tifurcate divisions rather than bifurcate divisions.81 George assumed Sanderson
was also aware of this latter restriction on the application of bifurcation:
But upon reﬂection, he [Sanderson] was probably led to consider, that,
if the successive bifurcate divisions of logical aggregates were carried
on to the lowest stage necessary for classiﬁcation, and if, at the same
time, names were given to every one of the intermediate aggregates
so formed, — this operation would, on many occasions, be attended
with more labour than advantage [our italics], and would require too
great a strain on the memory. He therefore added the restriction that
dichotomy was only to be made use of when it could be easily performed
[our italics]; and that it should not be sought out on all occasions with
superstitious strictness with which the Ramaeans followed it.82
Both the Benthams note the impracticality of applying this method to botanical
classiﬁcation. Jeremy wrote:
78J. Bentham, An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, ed. J. H. Burns
and H. L. A. Hart (London, 1970), 187.
79George also talks about division in his “Essai” see G. Bentham, “Essai sur la nomenclature et
la classiﬁcation des principales branches d’art-et-science” (Paris, Bossange Freres 1823). 70–72.
80J. Bentham, An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, ed. J. H. Burns
and H. L. A. Hart (London, 1970), 53 note c.
81J. Bentham, Chrestomathia ed M. J. Smith and W. H. Burston. (Oxford, Clarendon Press
1983), 252.
82G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 110–1.

24
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
The quantity of surface necessary to the exhibition of such a diagram,
presents another circumstance, by which, long enough before the num-
ber of the extreme branches had reached to any such number as forty
thousand, as above, not to say the tenth or the hundredth part of it,
the bar of impracticality would be opposed.83
Further, George was writing the Outline at a time when botanists were racing to
organize and classify the ever increasing numbers of known plants. With thou-
sands of plants species already described and thousands more estimated to exist,
memorization of species names was simply out of the question, so designs for ef-
ﬁcient storage and retrieval systems were the top priority.
While dichotomous
keys initially held some promise, especially considering how helpful they were
for the purpose of identiﬁcation, George was keenly aware of the many serious
ﬂaws resulting from the use of a bifurcating system as a classiﬁcation system
for tens of thousands of plants. The number of dichotomous divisions would be
enormous, and revising the system in light of new discoveries of species would
be tremendously diﬃcult. It is not surprising for George, then, to ﬁnd that in
natural history classiﬁcation systems, natural systems and even certain artiﬁcial
systems (like Linnaeus’s sexual system of plants) adopted multifurcate divisions
rather than bifurcating divisions in their classiﬁcation systems. Further, in some
instances, bifurcation loses its virtue of being exhaustive. For example, natural
history classiﬁcation systems need to be able to accommodate the new species are
always being discovered.84 For example, in the “Essai” George looks at the eﬀect
that the discovery of intermediate groups has on the kind of key he constructed,
arguing “our ignorance of so many beings, by implication as yet undiscovered,
would be even more damaging to ﬁner subdivisions of the key”.85 Jeremy was also
aware of the problem of the number of species not being ﬁxed had on bifurcation:
Take, for example, Natural History, and therein Botany. Forty thou-
sand was, some years ago, stated as the number of supposed diﬀerent
species of plants (exclusive of varieties) at that time more or less known
to the botanic world. But, at that time, the utmost knowledge obtained
of them by any person was not, to any such degree clear, correct, or
complete, as to enable him, in this way, to show, of every one of them,
in any such concise mode, its points of agreement and disagreement
with reference to every other. And even if, in and for any one year, the
distinctive properties of the whole multitude of individuals contained
in the whole multitude of species then known, could have been exhib-
ited in this systematic form, the sketch given them, if with regard to
the whole number of species of plants then existing it professed to be,
83J. Bentham, Chrestomathia. ed. M. J. Smith and W. H. Burston. (Oxford, Clarendon Press
1983), 252.
84J. Bentham, Chrestomathia. ed. M. J. Smith and W. H. Burston. (Oxford, Clarendon Press
1983), 252.
85P. F. Stevens, The Development of Biological Classiﬁcation: Antoine-Laurent de Jussieu,
Nature, and the Natural System. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994): 103.

Bentham’s Logic
25
and even if it really were, an exhaustive one, would, in and for the next
year, no longer posses that quality.
These concerns about bifurcation led George to suggested ﬁve considerations for
discussions of divisions:
1. The particular end in view, or object of the division. Knowing this will help
distinguish between practical or logical division.
2. The nature of its subject.
3. The source or principle of the division.
4. The mode of division, whether it is a contradictory bifurcate division or a
loose, irregular multifurcate division.
5. The extent to which the division should be carried out.86
George did suggest that, in some cases, a classiﬁcation system with multifurcate
divisions may turn out to be as complete and distinct as a bifurcate system, and
we can test its completeness by applying bifurcation to the same subject matter.87
George used the class of animals Vertebrata to illustrate his point. If the goal is
simply to give a general idea of the kind of animals that fall in the class Vertebrata
(in other words, it is not necessary to deﬁne exactly the nature of the several
subclasses or species), the class can be multifurcately divided into four classes:
Mammiferae are those who suckle their young; Birds are animals which have
wings and feathers; Fish are those who have ﬁns and live in the water; Lizards
are those little animals with four legs and scaly skin.88 For the naturalist, who
aims for the all-comprehensiveness of her classes and sub-classes, and requires all
classes and subclasses to be distinctly characterized, divisions must be performed
using bifurcation. Using the above example, this can be done in three successive
bifurcate divisions: every member of class Vertebrata are either endowed with lungs
(Mammifera, Birds, Reptiles) or not (Fish). Every member of class of animals not
endowed with lungs is either endowed with mammae (Mammifera) or not (Birds,
Reptiles).
Every member of class of animals endowed with mammae is either
endowed with wings (Birds) or not (Reptiles). This division is complete and its
logical species are distinct.89
It is in George’s chapter eight, titled “Propositions”, where we ﬁnd his famous
quantiﬁcation of the predicate. George prepared us for the quantiﬁcation of the
86G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 104-6.
87G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 111.
88G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 111–2.
89G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 113-4.

26
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
predicate early on by introducing us to the confusion that can arise from not being
clear about relations. In his Chapter Five, titled “Terms”, George drew attention
to one kind of confusion that can arise with respect to relations, a confusion that
arises when we trade terms between disciplines, speciﬁcally between Whately’s
logical notion of genera and species versus a naturalist’s notion:
As to predicating the “whole essence” of a subject, in one term, that
is impossible, unless that term be a strict synonym. Dr. Whately does
not appear to have been aware of this; he implies, that, if we predicate
the genus, we predicate part of the essence; and if the species, we
predicate the whole essence; considering species in the sense in which
naturalists employ the word, in which case it is, in fact, a logical genus
with reference to individuals.90
In Scholastic logic and in Whately’s logic, wrote George:
[l]ogical species and genus are only relative, not absolute terms, and the
use of them always implies subalternation; that is, relation, either to a
superordinate genus, or to a subordinate species or individual. . . As to
the particular sense in which naturalists make use of the word species,
it is very diﬀerent from the logical sense of the word, the only one in
which it should be made use of on the present occasion.91
The naturalist’s notion of genera and species, in contrast, is absolute, that is, genus
and species have a ﬁxed place in a ﬁxed hierarchy of nested sets. George was also
quick to notice that Jeremy’s emphasis hierarchical tree structures bring into the
spotlight the confusions surrounding the logical relations of logical identity, logical
diversity, and practical dependence. The goal for George would be to translate the
Aristotelian forms of propositions that contain inclusive relations into equivalent
propositions that contained relations of identity and diversity.92 In this respect,
we can begin to see why George would consider the quantiﬁcation of the predicate.
George gave a fuller discussion of his ideas concerning relations in his chapter on
propositions. The idea that propositions should be divided into two terms with the
relations of logical identity, logical diversity, or subalternation is ﬁrst introduced
in a footnote on page 123, but explored in the body of the text a few pages later:
[e]very simple proposition may be reduced to the expression between
two ideas: the two ideas are represented by the two terms (subject and
predicate); the relation itself by the copula. The species of relation here
referred to are those of identity and diversity [note: The diversity ex-
pressed in logical propositions is always absolute, and not contingent.
90G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 69.
91G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 69–71.
92N. I. Styazhkin, History of Mathematical Logic from Leibniz to Peano. (Cambridge: M.I.T.
Press, 1969), 148.

Bentham’s Logic
27
Resemblance and diﬀerence, and other modiﬁcations of diversity men-
tioned in the classiﬁcation of entities, are not taken into consideration
in the syllogistic process. Diversity here signiﬁes non-identity.] and if
logical subalternation.93
For George, the only possible relations within the terms of a proposition are
identity, diversity, and logical subalternation, where identity is expressed by the
copula “is”, diversity by the copula “is not”. However, for the copula verb to be an
identity between classes, the subject and predicate must be of the same quantiﬁable
form — hence the quantiﬁcation of both the subject and the predicate.
George began the task of reworking the classiﬁcation of the forms of propositions
by expressing the two terms of a judgment by X (subject) and Y (predicate), their
identity by the mathematical sign “=”, diversity by the sign “∥”, universality by
the words “in toto”, and partiality by the words “ex parte” (for brevity he preﬁxed
the letters t and p as signs of universality and partiality). What resulted were not
the four familiar Aristotelian forms of judgment, but eight possibilities dependent
on the way in which the quantity and quality of the subject will be combined with
the predicate:
1. X in toto = Y ex parte or tX = pY
2. X in toto ∥Y ex parte or tX∥pY
3. X in toto = Y ex toto or tX = tY
4. X in toto ∥Y ex toto or tX∥tY
5. X in parte = Y ex parte or pX = pY
6. X in parte ∥Y ex parte or pX∥pY
7. X in parte = Y ex toto or pX = tY
8. X in parte ∥Y ex toto or pX∥tY
George then took those eight forms and reduced them to ﬁve, rather than the four
traditional Scholastic forms AEIO.94 The diﬀerence between George’s classiﬁcation
of propositions and the Scholastic classiﬁcation of propositions is more than simple
a diﬀerence in number of forms of proposition. George was thinking extensionally,
in terms of nested sets of classes and reducing propositions and syllogisms to an
93G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 127-8.
94G. Bentham, G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination
of Dr Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 133-4. George realised
that 1 is equivalent with 7, and 2 with 8, because it is immaterial in his logic which is mentioned
ﬁrst, x or y. Similarly, he thinks we can eliminate 2 as 4 expresses the same meaning in a manner
more suitable to the process of deduction. Therefore, thought Bentham, we are left with only
ﬁve types of judgment.

28
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
identity between members of classes.
One consequence of this move was that
the familiar notions of “resemblance” and “essence” no longer belonged to logical
classiﬁcation.95
George was aware that earlier logicians had acknowledged the possibility of
quantifying the predicate term, but chose not to. George claimed that such an
omission led to fallacies. George wrote:
Logicians make no mention of the ﬁrst form, which they consider as
useless, and they say that the predicate (or the second term of the
proposition) is never distributed (note: Elements p, 42) (that is, uni-
versal). I should think however, that this assertion can scarcely be
logical. Many fallacies arise from the considering of terms as synony-
mous which are not so in reality; and it may be found as advantageous
to reduce perfect identity to a logical form; as partial identity, or per-
fect or partial diversity.96
This innovation, the quantiﬁcation of the predicate, also made George re-think
the axiomatization of syllogisms Whately presented in the Elements. One of the
virtues of Whately’s logic is that he provided an axiomatic presentation of the
rules for syllogisms — a virtue George happily acknowledged and adopted in his
Outline. George wrote:
But, if every legitimate syllogism must, by deﬁnition of the word, be
self-evident without the help of these rules, might we not suppress
altogether a system which requires so much labour to understand it,
so much strain on the memory to keep it in mind, and which, after all,
rather takes away from, than adds to, this self-evidence? Might not we
substitute a few plain and simple axioms, the truth of which cannot
be denied, and which may be found to contain, in general terms, every
principle upon which a syllogistic conclusion can be founded?97
Traditionally, the students of Scholastic logic had to memorise mnemonic devices
in order to remember the valid forms of syllogisms. Whately replaced the cum-
bersome memory tricks with a small set of axioms, an innovation that not only
rendered distinguishing syllogisms into moods and ﬁgures useless, but spoke to
Whately’s attempt to see logic as a science with syllogisms as its theoretical core.
In his Chapter Nine, titled “Deduction”, George discussed this axiomatization.
Like Whately, George set out to axiomatize syllogistic logic, and even credited
the ﬁrst two of his own four axioms to Whately. George cited the two relevant
axioms of Whately as: if two terms agree with one and the same third, they
95See G. McOuat “The Logical Systematist: George Bentham and His Outline of a New System
of Logic.” Archives of Natural History 30 (2003).
96G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 135.
97G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 155.

Bentham’s Logic
29
agree with each other; if one term agrees, and another disagrees with one and the
same third, these two disagree with each other.98 George then revised these two
axioms in accordance with his new analysis of propositions, that is, he replaced
the relationship of agreement in Whately’s axioms with the relation of equality.
Consequently, George’s ﬁrst two ﬁrst two axioms read as: things which are equal
to the same, are equal to one another; and when two things, one only is equal to
a third, and the other is not equal to that third, these two things are not equal to
each other.
George’s new analysis of propositions also prompted his addition of two more
axioms.99 For George, Whately’s axioms are suﬃcient for a logic that does not
quantify the predicate, but if we do quantify the predicate, then we become aware
of that rules are necessary for those syllogisms where, for example, the middle term
is universal in both premises. George claimed that “for it is then only that the
two extremes are precisely equal to the same mean.”100 George two new axioms
are as follows: parts of a part are parts of the whole of that part (that is, of the
whole of which that part is a part); and when the whole of a class is said to be
equal to, or diﬀerent from, the whole or any part of another class, it is meant that
every individual referred to by the ﬁrst class, is the same as, or diﬀerent from, any
individual referred to by such whole or part of such other class.101
George’s innovations in this chapter regarding the analysis of propositions marked
a shift away from relations of “resemblance” and “essence”, and a move towards
a logic of classes — an extensional logic with relations of identity and diversity —
that would be taken up by the pioneers of algebraic logic.
To conclude, during the 1870s, our retired botanist found himself in a strange
position in two revolutions.
In spite of the fact that he was President of the
Linnean Society of London, George was seen as being mired in the pre-evolutionary
styles and practices of a by-gone era during the revolution in natural history.
In spite of the fact that his only signiﬁcant logic publication — the Outline of
a New System of Logic — was not widely read, George was seen as going well
beyond his masters Richard Whately and Jeremy Bentham during the revolution
in logic. What remained constant in George were his ideals of clarity and precision
in language, and cautioning against speculation in science. The tale of George
98G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827).
99George wrote:
In order to obviate all these diﬃculties of expressions with regard to the concordance
and the disagreement of collective entities, that I have thought it necessary to
modify the expression of Dr. Whately’s two axioms, and to add two others, the
last of which may perhaps be considered rather as an explanation of the relations
of collective entities to one another, than strictly speaking, as an axiom.
G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr Whately’s
“Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 158.
100G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 156.
101G. Bentham, Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination of Dr
Whately’s “Elements of Logic” (London: Hunt & Clarke 1827), 155-6.

30
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
Bentham’s life, his inﬂuences, and his innovations show that logic and natural
history were intimately connected during the nineteenth century, but not in ways
normally discussed in the histories of either discipline.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are very much indebted to Philip Schoﬁeld and Michael Quinn for their in-
sights and assistance while we were looking at Jeremy Bentham’s unpublished
logic papers at University College, London. We would like to thank the librarians
at Robarts, Gerstein, and Thomas Fisher Rare Books Libraries at the University
of Toronto for their invaluable help. Charissa Varma owes particular thanks to
Jennifer Keelan, Martha Harris, and Sharon Brown. This research was supported
by a grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada,
we are grateful to the University of King’s College, Halifax, which administers this
grant, and to the taxpayers of Canada.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Ashwroth, 1970] E. J. Ashworth. Some Notes on Syllogistic in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries, Notre Dame 11, no. 1, 17–33, 1970.
[Ashworth, 1979] E. J. Ashworth. The ‘Libelli Sophistarum’ and the Use of Medieval Logic Texts
at Oxford and Cambridge in the Early Sixteenth Century. Vivarium, 17:134, 1979.
[Ayers, 1981] M. R. Ayers. Locke versus Aristotle on Natural Kinds. Journal of Philosophy 78:
247-72, 1981.
[Ayers, 1994] M. R. Ayers. Locke: Epistemology and Ontology. London: Routledge, 1994.
[Ayers, 1999] M. R. Ayers. Locke. London: Routledge, 1999.
[Baynes, 1873] T. S. Baynes. Mr. Herbert on Sir Wm. Hamilton and the quantiﬁcation of the
predicate Contemporary Review 21: 796-798, 1873.
[Bentham, 1823] G. Bentham. Essai sur la nomenclature et la classiﬁcation des principales
branches d’art-et-science Paris: Bossange Freres, 1823.
[Bentham, 1827] G. Bentham. Outline of a New System of Logic, With a Critical Examination
of Dr Whately’s Elements of Logic. London: Hunt & Clarke 1827.
[Bentham, 1817] G. Bentham. Presidential Address Proceedings of the Linnean Society of Lon-
don 1870-1871, xxxiv-lxxviii, 1817.
[Bentham, 1968] J. Bentham. The Correspondence of Jeremy Bentham, 1, 1752–76. ed. T. L.
S. Sprigge, London: Athlone Press, 1968.
[Bentham, 1970] J. Bentham. An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, ed.
J.H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart, London: Oxford University Press, 1970.
[Bentham, 1977] J. Bentham. A Fragment on Government, in A Comment on the Commentaries
and A Fragment on Government, ed. J.H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart London:Oxford University
Press 1977.
[Bentham, 1983] J. Bentham. Chrestomathia. ed M. J. Smith and W. H. Burston. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1983.
[Blakey, 1851] R. Blakey. Historical Sketch of Logic: From the Earliest Times to the Present
Day. London: Bailli`ere, 1851.
[Coley, 2004] N. G. Coley. G. Fordyce (1736–1802), in Oxford Dictionary of National Biography,
ed. H. C. G. Matthew and Brian Harrison, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
[Blunt, 1971] W. Blunt. The Compleat Naturalist: A Life of Linnaeus (New York, Viking Press
1971)
[Bochenski, 1961] J. Bochenski. A History of Formal Logic. New York: Chelsea Publishing Co.
1961.

Bentham’s Logic
31
[Daston, 2004] L. Daston. Type Specimens and Scientiﬁc Memory. Critical Inquiry 31: 153-182,
2004.
[Drouin, 2001] J.-M. Drouin. Principles and Uses of Taxonomy in the Works of Augustin-
Pyramus de Candolle. Studies in History and Philosophy of Biology and Biomedical Sciences
32: 255-275, 2001.
[Eriksson, 1985] G. Eriksson. Linnaeus the Botanist. In Linnaeus: The Man and his Work,
edited by F. Fr¨angsmyr. Berkley: University of California Press, 1985.
[Ferreiros, 2001] J. Ferreiros. The Road to Modern Logic—An Interpretation The Bulletin of
Symbolic Logic 7: 441-484, 2001.
[Filipiuk, 1997] M. Filipiuk, ed. George Bentham, Autobiography 1830-1834. Toronto: Univer-
sity of Toronto Press, 1997.
[Fr¨angsmyr, 1985] F. Fr¨angsmyr, ed.
Linnaeus: The Man and his Work. Berkley: University
of California Press, 1985.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1984] I. Grattan-Guinness. Notes on the Fate of Logicism from ‘Principia
Mathematica’ to G¨odel Incompletability. History and Philosophy of Logic 5: 67-78, 1984.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1991] I. Grattan-Guinness. The Correspondence Between George Boole and
Stanley Jevons, 1863-1864. History and Philosophy of Logic 12: 15-35, 1991.
[Howell, 1961] W. S. Howell. Logic and rhetoric in England, 1500-1700. New York: Russell &
Russell, 1961.
[Howell, 1971] W. S. Howell. Eighteenth-century British logic and rhetoric. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1971.
[Jacobs, 1990] S. Jacobs. Bentham, Science and the Construction of Jurisprudence History of
European Ideas 12: 583-94, 1990.
[Bentham, ] Jeremy Bentham Papers, University College London Library ci, cii.
[Jevons, 1873] W. S. Jevons. Who discovered the quantiﬁcation of the predicate? Contemporary
Review 21: 821-824, 1873.
[Jolley, 1999] N. Jolley. Locke: His Philosophical Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1999.
[Jongsma, 1982] C. Jongsma. Richard Whately and the Revival of Syllogistic Logic in Great
Britain in the early Nineteenth Century. Unpublished dissertation, Toronto, 1982.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Oxford:
Clarendon Press 1962.
[Larson, 1977] J. Larson. Reason and Experience: The Representation of Natural Order in the
Work of Carl von Linn´e. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977.
[Lindroth, 1985] S. Lindroth. The Two Faces of Linnaeus In Linnaeus: The Man and his Work,
edited by F. Fr¨angsmyr. Berkley: University of California Press, 1985.
[Locke, 1993] J. Locke An essay concerning human understanding; abridged and edited by John
W. Yolton. London: Dent, 1993.
[Mackie, 1976] J. L. Mackie. Problems From Locke. London: Oxford University Press, 1976.
[Mayr, 1982] E. Mayr. The Growth of Biological Thought: Diversity, Evolution, and Inheri-
tance. Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1982.
[McOuat, 2003] G. R. McOuat. The Logical Systematist: George Bentham and His Outline of
a New System of Logic. Archives of Natural History 30: 203-223, 2003.
[Merrill, 2005] D. D. Merrill. Augustus De Morgan’s Boolean Algebra History and Philosophy
of Logic, 26: 75-91, 2005.
[Mitchell, 1918] W. C. Mitchell. Bentham’s Feliciﬁc Calculus Political Science Quarterly 33
no.2: 161-183, 1918.
[M¨uller-Wille, 2001] S. M¨uller-Wille. Gardens of Paradise Endeavour 25 No. 2: 49-54, 2001.
[Ogden, 1982] C. K. Ogden. Theory of Fictions in H.L.A. Hart Essays on Bentham. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1982.
[Stevens, 2003] P. F. Stevens. George Bentham (1800–1884): the life of a botanist’s botanist
Archives of Natural History 30: 189–202, 2003.
[Pease-Watkin, 2002] C. Pease-Watkin. Jeremy and Samuel Bentham–The Private and the Pub-
lic, Journal of Bentham Studies 5: 2002.
[Pease-Watkin, 2004] C. Pease-Watkin. Bentham, Samuel (1757–1831), in Oxford Dictionary of
National Biography, ed. H. C. G. Matthew and Brian Harrison, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2004.
[Pease-Watkin, 2006] C. Pease-Watkin. The Inﬂuence of Mary Bentham on John Stuart Mill,
Journal of Bentham Studies 8: 2006.

32
Gordon R. McOuat and Charissa S. Varma
[Peckhaus, 1999] V. Peckhaus. 19th Century Logic between Philosophy and Mathematics The
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 5: 433-450, 1999.
[Peckhaus, 2003] V. Peckhaus. The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
Entwurf f¨ur den Beitrag zum History of Modern Logic-Projekt, ed. Leila Haaparanta, Helsinki.
2003.
[Peckhaus, 2004] V. Peckhaus. Calculus ratiocinator versus characteristica universalis? The two
traditions in logic, revisited History and Philosophy of Logic, 25, 3–14, 2004.
[Perreau=Saussine, 2004] A. Perreau-Saussine. Bentham and The Boot-Strappers of Jurispru-
dence: The Moral Commitments of a Rationalist Legal Positivist Cambridge Law Journal, 63
no.2: 346–383, 2004.
[Prest, 2004] W. Prest. Blackstone, Sir William (1723–1780), in Oxford Dictionary of National
Biography, ed. H. C. G. Matthew and Brian Harrison, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
[Quine, 1980] W. V. O. Quine. Five Milestones of Empiricism in From a Logical Point of View.
Boston: Harvard University Press, 1980.
[Quine, 1981] W. V. O. Quine. Theories and Things. Cambridge: Belknap Press, 1981.
[Quine, 1966] W. V. O. Quine. Russell’s Ontological Development The Journal of Philosophy
63, No. 21: 657-667, 1966.
[Schoﬁeld, 2003] P. Schoﬁeld. Jeremy Bentham, The Principle of Utility, and Legal Positivism,
Current Legal Problems 56: 1–39, 2003.
[Smiley, 1973] T. Smiley. What is a Syllogism? Journal of Philosophical Logic 2 (1973): 136-154,
1973.
[Spencer, 1873] H. Spencer. The study of sociology IX - the bias of patriotism Contemporary
Review 21: 475-502, 1873.
[Stearn, 1959] W. T. Stearn. The Background of Linnaeus’s Contributions to the Nomenclature
and Methods of Systematic Biology. Systematic Zoology 8: 4–22, 1959.
[Stevens, 1994] P. F. Stevens. The Development of Biological Classiﬁcation: Antoine-Laurent
de Jussieu, Nature, and the Natural System. New York: Columbia University Press, 1994.
[Stevens, 2004] P. F. Stevens. Bentham, George (1800–1884), in Oxford Dictionary of National
Biography, ed. H. C. G. Matthew and Brian Harrison, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
[Styazhkin, 1969] N. I. Styazhkin. History of Mathematical Logic from Leibniz to Peano. Cam-
bridge: MIT Press, 1969.
[van Heijenoort, 1974] J. van Heijenoort. Subject and Predicate in Western Logic. Philosophy
East and West 24: 253-268, 1974.
[van Heijenoort, 1992] J. van Heijenoort. Historical Development of Modern Logic. Modern
Logic 2: 242-255, 1992.
[van Evra, 1977] J. van Evra. A Reassessment of George Boole’s Theory of Logic. Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic 18: 363-77, 1977.
[van Evra, 1984] J. van Evra. Richard Whately and the rise of Modern Logic, History and
Philosophy of Logic 5: 1-18, 1984.
[van Evra, 2000] J. van Evra. The Development of Logic as Reﬂected in the Fate of the Syllogism
1600-1900. History and Philosophy of Logic 21: 115-34, 2000.
[Whately, 1866] E. J. Whately. Life and correspondence of Richard Whately, D.D. London:
Longmans, Green, 1866.
[Whately, 1831] R. Whately. Elements of Logic, Comprising the Substance of the Article in the
Encyclopaedia Metropolitana; with Additions, &c,. London: B. Fellowes, 1831.
[Yolton, 1985] J. W. Yolton. Locke, an introduction. New York: B. Blackwell, 1985.
[Yolton, 1968] J. W. Yolton. Locke and the Way of Ideas Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968.

COLERIDGE’S LOGIC
Tim Milnes
1
WHY READ COLERIDGE’S LOGIC?
In 1834, Thomas De Quincey wrote of a fellow essayist, philosopher and opium
addict that ‘logic the most severe was as inalienable from his modes of thinking as
grammar from his language.’1 This assessment of Samuel Taylor Coleridge reveals
more, perhaps, than De Quincey intended. It not only indicates the importance of
logic to Coleridge’s thought, but also the unconventional use he made of it. One
of Coleridge’s main intellectual ambitions, indeed, was to unite the disciplines of
grammar and logic. This task, daunting enough in itself, was however, only part
of a much broader undertaking. The reconciliation of grammar, or language, with
logic could only be eﬀected through a universal organon that encompassed subjects
as diverse as poetry, epistemology, natural philosophy, hermeneutics, metaphysics
and theology: in short, as he saw it, all aspects of human life. Even in the work
which he devoted to the subject, the Logic manuscript, which, like so many of
the tantalising, unﬁnished or fragmentary works that littered his career, remained
unpublished at his death, Coleridge showed little inclination to separate logical
questions from ethical and existential concerns. The reader who approaches Co-
leridge for the ﬁrst time with the assumption, as Quine puts it, that ‘logic in the
strictest sense is quantiﬁcation theory, and a logical deduction in the strictest sense
consists in establishing a quantiﬁcational implication,’ is likely to ﬁnd Coleridge’s
treatment of logic exotic, often baﬄing, sometimes even frustrating.2
Why then, as James McKusick asks, ‘should we care about Coleridge’s Logic, a
book that was unpublished in his lifetime and had no contemporary inﬂuence?’3
Most of its readers today are professional academics attached to English Litera-
ture departments whose interest in Coleridge is primarily literary, historical, or
a mixture of both. Such commentators have on the whole, long since discarded
what Owen Barﬁeld disparagingly refers to as ‘biographical/comparative’ and ‘bi-
ographical/psychological’ approaches to Coleridge’s thought that characterised
1Thomas De Quincey, ‘Samuel Taylor Coleridge,’ The Collected Writings of Thomas de
Quincey, rev. ed. David Masson, vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1889) 153.
2Willard Van Orman Quine, Elementary Logic, rev. ed. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1980) 116.
3James C. McKusick, ‘Coleridge’s “Logic”: A Systematic Theory of Language,’ Papers in the
History of Linguistics, eds. Hans Aarsleﬀ, Louis G. Kelly and Hans-Joseph Niederehe (Amster-
dam: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 1987)479-480.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Ninteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

34
Tim Milnes
much scholarship in the early twentieth century, preferring instead to concen-
trate on the materiality of either Coleridge’s language or the historical conditions
through which it was determined.4 This adjustment in focus has been linked to
developments in critical theory that make any attempt to assess what Coleridge
thought appear hazardous, to say the least.5 For his part, McKusick responds to
his own challenge by arguing that the Logic is one of Coleridge’s ‘most coherent
and intellectually sophisticated works,’ and ‘arguably the most important theory
of general linguistics produced in England during the early nineteenth century.’6
Whether such claims stand up to scrutiny remains to be seen. Nonetheless, what
can be averred at this stage, albeit tentatively, is that it is the very same qualities
that make Coleridge’s logic appear so exotic and alien to a modern reader that
make it worthy of attention, and then not merely as some historical curio, but as
highlighting a signiﬁcant part of the genealogy of modern European thought, one
that is too easily forgotten.
This claim will come as no surprise to Coleridge’s commentators, who have
long since established that Coleridge’s reputation rests upon more than a slim
collection of poems and an inﬂuential if gnomic apology for the creative imagina-
tion. His wide- ranging writings, collected in the Bollingen edition — which, after
half a century’s work, has recently been completed — reﬂect the ebbing of the
eighteenth-century faith in empirical science and reason and the nineteenth cen-
tury’s dawning interest in religion, history and idealism. Coleridge’s world is that
of post-revolutionary optimism swiftly followed by war, paranoia and the search
for a new resolution. For Coleridge, one of the lessons of the age is the inevitable
failure of any attempt to reform society upon purely abstract principles. Instead,
modernity must be allowed to evolve as a higher synthesis of the new energies
of reason and science with the best traditions present in the collective and often
unconscious experience of the people.
In this new synthesis, logic plays an important but ambivalent role. On one
hand it is the levelling instrument of the revolution, a principle of abstract un-
derstanding, which, overplayed by the Enlightenment philosophes, is all too easily
appropriated by the discourse of calculated utility, by a system of capital that
hi-jacks the language of Hume and Bentham.
The logic of Enlightenment, as
Wordsworth expresses it in his poem ‘The Tables Turned,’ represents the ‘med-
dling intellect’ by which ‘We murder to dissect.’ On the other hand, and against
Wordsworth, Coleridge argued that logic could be rehabilitated once it had been
reconnected with an older wisdom, with the higher logic he found in scripture,
ancient philosophy, and above all in the new German idealism.
4Owen Barﬁeld, What Coleridge Thought (Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1971) 3.
Nigel Leask’s The Politics of Imagination in Coleridge’s Critical Thought (Basingstoke: Macmil-
lan, 1988) remains one of the best studies of the historical and political context of Coleridge’s
philosophy.
5Thus, a decade after Barﬁeld’s work, Jerome Christensen sought in Coleridge’s Blessed
Machine of Language (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981) ‘not [...]
to reproduce what
Coleridge thought,’ but ‘to produce the way Coleridge writes’ (15-16).
6McKusick, ‘Coleridge’s “Logic”’ 480.

Coleridge’s Logic
35
How this rehabilitation was to be eﬀected was already the subject of debate.
By the end of the eighteenth century there was a widespread feeling that logic
was in need of a serious overhaul. Traditional logic was struggling to adapt to the
epistemological implications of an accelerating culture of scientiﬁc discovery. In
particular, before Mill developed an inductive logic, there seemed to be a disjunc-
ture between empirical psychology and the canons of logical deduction. Coleridge
registers this friction, noting with regret that Aristotle’s ‘Organum,’ which had
survived largely intact for centuries, had recently been deposed in France and
‘made to give way to the Logic of Condillac,’ although it would ‘be more accu-
rate perhaps to say that the Study of Logic altogether is exploded in France, for
Condillac’s Book is rather psychological than logical.’7
Written in 1803, these
remarks form part of the preparatory notes Coleridge made outlining a plan for
his own ‘History of Logic.’ It is a full twenty years, however, before he writes to
John Taylor Coleridge, announcing the readiness of the Logic, which at this stage
still bears the working title, ‘ “The Elements of Discourse, with the Criteria of
true and false Reasoning, as the ground-work and preparation for Public Speaking
and Debate — addressed to the Students and Candidates for the Pulpit, the Bar,
or Senate”.’ By this time, Coleridge has apparently made up his mind about the
subordinate status of logic within the hierarchy of intellectual disciplines. The
‘Elements,’ he claims, is ‘a Work of Logic for [...] forensic purposes, denying its
applicability, as a positive Organ, to all subjects [...] in which the absolute Truth
is sought for,’ and of use ‘in all subjects of discussion or inquiry, in which the
Truth relatively to the Sense and Understanding of man in all his social and civil
Concerns and Functions is alone required or of pertinence.’8 Nonetheless, and de-
spite Coleridge’s careful demarcations, it was to prove diﬃcult to conﬁne logic to
the purely ‘forensic purposes’ of intellect, a problem that was to have signiﬁcant
ramiﬁcations for his conception of the relationship between logic, truth, and ‘man
in all his social and civil Concerns.’
2
THE POLITICS OF LOGIC
The civic function of logic is of vital importance to Coleridge. As Heather Jackson
has noted, after the French Revolution the concept of logic becomes highly politi-
cised, one of the ‘red-ﬂag terms,’ like method, theory or even philosophy, which
could be relied upon to send sections of British society into paroxysms of anxi-
ety.9 Increasingly disaﬀected with the ‘logic’ of French rationalism, but equally
contemptuous of the British tradition of ‘common sense,’ Coleridge comes to the
7Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Shorter Works and Fragments, eds. H. J. Jackson and J. R. de J.
Jackson, vol. 1 (Princeton University Press, 1995) 128.
8Samuel Taylor Coleridge, ‘To John Taylor Coleridge,’ 5 June 1823, letter 1335 of Collected
Letters of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, ed. Earl Leslie Griggs, vol. 5 (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1956-71) 275.
9See Heather J. Jackson, ‘Coleridge’s Lessons in Transition: The “Logic” of the “Wildest
Odes”,’ Lessons of Romanticism: A Critical Companion, eds.
Thomas Pfau and Robert F.
Gleckner (Durham: Duke University Press, 1998) 221-222.

36
Tim Milnes
conclusion that what both lack is logic, in its strictest sense. Around the time
he writes his ‘Outlines of the History of Logic,’ he makes a notebook entry that
reﬂects upon the decline of the discipline in both Britain and France:
Of Logic & its neglect, & the consequent strange Illogicality of many
even of our principal writers — hence our Crumbly friable Stile/each
Author a mere Hour-Glass/ — & if we go on in this way, we shall soon
have undone all that Aristotle did for the human Race, & come back
to Proverbs & Apologues — /The multitude of Maxims, Aphorisms, &
Sentences & their popularity among the French, the beginners of this
Style, is it some proof & omen of this?10
Coleridge’s particular concern with the ‘Crumbly friable Stile’ of the modern writer
in this entry is telling. Deprived of a unifying logic, language becomes atomised,
contingent, ‘each Author a mere Hour-Glass’ of running particulars. In this way,
Coleridge hopes to show that ‘The multitude of Maxims, Aphorisms, & Sentences’
to be found in the French materialist writers who supported the revolution, so
far from being the neplus ultra of logic, was thoroughly illogical. Once again, he
found the neglect of ancient thought, and the declining reputation of Aristotle
in particular, to be symptomatic of a deep intellectual malaise.
The virtue of
Aristotle’s logic, in contrast to the psychologising of the French followers of Locke,
was its understanding of the deep and noncontingent connection between thought
and language, a theme he examines at length in his 1818-1819 lectures on the
history of philosophy:
So Aristotle ﬁrst of all determined what were the laws common to
all coherent thinking, and therein he founded not only the science of
logic, but with it he made general throughout all the civilised world
the terms of the connection: “we”, “me”, “our”, [“us”], our “ands”,
and our “thes”, and our “therefores”, and so forth.
In contrast, he continues, like ‘oriental writing’ in which ‘thought is put on thought
with little other connective than “ad[d]” for “and”,’ the ‘new French writings’ are
‘aimed at destroying all the connections of thought’ as well as ‘all the connec-
tions of society and domestic life.’11 At this point, Coleridge’s concern for the
links between language, logic and civic harmony breaks the surface of his writ-
ing. Above all, ancient Greek thought demonstrated the compatibility between
principles of democracy, social cohesion and logic in a way that did not depend
upon the reductive, aggregative kind of philosophy that had, as he saw it, reduced
France and much of Europe to dust.
Indeed, as he argues in the ‘Outlines of
the History of Logic,’ ‘Ethics & argumentative Metaphysics were the Oﬀspring of
Democracies whom superior Courage & superior Intellect had rendered victorious
10Samuel Taylor Coleridge, The Notebooks of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, ed. Kathleen Coburn
et al., vol. 1 (London: Routledge, 2002) 1759 (text).
11Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lectures 1818-1819 On the History of Philosophy, ed. J.R. de J.
Jackson, vol. 1 (Princeton University Press, 2000) 234.

Coleridge’s Logic
37
over Despots.’12 In this way, having ‘scramble[d] the familiar codes,’ as David
Simpson puts it,13 disassociating method, theory and logic from Jacobinism, Co-
leridge felt able to have his radical cake and eat it, arguing that ‘the origin of
Logic’ was in ‘a democracy when the Varieties of Character & moral habit ﬁnd
suﬃcient Space & free playroom.’14 The challenge facing modernity then, was one
of recovering that democratic intellect in an age when the increasing dominance of
a mechanised and levelling understanding had rendered democracy itself danger-
ous. To this end, Coleridge believed, philosophy must be enlisted in the process of
reform, binding particular, empirical or abstract truths to spiritual, practical, or-
ganic Truth. It is on this basis that The Friend mounts its politically conservative
defence of ‘theory’:
The Friend, however, acts and will continue to act under the be-
lief, that the whole truth is the best antidote to falsehoods which are
dangerous chieﬂy because they are half-truths: and that an erroneous
system is best confuted, not by an abuse of Theory in general, nor
by an absurd opposition of Theory to Practice, but by a detection of
the errors in the particular Theory. For the meanest of men has his
Theory: and to think at all is to theorize.15
The faintly unpatriotic air of the ﬁnal remark is neutralised by Coleridge’s insis-
tence that the ultimate destiny of all theory is the ideal. The past excesses of
theory, philosophy, method, and logic will be overcome not by rejecting theory as
such, but by pursuing theory to its limit as an ideal of reason: in other words, to
the point where it merges with being. This notion of atonement through higher
synthesis, through the reconciliation of positions apparently opposed or contradic-
tory, is crucial to Coleridge’s changing view of logic, as the radical philosophies of
the young Unitarian poet and lecturer give way to the more harmonious visions of
the German idealist. For the latter ﬁgure, increasingly reliant upon opium, upon
his doctor and landlord in Highgate for managing that addiction, and upon friends,
students and the ﬂattering attention of curious visitors for his sense of self-worth,
feelings of guilt combine with a sense of lost opportunities and wasted strength to
colour his view of human intellect. In the struggle to comprehend the failures of
revolution and his own personal inadequacies, ideas of expiation and the search
for a higher unity become the dominant ﬁgures of Coleridge’s later thought: in
particular, they shape his belief that the quantiﬁcational logic of an overweening,
‘mechanical’ understanding must be redeemed by the higher, qualitative logic of
a divinely sanctioned summum bonum.
Indeed, one of the few constant elements throughout Coleridge’s career is his
Christian faith, and his refusal to treat questions of faith and reason separately.
12Coleridge, Shorter Works 1 127.
13David Simpson, Romanticism, Nationalism, and the Revolt Against Theory (University of
Chicago Press, 1993) 60.
14Coleridge, Shorter Works 1 128.
15Samuel Taylor Coleridge, The Friend, ed. Barbara E. Rooke, vol. 1 (Princeton University
Press, 1969) 189.

38
Tim Milnes
Logic, like any dimension of human intelligence, can only ultimately be compre-
hended in terms of Christianity. Christianity, however, is not a ‘subject’ for phi-
losophy; indeed, it is questionable whether it is susceptible of ‘comprehension’ at
all. As he puts it in Aids to Reﬂection, ‘Christianity is not a Theory, or a Spec-
ulation; but a Life. Not a Philosophy of Life, but a Life and a living Process.’16
The notion that logic has an integral role to play within a Christian theosophy,
and that only as part of that broader theosophical order can logic itself be demon-
strated to its fullest extent, is one of the larger gulfs that lie between the modern
reader and Coleridge’s work. One useful way of approaching this problem is to
remain alert to how elastic the concept of ‘logic’ remains in this period. Reﬂecting
on his own early education in Biographia Literaria, Coleridge reveals a climate in
which, as the boundaries between disciplines are being contested and reformed,
deﬁnitions are up for grabs. Recalling his old schoolmaster at Christ’s Hospital,
James Bowyer, he writes:
I learnt from him, that Poetry, even that of the loftiest, and, seemingly,
that of the wildest odes, had a logic of its own, as severe as that of
science; and more diﬃcult, because more subtle, more complex, and
dependent on more, and more fugitive causes.17
Comments such as this hint at Coleridge’s ambition to forge a link between the
logical and the existential, between ratiocination and ‘life.’ This aspiration, how-
ever, wrestled with a more positivist impulse to regulate any new illumination
under the auspices of a master discipline that embodied the codes of traditional
philosophy. Turning to his early schooling in the rules of poetic diction, Coleridge
recounts his dissatisfaction with conventional authorities on prosody:
But as it was my constant reply to authorities brought against me from
later poets of great name, that no authority could avail in opposition to
Truth, Nature, Logic, and the Laws of Universal Grammar; actuated
too by my former passion for metaphysical investigations; I laboured at
a solid foundation, on which permanently to ground my opinions, in the
component faculties of the human mind itself, and their comparative
dignity and importance.18
These attempts on one hand to poeticise logic and, on the other, to underpin
poetry with logic might appear, at least potentially, to conﬂict. For Coleridge,
they are two sides of the same coin, as the common principles of both are to
be found ‘in the component faculties of the human mind itself.’ And yet, even
though Coleridge writes Biographia in 1816 with the conﬁdence of someone who,
having studied long and hard the lessons of German idealism, is able to ﬂourish
16Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Aids to Reﬂection, ed. John Beer (Princeton University Press,
1995) 202.
17Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Biographia Literaria, eds. James Engell and Walter Jackson Bate,
vol. 1 (Princeton University Press, 1995) 9.
18Coleridge, Biographia 1 22

Coleridge’s Logic
39
as his trump card Kant’s account of the ‘comparative dignity and importance’ of
the faculties of understanding and reason (of which more later), his concern with
the relationship between logic and the language of poetry indicates the continuing
inﬂuence of a diﬀerent tradition. As Paul Hamilton argues, the imported German
philosophy of self-consciousness to which Coleridge was ﬁrst introduced around
1800 had to ﬁnd an accommodation in his thought with a concern with linguistic
propriety — speciﬁcally, with the normativity of ‘ordinary’ language — that he had
inherited from late eighteenth-century British philosophies of language and literary
theory.19 It is within this tradition that Coleridge’s original logical speculations
had originally taken shape.
3
ETYMOLOGIC
The question of the relationship between logic and language is one to which Co-
leridge returns throughout his life, with varying results.
Here, as in so many
areas, his views change over time. An 1800 letter to William Godwin, however,
reveals one preoccupation that was to remain central to his thinking: the idea
that language is not merely a system of conventions, but a manifestation of divine
providence:
I wish you to write a book on the power of words, and the processes
by which human feelings form aﬃnities with them — in short, I wish
you to philosophize Horn Tooke’s System, and to solve the great Ques-
tions [...]. “Is Logic the Essence of Thinking?” in other words — Is
thinking impossible without arbitrary signs? & — how far is the word
“arbitrary” a misnomer? Are not words &c parts & germinations of
the Plant? And what is the Law of their Growth? — In something of
this order I would endeavour to destroy the old antithesis of Words &
Things, elevating, as it were, words into Things, & living Things too.20
Coleridge’s initial willingness to identify logic with ‘arbitrary signs’ reveals the
increasing inﬂuence of John Home Tooke’s work, particularly The Diversions of
Purley, upon his thought at this point. And yet, his desire ‘to philosophize Horn
Tooke’s System’ shows that he is already trying to link Tooke’s etymological theo-
ries to a metaphysical order based on organic principles, according to which words
are ‘parts & germinations of the Plant.’ The idea that logic and language grow
from the same seed underscores Coleridge’s conviction that the linguistic sign is
not arbitrary in its reference, and thus that etymology and logic are fundamen-
tally engaged in the same enterprise: that of understanding their common ‘germi-
nation.’ Following Stephen Prickett, we can roughly divide Coleridge’s thinking
about language into three phases: (1) an early stage, up to around 1800, when
his theories are still dominated by the ahistorical, materialistic associationism of
19Paul Hamilton, Coleridge’s Poetics (Basil Blackwell, 1983) 3.
20Coleridge, ‘To William Godwin,’ 22 September 1800, letter 352 of Letters 1 625-626.

40
Tim Milnes
David Hartley; (2) a relatively brief period in the ﬁrst decade of the nineteenth
century, during which the inﬂuence of Tooke made him increasingly ‘aware of the
illogical complexities of language,’ and a ﬁnal phase (3) in which, under the sway
of German idealism, he developed a metaphysics of language as constantly evolv-
ing, ‘with words related not so much to things as changes in human consciousness
itself.’21
(1)
Seen in this frame, Coleridge’s comments to Godwin are pivotal, in that
they attest to his gathering sense that Hartley’s claim that words are simply im-
pressions that ‘excite Ideas in us by Association, and [...] by no other means’ was
damagingly reductive, a poor explanation of ‘the power of words, and the pro-
cesses by which human feelings form aﬃnities with them.’22 Similarly, Hartley’s
vision of the growth of language as fundamentally metaphorical, producing mean-
ing as new relations of ‘likeness’ replaced older, ‘literal expressions,’ sat uneasily
with Coleridge’s belief that the principle of words and the ‘Law of their Growth’
must be rooted in a power more digniﬁed than that of contingent association.23
In this light, Hartley’s assumption that the bond between language and the world
was a secure but inscrutable part of God’s design is cold comfort. In response,
Coleridge’s plan ‘to destroy the old antithesis of Words & Things, elevating, as
it were, words into Things, & living Things too,’ should be read as beginning a
move away from a correspondence theory of language, towards a view of words as
in some way constitutive of thought. Words, as he writes in a notebook entry of
1810, ‘are not mere symbols of things & thoughts, but themselves things.’24
Coleridge’s reaction against Hartley thus helps to form his own contribution to
the ongoing search for a ‘natural’ language of humanity. By rejecting Hartley’s
conventionalist linguistics of association, he aligns himself with eighteenth-century
nonconventionalists like Thomas Reid and Lord Monboddo, who argued that the
origins of language were to be found in the nascent concepts of inarticulate cries
in primitive societies.25 Indeed, Coleridge’s involvement in the debate over natu-
ral language feeds directly into his famous argument with Wordsworth on poetic
diction. Like Wordsworth and Shelley, Coleridge was given to drawing parallels
between the inchoate lyricism of early societies and the embryonic linguistic skills
of children. However, he drew the line at making a fetish of everyday language,
or prizing childish utterance as worthy of poetic emulation. Natural language was
emphatically not ‘ordinary’ language. Accordingly, in the second volume of Bi-
ographia Literaria, he denies that everyday language of rural folk should in be
taken any way as normative:
21Stephen Prickett, Words and The Word (Cambridge University Press, 1986) 147.
22David Hartley, Observations on Man, vol. 1 (1791, Poole: Woodstock Books, 1998) 268.
23Hartley 1 292.
24Coleridge, Notebooks 3 3762.
25Monboddo, in turn, aligns himself with Rousseau when he claims ‘that, before men used
language, they conversed together by signs and inarticulate cries [...]. And that the ﬁrst languages
had a greater greater deal of prosody, or musical tones [...]’ (On the Origin and Progress of
Language, 2nd ed., vol. 1 [Edinburgh, 1774] x).

Coleridge’s Logic
41
The best part of human language, properly so called, is derived from
reﬂection on the acts of the mind itself. It is formed by a voluntary
appropriation of ﬁxed symbols to internal acts, to processes and re-
sults of imagination, the greater part of which have no place in the
consciousness of uneducated man [. . . ].26
More revealing still is Coleridge’s own advice to the poet:
But if it be asked, by what principles the poet is to regulate his own
style, if he do not adhere closely to the sort and order of words which
he hears in the market, wake, high-road, or plough-ﬁeld?
I reply;
by principles, the ignorance or neglect of which would convict him of
being no poet, but a silly or presumptuous usurper of the name! By
the principles of grammar, logic, psychology!27
The origins of language are ‘primitive,’ then, in a metaphysical, not a social, sense.
Just as the principles of poetic language are bound up with logic, grammar and
psychology, the origins and fates of words are bound up with the universal Logos.
The appearance of ‘grammar’ in Coleridge’s list of poetic desiderata is signiﬁcant,
notwithstanding its philosophical subordination, for it betrays the extent to which
Tooke’s inﬂuence on Coleridge persisted, despite the immersion in transcendental-
ism that helped to produce Biographia.
(2)
For Coleridge, Tooke’s work had two major implications, one of which was
deplorable, the other welcome. The ﬁrst — the hub of Tooke’s argument — was
the linguistic deﬂation of ideas. As he argues in Diversions, any truly empirical
‘consideration of Ideas [...] will lead us no farther than to Nouns: i.e. the signs
of these impressions, or names of ideas.’28 Coleridge found this reduction unac-
ceptable, an error driven, as he saw it, by a regrettable hangover from empiricism,
namely the assumption that ‘Words are the signs of things.’29 Against Tooke’s
linguistic atomism, Coleridge proposes a dynamic model of language based upon
the power of the verb, an agency he links to the act of consciousness and the Lo-
gos. As Mary Anne Perkins argues, the Logos, presenting the underlying spiritual
unity of truth, language and being, is ‘the “key” to understanding every area of
his thought after 1805.’30 Vital to this idea is the conception of being as an act,
not a thing. Reality and thought are formed by verb substantive, the ‘I am,’ or
living word of God. The most basic presupposition of thought then, is unity, not
diﬀerence. Coleridge makes this point unambiguously in one of his 1819 lectures
on philosophy, when he tackles the question: what is thought?
26Coleridge, Biographia 2 54.
27Coleridge, Biographia 2 281.
28John Home Tooke, Epea Pteroenta or the Diversions of Purley, rev. ed. by Richard Taylor,
vol. 1 (London, 1829) 49.
29Tooke, Diversions 1 18.
30Mary Anne Perkins, Coleridge’s Philosophy:
The Logos as Unifying Principle (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1994) 3.

42
Tim Milnes
We are [so] apt to use words derived from external objects, that I verily
believe that many a man before he asked himself the question would
imagine his mind made of thoughts, as a wall is of bricks, till he asks
whether he ever separated a thought from a thought, whether there
was a meaning in the word “thought,” except as the mind thinking in
such a situation; whether a notion of any plurality, or anything we can
call construction, takes place in our experience. We are aware of no
such thing [...].31
Such speculations, however, inevitably raise the question: is logic subordinate to
grammar?
Despite the claims of his apologists, this is a conundrum that Co-
leridge never quite resolves.
McKusick, for instance, defends the coherence of
Coleridge’s belief that the apparent dependence of logical canons upon rules of
grammar merely indicates the existence of a higher logic in the form of the Lo-
gos, in which truth and meaning have not yet been alienated. Language is prior
to syllogistic logic, in other words, but the Logos is the spirit of a higher rea-
son in words.
Accordingly, language speaks us, but only because the spirit of
God, and thus humanity, already inhabits language.32 Further, McKusick agrees
with Heather Jackson that it is in this way, by drawing the deﬂationary sting
from Tooke’s theory of language, that Coleridge is able to welcome the second
major implication of Tooke’s work: the constitutive role of language in thought
and, correspondingly, the centrality of etymological inquiry to any philosophical
investigation. As Coleridge himself wrote in literary correspondence published in
1821:
Etymology [...] is little else than indispensable to an insight into the
true force, and, as it were, freshness of the words in question, especially
of those that heve passed from the schools into the marketplace, from
the medals and tokens [...] of the philosopher’s guild or company into
the current coin of the land.33
Coleridge accepts Tooke’s etymology as a method of inquiry, but sides with Tooke’s
opponents like Monboddo in arguing that, far from being accidental, the structures
of language are determined by ‘logical categories which are themselves intrinsic to
thought.’34 Indeed, Coleridge’s disagreement with Tooke even ﬁnds its way into
his lectures on Shakespeare, as J. Tomalin’s contemporary notes testify:
Home Tooke had called his book Epea Pteroenta, winged words. In
Coleridge’s judgement it might have been much more ﬁtly called Verba
Viventia, or “living words” for words are the living products of the
living mind & could not be a due medium between the thing and the
31Coleridge, Lectures 1818-1819 2 577.
32James C. McKusick, Coleridge’s Philosophy of Language (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1986) 50.
33Coleridge, Shorter Works 2 927-928.
34McKusick, Coleridge’s Philosophy of Language 42.

Coleridge’s Logic
43
mind unless they partook of both. The word was not to convey merely
what a certain thing is, but the very passion & all the circumstances
which were conceived as constituting the perception of the thing by
the person who used the word.35
Etymology then, as Jackson puts it, becomes a ‘tool won from the enemy’: eﬀec-
tively, ‘etymologic.’36 This in turn enables Coleridge to revive the Enlightenment
quest for a theory of universal language based on the metaphysical primacy of the
Absolute act of self-creation made incarnate in the divine Logos. By the time he
writes Aids to Reﬂection in the late 1820s, Coleridge has even abandoned earlier
talk of words as ‘living things,’ denying that words are ‘things’ at all: ‘For if words
are not things, they are living powers, by which the things of most importance to
mankind are actuated, combined, and humanized.’37
It is worth pausing for a moment to consider further the signiﬁcance of this turn
in Coleridge’s theosophy of language. So long as he had sought to ‘philosophize’
Tooke’s system by rendering it more dynamic, by drawing truth and meaning closer
together, Coleridge’s conception of ‘etymologic’ had had the potential to lead to
conclusions similar to those of Tooke. Increasingly linked to meaning and to the
everyday activity of interpretation, Coleridge’s concept of truth, for a moment,
begins to appear more holistic and linguistic than metaphysical or absolute. In a
notebook entry of December 1804, for instance, he once again attempts to improve
on Tooke by demonstrating how both ‘Word’ and ‘Truth’ are etymologically related
to terms of action:
Word, Werden — that which is — <Worth, wirthy — Rede, Redlich>
— Truth is implied in Words among the ﬁrst men. Tale = tale. Word,
wahr, wehr — truth, troweth, throweth i.e. hitteth = itteth = it is it.
The aspirate expresses the exclamatia of action. Through, & Truth —
Etymol.38
In his haste to demonstrate that truth and language originate in a primordial
‘action,’ however, Coleridge chooses not to explore the further implications of his
remark that ‘Truth is implied in Words among the ﬁrst men.’ The possibility that
35Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lectures 1808-1819 On Literature, ed. R.A. Foakes, vol. 1 (New
Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1987) 272-273.
36See Heather J. Jackson, ‘Coleridge, Etymology and Etymologic,’ Journal of the History of
Ideas 44.1 (1983) 81. Similarly, James McKusick argues in Coleridge’s Philosophy of Language
that ‘Home Tooke was a seminal inﬂuence throughout most of Coleridge’s intellectual career’
(39).
37Coleridge, Aids 10.
38Coleridge, Notebooks 2 Text 2354. In her note to this passage, Kathleen Coburn argues that
Coleridge was misled by Adelung’s dictionary, which ‘suggests, wrongly, that wahr is identical
with the past tense, war, of the verb “to be”.’ As for ‘truth, troweth, throweth’: ‘The ﬁrst two
words are obviously connected, but neither of them with the third.’ Coleridge’s speculations
on the origins of ‘hitteth,’ meanwhile, ‘seem devoid of any philological basis, nor is there any
etymological connexion between “through” and “truth”.’

44
Tim Milnes
truth might simply be the presupposition of communication, the basic precondi-
tion for language to have meaning at all, is passed over. In Coleridge, linguistic
explanations must ultimately rest upon ontological or metaphysical theories. Not
for the last time, the potential of ‘etymologic’ is sacriﬁced to Coleridge’s quest for
ultimate etymologoi.
(3)
This brings us to Prickett’s ‘third’ stage in Coleridge’s changing views on
language. Parallel to his etymological speculations, Coleridge developed a meta-
physical picture of language evolving through a spiritual process of dialectic. Ety-
mologic was certainly one way of comprehending this evolution. But while etymo-
logic helped one to understand the outward signs of this progression — by, as it
were, putting the process into reverse — it could provide no insight into its basic
principles. Consequently, when Coleridge writes Logic (ostensibly a handbook on
logic but, as McKusick notes, equally a theory of language) and Aids to Reﬂection
in the 1820s, the role of etymologic is reduced to that of under-labourer, a mere
supplement of theosophy. Thus, when Coleridge declares in the Preface that one of
the main aims of Aids to Reﬂection is to highlight the advantages of knowing words
in ‘their primary, derivative, and metaphorical senses,’ these varieties of meaning
are seen as determined by a prior metaphysical order of unity, antithesis and syn-
thesis.39 As Michael Kent Havens notes, the ‘three types of meaning correspond
respectively to a primal unity of language, the ongoing process of distinction or
desynonymization, and the reuniting of distinguished meanings in a newly holistic
language.’40
Desynonymization
is a key
element in
Coleridge’s
theory of
language.41
Coleridge sees the development of language as an organic process whereby equiva-
lences between terms are broken down, just as branches and leaves emerge from an
originally undiﬀerentiated trunk. As Coleridge explains in one of his philosophical
lectures of 1819, one must be conscious
that the whole process of human intellect is gradually to desynonymise
terms, that words, the instruments of communication, are the only
signs that a ﬁnite being can have of its own thoughts, that in proportion
as what was conceived as one and identical becomes several, there will
necessarily arise a term striving to represent that distinction.42
This emergence of diﬀerence, however — a process that is both conceptual and
historical — is merely the furtherance of a richer unity already inherent in the
totality of the organism, or language. For Coleridge then, the fate of formal logic
is bound up with the progress of language as it strives throughout history to
39Coleridge, Aids 1.
40Michael Kent Havens, ‘Coleridge on the Evolution of Language,’ Studies in Romanticism 20
(1981): 167.
41Paul Hamilton argues that Coleridge repressed his argument concerning desynonymy in Bi-
ographia Literaria because of his concerns about how its potentially radical political implications
might be interpreted. See Coleridge’s Poetics 72.
42Coleridge, Lectures 1818-1819 1 212.

Coleridge’s Logic
45
become more fully itself, growing through stages of spiritual improvement towards
the vanishing point of ultimate reuniﬁcation with the Logos in higher synthesis.
Consequently, the condition of a language at any given time is an expression of the
stage of a culture’s spiritual and intellectual development. In an 1818 lecture to the
London Philosophical Society, Coleridge contrasts the primitive unity of ancient
Greek with the atomistic, aggregative logic of northern European, or ‘Gothic’
languages. In this way, Greek societies, leaning ‘to the manifold and popular, the
unity in them being purely ideal, namely of all as an identiﬁcation of the whole’
diﬀered from the ‘northern or Gothic nations,’ in which ‘the individual interest
was sacred’:
In Greek the sentences are long, and structure architectural, so that
each part or clause is insigniﬁcant when compared with the whole. But
in the Gothic [...] the structure is short, simple, and complete in each
part, and the connexion of the parts with the sum total of the discourse
is maintained by the sequency of the logic, or the community of feelings
excited between the writer and his readers.43
In this light, it is the privilege of modernity to complete the dialectic by which
these traditions are united. Only in the greatest writers, however, does Coleridge
ﬁnd clear evidence of the growth of the Logos through language, and only in
Shakespeare does the fallen status of human language as a system of arbitrary
signs achieve partial redemption. As he writes in his lecture notes, Shakespeare’s
language is neither the original ‘Language of Nature’ that ‘was with the Thing,
⟨it⟩represented, & it was the Thing represented,’ nor the artiﬁcial language of the
civilized intellect, but
a something intermediate, or rather it is the former blended with the
latter, the arbitrary not merely recalling the cold notion of the Thing
but expressing the reality of it, & as arbitrary Language is an Heir loom
of ⟨the⟩Human Race, being itself a part of that which it manifests.44
For Coleridge then, as he puts it in Biographia, ‘besides the language of words,
there is a language of spirits,’ and ‘the former is only the vehicle of the latter.’45
The position of logic in this arrangement, however, remains ambiguous: formally,
a mere stepping-stone of abstraction in language’s return to the Logos, it is also
destined, in its higher, metaphysical incarnation, to form the Logos itself.
4
THE IDEA OF LOGIC
Coleridge’s views on Shakespearean language in 1818 show how his reading in
German philosophy is leading him to think of language and logic in more frankly
43Coleridge, Lectures 1808-1819 2 231.
44Coleridge, Lectures 1808-1819 1 429.
45Coleridge, Biographia 1 290.

46
Tim Milnes
idealistic terms. And it is principally the inﬂuence of German thought, particularly
that of Kant, which leads to Coleridge’s hesitation over whether to conﬁne ‘logic’
to the abstract understanding or renew it as a higher discipline of knowledge. Not
for the ﬁrst time, the dilemma facing Coleridge was between revolution and reform.
Having already resolved to recover reason from the Jacobins, rehabilitating it as
spiritual insight, could he do the same for logic? In both cases, it was German
idealism that suggested the path to redemption. In Biographia, Coleridge recounts
how his early reading of Kant introduced him to a new way of thinking about the
nature of experience:
I began then to ask myself, what proof I had of the outward existence
of any thing? Of this sheet of paper for instance, as a thing in itself,
separate from the phenomenon or image in my perception. I saw, that
in the nature of things such proof is impossible; and that of all modes of
being, that are not objects of the senses, the existence is assumed by a
logical necessity arising from the constitution of the mind itself, by the
absence of all motive to doubt it, not from any absolute contradiction
in the supposition of the contrary.46
The use of the term ‘pheænomenon’ here — together with the way in which he dis-
tinguishes the type of thought process he describes from empirical ‘perception’ on
one hand, and, on the other, formal questions relating to ‘absolute contradiction’
— reveals the inﬂuence of Kant’s method upon Coleridge’s changing conception
of ‘logical necessity.’ The kind of argument that Coleridge identiﬁes with the new
‘logic’ is nowadays, following Kant, widely classed as a transcendental argument,
whereby the truth of a statement in dispute is shown to be necessarily implied by
the same conditions that constitute the possibility of an indubitable statement.
What varies between diﬀerent transcendental arguments, however, is the inter-
pretation of ‘necessarily.’
Kant’s arguments have long been criticized for their
tendency to blur the distinction between conceptual necessity and mere psycho-
logical incorrigibility. If anything, however, Coleridge is even more inclined than
Kant to fall into what Frege would later deplore as the conﬂation of formal and
psychological arguments, equating ‘logical necessity’ with the limits on thought
dictated by ‘the constitution of the mind itself.’ Moreover, as demonstrated by
a schema of the human faculties sketched by Coleridge around the same time, he
saw this new kind of knowledge not (as Kant did) as the foundation of knowledge
in general, but as a ‘logical’ intermediary connecting empirical perception and
spiritual truths accessed through intuition:
We may usefully distribute all our knowleges into four sorts [?
or]
Orders. First, those derived from the senses by the aid of the Under-
standing.
Second, those derived from the Understanding by reﬂection on its own
acts and processes.
46Coleridge, Biographia 1 200-201.

Coleridge’s Logic
47
Third: those derived from the pure Reason.
Fourth: those derived from the Conscience.47
The new logic is covered by the ‘second’ order of knowledge, which is the province
of the understanding. Coleridge’s scheme, it should be noted, is hierarchical: the
knowledge of understanding is subordinate to that of reason, and that, in turn, to
Conscience (which he often refers to as practical reason). This architectonic lies
behind Coleridge’s ambition to complete his great work on the intellect, the work
that in a contemporaneous letter to John May he describes as the ‘Logosophia:
or on the Logos, divine and human, in six Treatises.’ Logic, accordingly, takes its
place in volume two:
The ﬁrst, or preliminary treatise contains a philosophical History of
Philosophy [...]. The second Treatise is [...] on the science of connected
reasoning, containing a system of Logic puriﬁed from all pedantry &
sophistication, & applied practically to the purpose of ordinary life,
the Senate, Pulpit, Bar, &c.
[...]
The III. (Logos Architectonicus)
on the Dynamic or Constructive Philosophy — preparatory to the IV.
or a detailed Commentary on the Gospel of St John [...]. The Vth.
[...] on the Panthesists and Mystics [...] The Vlth on the Causes &
Consequences of modern Unitarianism.48
And yet, the master method of this system remains the ‘logic’ of transcendental
argument — only, in Coleridge’s hands, Kant’s transcendental method is extended
from the theoretical or purely cognitive into the realm of the practical. As he
explains in Biographia, the use of spatial intuitions as postulates in geometry
supplies philosophy with an example of the foundation ‘from which every science
that lays claim to evidence must take its commencement.
The mathematician
does not begin with a demonstrable proposition, but with an intuition, a practical
idea.’49
Conceived as inherently moral, the foundational intuition reveals the
original unity of knowing and being. It is in this context that Coleridge urges his
favourite Delphic injunction upon his reader as the ‘ﬁrst postulate’ of philosophy:
The postulate of philosophy and at the same time the test of philo-
sophic capacity, is no other than the heaven-descended know thyself!
[...]. And this at once practically and speculatively. For as philosophy
is neither a science of the reason or understanding only, nor merely
a science of morals, but the science of being altogether, its primary
ground can be neither merely speculative or merely practical, but both
in one.50
47Coleridge, Shorter Works 1 412.
48Coleridge, To John May,’ 27 September 1815, letter 976 of Letters 4 589-590.
49Coleridge, Biographia 1 250. See also Aids 136: ‘we proceed, like the Geometricians, with
stating our postulates; the diﬀerence being, that the Postulates of Geometry no man can deny,
those of Moral Science are such as no good man will deny.’
50Coleridge, Biographia 1 252.
On similar grounds, Coleridge later criticises Aristotle for

48
Tim Milnes
As a result, Coleridge’s treatment of logic bears the strain of two competing imper-
atives: ﬁrst, that philosophy should be uniﬁed and complete, a seamless panoply
of thought and faith, and second, that ‘logic’ as such falls within the remit of the
understanding alone. In particular, it is when he tries to deﬁne a metaphysical
logic on the basis of the model of transcendental argument inherited from Kant
that Coleridge runs into diﬃculties. It proved impossible to dovetail the relatively
modest, conceptual aims of transcendental argument with the higher dialectic of
knowing and being planned for the Logosophia, involving as the latter did ques-
tions of will, faith, and the overcoming of logical categories and conceptual clarity
associated with the mere understanding.
This tension is one reason why Logic, putatively Coleridge’s study of ‘the sci-
ence of connected reasoning’ in the understanding and the propaedeutic to the
‘Dynamic or Constructive Philosophy,’ remains incomplete. Coleridge divides his
subject into the ‘organon or logice organica, heuristica [...] the criterion or logice
dialectica, and the canon or logice simplex et syllogistica.’51 In other words, logic
subdivides into the metaphysical logic of discovery, the transcendental logic of psy-
chology, and the purely formal logic of the syllogism. However, only the sections
on canonic and dialectic logic were completed. On the face of it, this absence
is surprising, given the fact that Logic is full of apologetic digressions where Co-
leridge teasingly anticipates the transition between conceptual understanding and
spiritual insight. Indeed, at times it seems as if he cannot wait to cut through the
dry formalities in order to penetrate the metaphysical order behind reason.52 In
this respect, Logic bears an uncanny resemblance to that earlier and more notori-
ous case of deductive interruption, Biographia, in which Coleridge left incomplete
his metaphysical argument designed to underpin a poetics grounded in the prin-
ciples of imagination. The reasons behind Coleridge’s omission of organic logic,
together with his decision not to include ‘polar logic’ in the rubric of the work,
will be considered later.
5
THE CANON, OR LOGIC AS SYLLOGISM
Coleridge’s tendency in the Logic to digress from pure or formal logic into meta-
physics is one symptom of his impatience to broaden the subject and branch out
into what he sees as deeper and more urgent questions. Another is his painstaking
articulation of the place of logic within the hierarchical structure of knowledge.
Noting that the ancient Greeks considered ‘the mind in the threefold relation,’
having ‘confounded Science with Philosophy,’ when in truth, ‘Philosophy is the middle state
between Science or Knowledge and Wisdom or Sophia’ (Samuel Taylor Coleridge,Table Talk, ed.
Carl Woodring, vol. 1 [Princeton University Press, 1990] 173-174).
51Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Logic, ed. J.R. de J. Jackson (Princeton University Press, 1981)
52.
52See, for example, Logic 87: while ostensibly still treating of ‘common or syllogistic logic,’
Coleridge admits to drifting into territory concerned with ‘the last and concluding stage of our
present subject, viz. the transition of the dialectic into the organic [...].’

Coleridge’s Logic
49
that is, relative to the evidence of reason, understanding and the senses, he ranks
the metaphysical disciplines accordingly:
A — Noetics = the evidence of reason
B — Logic = the evidence of the understanding
C — Mathematics = the evidence of sense
Under the heading ‘physics,’ he lists:
D — Empiric = evidence of the senses
Scholium. The senses = sense+sensation+impressions.53
In this Kantian division of labour, ‘Logic’ is clearly deﬁned as the province of the
understanding, mediating between Mathematics and Noetics:
Thus by the mathematic we have the immediate truth in all things nu-
merable and mensurable; or the permanent relations of space and time.
In the noetic, we have the immediate truth in all objects or subjects
that are above space and time; and, by the logic, we determine the
mediate truths by conception and conclusion, and by the application
of all the world to the senses, we form facts and maxims of experience
which is one of the two provinces in and on which the formal sciences
are to be employed and realised.54
The distinctly un-Kantian deﬁnition of ‘Noetics’ as concerned with ‘the immediate
truth in all objects or subjects that are above space and time’ betrays, once again,
Coleridge’s impatience with the Critical Philosophy and his tendency to equate
Kant’s work with logic as the science of understanding. On this picture, Logic is
limited to only one facet of human knowledge because it expresses only one side of
the power of self-consciousness. As he expresses it in marginal comments to Kant,
‘in Logic the mind itself being the Agent throughout does not take itself into
question in any one part. It is a Teller which does not count itself; but considers
all alike as Objective, because all alike is in fact subjective.’55
This lack of self-consciousness betrays a naivete inherent in formal logic, one
which Coleridge attempts to explain in the introductory chapters of Logic in both
conceptual and historical terms. Here, the ﬁrst emergence of logic is ﬁgured as an
adolescent stage through which the fallen or ﬁnite human mind must develop in its
journey towards a reunion with its origin in the plenitude of the Logos, the unity
of being and act. ‘In the infancy and childhood of individuals (and something
analogous may be traced in the history of communities),’ he claims, this logical
phase is preceded by a kind of ‘happy delirium, the healthful fever, of the physical,
moral, and intellectual being, Nature’s kind and providential gift to childhood,’ in
53Coleridge, Logic 43-44.
54Coleridge, Logic 36.
55Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Marginalia, eds.
H. J. Jackson, George Whalley, et al, vol.
3
(Princeton University Press, 1980-2001) 275.

50
Tim Milnes
which ‘the ﬁrst knowledges are acquired promiscuously.’56 As it grows, the infant
mind / society develops the ability to trace similarities between things, and thus
form abstractions.
The ‘earliest products of the abstracting power’ are words,
which also ‘become the ﬁrst subject matter of abstraction; and consequently the
commencement of human education.’57 As language becomes increasingly abstract
and complex, it nonetheless retains an organic relation to its origin. As Coleridge
explains, the community of parts of speech ‘is a necessary consequence of their
common derivation or rather production from the verb substantive.’ For ‘the verb
substantive (“am” [...]) expresses the identity or coinherence of being and act. It
is the act of being. All other words therefore may be considered as tending from
this point [...].’58
This organic solution to the relationship between logic and language can be
seen as Coleridge’s contribution to a debate about the possibility of a ‘universal
grammar.’ Inherited from Port Royal Logic, the notion of a purely rational lan-
guage had been undermined in the late eighteenth century by the nominalism of
Tooke and, more damagingly, by Kant’s insistence that logic was the domain of
understanding rather than reason. As we have seen, however, Coleridge, ever the
philosophical magpie, manages to borrow what suits him from both these thinkers.
He audaciously combines an adapted form of Kantian logic with a metaphysical
rendering of Tooke’s etymology to argue for the ideal unity of grammar and logic.
This line of argument is pursued further in the Magnum Opus:
in fact, the science of grammar is but logic in its ﬁrst exempliﬁcation,
or rather in its ﬁrst product, Loγoς, discursus, discourse, meaning [...]
either, i.e. thoughts in connexion, or ⟨connected⟩language, and the
⟨primary⟩distinctions of identity and alterity, ⟨of essence and form⟩,
of act and of being, constituting the groundwork and, as it were, the
metaphysical contents ⟨and preconditions⟩of logic.59
The claim that ‘the science of grammar is but logic in its ﬁrst exempliﬁcation’
is also Coleridge’s main premise in Logic, where he argues that one cannot un-
derstand logic without understanding language, and that one cannot understand
language without understanding the psychological and metaphysical act that un-
derlies being. Tellingly, the relatively short chapter on ‘Pure Logic or the Canon’
that opens the main body of Logic (53-59) is swiftly followed by a more substan-
tial chapter ‘On the Logical Acts’ (60-103), in which the reader is urged not ‘to
think too meanly of the process’ of reasoning by syllogism: ‘If A −C, and B be
contained in A, then B is contained in C. This [...] is a truth of mind: a somewhat
that in the mind actually exists, as any object of the senses exists without us.’60
56Coleridge, Logic 7-8.
57Coleridge, Logic 15
58Coleridge, Logic 16-17.
59Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Opus Maximum, eds. Thomas McFarland and Nicholas Halmi,
(Princeton University Press, 2002) 208.
60Coleridge, Logic 65.

Coleridge’s Logic
51
Armed with his idealistic form of etymology, Coleridge outlines the metaphysi-
cal and grammatical foundations of canonic or syllogistic logic in a logical primer
inscribed for his son, Derwent, in a copy of the 1818 edition of The Friend:
All Logic, as far as it is pure Science and of course purely formal, is
reducible to three Acts of the Intellect — i.e. to the ﬁrst Figure of
Syllogism. These are: 1. Seclusion. 2. Inclusion. 3. Conclusion —
and of these the ﬁrst is the whole, as far as any eﬀort of Judgement
is concerned. The 2nd and 3rd are self-evident. To think absolutely or
indeﬁnitely is impossible, for a ﬁnite mind at least. To think (Ding,
denken; res, reor) is to thingify. Thing = The Ing [...] is a somewhat
set apart — thus Ingle = the Hearth. Conceive the indistinguishable
all of our Perceptions, Conceptions and Notions as a vast Common
— In or from this I seclude a determinate portion [...] by assigning
it’s Terminus = Terminus Major sive communis. 1. All men (= the
portion) are mortal = Term. Major. Within this common ring-fence I
include with a fence of it’s own Socrates = Terminus Minor.61
Having set out to demonstrate the basis of syllogistic logic in ‘three Acts of the
Intellect,’ Coleridge suddenly sweeps his reader away on an etymological excur-
sion whereby, ﬁrst, the origin of thinking is linked to ‘thingifying,’ and secondly,
the process of thingifying is itself traced, via the suﬃx ‘ing,’ to the way in which
we ‘ring-fence’ the vast, indistinguishable ‘Common’ of our perceptions in logical
reasoning. What seems at ﬁrst a whimsical ﬂight of speculation is entirely char-
acteristic of Coleridge’s thinking on this subject, and consistent with his other
writings. The same premise that logic, grammar and mind emerge from the pri-
mordial unity of an act forms the basic assumption of Logic. By 1818, Coleridge
is conﬁdent that he has answered the questions he posed to Godwin ﬁfteen years
earlier.
Canonic logic, however, constitutes only one part of Coleridge’s tripartite con-
ception of logic proper. A full account of logic, he maintains, must include an
account of the relationship between logic and truth, and for the logician, ‘all
truth, and consequently all true knowledge, rests on the coincidence of the object
with the subject.’62
6
THE CRITERION, OR LOGIC AS DIALECTIC
This brings us to the form of logic Coleridge terms the ‘criterion’ or ‘dialectic.’
The appearance of the latter term, together with Coleridge’s identiﬁcation of the
central concern of dialectical logic as the problem of the ‘coincidence of subject
and object,’ attests to Kant’s inﬂuence on this part of Logic. Indeed, it has long
61Coleridge, ‘To Derwent Coleridge,’ November 1818, letter 1152 of Letters 4 885. Coleridge
presents the same etymological account of ‘thing’ in Logic 114-115: ‘The “ing” [...] is the universal
exponent of whatever is inclosed, bounded.’
62Coleridge, Logic 37.

52
Tim Milnes
been accepted that how one reads the Logic as a whole will be in no small part
determined by how one views Coleridge’s relation to Kant. Controversy over the
exact use Coleridge makes of Kant’s philosophy dates back to contemporaries such
as Henry Crabb Robinson, who wrote the following, not uncritical, assessment:
To Kant his obligations are inﬁnite, not so much from what Kant has
taught him in the form of doctrine as from the discipline Kant has
taught him to go through. Coleridge is indignant at the low estimation
in which the Post Kantians aﬀect to treat their master. At the same
time Coleridge himself adds Kant’s writings are not metaphysics, only
a propaedutic. Were Coleridge in Germany he would not be suﬀered to
hold this language; he would be forced to make his election between the
critical and the absolute philosophy, or he would be equally proscribed
by both.63
Robinson’s parting shot — the claim that, were he writing in Germany, Coleridge
would not be allowed to have it both ways, borrowing from the Critical Philosophy
where it suited him while simultaneously adopting the more full-blooded idealism
of Kant’s successors, Fichte and Schelling — preﬁgures the kind of debates over
Coleridge’s debts to Kant that have occupied scholars and commentators for at
least the past century. The fact that Logic is widely seen as Coleridge’s most
explicitly ‘Kantian’ work means that much of this controversy has centred on the
manuscript originally intended as primer for the ‘forensic purposes’ of discourse.
Ranged on one side are those who argue that Coleridge’s handling of logic contains
little new of signiﬁcance, either (as Rene Wellek argues) because Coleridge sim-
ply misunderstood Kant’s logic or (as J.R. de J. Jackson maintains) because an
exposition of Kant was the limit of his aims in this particular work, or indeed (as
G.N.G. Orsini allows) for both these reasons.64 On the other side of the argument,
however, is a tradition of criticism that has defended Coleridge as an innovator in
logic who improves on Kant, whether (as John Muirhead claims) because of the
way his use of triadic conception of reason logic trumps the dichotomic logic of the
ﬁrst Critique, or (as James McKusick, Tim Fulford, Gerald McNeice, and Thomas
McFarland have all proposed) because, by playing ‘Tooke,’ as it were, to Kant’s
‘Locke,’ Coleridge successfully introduces a ‘linguistic turn’ into transcendental
idealism.65
63Coleridge, Table Talk 2 485.
64In Immanuel Kant in England 1793-1838 (Princeton University Press, 1931), Rene Wellek
claims that Coleridge failed to see ‘that nothing of the Kantian epistemology can be preserved
in a new system’ (80). However, in his Editor’s Introduction to the standard edition, J.R. de
J. Jackson counters that Coleridge ‘does not oﬀer any new arguments’ in the Logic because it
is ‘essentially a popularisation of the Critique of Pure Reason’ (lxii). G.N.G. Orsini combines
both points of view in Coleridge and German Idealism (Southern Illinois University Press, 1969),
arguing that while Logic ‘is professedly an exposition of Kant’ (115), Coleridge was hampered by
the fact that he ‘did not fully grasp, or perhaps did not fully accept’ (256) Kant’s argument for
the transcendental unity of apperception in the second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason.
65As long ago as 1930, in Coleridge as Philosopher (George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1930), John H.
Muirhead praised Coleridge’s proto-Hegelian ‘triadic logic’ as ‘an attempt to carry the dialectic

Coleridge’s Logic
53
Whatever one’s position on this perennial topic, the imprint of Kant’s inﬂuence
on Logic is undeniable. Having covered ‘canonic’ or syllogistic logic in Part One
in a tidy ﬁfty pages, and with no third section on ‘organic’ logic ever written,
Part Two of Logic, on ‘The Criterion or Dialectic,’ occupies the remaining one
hundred and sixty four pages of the standard edition, thus making up the bulk
of the work as a whole. With chapter titles such as ‘Judicial Logic, Including the
Pure Aesthetic’ and ‘On Synthesis a priori,’ The ‘Dialectic’ makes little attempt
to disguise its reliance upon the Critique of Pure Reason.
The concern of dialectic, as Coleridge makes clear, is with truth as the ‘coinci-
dence’ of subject and object. However, he notes, this is an ambiguous question.
The question, ‘what is truth?’
could mean three things, quite apart from the
verbal deﬁnition of truth, whereby ‘ “If you ask for the meaning of the word [...]
I reply, ‘the coincidence of the word with the thought and the thought with the
thing’”.’ First, the question could mean, what is truth, relatively to God? In this
case, the question has either no meaning or admits of but one reply, viz. “God
himself.” God is the truth, the identity of thing and thought [...]’ But this can-
not be a ‘criterion’ of truth, since a criterion implies an abstraction, which God
is not. ‘Truth, therefore, is its own criterion [...].’66 Secondly, the question may
refer to the ‘coincidence between thought and the word’ most often implied in
the ‘communication’ of truth. While acknowledging that ‘the criteria must vary
with the occasion and the purpose,’ Coleridge links this kind of question with
the search for what ‘metaphysicians have named the thing-in-itself,’ independent
of all human conception, a search that he claims permits of ‘no answer at all.’67
Thirdly, however, ‘[w]e may mean subjective truth, in which truth may be deﬁned
[as] the coincidence between the thought and the thinker, the forms, I mean, of
the intellect.’ And this is the very oﬃce of logic as dialectic, which ‘as far as it
concerns the knowledge of the mere form abstractedly from the matter,’ presents
‘the criterion of truth, that is, of formal truth [...].’68
Signiﬁcantly, this has the consequence that, strictly speaking, logic is ‘not philo-
sophical; for logic [...] consists in the abstraction from all objects. It is wholly
and purely subjective,’ and ‘has no respect to any reality independent of the
mind.’69The dialectic of logic is necessary, however, as a propaedeutic and a guard
against attempts to identify the ‘thing-in-itself,’ to rush into the ontology of truth
without having ﬁrst established one’s grounds in the psychology of truth.
For
of Kant’s thought a step farther and turn criticism against the critic’ (89). More recently, Tim
Fulford in Coleridge’s Figurative Language (MacMillan, 1991) (106), Gerald McNiece in The
Knowledge that Endures: Coleridge, German Philosophy and the Logic of Romantic Thought
(MacMillan, 1992) (21), and Thomas McFarland — in his editorial ‘Prolegomena’ to Opus Max-
imum — have agreed with McKusick’s assessment in Coleridge’s Philosophy of Language that,
in McFarland’s words, ‘[m]uch more clearly than Kant, Coleridge sees that epistemological ques-
tions cannot be resolved without recourse to a prior analysis of the linguistic structures that
constitute the means of intellectual inquiry’ (ccxxix).
66Coleridge, Logic 111.
67Coleridge, Logic 112-114.
68Coleridge, Logic 112.
69Coleridge, Logic 127.

54
Tim Milnes
Coleridge, the worst oﬀenders in this respect are materialist philosophers such as
Hartley and Godwin, who through their neglect of logic unwittingly substituted
philosophical Hypopoeisis for philosophical ‘Hypothesis.’ As he argues in an 1809
notebook entry, ‘Hypothesis’ consists in ‘the placing of one known fact under oth-
ers as their ground or foundation. Not the fact itself but only its position in a
[...] certain relation is imagined.’ Where both the position and the fact are imag-
ined, it is Hypopoeisis not Hypothesis, ‘subﬁction not supposition.’70 Increasingly
inﬂuenced by Kant, Coleridge came to see logic as the art of supposition, prelim-
inary to philosophy. Thus, the architectonic of Kant’s Transcendental Aesthetic
and deduction of the categories of understanding became exercises in a prepara-
tory discipline of logical hypothesis whereby the mind shed itself of the naive
objectivism that would only produce subﬁction or Hypopoeisis. Later, in Aids to
Reﬂection, he associates this discipline with an awareness of forethought, writing
that it ‘is at once the disgrace and the misery of men, that they live without fore-
thought. Suppose yourself fronting a mirror. Now what the objects behind you
are to their images at the same apparent distance before you, such is Reﬂection
to Fore-thought.’71
A crucial element in the hypothesis of dialectic is transcendental method. Al-
ready in Biographia Literaria, Coleridge shows how Kant’s demonstration of the
necessary conditions of experience has aﬀected his insight into the Hypopoeisis of
the materialists. The errors of Hartley and associationist philosophy, he argues,
may be all reduced to one sophism as their common genus; the mis-
taking of the conditions of a thing for its causes and essence; and the
process by which we- arrive at the knowledge of a faculty, for the fac-
ulty itself. The air I breathe, is the condition of my life, not its cause.
We could never have learnt that we had eyes but by the process of
seeing; yet having seen we know that the eyes must have pre-existed
in order to render the process of sight possible.72
In other words, knowing that eyes are the precondition of sight requires more than
sight itself, it requires a kind of reasoning that goes beyond the mere ‘conditions of
a thing,’ to the ‘cause’ that makes it possible. Later in Biographia, Coleridge gives
the same point a more recognizably Kantian formulation: ‘We learn all things
indeed by occasion of experience; but the very facts so learnt force us inward on
the antecedents, that must be pre-supposed in order to render experience itself
possible.’73
In Logic, following Kant still more closely, he terms this method
of reasoning ‘transcendental,’ noting that ‘the term “transcendental” means the
same as “sciental,” but with an additional signiﬁcance. All knowledge is excited
or occasioned by experience, but all knowledge is not derived from experience,
such, for instance, is the knowledge of the conditions that render experience itself
70Coleridge, Notebooks 3 text 3587.
71Coleridge, Aids 12.
72Coleridge, Biographia 1 123.
73Coleridge, Biographia 1 142.

Coleridge’s Logic
55
possible [...].’74
Thus far, Coleridge’s logic of dialectic looks similar to Kant’s transcendental
method. This is why much of the later sections of Logic in particular read as free
translations and adaptations from the Critique of Pure Reason. It is when the
‘Criterion’ is placed within Coleridge’s broader conception of philosophy, however,
that serious diﬀerences emerge. Coleridge learns from Kant the power of transcen-
dental argument, or thinking by way of presuppositions, but he has a very diﬀerent
conception of the status and nature of those presuppositions. ‘Fore-thought’ for
Coleridge represents not just the conceptual or even psychological conditions that
make thought or experience possible, but the half-hidden presence of an Idea that
bears life, encompassing the very dimensions of will, love, and intuition that Kant
had taken such care in the ﬁrst Critique to isolate from transcendental deduction.
Thus, like Kant, Coleridge is apt to hypostatize the preconditions of thought, as-
suming that the thing presupposed must itself have foundational status. But while
for Kant this foundation is the ‘I think’ or transcendental unity of apperception,
for Coleridge it is the ‘I am,’ the self-inaugurating word, or Logos.
Unsurprisingly, Coleridge ﬁnds it diﬃcult to connect Kant’s transcendental
method to the principles of his theosophy.
The closest he comes to success is
in the ‘Essays on the Principles of Method,’ written for the 1818 edition of The
Friend (ﬁrst published in 1809). ‘Method,’ he notes, ‘implies a progressive transi-
tion’ in reasoning. ‘But as, without continuous transition, there can be no Method,
so without a pre-conception there can be no transition with continuity. The term,
Method, cannot therefore, otherwise than by abuse, be applied to a mere dead
arrangement, containing in itself no principle of progression.’75 Thus, the presup-
position or ‘pre-conception’ underlying Method proper cannot simply be a truth
of formal logic, much less an empirical fact. It must be an Idea with a ‘life’ of its
own; it must, in short, be an organism, capable of growing and seeding further
thought. Coleridge calls this ‘leading Thought’ in Method the ‘Initiative.’76 To-
wards the end of his life, in conversation with Henry Nelson Coleridge, he refers
to this beefed-up transcendental method as ‘structive’ or ‘Synthetic’:
There are three ways of treating any subject.
1.
Analytically.
2.
Historically.
3.
structively or Synthetically.
Of these the only one
complete and unerring is the last. [...] You must begin with the philo-
sophic Idea of the Thing, the true nature of which you wish to ﬁnd
out and manifest. You must carry your rule ready made if you wish
to measure aright. If you ask me how I can know that this idea — my
own invention — is the Truth, by which the phenomena of History are
to be explained, I answer, in the same way exactly that you know that
your eyes are made to see with — and that is — because you do see
with them.77
74Coleridge, Logic 146.
75Coleridge, Friend 1 457.
76Coleridge, Friend 1 455.
77Coleridge, Table Talk 1 364-366.

56
Tim Milnes
The deployment once again of the ‘sight’ analogy indicates Coleridge’s continuing
belief in the link between Kant’s transcendental argument and the seminative and
self-authorizing power of the Ideal, ‘the philosophic Idea of the Thing.’ And yet,
an ‘Idea’ is more than just a logical construct, it is a postulate with an existential
component.
Every ‘initiative’ of reasoning involves the input of the volitional,
emotional and spiritual life of an individual. Thus, Coleridge opens the Magnum
Opus with the declaration that ‘[i]n every science something is assumed, the proof
of which is prior to the science itself,’ adding that ‘the one assumption, the one
postulate, in which all the rest may assume a scientiﬁc form [...] is the Existence
of the Will [...].’ Linking logic to the Will would be the task of the polar logic of
the Divine Tetractys: in turn, bridging the logic of understanding (the canon and
the criterion) and this higher logic of reason was to be the task of the ‘organon or
logice organica.’78
7
THE ORGANON, OR LOGIC AS DISCOVERY
This brings us to the missing logic of Logic. In long footnote to the ‘Aphorisms
on Spiritual Religion’ in Aids to Reﬂection in which he presents his conception of
polar logic as the schema of a ‘Noetic Pentad’ (to which I shall return later),79
Coleridge directs his more logical-minded reader to the ﬁnal section of his Logic:
In the third and last Section of my ‘Elements of Discourse’; in which
(after having in the two former sections treated of the Common or
Syllogistic Logic, the science of legitimate Conclusions; and the Critical
Logic, or the Criteria of Truth and Falsehood in all Premisses) I have
given at full my Scheme of Constructive Reasoning, or ‘Logic as the
Organ of Philosophy,’ in the same sense as the Mathematics are the
Organ of Science [...].
Not for the ﬁrst time, Coleridge’s redirected reader is destined to be disappointed.
Yet later in the same footnote, Coleridge hints at the reasons behind the absence
of the ’organon’:
As this third Section does not pretend to the forensic and compara-
tively popular character and utility of the parts preceding, one of the
Objects of the present Note is to obtain the opinions of judicious friends
respecting the expedience of publishing it, in the same form, indeed,
and as an Annexment to the ‘Elements of Discourse,’ yet so as that
each may be purchased separately.80
As the appeal to ‘judicious friends’ (his usual coded alert for a project that has
stalled) shows, Coleridge was already thinking of the ‘organon’ as suﬃciently dif-
ferent to the ‘canon’ and ‘criterion’ to warrant publication in a separate volume.
78Coleridge, Opus Maximum 5, 11, 33.
79Coleridge, Aids 180.
80Coleridge, Aids 183.

Coleridge’s Logic
57
The ostensible reason for this is clear enough: the ﬁrst and second sections of
Logic are ‘forensic’ and ‘comparatively popular,’ insofar as they are intended to
be formal guides to the principles of reasoning for young professionals. They do
not (explicitly at least) presuppose any theological doctrine. However, logic con-
ceived as ‘Constructive Reasoning,’ as the ‘Organ of Philosophy,’ or ‘instrument
of Discovery and universal Method in Physics, Physiology, and Statistics’ was, as
Coleridge came to see, a method that required content.81 At this point, we realise
the extent of Coleridge’s ambitions in logic: in addition to what he saw as the
older logic of syllogism and exposition, he wanted to create a new logic that was
not only ﬁt for modern science, but managed to anchor the growth of knowledge
in an ancient tradition of Christian metaphysics. It was to be a synthetic logic of
discovery, explaining and regulating the expansion of human consciousness. Such
was the goal of polar logic. The job of organic logic was to connect this higher
scientiﬁc/metaphysical logic to the formal/transcendental logic of the canon and
the criterion. Coleridge thought of this task as the attempt to build a bridge be-
tween reason and understanding. Ultimately, it seems, the organon proved to be
a bridge too far.
As with transcendental method, Coleridge adapted the distinction between rea-
son and understanding from Kant. For Coleridge, Kant’s act of desynonymisation
could not have been more timely. He saw the confusion of the human mind with
the merely formal and mechanical understanding as the great mal de siecle, a
problem that loomed with the same menace as it had when Kant published the
ﬁrst Critique. Indeed, if anything, the situation was worse in 1830, as Coleridge
complains in On the Constitution of the Church and State, declaring that thanks to
industry and utilitarianism, ‘we live [...] under the dynasty of the understanding:
and this is its golden age.’82 Coleridge’s later works signal a return to Kant after
the ill-fated ﬂirtation with the idealism of Schelling and Fichte in Biographia Lit-
eraria. As Gian Orsini notes, one result of this is that after 1815 Coleridge places
less emphasis on the restorative power of the imagination. Instead, ‘the proper use
of Reason serves to correct the errors of the Understanding.’83 Indeed, Thomas
McFarland argues that the distinction between understanding and reason ‘was the
keystone in the arch of Coleridge’s thought; it was the ultimate, the ne plus ultra,
of all his mentation.’84While this might be a slight exaggeration, it is certainly
true that Coleridge hoped, ‘by converting the reason of Hume and Diderot into
understanding, and marching to relieve the beleaguered garrison of Christianity
under the generalship of a new conception of reason [...] to wrest “reason” from
the hands of the Antichrist [...].’85As early as 1812 Coleridge is writing in the
81Coleridge, Aids 183.
82Samuel Taylor Coleridge, On the Constitution of the Church and State, ed. John Colmer
(Princeton University Press, 1976) 59.
83Orsini 140.
84Thomas McFarland, ‘Aspects of Coleridge’s Distinction Between Reason and Understanding,’
Coleridge’s Visionary Languages: Essays in Honour ofJ.B. Beer, eds. Tim Fulford and Morton
D. Paley (Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 1993) 168.
85McFarland, ‘Aspects’ 171.

58
Tim Milnes
margins of his copy of Moses Mendelssohn of
[t]he unspeakable importance of the Distinction between the Reason,
and the Human Understanding, as the only Ground of the Cogency
of the Proof a posteriori of the Existence of a God from the order of
the known Universe — . Remove or deny this distinction, and Hume’s
argument from the Spider’s proof that Houses &c were spun by Men
out of their Bodies becomes valid.86
This innovation also had profound implications for Coleridge’s conception of logic.
Unlike Kant, Coleridge conceives of pure reason as constitutive and cognitive as
well as regulative and moral. Consequently, he believes that the canons of logic
must be demonstrably based upon higher principles of reason. This is because
reason as a faculty is not just superior to understanding, but a superintending
presence for all the faculties. As he argues in the Statesman’s Manual, ‘the Reason
without being either the Sense, Understanding or the Imagination contains all
three within itself, even as the mind contains its thoughts, and is present in and
through them all.’87
As Coleridge explains in The Friend, reason diﬀers from
understanding in two key respects.
First, it is immutable: ‘the understanding
may be deranged, weakened, or perverted,’ he maintains, ‘but the reason is either
lost or not lost, that is, wholly present or wholly absent.’88
Second, reason is
consubstantial with its objects: ‘Thus, God, the Soul, eternal Truth, &c. are the
objects of Reason; but they are themselves reason [...]. Whatever is conscious
Self-knowledge is Reason; and in this sense it may be safely deﬁned the organ of
the Super-sensuous [...].’ Understanding, on the other hand, ‘supposes something
that is understood’; it is the organ of the sensuous, depending upon a combination
of logic and the objects of experience.89
The logic of the understanding then, derives its validity from principles or ideas
of reason, which, being ‘Super-sensuous’ and verbal in nature, supersede logical
canons. There are few areas where the subordination of formal logic to Coleridge’s
notion of rational principle is more glaring than in his treatment of predication
and the law of contradiction. Predication for Coleridge is the product of reﬂec-
tion, which is itself a lower power of intuition.
Since logic depends upon the
pre-reﬂective unity in judgement, an act of mind, ‘neither the subject nor its
predicate,’ taken separately or together contain the principle of ‘their reality or
objective being.’ This principle is only realised ‘when the mind bears witness to
its own unity in the subject represented to it, and this act with this consciousness
of the same is conveyed or expressed in the connective “is”.’90 At the level of logic
or understanding then, it is through the connective or copula ‘is’ that the mind
aﬃrms not only its own reality and unity, but its power to create that reality. As
86Coleridge, Marginalia 3 848.
87Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lay Sermons, ed. R. J. White (Princeton University Press, 1972)
69-70.
88Coleridge, Friend 1 153.
89Coleridge, Friend 1 156.
90Coleridge, Logic 79.

Coleridge’s Logic
59
Coleridge puts it, ‘the mind is, and it is a form, and it is formative,’ and predi-
cation is a reﬂection of this formative act of consciousness.91Barﬁeld explains this
idea further in What Coleridge Thought:
The moment of predication is the moment in which the presence of rea-
son in the understanding is manifested in its eﬀect, but only as eﬀect.
To meditate faithfully on the principle of contradiction, upon which
predication and syllogism are based, is to have one’s attention drawn
[...] to the eﬀective reality of Reason as a universal and constitutive
principle.92
However, as we saw with Coleridge’s etymological treatment of the syllogism, the
act of consciousness, indeed the act of being itself, is formed through language. ‘If
we ask ourselves how we know anything,’ he notes in Logic, ‘that rose, for example,
or the nightingale hidden in yonder tree [...] what are these but the goings from
the subject, its words, its verb? The rose blushes, the nightingale sings.’93 Thus,
just as the identity of subject and object is found in self-consciousness, ‘the ﬁrst
rule of logic is in accordance with the ﬁrst rule of grammatical syntax — that the
case which follows the verb substantive, and as such stands for the objective, is the
same with the case that precedes, that is, the subjective case.’94 The principles of
reason that govern the logic of understanding are both ideal and linguistic.
Coleridge’s insistence on the metaphysical and linguistic roots of logic leads him
to distinguish between ‘natural’ and ‘verbal’ applications of logic. The former, in
which there is ‘an actual inclusion’ of the predicate by the subject, is ‘almost
automatic and spontaneous’ to the understanding.
It is ‘a science of nature’s
rather than of our conscious self.’ Verbal logic however, is an echo of the divine
Logos, ‘partaking of this communicative intelligence’ through ‘ideas or communi-
cable forms.’95 It is within the latter concept of logic, rooted in the primordial
verbal performance, the ‘I am’ of the communicative Logos, that Coleridge believes
the canons of predication and contradiction must ultimately be framed. Thus, if
the principle of contradiction, which Coleridge gives as ‘impossibile est idem simul
esse [ac non] esse’ (it is impossible for the same thing at the same time to be and
not be), is to be a principle, ‘there ought to be something that should follow’:
[B]ut what is to follow in the present instance? How can we arrive from
this negative to a positive? Through another negative? As whatever is
not ens and non ens [being and not-being] at the same time is possi-
ble[?] But the rule that two negatives make a positive is grammatical,
not logical.96
91Coleridge, Logic 80.
92Barﬁeld 190.
93Coleridge, Logic 82.
94Coleridge, Logic 80.
95Coleridge, Logic 95-96.
96Coleridge, Logic 89.

60
Tim Milnes
At the same time, the ‘rival position,’ the principle of identity, or “‘whatever
is, is”,’ is ‘merely a repetition during the act of reﬂection of the term “is”.
I
mean that it expresses no more than my consciousness that I am reﬂecting, that
is, consciously reﬂecting the truth of being.’97 Thus, ‘[i]nstead of truth, principle,
or axiom, it is in reality a mere narration of a fact: I reﬂect on being.’ What
troubles Coleridge, like Hume and Kant before him, about the so-called principles
of contradiction and identity is that they tell us nothing new about the world, and
actually ‘encourage the error of presenting as particular truths the mere exponents
of our universal or essential consciousness.’ Ultimately, these axioms are analytic,
but the copula ‘is’ is itself ‘grounded, not in our reﬂection, or the analytic unity,
but in the synthetic.’98 Their validity derives from a unity whose origins lie in
the emergence of the universal consciousness into language and being through the
communicative Logos, in the form of the verb substantive, the ‘I am.’ The only
human faculty that can even approach this power is the intuitive reason.
We can now see that the missing logic in Coleridge’s philosophy, the organon or
logic of discovery, was to be a logic that enabled the mind to make the transition
from understanding to reason, from ‘natural’ to ‘verbal’ logic, and from predication
and contradiction to the more fundamental act of the divine consciousness, which,
echoing in the human mind, subtended the division between analysis and synthesis.
We can also now appreciate why Coleridge runs into trouble.
In eﬀecting the
shift from ‘dialectic’ or transcendental argument to a metaphysical logic worthy
of theosophy and the ideas of reason, one might expect Coleridge to show how
argument by way of presupposition (dialectic) cannot account for the totality of
its own presuppositions. Thus, by eﬀectively presupposing its own supersedence,
it would pave the way for a higher ‘polar logic’ of alterity. Indeed, it is for just this
proto-Hegelian move, as he saw it, that Muirhead applauds Coleridge, claiming
that the latter succeeds in turning ‘criticism against the critic.’99
However, while this may be ﬁne in theory, in Coleridge things are not so straight-
forward. First, Coleridge does not conﬁne the criterion or transcendental logic to
questions of understanding, that is, to questions regarding the way in which con-
cepts are applied to experience, but frequently deploys the method in the realm
of ‘Noetics,’ or intuitive reason. Indeed, Coleridge routinely uses transcendental
argument in support of ideas, not concepts (what he calls ‘conceptions’). Thus, in
the Magnum Opus, the existence of ideas of reason, which are ‘contradistinguished
alike from the forms of the sense, the conceptions of the understanding, and the
principles of the speculative reason by containing its reality as well as the peculiar
form of the truth expressed therein,’ is established by transcendental argument,
since ‘[t]hat without which we cannot reason must be presumed [...] as the ground
97Coleridge, Logic 89.
98Coleridge, Logic 89.
99Muirhead 89. See also Kathleen Wheeler, ‘Coleridge’s Theory of Imagination: a Hegelian So-
lution to Kant?’ The Interpretation of Belief: Coleridge, Schleiermacher and Romanticism, ed.
David Jasper (London, 1986) 22: ‘Coleridge’s conclusion is one with Hegel’s: “The Subjectivity
of Reason is the great error of the Kantean system”.’

Coleridge’s Logic
61
of the reasoning.’100
Second, there is nothing in Coleridge to compare with Hegel’s argument in
the Phenomenology of Spirit that any ‘dialectic’ based on transcendental method
inevitably gives way to ‘dialectic’ based upon negation.101 As I have shown else-
where, this is because the conception of alterity that Coleridge locates at the
heart of his higher logic of reason is not driven by the power of negation, but by
the altogether obscurer agency of the Pythagorean Tetractys, which (among other
things) involves a metaphysics of Will.102As he indicates in the passage from Mag-
num Opus mentioned above, the ‘source’ of ideas is ‘neither in the reason without
the Will nor in the Will without the reason.’ What this means is that Coleridge
cannot, like Hegel, demonstrate how the Kantian dialectic itself presupposes neg-
ativity.
Instead, he relies upon para-philosophical means such as illustrations,
ﬂashes of insight, aids to reﬂection and above all the willingness of his reader to
be guided, in order to lead his audience towards an illumination that cannot be
attained without an element of volition, or faith. In this respect, as Katherine
Miles Wallace points out, Coleridge saw his relation to the reader more as a guide,
albeit a ‘Chamois-hunter,’ than as a preceptor.103 As he argues in his Appendix
to the 1831 edition of Aids to Reﬂection, within Noetics, practical and theoretic
reason must work together:
The Practical Reason alone is Reason in the full and substantive sense.
It is reason in its own Sphere of perfect freedom; as the source of
ideas, which Ideas, in their conversion to the responsible Will, become
Ultimate Ends. On the other hand, Theoretic Reason, as the ground
of the Universal and Absolute in all Logical Conclusion, is rather the
Light of Reason in the Understanding [. . . ].104
As Coleridge found in the case of organic logic, one can gesture towards the light of
reason in the understanding as the Absolute of logical conclusion, but one cannot
demonstrate it. In the end, Coleridge’s failure to develop an organon betrays the
extent to which his interest in ‘dialectical’ logic or transcendental argument is
motivated by his unwarranted assumption that this form of reasoning was merely
a preparatory exercise for metaphysical illumination, as if Kant’s method was
merely the stepladder needed to reach the ﬁrst step on the marble staircase of
‘polar logic.’
100Coleridge, Opus Maximum 270-271. Emphasis added.
101See G.W.F. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A.V. Millar (Oxford University Press,
1977) 29.
102Tim Milnes, ‘Through the Looking-Glass: Coleridge and Post-Kantian Philosophy,’ Com-
parative Literature 51.4 (1999): 309-323.
103Catherine Miles Wallace, The Design of the Biographia Literaria (London: George Allen
& Unwin, 1983) chapter 1: ‘The Chamois Hunter.’ Coleridge uses the metaphor in the 1818
Friend 1 55: ‘Alas! legitimate reasoning is impossible without severe thinking, and thinking is
neither an easy nor an amusing employment. The reader, who would follow a close reasoner to
the summit and absolute principle of any one important subject, has chosen a Chamois-hunter
for his guide.’
104Coleridge, Aids 413.

62
Tim Milnes
8
POLAR LOGIC AND THE NOETIC PENTAD
This brings us to the logic that transcended the science of understanding cov-
ered by Logic: the logic of reason. Indeed, with polar logic we are immediately
confronted by the question of what logic is, if it is not to be the articulation of
demonstrable principles of reasoning. As we have seen, this is more than just a
problem of nomenclature, in that its answer is bound up with Coleridge’s esti-
mation of the legitimate reach of philosophy within human life. Ever conscious
of what he saw as the hollow rationalism that lay behind the French Revolution,
Coleridge is vigilant about the dangers of an unregulated understanding. Con-
sequently, logic plays a systematically ambiguous role in his thought, potentially
both a menace and a comfort. On one hand, as the instrument of understanding,
it threatens to break out of its allocated canonical and dialectical functions. Un-
fettered, formal logic has dangerous tendency to become reiﬁed, collapsing back
into a damaging irrationalism. Thus, in Aids to Reﬂection, Coleridge complains of
‘Ideas or Theories of pure Speculation, that bear the same name with the Objects
of Religious Faith’ being taken for those objects themselves thanks to the natural
tendency of mind to form
certain Essences, to which for its own purposes it gives a sort of notional
Subsistence. Hence they are called Entia rationalia: the conversion of
which into Entia realia, or real Objects, by aid of the Imagination, has
in all times been the fruitful Stock of empty Theories, and mischievous
Superstitions.105
For this reason, he maintains, following Kant, the purely spatio-temporal cate-
gories of understanding should not be extended ‘beyond the sphere of possible
Experience.
Wherever the forms of Reasoning appropriate only to the natural
world are applied to spiritual realities, it may be truly said, that the more strictly
logical the Reasoning is in all its parts, the more irrational it is as a whole.’106
Upon this reasoning, Coleridge bases his argument that the irrationalism of his
age is merely the reﬂex of an overextended faculty of understanding. One way in
which this pyrrhic triumph of logic is expressed is pantheism, a heresy with which,
as Thomas McFarland has shown, Coleridge struggles throughout his career.107
Dictating the fragments that were to form the uncompleted manuscripts for Lo-
gosophia or Magnum Opus, Coleridge claims to have demonstrated in the Logic
‘that Dichotomy, or the primary Division of the Ground into Contraries,’ though
‘the necessary form of reasoning as long as and wherever the intelligential faculty of
Man [weens] to possess within itself the center of its own System,’ can easily excite
a ‘delusive conceit of Self-suﬃciency,’ the ‘inevitable result’ of which, as with ‘all
consequent Reasoning, in which the Speculative intellect refuses to acknowledge a
higher or deeper ground than it can itself supply, is [...] Pantheism.’108
105Coleridge, Aids 167.
106Coleridge, Aids 254.
107Thomas McFarland, Coleridge and the Pantheist Tradition (Oxford University Press, 1969).
108Coleridge, Opus Maximum 104-106.

Coleridge’s Logic
63
On the other hand, Coleridge’s careful restriction of his critique to the dangers
threatened by ratiocination dominated by ‘Dichotomy,’ reminds us of his attraction
to logic, and his desire to free it from the conﬁnes of the understanding. Thus,
while in Logic he urges his reader not to ‘think too meanly’109 of formal logic,
elsewhere he criticises Robert Leighton for assuming that an argument ‘in point of
Logic, legitimately concluded’ is the same as a truth of reason. On the contrary,
‘the truths in question are transcendent, and have their evidence, if any, in the
Ideas themselves, and for the Reason; and do not and cannot derive it from the
conceptions of the understanding [...].’110 Similarly, in his marginalia to Johann
Christian Heinroth’ s Lehrbuch der Anthropologie, he complains of the ‘Followers
of Fichte, Baader, Schelling and Steﬀens’ that ‘they neglect Logic — or rather do
not understand what Logic is. Thus, what Kant asserted as an assumption for the
purposes of a formal Science, Heinroth asserts as a matter of fact. It is a necessary
ﬁction of pure Logic [. . . ].’ 111
Where all these thinkers fail, according to Coleridge, is in their inability to
recognise the point where dichotomic logic (the logic of understanding) must give
way to polar or trichotomic logic (the logic of reason).
The same distinction
informs the transition that Coleridge envisages in his 1815 letter to John May
between the preparatory discipline of the Logic or ‘Elements of Discourse’ and
that of the ‘Dynamic or Constructive Philosophy’ or ‘Logos Architectonicus.’ The
exposition and articulation of the latter was to be one of the main tasks of the
Magnum Opus. The limitations of the former, he claims, are evident in Emanuel
Swedenborg’s Prodromus Philosophiae:
The Reasoning in these pages might be cited as an apt example of
the inconvenience of the Dichotomic Logic: which acts in a contrary
direction to the prime end and object of all reasoning, the reduction of
the Many to One [...]. Two terms in manifest correspondence to each
<other> are yet opposed as contraries, without any middle term: the
consequence of which is, that one [...] of the [...] two becomes a mere
negation of the other [...].112
For Coleridge, duality, opposition, diﬀerence, contradiction, all presuppose a more
fundamental unity. As he continues to explain, the negation in dichotomic logic is
‘a mere act of the mind, arising from a defect of perception.’ It is therefore nec-
essary to establish a logic that is able to express the way in which contraries are
always mediated by a ‘middle term,’ yoking dualities within a dynamic unity. The
only way this can be done, he maintains, is with a logic of ‘Trichotomy,’ similar
to that involved in ‘Pythagorean Tetractys.’113 Kant had introduced trichotomic
logic to eighteenth-century though by arguing that all logical oppositions presup-
pose a fundamental unity of consciousness in apperception, but as usual this did
109Coleridge, Logic 65.
110Coleridge, Marginalia 3 516.
111Coleridge, Marginalia 2 1002.
112Coleridge, Marginalia 5 459.
113Coleridge, Marginalia 5 459.

64
Tim Milnes
not go far enough for Coleridge. In his marginalia to Richard Baxter, Coleridge
complains that Kant takes trichotomy ‘only as a Fact of Reﬂection — [...] in which
he seems to anticipate or suspect some yet deeper Truth latent & hereafter to be
discovered.’ Baxter, on the other hand, is commended not just for preﬁguring
Kant’s arguments a century earlier, but for grounding trichotomy ‘on an absolute
Idea presupposed in all intelligential acts.’114
Coleridge makes the same point in
a diﬀerent way when, in The Statesman’s Manual, he distinguishes three kinds of
necessity. There is, as he puts it, ‘a threefold Necessity’:
There is a logical, and there is a mathematical, necessity; but the latter
is always hypothetical, and both subsist formally only, not in any real
object. Only by the intuition and immediate spiritual consciousness
of the idea of God, as the One and Absolute, at once the Ground
and the Cause, who alone containeth in himself the ground of his own
nature, and therein of all natures, do we arrive at the third, which
alone is a real objective, necessity. Here the immediate consciousness
decides: the idea is its own evidence, and is insusceptible of all other.
It is necessarily groundless and indemonstrable; because it is itself the
ground of all possible demonstration. The Reason hath faith in itself,
in its own revelations.115
In this passage we can see how the principal forces in Coleridge’s thought conspire
to ensure the subordination of ‘formal’ (both logical and mathematical) neces-
sity: the prioritisation of intuitive reason and ‘immediate spiritual consciousness’;
the insistence on unity; the idea of the self-grounding and therefore fundamental
agency of consciousness in its act of ‘faith,’ and above all the primacy of a revela-
tory God ‘as the One and Absolute.’ For Coleridge, these principles conﬁrm the
ascendancy of reason over understanding, and thus of intuitive Ideas over logical
rules. The law of contradiction, for example, is seen as secondary to the indemon-
strable principle (itself the engine of the growth of language through desynonymy)
of diﬀerence within unity, or distinction without division. Thus, in a fragment
on consciousness from around 1816, he notes that ‘all Ideas, when interpreted
into Conceptions [...] must appear to involve contra-dictions’ to those who never
move beyond the understanding: ‘in other words, as the Ideal Power can only
[...] manifest itself for the Senses in opposite Forces, so the Idea [...] relatively to
Speculation, can only be conceived by incompatible Conceptions [...].’116
Diﬀerence, in other words, will always remain secondary to a fundamental unity,
which means that while diﬀerence might appear as contradiction in the understand-
114Coleridge, Marginalia 1 347-348.
In a further note, Coleridge links ‘the principle of
Trichotomy’ to the ‘Polar Logic’ of ‘Giordiano Bruno’s Logica Venatrix Veritatis’ and the
‘Pythagorean Tetractys’.
For a meditation on the signiﬁcance of Bruno’s sudden appearance
in this note, see Barﬁeld’s Appendix to What Coleridge Thought.
115Coleridge, Lay Sermons 32.
116Coleridge, Shorter Works 1 430.

Coleridge’s Logic
65
ing, it retains a one-ness in the Reason.117 Thus, dysynonymising terms in Church
and State, Coleridge remarks on ‘the essential diﬀerence between opposite and
contrary,’ arguing that unlike contraries ‘[o]pposite powers are always of the same
kind, and tend to union, either by equipoise or by a common product.’118 ‘Op-
position,’ however, is prior to contrariness; just as all contradictions presuppose
a unity, all contraries presuppose an opposition. Indeed, without this principle,
Coleridge’s theory of desynonymy as the means by which thought enriches and
renews itself through diﬀerentiation in language would lose its foundation: the
undiﬀerentiated Logos, from which language descends and to which it seeks to
return.
Nor is this the only consequence of the superiority of the ‘polar’ logic of ‘op-
positions’ over the formal logic of ‘contraries.’ In Church and State, Coleridge’s
opposite / contrary distinction is ﬁnally deployed to explain how the principles of
the state, like those of language, can be traced to the two opposite or ‘antagonist’
powers of ‘Permanence and of Progression.’119 Similarly, in his contributions to
J.H. Green’s lectures on aesthetics, Coleridge maintains that ‘the Beautiful ex-
cludes the distinct consciousness [...] of the forms of the Understanding — for
these are determined by a logical necessity’ and do not consider ‘an ultimate end’
but merely the means or ‘the mode of the conspiration of the Manifold to the One.’
However, he continues, ‘the direct contrary is the character of the Beautiful. The
manifold must be melted into the one,’ just as a ‘beautiful Piece of Reasoning’ is
‘not beautiful because it is [...] understood as truth; but because it is felt, as a
truth of Reason, i.e. immediate, and with [...] a facility analogous to Life.’120
Above all, however, the impetus behind polar logic was theological. As McFar-
land observes, having already established through trichotomic logic that no two
positions in a dyad are equal, and that ‘trinal conceptions arise inevitably from
dyadic conceptions,’ it seems obvious to Coleridge that the next step is to replace
the ‘I-Thou’ dyad implicit in most unreﬂective conceptions of the relationship be-
tween the self and God, with an account that would vindicate the ‘reasonableness
of the Trinity.’121 This brings us back to the ‘Noetic Pentad,’ which Coleridge
models on the Pythagorean Tetractys. Included in a footnote to the ‘Aphorisms
on Spiritual Religion’ in Aids to Reﬂection, this schematism incorporates the dy-
namics of polar logic in a relational model of reality that Coleridge hopes will give
a philosophical underpinning to Trinitarianism. He ﬁrst proposes adopting the
terms ‘objective and subjective reality, &c. as substitutes for real and notional,
and to the exclusion of the false antithesis between real and ideal,’ the relationship
between the two being that of ‘Thesis’ and ‘Antithesis.’122 Once again, however,
the relation between these points is dictated not by negation, as in Hegel, but by
117Indeed, Perkins claims that the principle of diﬀerence-in-unity ‘is the very foundation of
Coleridge’s system’ (39).
118Coleridge, Church and State 24.
119Coleridge, Church and State 24.
120Coleridge, Shorter Works 2 1313.
121McFarland, ‘Prolegomena,’ Opus Maximum cxlii.
122Coleridge, Aids 178.

66
Tim Milnes
a dynamic produced by Coleridge’s conﬂicting needs. On one hand, he wishes to
install the identity of mind and world as the foundation of knowing and being; on
the other, he seeks to secure a dynamic of mediation between the two that will
obviate any suggestion of a return to pantheism. As a result, the Pentad is organ-
ised according to Coleridge’s metaphysics of language, centring on the Prothesis
as ‘Verb Substantive,’ the Absolute copula or ‘I am,’ which expresses ’the identity
or co-inherence of Act and Being’:123
1. Prothesis
[Verb Substantive: ‘I am’]
2. Thesis
4. Mesothesis
3. Antithesis
[Substantive: ‘thing’]
[Inﬁnitive: ‘to act’]
[Verb: ‘I act, undergo’]
5. Synthesis
[Participle: ‘acting’]
It is here that the signiﬁcance of Coleridge’s desynonymisation of ‘opposite’
and ‘contrary’ becomes clear, since it is only through the oppositions of polar
logic, and not the contraries of the logic of equation and contradiction, that the
dynamic relationship between world and self, thesis and antithesis, can come into
being.
Thus, the subordination of the laws of formal logic to the principle of
diﬀerence-in-unity allows Coleridge, not for the ﬁrst time, to have it both ways.
Accordingly, while the Prothesis is installed as a noumenous foundational identity,
the ‘Punctum invisibile, et presuppositum [the invisible and presupposed point],’
by which the Pythagoreans ‘guarded against the error of Pantheism,’ a mediating
term is introduced in the form of the ‘Mesothesis,’ expressing the ‘Indiﬀerence’ —
but not the identity — of subject and object.124 Inserting the mesothetical point
as ‘the Indiﬀerence of the two poles or correlative opposites,’125 as Perkins points
out, enables Coleridge ﬁnally to sever his links with Schelling by showing that the
Absolute foundation is the identity of ‘unity and distinction’ and not (as Schelling
claimed in his Identity Philosophy) the identity of ‘identity and distinction.’126
9
BEYOND LOGIC
Ultimately, Coleridge’s philosophy aspires to move beyond argument, beyond even
polarity, into a horizon where knowledge merges with power. As the 1816 fragment
on the ‘four sorts of knowledge’ makes clear, only the ‘fourth’ source of knowledge,
the conscience, enables the reﬂective intellect to recover its original unity with the
transcendent agency of Will.127 Consequently, we run the risk of misrepresenting
Coleridge’s logic if we ignore the role it plays within a broader logosophic system
123Coleridge, Aids 180.
124Coleridge, Aids 180-181.
125Coleridge, Aids 179.
126Perkins 65.
127Coleridge, Shorter Works 1 412.

Coleridge’s Logic
67
that incorporates conscience, imagination, and faith.
‘We (that is, the human
race) live by faith,’ he maintains in The Statesman’s Manual; faith ‘is scarcely
less than identical with its own being,’ thus ‘it is the Copula — it contains the
possibility of every position, to which there exists any correspondence in reality.
It is itself, therefore, the realising principle, the spiritual substratum of the whole
complex body of truths.’128
Statements such as this, as we have seen, are typical of Coleridge’s curious
willingness to continue to deploy transcendental arguments (concerning ‘the pos-
sibility of every position’) in areas where argumentation itself might appear to be
ceding ground to volition. Nonetheless, for much of his career, as Coleridge strug-
gled to reconcile the claims of philosophy with those of his religion, the balance of
his thinking shifted increasingly towards the noncognitive. ‘For a very long time
indeed I could not reconcile personality with inﬁnity,’ he recounts in Biographia,
‘and my head was with Spinoza, though my whole heart remained with Paul and
John.’129 It
was to be the power of personality that ﬁnally triumphed in this
contest, as the teachings of Paul and John overcame the limitless philosophical
planes of Spinoza. Will, rather than reason, becomes the keystone of Coleridge’s
thought as he endeavours to vindicate his belief that ‘[t]he Ground of Man’s nature
is the Will in a form of Reason.’130
Indeed, for Coleridge, even the alterity that determines Noetics, or the science of
reason, is itself the product of Absolute Will. In an unpublished fragment dating
from around 1818-1819, Coleridge maintains of the Will that ‘being causative
of alterity it is a fortiori causative of itself[,] and conversely the being causative
of itself it must be causative of alterity [...].
Consequently the Will is neither
abstracted from intelligence nor can Intelligence be conceived of as not grounded
and involved in the Will [...].’131 The trichotomic logic upon which all logic depends
thus ultimately rests upon an alterity grounded in the Will. One consequence of
this is that Coleridge conceives of the most fundamental relations governing reality
as personal relationships rather than logical relations.
This is most powerfully expressed in the familial model deployed to explain the
emergence of consciousness (both human and Absolute) in Magnum Opus. Here,
Coleridge distinguishes three relationships — mother/child, father/son, I/thou —
whose interdependence forms the condition of possibility for the communicative
Logos. Without these relationships, indeed, it is impossible to explain how diﬀer-
ence emerges from identity. ‘The whole problem of existence,’ he argues, ‘is present
as a sum total in the mother: the mother exists as a One and indivisible some-
thing.’ Alterity, and with it language, is only made possible by the intervention of
the father, introducing the diﬀerence-in-unity expressed in the Logos: ‘The father
and the heavenly father, the form in the shape and the form aﬃrmed for itself are
blended in one, and yet convey the earliest lesson of distinction and alterity. There
128Coleridge, Lay Sermons 18.
129Coleridge, Biographia 1 201.
130Coleridge, Shorter Works 2 1368.
131Coleridge, Shorter Works 1 779.

68
Tim Milnes
was another beside the mother, and the child beholds it and repeats [...].’ Finally,
having left the maternal knee, ‘the child now learns its own alterity’.132 Viewed
this way, personality is no less than the key to the relation between unity and
diﬀerence. Only when one thinks of the most fundamental relations as personal
relationships, Coleridge argues, can one understand how alterity itself is possible.
Only through the metaphysics of personality is it possible, by acknowledging that
the claims of otherness touch us at the deepest level of our being, to resist the lure
of hyperrationalism or Spinozism.
This is not to say that our personal relationship with God is identical to our
relationships with other people. Being perfect, God’s personhood is prothetical,
it is ‘personeity, diﬀering from personality only as rejecting all commixture of im-
perfection associated with the latter.’ This installation of God as ‘at once the
absolute person and the ground of all personality,’133 represents Coleridge’s most
mature attempt to bridge religion and philosophy by reconciling ‘personality with
inﬁnity.’ By making the alterity outlined in his ‘higher’ polar logic or noetic de-
pendent upon the willing relationships that sustain the relations between persons,
Coleridge avoids collapsing these relations into an undiﬀerentiated foundation that
could once again be made the exclusive property of philosophy. For the later Co-
leridge, personhood is prior to being, just as faith is prior to knowing.
Thus, in the unpublished ‘Essay on Faith,’ written in 1820, Coleridge deﬁnes
‘Faith’ as ‘Fidelity to our own Being as far as such Being is not and cannot become
an object of the sense,’134 arguing that ‘even the very ﬁrst step [...] the becoming
conscious of a Conscience, partakes of the nature of an Act [...] by which we take
upon ourselves [...] the obligation of Fealty.’135 As Steven Cole points out, in ‘The
Essay on Faith,’ ‘Coleridge oﬀers his fullest, and most compelling, explanation
of how the idea of personhood is contextually enacted,’ based on how “‘ﬁdelity
to our own being” establishes a relation our being has to the being of others.’136
But Coleridge goes further even than this. He intimates that the obligation of
acknowledgement is the most fundamental precondition of all recognition; whether
perceiving nature or other persons, we are bound to enter into a moral relationship
that presupposes an element of will, and thus faith. Consequently, ‘Conscience is
the root of all Consciousness, and a fortiori the precondition of all Experience’; it
‘is a witnessing respecting the unity of the Will and the Reason eﬀected by the
Self-subordination of the Will, as = Self, to the Reason, as = the Will of God.’137
In essence, as Anthony John Harding indicates, what Coleridge attempts in the
‘Essay on Faith’ and the Magnum Opus is to reverse Kant’s proof of the exis-
132Coleridge, Opus Maximum 131-132. As McFarland notes, this account of the Logos or ‘I
am’ was crucial in freeing Coleridge from Schelling’s dyadic, ‘either/or’ conception of Absolute
Identity (cxxxi).
133Coleridge, Opus Maximum 176-177.
134Coleridge, Shorter Works 2 834.
135Coleridge, Shorter Works 2 836.
136Steven E. Cole, The Logic of Personhood: Coleridge and the Social Production of Agency,’
Studies in Romanticism 30 (1991) 103-105.
137Coleridge, Shorter Works 2 837-838.

Coleridge’s Logic
69
tence of free will from the moral law, basing the moral law on the existence of
free will. In this, he was inﬂuenced by recent German criticism of Kant’s sys-
tem as crypto-Spinozism, and in particular Jacobi’s argument in Concerning the
Doctrine of Spinoza in Letters to Herr Moses Mendelssohn (1785) that ‘[f]aith is
the element of all human cognition and activity.’138
It was Jacobi’s work that
encouraged Coleridge in his conviction that ‘[t]he conscience [...] is not a mere
mode of our consciousness, but presupposed therein.’139 And yet, Coleridge was
not prepared to swallow Jacobi’s antidote to philosophy, what the latter termed
in his 1815 Preface to David Hume on Faith as a ‘knowing not-knowing.’140 In-
stead, as Harding indicates, by establishing conscience as the means by which
‘the self becomes aware of its own existence,’ Coleridge does ‘what Kant did not
do for himself, that is, establish a priori the possibility of recognising other hu-
man beings as themselves possessed of conscience and selfhood.’141 Ultimately,
Jacobi’s insistence on the priority of personhood and faith in human knowledge
is transformed by Coleridge into a metaphysics of personality designed to prevent
the higher logic of Noetics from folding into pantheism. Against Kant’s stricture
that there could never be a theology of reason, Coleridge envisages religion and
philosophy in perfect equipoise, the logic of understanding blending with a logic
of reason that is itself part logic, part revelation. Such is the place of logic in
a theosophy according to which reason must always incorporate the illumination
of faith, as Coleridge’s Appendix to On the Constitution of the Church and State
makes clear:
Finally, what is Reason? You have often asked me; and this is my
answer;
Whene’er the mist, that stands ’twixt God and thee
Defecates to a pure transparency,
That intercepts no light and adds no strain —
There Reason is, and there begins her rein!142
10
COLERIDGE’S LOGIC TODAY
The story of Coleridge’s inﬂuence on modern logic is not one likely to detain the
historian of ideas for very long. This is almost entirely due to the fact that the
Logic manuscripts lay almost unnoticed for much of the nineteenth century, and
were ﬁrst published, in excerpted form, in Alice Snyder’s 1929 Coleridge on Logic
138Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, The Main Philosophical Writings and the Novel Allwill, trans.
George di Giovanni (McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1994) 234.
139Coleridge, Opus Maximum 73.
140Jacobi 545.
141Anthony John Harding, Coleridge and the Idea of Love: Aspects of Relationship in Co-
leridge’s Thought and Writing (Cambridge University Press, 1974) 189-91.
142Coleridge, Church and State 184.

70
Tim Milnes
and Learning.143 Even then, a further 62 years elapsed before J.R. de J. Jackson
produced a text for the Bollingen Collected Coleridge that accurately reﬂected the
content of the Logic manuscripts. Rather like Bentham’s contemporary work on
logic and language, Coleridge’s logic suﬀered from the chaotic state of the writer’s
corpus at the time of his death. While in the case of Bentham this was largely due
to carelessness about publication, with Coleridge the causes were excessive caution
and procrastination. This, combined with the fact that Coleridge tends to avoid
the technicalities of logic in his published works — typically deferring full expo-
sition with an apology and a promissory note for the ‘Elements of Discourse’ —
means that little of Coleridge’s logical theory was available in the decades follow-
ing his death. His inﬂuence in the spheres of ethics and the theory of government
(famously impressing John Stuart Mill), theology (encouraging Newman and the
Oxford movement with his defence of Trinitarianism), philosophy (transmitting his
ideas via Carlyle to Emerson and the American Transcendentalists), and aesthet-
ics (single-handedly inventing the concept of practical criticism that would later
be developed by LA. Richards) is immense and well documented.144 In logic, how-
ever, the dissemination of Coleridge’s thought, at least until recently, has largely
been limited to footnotes and the inferences of his more attentive readers.
That said, since the end of the nineteenth century a succession of critics has
deplored the neglect of Coleridge’s logic.
Among these commentators there is
near unanimity in the view that Coleridge’s single greatest achievements in this
ﬁeld stem from his exploration of the interconnectedness of logic, language, and
the noncognitive matrices of faith and personhood. Snyder set the tone by ar-
guing that, more than his eﬀorts ‘to schematise the dialectic movement of the
reason,’ Coleridge’s ‘negative criticisms of the lower faculty, the understanding
[...] threw out informal suggestions for which thinkers today are still expressing
their gratitude.’145 Less patronisingly, Muirhead embraced Coleridge’s rejection
of conventional logic, praising ‘a method which proceeds, as he expresses it, by
“enlargement” instead of by “exclusion,” and by inner development instead of by
mere external synthesis,’146 as well as Coleridge’s anticipation of the principle — of
which later idealists such as Bradley, Green and Bosanquet made so much — that
143Alice D. Snyder, Coleridge on Logic and Learning (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1929).
144Coleridge’s impact on these areas is too vast, and the literature devoted to the subject too
extensive to document here. However, for a comprehensive study of Coleridge’s inﬂuence on Mill
and the thought of nineteenth-century Britain, see Ben Knights, The Idea of the Clerisy in the
Nineteenth Century (Cambridge University Press, 1978). For his inﬂuence on Cardinal Newman,
see Philip C. Rule, ‘Coleridge and Newman: The Centrality of Conscience,’ The Fountain Light:
Studies in Romanticism and Religion in Honor of John L. Mahoney, ed. Robert J. Barth (NY:
Florida University Press, 2002). Basil Willey’s ‘I.A. Richards and Coleridge,’ in LA. Richards:
Essays in his Honor, eds. Rueben Brower, et al. (Oxford University Press, 1973) assesses the role
Coleridge played in Richards’ conception of the function of criticism, while the poet’s relation to
American transcendentalism is examined by Kenneth Marc Harris in ‘Reason and Understanding
Reconsidered: Coleridge, Carlyle and Emerson,’ Essays in Literature 13.2 (1986). The wider
impact of Coleridge’s thought is mapped in Coleridge’s Afterlives, 1834-1934, eds. Jane Wright
and James Vigus (Palgrave, forthcoming).
145Snyder 13.
146Muirhead 86-87.

Coleridge’s Logic
71
‘what is necessary and at the same time possible must be real.’147 More recently,
as well as McKusick’s championing of Logic as a landmark of nineteenth-century
linguistics, Nicholas Reid has published a series of articles in which he argues
that by indexing meaning to an imaging process rather than to ﬁctional entities
called images, Coleridge evades the Fregean-Wittgensteinian attack on psychol-
ogism, presenting a view of logic and language, which, ‘admittedly shorn of its
idealist and theistic roots, is ripe for revival.’148
Apologias such as the above notwithstanding, it is diﬃcult to see how, for the
foreseeable future at least, Coleridge’s position in the history of logic, sandwiched
between Kant and Mill, can avoid appearing to many as an embarrassing example
of romantic overreaching. This is partly because of the way in which the status
of logic as a ‘discipline’ is contested in his writings, but mainly because of how
he challenges philosophy to justify itself at the bar of ‘life.’
Yet it is for pre-
cisely this reason, I would argue, that we should applaud Coleridge and continue
to read him. Driven by an urgent desire to deﬁne a new index of rationality for
a post-revolutionary age, the sheer range and audacity of Coleridge’s theosophi-
cal resuscitation of logic in an era dominated by the spectre of irrationalism can
reacquaint a modern reader with the historical conditions of what Habermas calls
the plurality of the voices of reason.149 In particular, his endeavours remind us
how, before Frege, logic brieﬂy assumed an existential form, which, however out-
landish it might appear today, rightly refused the Humean severance of thought
that analytic philosophy was later to inﬂict on human intellect.
Admittedly, one result of this is that navigating what McFarland aptly describes
as ‘the reticulation of Coleridge’s thought’ is never without its diﬃculties.150 In
particular, as his later work strives to adjudicate between competing conceptions
of reason (instrumental, dialogic, intuitive, incarnate, practical), Coleridge’s in-
creasingly elaborate attempts to square the circle between faith, logic and com-
munication acquire a dogmatic character. Suspicious of foundationalism, Coleridge
originally grounds thought and being in a linguistic act. Yet, rather than leave rea-
son to the pragmatics of communication, to the everyday function of ‘etymologic,’
he hypostasizes this act in the form of a metaphysical principle. Instead of dis-
pensing with philosophical foundations altogether, Coleridge ultimately installs a
147Muirhead 110.
148Nicholas Reid, ‘Coleridge, Language, and the Imagination,’ Romanticism on the Net,22,
May 2001, 31 March 2006 www.erudit.0rg/revue/ron/2001/v/n22/005977ar.html.
See also
Nicholas Reid, ‘Form in Coleridge, and in Perception and Art More Generally,’ Romanticism on
the Net 26, May 2002, 31 March 2006 www.erudit.0rg/revue/ron/2002/v/n26/005699ar.html,
and ‘ “That Eternal Language,” or Why Coleridge was Right about Imaging and Meaning,’
Romanticism on the Net 28, November 2002, 31 March 2006 www.erudit.org/revue/ron/2002/
v/n28/007208ar.html.
149See J¨urgen Habermas, ‘The Unity of Reason in the Diversity of its Voices,’ Postmetaphysical
Thinking: Philosophical Essays, trans. William Mark Hohengarten (Cambridge: Polity Press,
1992): ‘[T]he unity of reason only remains perceptible in the plurality of its voices — as the
possibility in principle of passing from one language to another — a passage that, no matter how
occasional, is still comprehensible’ (117).
150McFarland, Pantheist Tradition xl.

72
Tim Milnes
super-foundationalism. Thus, the ‘copula’ that the verb substantive, the Prothesis
or ‘I am’ presents in thought becomes a ground of grounds, a logical, grammatical,
psychological and metaphysical principle underwriting logic and theory of method
alike. But is this principle itself logical? The closing words of Barﬁeld’s study will
serve just as well here, in that they elegantly capture the question that Coleridge
bequeaths to modern logic. What ﬁnally matters when considering Coleridge’s
logic, Barﬁeld concludes, is ‘whether there is indeed a sense in which it is proper
to characterise as a nuclear — or polar — logic the exactness of the understanding,
not blurred or cancelled, but pierced to its empty heart at each moment, by the
energy of imagination as the bearer of related qualities.’151
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Barﬁeld, 1971] O. Barﬁeld. What Coleridge Thought. Wesleyan University Press, 1971.
[Burnett, 1773–92] J. Burnett [Lord Monboddo]. On the Origin and Progress of Language. 6
vols. Edinburgh, 1773-92.
[Christensen, 1981] J. Christensen. Coleridge’s Blessed Machine of Language. Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 1981.
[Cole, 1991] S. E. Cole. The Logic of Personhood:
Coleridge and the Social Production of
Agency. Studies in Romanticism 30 (1991): 85-111.
[Coleridge, 1995] S. T. Coleridge. Aids to Reﬂection. Ed. John Beer. Princeton University Press,
1995.
[Coleridge, 1983] S. T. Coleridge. Biographia Literaria. Eds. James Engell and Walter Jackson
Bate. 2 vols. Princeton University Press, 1983.
[Coleridge, 1956–71] S. T. Coleridge. Collected Letters of Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Ed. Earl
Leslie Griggs. 5 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1956-71.
[Coleridge, 1969] S. T. Coleridge. The Friend. Ed. Barbara E. Rooke. 2 vols. Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1969.
[Coleridge, 1972] S. T. Coleridge. Lay Sermons. Ed. R.J. White. Princeton University Press,
1972.
[Coleridge, 1987] S. T. Coleridge. Lectures 1808-1819 On Literature. Ed. R.A. Foakes. 2 vols.
Princeton University Press, 1987.
[Coleridge, 2000] S. T. Coleridge. Lectures 1818-1819 On the History of Philosophy. Ed. J.R.
de J. Jackson. 2 vols. Princeton University Press, 2000.
[Coleridge, 1981] S. T. Coleridge. Logic. Ed. J.R. de J. Jackson. Princeton University Press,
1981.
[Coleridge, 1980–2001] S. T. Coleridge. Marginalia. Eds. H. J. Jackson, George Whalley, et al.
6 vols. Princeton University Press, 1980-2001.
[Coleridge, 2001] S. T. Coleridge. The Notebooks of Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Ed. Kathleen
Coburn, et al. 5 vols. Routledge, 2002.
[Coleridge, 1976] S. T. Coleridge. On the Constitution of the Church and State. Ed. John
Colmer. Princeton University Press, 1976.
[Coleridge, 2002] S. T. Coleridge. Opus Maximum. Eds. Thomas McFarland and Nicholas
Halmi. Princeton University Press, 2002.
[Coleridge, 1995] S. T. Coleridge. Shorter Works and Fragments. Eds. H. J. Jackson and J. R.
de J. Jackson. 2 vols. Princeton University Press, 1995.
[Coleridge, 1990] S. T. Coleridge. Table Talk. Ed. Carl Woodring, 2 vols. (Princeton University
Press, 1990)
[De Quincey, 1889] T. De Quincey. The Collected Writings of Thomas de Quincey. Rev. ed.
David Masson. 14 vols. Edinburgh, 1889.
[Fulford, 1991] T. Fulford. Coleridge’s Figurative Language. MacMillan, 1991.
151Barﬁeld 193.

Coleridge’s Logic
73
[Habermas, 1992] J. Habermas. Postmetaphysical Thinking:
Philosophical Essays. Trans.
William Mark Hohengarten. Polity Press, 1992.
[Hamilton, 1983] P. Hamilton. Coleridge’s Poetics. Basil Blackwell, 1983.
[Harding, 1974] A. J. Harding. Coleridge and the Idea of Love:
Aspects of Relationship in
Coleridge’s Thought and Writing. Cambridge University Press, 1974.
[Harris, 1986] K. M. Harris. Reason and Understanding Reconsidered: Coleridge, Carlyle and
Emerson. Essays in Literature 13.2 (1986): 263-282
[Hartley, 1791] D. Hartley. Observations on Man. 2 vols. 1791, Woodstock Books, 1998.
[Havens, 1981] M. K. Havens. Coleridge on the Evolution of Language. Studies in Romanticism
20 (1981): 163-183.
[Hagel, 1977] G. W. F. Hegel. Phenomenology of Spirit. Trans. A.V. Millar. Oxford University
Press, 1977.
[Jackson, 1998] H. J. Jackson. Coleridge’s Lessons in Transition: The “Logic” of the “Wildest
Odes”. Lessons of Romanticism: A Critical Companion. Eds. Thomas Pfau and Robert F.
Gleckner. Duke University Press, 1998. 213-224.
[Jackson, 1983] H. J. Jackson. Coleridge, Etymology and Etymologic. Journal of the History of
Ideas 44.1 (1983): 75-88.
[Jacobi, 1994] F. H. Jacobi. The Main Philosophical Writings and the Novel Allwill. Trans.
George di Giovanni. McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1994.
[Knights, 1978] B. Knights. The Idea of the Clerisy in the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge
University Press, 1978.
[Leask, 1988] N. Leask. The Politics of Imagination in Coleridge’s Critical Thought. Macmillan,
1988.
[McFarland, 1993] T. McFarland. Aspects of Coleridge’s Distinction Between Reason and Un-
derstanding. Coleridge’s Visionary Languages: Essays in Honour of J.B. Beer. Eds. Tim
Fulford and Morton D. Paley D.S. Brewer, 1993. 165-180.
[McFarland, 1969] T. McFarland. Coleridge and the Pantheist Tradition. Oxford University
Press, 1969.
[McKusick, 1987] J. C. McKusick. Coleridge’s “Logic”:
A Systematic Theory of Language.
Papers in the History of Linguistics. Eds. Hans Aarsleﬀ, Louis G. Kelly and Hans-Joseph
Niederehe. John Benjamins Publishing Company, 1987. 478-489.
[McKusick, 1986] J. C. McKusick. Coleridge’s Philosophy of Language. Yale University Press,
1986.
[McNiece, 1992] G. McNiece. The Knowledge that Endures: Coleridge, German Philosophy and
the Logic of Romantic Thought. MacMillan, 1992.
[Milnes, 1999] T. Milnes. Through the Looking-Glass: Coleridge and Post-Kantian Philosophy.
Comparative Literature 51.4 (1999): 309-323.
[Muirhead, 1930] J. H. Muirhead. Coleridge as Philosopher. George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1930.
[Orsini, 1969] G. N. G. Orsini. Coleridge and German Idealism. Southern Illinois University
Press, 1969.
[Perkins, 1994] M. A. Perkins. Coleridge’s Philosophy: The Logos as Unifying Principle. Claren-
don Press, 1994.
[Prickett, 1986] S. Prickett. Words and The Word. Cambridge University Press, 1986.
[Quine, 1980] W. V. O. Quine. Elementary Logic. Rev. ed. Harvard University Press, 1980.
[Reid, 2001] N. Reid. Coleridge, Language, and the Imagination. Romanticism on the Net 22.
May 2001. 31 March 2006. www.erudit.0rg/revue/ron/2001/v/n22/005977ar.html
[Reid, 2002] N. Reid. Form in Coleridge, and in Perception and Art More Generally. Roman-
ticism on the Net 26. May 2002. 31 March 2006. www.erudit.0rg/revue/ron/2002/v/n26/
005699ar.html
[Reid, 2002a] N. Reid. That Eternal Language, or Why Coleridge was Right about Imaging
and Meaning. Romanticism on the Net 28. November 2002. 31 March 2006. www.erudit.org/
revue/ron/2002/v/n28/007208ar.html
[Rule, 2002] P. C. Rule. Coleridge and Newman: The Centrality of Conscience. The Fountain
Light: Studies in Romanticism and Religion in Honor of John L. Mahoney. Ed. Robert J.
Earth. Florida University Press, 2002. 231-255.
[Simpson, 1993] D. Simpson. Romanticism, Nationalism, and the Revolt Against Theory. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1993.
[Snyder, 1929] A. D. Snyder. Coleridge on Logic and Learning. Yale University Press, 1929.

74
Tim Milnes
[Tooke, 1829] J. H. Tooke. Epea Pteroenta or the Diversions of Purley. Rev. ed. by Richard
Taylor. 2 vols. London, 1829.
[Wallace, 1983] C. M. Wallace. The Design of the Biographia Literaria. George Allen & Unwin,
1983.
[Wellek, 1931] R. Wellek. Immanuel Kant in England 1793-1838. Princeton University Press,
1931.
[Wheeler, 1986] K. Wheeler. Coleridge’s Theory of Imagination: a Hegelian Solution to Kant?
The Interpretation of Belief: Coleridge, Schleiermacher and Romanticism. Ed. David Jasper.
London, 1986. [16-40]
[Willey, 1973] B. Willey. LA. Richards and Coleridge. LA. Richards: Essays in his Honor. Eds.
Rueben Brower, et al. Oxford University Press, 1973. 227-236.
[Wright and Vigus, forthcoming] J. Wright and J. Vigus, eds. Coleridge’s Afterlives, 1834-1934.
Palgrave, forthcoming.

RICHARD WHATELY AND LOGICAL
THEORY
James Van Evra
1
INTRODUCTION
Richard Whately (1787–1863) is better known for his inﬂuential defense of logic
than for adding anything to the formal core of the subject. That defense, set out
in his Elements of Logic [EL] of 1826,1 appeared at the beginning of a period
of signiﬁcant change in the subject. The popular logic2 that Whately inherited
had been the subject of unremitting criticism at the hands of major thinkers for
more than two centuries. As a result, the received logic, which consisted largely
of texts that were formally defective and contained little evidence of theoretical
insight, was in disarray.
Soon after the publication of Elements, by contrast,
the ﬁrst wave of great 19th century works in logic appeared, works by George
Boole and Augustus De Morgan in Britain, Bernard Bolzano on the continent,
and Charles Sanders Peirce in the United States. Many factors contributed to this
reversal of fortune, including, perhaps most importantly, the growing recognition
of interesting ties between logic and mathematics. Although Whately’s defense
of the subject preceded the mid century shift, it was nonetheless more than a
defense of the existing tradition. Rather, Whately’s contribution to the process
was a reconception of the broad theoretical context within which logic occurs. In
eﬀect, his theory cast logic in a form more congenial to the formal developments
soon to come. In addition to its impact on the core conception of the subject, his
reconception had the further eﬀect of clarifying the boundary conditions on logic,
something sorely needed in a period in which logic had often been uncritically run
together with epistemology or rhetoric. Settling logic’s boundary conditions, in
turn, served to better deﬁne the scope and limits of the neighboring disciplines (in
particular rhetoric, the topic of another of Whately’s works, Elements of Rhetoric
[1828]).
1The date of the ﬁrst monograph edition; the work ﬁrst appeared in 1823 in several parts in
a popular cyclopedia. See Jongsma 1983 for a full account of its provenance.
2While they contain no innovations, popular texts are nonetheless a good indicator of the
state of logic at that time. E. J. Ashworth puts the point well: “. . . the textbook-writers and
schoolteachers of a period may be as important as the leading intellectuals, for it is by these
minor ﬁgures that all innovations are accepted, altered, and made into the new commonplace.
To concentrate solely on the great thinkers is to obscure the reality of the university and school,
of the mainstream orthodoxy which lies behind these thinkers and which feeds them.” [Ashworth,
1985: LIV]
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

76
James Van Evra
2
BIOGRAPHY
2.1
Life and Works
Richard Whately was born in London on February 1, 1787, to an established family
whose members held positions of responsibility in government service, banking, law
and the clergy. Throughout his life, he is described as being a brilliant, independent
thinker who bore little routine allegiance to established tradition. The youngest
(by six years) of nine children, his independence was at ﬁrst a matter of necessity;
often isolated and left to his own interests, he learned to read and write at an
early age, studied nature on solitary walks, and displayed prodigious ability at
arithmetic calculation. Later in life his independence took the form of advocacy
of less than uniformly popular causes, such as ending legal disadvantages borne
by English Catholics, and, while serving as president of a royal commission on the
Irish poor (1835/6), arguing for making improvements to agriculture rather than
forcing the impoverished into workhouses.
After early schooling near Bristol, Whately entered Oriel College in 1805. His
life in Oxford was a series of successes, beginning with a double second BA (in
Classics and Mathematics) in 1808. The degree was one of the ﬁrst double degrees
awarded there, and one of its components, mathematics, was just beginning to
gain acceptance in Oxford as an independent ﬁeld of study. He was elected fellow
of Oriel in 1811, awarded an MA in 1812, and became a private tutor. In 1822,
he left Oxford to become a parish priest, but returned in 1825 as principal of St.
Alban Hall. He became professor of Political Economy in 1829, and in 1831 left
Oxford permanently to become Archbishop of Dublin, a post he occupied until his
death on October 8, 1863.3
Throughout his working life, Whately was known more for his talent as a teacher
(“no don,” it was said at the time, “was ever less donnish”)4 than for his pub-
lished scholarship. However, while not extensive in quantity, and while his two
primary works were texts, his writings were nonetheless inﬂuential; they are cited,
for instance, 237 times in the Oxford English Dictionary. Among them, three are
particularly noteworthy: the two Elements already mentioned, and his early His-
toric Doubts Relative to Napoleon Buonaparte [1819], an ironic critique of David
Hume’s argument on miracles based on the claim that the same argument could
be used to cast doubt on the existence of historical ﬁgures such as Napoleon.
Logic played a relatively minor role in the full scope Whately’s working life; he
was primarily a theologian and philosopher. However, the fact that he was not a
logician is unremarkable, for at that time, no one was a logician.5 What interest he
had in logic had two origins, one theological, the other pedagogical. Regarding the
former, while at Oxford, Whately came under the inﬂuence of Edward Copleston,
3A full account of Whately’s life can be found in E. Jane Whately 1875.
4Cf. Brent 2004/5. Mary Prior [1967] likens him to an early 19th century P. T. Geach.
5None of the text writers in the tradition were primarily logicians. Much later, Peirce (cor-
rectly) claimed that he was the ﬁrst since the middle ages to completely devote his life to logic.
Cf. [Fisch, 1985, xviii].

Richard Whately and Logical Theory
77
the founder of a group (the Noetics) devoted to defending Christian doctrine on
the ground of its presumed reasonableness, and to producing clergy capable of
providing a reasoned defense of the teachings of the Church of England. Whately
considered logic to be an important part of the university curriculum insofar as it
strengthened rationality to such ends:
The cause of Truth universally, and not least, of religious Truth, is ben-
eﬁted by everything that tends to promote sound reasoning and facili-
tate the detection of fallacy. The adversaries of our Faith would, I am
convinced, have been on many occasions more satisfactorily answered
. . .
had a thorough acquaintance with Logic been a more common
qualiﬁcation than it is. [1826, xxvii]6
The other source of his interest in logic stems from changes then taking place in
Oxford. At the time, logic was being forced to prominence as a result of curricular
reform, one eﬀect of which was that more students were required to study it. At the
same time, the university came under attack from external critics for promoting
the teaching of what they took to be a worthless subject. With logic so much a
matter of contention, there was obvious need for a clear account of the nature of
the subject and a rationale for studying it. Whately provided both.7
2.2
Reception
Elements was one of the most inﬂuential logic texts of the 19th century. When
referring to the background against which his own work was set, for instance,
George Boole immediately recognized Elements as the standard text in logic.8 In
reaction to Elements, De Morgan called Whately the “restorer of logical study in
England”,9 and Peirce’s interest in the subject was initially spurred by a reading of
the work at age 11.10 Beyond such direct inﬂuence, Elements was broadly popular,
appearing in nine editions during Whately’s lifetime, and in many reprint editions
6This was a common sentiment at the time. Others (e.g. Wesley quoted below) held the same
view. Unlike them, however, Whately sharply distinguished the science itself from its presumed
beneﬁts.
7A more complete account of the reform process and reactions to it can be found in my [1984,
sec. 2.3].
8In Laws of Thought, Boole says “that portion of this work which relates to logic presupposes
in its reader a knowledge of the most important terms of the science, as usually treated, and of
its general object. On these points, there is no better guide than Archbishop Whately’s Elements
of logic [Boole, 1854, pref.].
9[De Morgan, 1860, 247]
10Peirce’s ﬁrst encounter with logic, as Max Fisch [1982, xviii] describes it, occurred when
Charles found a copy of Elements in his brother’s room, and asking what logic was, got a simple
answer, stretched himself on the carpet with the book open before him, and over a period of
several days absorbed its contents. Since that time, he often said in later life, it had never been
possible for him to think of anything, including even chemistry, except as an exercise in logic.
And so far as he knew, he was the only man since the middle ages who had completely devoted
his life to logic.

78
James Van Evra
throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.11
It was so popular
in the United States that, as Whately (correctly) observed, “. . .
it is in use, I
believe, in every one of their Colleges” [9th ed., xviii] The reason for its popularity
is clear: Elements contains a well reasoned and engaging defense of logic generally,
an accurate presentation of what was then its formal core, and a coherent theory
of the subject.
3
WHATELY’S CONCEPTION OF LOGIC
3.1
Logic as Whately Found it
Whately wrote Elements in part as a critique of a long standing tradition in
common logic on the one hand, and in reaction to the pointed criticisms of logic
which arose in reaction to that tradition on the other. His point throughout was
that logic had been misrepresented by the authors of the texts and misunderstood
by the critics.
The tradition in question began as a revival of Aristotelianism in the late six-
teenth century. By that time, the sophistication of Medieval logic had been lost
to critics (e.g. the “Humanists”) who deplored the imposition of what they con-
sidered barbarous technicalities on the language, and yearned instead for a return
to the elegant Latin of Cicero and Seneca. By the mid-sixteenth century, popular
works such as the Dialectic of Peter Ramus [1543] appeared which played to liter-
ary fashion by freely drawing illustrations from favored Latin authors. Rather than
conceiving of logic as having to do with semantic problems, forms of argument, or
paradoxes as it had been during the medieval period, logic was now described as
“an art which teaches one to dispute well”. As a result, such
Lack of interest in, and open hostility to, the older logical methods
were widely accompanied by an increased concern with rhetoric, so
that logic, for long the ‘art of arts’, was now required to be patterned
on logically untutored thought and speech in a way as free as possible
from subtle technicalities and rigour. [Thomas, 1964, 300]
Later works in the tradition identiﬁed the syllogism as the central formal feature
in logic, but often gave faulty accounts of such basic topics as rules for identifying
middle terms, and for distinguishing major and minor premisses.
Clearly, the
atmosphere of continuing hostility to the older logic had taken its toll:
11So popular was Elements that it was featured in an 1867 poem by W. S, Gilbert: (“Sir
Macklin”. Cf [Gilbert, 1968, 96]):
Then I shall demonstrate to you,
According to the rules of Whately
That what is true of all, is true
Of each, considered separately.

Richard Whately and Logical Theory
79
Having discarded the whole corpus of late medieval novelties and dis-
coveries, it is clear that [the authors] left themselves little room for
manoeuvre. In strictly formal logic, about all that they set themselves
to do was to give an account of the syllogistic. Their normal ill success
is a measure of the general loss of logical nerve at this time. [Ibid., 302]
Prominent works in the tradition include those by Robert Sanderson [1615],
Richard Crakanthorpe [1622], The mathematician (and teacher of John Locke)
John Wallis [1687], and Henry Aldrich [1691]. Of these, versions of the ﬁrst and
especially the last were still in prominent use in Britain in the early 19th century.
Indeed, Whately acknowledged Aldrich’s (“concise, but generally accurate”) Com-
pendium as the source of the formal core of Elements. When attention turned to
theory, however, any allegiance Whately felt to his predecessor vanished.
To give some indication of what texts of the period were like, what follows is a
brief characterization of those by Sanderson and Aldrich. Both texts begin with
essentially the same description of logic. Here, in translation, is Aldrich’s version:
Logic, which by synecdoche (or the ﬁgure which takes the part for the
whole) is denominated Dialectics, has been called the art of reasoning;
or, an instrumental art, directing the mind into the knowledge of all
intellectual things. For this reason it ought to be the ﬁrst of all dis-
ciplines, as being necessary to the acquirement of the rest. [Jackson,
1836, 1n]12
As we will see, such an optimistic estimate of logic’s role is an example of what
for critics was a sure sign of its abject failure.
Sanderson’s Logicae Artis Compendium [1615] was popular throughout its his-
tory and still in use in the late 18th and early 19th centuries.13
Little of it is
devoted to what would now be considered logic. An account of the ﬁgures and
rules of the syllogism, for instance, occupies just three (of 357) pages. Further,
the syllogism is interpreted, following Aristotle, as a kind of discourse, but not
one based on a distinct conception of logical form (there is, for instance, no formal
representation of the syllogism in the text). Also, Sanderson recognizes only three
syllogistic ﬁgures on the Philoponian arrangement of syllogistic terms. The re-
mainder of the work is devoted to topics which, while related to logic (e.g. speech,
or the mind), are no longer considered proper parts of the subject. Sanderson’s
conception of logic is broad enough, in fact, to include everything to which logic
might apply, including all of (material) existence (and non-existence!) The syllo-
gism appears only derivatively, i.e. as a sub-class of second intentions (used to
group things taken materially. (The other sub class being demonstration.))
12Sanderson, more than a century earlier, put it as follows: “Logica, quae & Synecdichice Di-
alectica, est ars instrumentalis, dirigens mentam nostrum in cognitionem omnium intelligibilum”.
(1) Obviously, little had changed in the intervening period.
13Cf. [Ashworth, 1974]. Jeremy Bentham studied Sanderson as an undergraduate, and used it
in designing a new curriculum for logic in the schools. See also [Bentham, 1827, 13, 22].

80
James Van Evra
Beﬁtting its status as a compendium, is Aldrich’s Artis Logicae Compendium
[1691] is spare (in most versions, approx. 50 pages in length), and contains little
more than the basic components of an Aristotelian text, i.e. a classiﬁcation of
terms and propositions, an account of syllogistic structure, a few pages on method,
and an appendix on fallacies. While slight, Aldrich’s text contains evidence that
by the latter stages of the 17th century, at least some formal progress had been
made:
[Aldrich] deﬁnes the terms in the Philoponian way and works out the
consequences accurately and completely, arriving at twenty-four moods
in four ﬁgures, tables them in full, and eﬀects a deductive rejection of
the 232 invalid moods. To come on these few pages after the logical
rags and tatters of the previous two centuries is to be presented with
a creation of haute couture. [Thomas, 1964, 310–311]14
Though not part of the same tradition, other 17th century works displayed much
the same character. Arnauld and Nicole’s Port Royal logic (La Logique, ou l’art
de Penser (1662)) was, like Aldrich compendium, formally accurate in its (brief)
presentation of the syllogism, but was otherwise in the thrall of Cartesian epis-
temology, and promoted Descartes’ critical attitude toward logic as traditionally
conceived.15
The same extravagant claims made for logic in the 17th century can be found in
the 18th century as well. In his “Address to the Clergy”, for instance, John Wesley
(a translator of Aldrich in addition to being a noted theologian) characterized logic
in this way:
Some knowledge of the sciences also, is, to say the least . . .
expedi-
ent. Nay, may we not say, that the knowledge of one, (whether art
or science), although now quite unfashionable, is even necessary next,
and in order to, the knowledge of the Scripture itself? I mean logic.
For what is this, if rightly understood, but the art of good sense? of
apprehending things clearly, judging truly, and reasoning conclusively?
What is it, viewed in another light, but the art of learning and teach-
ing; whether by convincing or persuading? What is there, then, in the
whole compass of science, to be desired in comparison of it? [Wesley’s,
Works, 1756. Jackson ed. 1872, Vol. 10. 483]
3.2
The Critics
As Whately received it, logic was caught in the rational equivalent of a perfect
storm, i.e. a set of circumstances that converged to make progress in the sub-
ject highly unlikely. During the same period in which logic was being described
14Whately incorporated this feature of the Compendium, with some modiﬁcations, in Elements.
It is one of the few features of the work that he used without extensive alteration.
15See [Descartes, quote below, 82].

Richard Whately and Logical Theory
81
as playing a role in gaining knowledge, (while at the same time being based on
modes of thought ﬁxed by tradition), major thinkers in the great outwash from the
Renaissance were busy promoting their own new methods for gaining knowledge
(including the fundamentals of the scientiﬁc method as we now know it) and mak-
ing major additions to the theory of knowledge itself. To them, not only did the
logic of terms, propositions and syllogisms play no role in uncovering new truths,
it was an example of what they were intent on leaving behind, i.e. a device based
on discredited tradition that did nothing but merely reshuﬄe knowledge already
in hand. Here is Whately’s description of the situation:
By representing logic as furnishing the sole instrument for the discovery
of truth in all subjects, and as teaching the use of intellectual faculties
in general [members of the preceding tradition] raised expectations
which could not be realized, and which naturally led to a reaction.
[1826, vii]
The reaction is well known. Some critics focused on the general Aristotelian
context. Thus Francis Bacon:
For as water ascends no higher than the level of the ﬁrst spring, so
knowledge derived from Aristotle will at most arise no higher again
than the knowledge of Aristotle. And therefore, though a scholar must
have faith in his master, yet a man well instructed must judge for
himself. [Bacon, 1605, 20]
And in the 18th century, Thomas Reid:
[Aristotle’s]’s works carry too evident marks of pride, vanity and envy
which have often sullied the character of the learned. He determines
boldly things above all human knowledge.
He delivers his decisions oracularly, and without any fear of mistake.
Rather than confess his ignorance he hides under hard words and am-
biguous expressions, of which his interpreters can make what they
please. [Reid, 1843, 553]16
Others focused on what they took to be the nature of logic.
Thus Locke’s
famous remark that
If the syllogism be taken as the only proper instrument of reason and
means of knowledge, it will follow that before Aristotle, there was not
one man that did or could know anything by reason, and that since the
invention of the syllogism there is not one in ten thousand that doth.
But God has not been so sparing to men to make them barely two-
legged creatures and left it to Aristotle to make them rational. [Locke,
1706, 264]
16In his review of Elements, John Stuart Mill [1828, 138] indicated that even before Whately,
such extreme views had already lost favor.

82
James Van Evra
The main criticism directed at logic, however, and one repeated frequently, was
that it could not do what had been claimed for it. Again in Bacon’s words,
The syllogism consists of propositions, propositions of words are the
signs of notions. If, therefore, the notions (which form the basis of
the whole) be confused and carelessly abstracted from things, there is
no solidarity in the superstructure. Our only hope, then, is induction.
[Bacon, 1620, 316]
And in a similar vein, Descartes says that
I noticed that as far as logic was concerned, its syllogism and most
of its other methods serve rather to explain to another what one al-
ready knows, or even, as in the case of Lully, to speak freely and with-
out judgement of what one does not know, than to learn new things.
[Descartes, 1637, 14] 17
Comments such as these are only a small sampling of the widespread contempt
for logic.
In a period of intense activity in epistemology, the logicians’ claims
seemed both antiquated and false.
The point constantly made was that there
are better ways to gain knowledge than those oﬀered in logic, methods such as
Baconian induction, or the new methods of Descartes or Locke.
Such criticism gave rise, in turn, to a variety of works, identiﬁed as logics, that
were designed substantially to modify, or completely replace, syllogistic texts.
The common rationale was that if the syllogism could not lead to knowledge, then
syllogistic texts should be replaced by accounts of what could. Thus, for instance,
as Rolf George points out,
Denis Diderot’s article on logic in the Encyclopedie, the most widely
consulted work of the 18th century, has nothing whatever to say about
logic. It is claimed here, simply, that reasoning is a natural ability,
and that to conduct logical inquiries is like “setting oneself the task of
dissecting the human leg in order to learn how to walk” (Encyclopedie,
Logique; [George, 2002, 36]).
Other works, including Arnauld’s [1662] work already mentioned, Issac Watts’
Logick, or the right use of reason [1725], and Elements of logick [1748], by William
Duncan, relegate the syllogism to a minor role, or discard it altogether, and replace
it with the fruits of 17th century Epistemology.
While such alternatives to the syllogistic manuals were popular, they did not en-
tirely displace the 17th century texts. Support for the standard texts, for instance,
remained particularly strong in Oxford. That support, in turn, led inevitably to
renewed criticism, and the debate over logic that resulted was an important factor
in the genesis of Elements.
17‘Lully’ is Ramon Lull (1232? –1315), best known as the author of an Ars Magna [1274].

Richard Whately and Logical Theory
83
3.3
Whately’s alternative
Whately made two initial assumptions that set his view of logic apart from those
of his forbears. The ﬁrst is that logic is a science on a par with other prominent
sciences (e.g. chemistry, physics or algebra). While logic had been considered to
be equally an art as well as a science, that is, Whately considered it to be primarily
a science, and an art only derivatively and in application (see [1826, 1, 127–28]).
In calling logic a science, Whately meant that it is a discipline based on clear
theoretical principles.18
For Whately, it was the longstanding lack of a strong theoretical foundation,
by contrast, that helped to explain why logic had progressed so little in preceding
centuries, for, as he says, no science progresses unless it is founded on such prin-
ciples [1826, 2]. And, while centuries of stagnation suggested to its critics that
logic had become moribund, Whately remained optimistic about its prospects.
One had to recall, he suggested, that sciences such as physics and chemistry had
been dormant for long periods before receiving the theoretical support needed for
scientiﬁc progress [1826, 11].
The same lack of ‘right principles’ also explained, according to Whately, why
logic had been the subject of so much criticism, for without a proper foundation,
it had been subjected to the claims and demands of common opinion, but not
science:
The vanity . . . by which all men are prompted unduly to magnify their
own pursuits, has led unphilosophical minds . . . to extend the bound-
aries of their respective sciences, not by the patient development and
just application of the principles of those sciences, but by wandering
into irrelevant subjects. . . . none is more striking than the misappli-
cation of logic, by those who treated it as the ‘art of rightly employing
the rational faculties’, or who have intruded it into the province of
natural philosophy, and regarded the syllogism as an engine for the
investigation of nature. [1826, 6–7].
The second assumption Whately made is that logic is immediately concerned
with language.
Earlier logicians had held that language serves logic only as a
representative of thought, which in turn is the primary subject.19 Whately, on the
other hand, took language itself to be the primary subject:
Logic is entirely conversant about language: a truth which most writers
on the subject, if indeed they were fully aware of it themselves, have
18Sir William Hamilton criticized Whately for suggesting that the deﬁnition of logic as a
science introduced something new. He pointed out that it had often been so described in the
past [Hamilton, 1833, 131 ﬀ.]. Hamilton was right; there had been considerable debate in the
16th and 17th centuries concerning whether logic was an art or a science. As then understood,
however, ‘science’ was understood in the broad Aristotelian conception of that term (i.e. one
that encompassed any classiﬁcatory scheme). Whately’s conception of science, by contrast, is of
the modern theoretical variety, and not the Aristotelian.
19See [Aldrich,, Jackson, 1836, 3]

84
James Van Evra
certainly not taken care to impress on their readers. Aldrich’s deﬁnition
of logic, for instance, does not give any hint of this. [1826, 56n]
And,
. . . since logic is wholly concerned with the use of language, it follows
that a Syllogism (which is an argument stated in regular logical form)
must be “an argument so expressed, that the conclusiveness of it is
manifest from the mere force of the expression”, i.e. without consider-
ing the meaning of the terms . . . [1826, 88]20
While placing language in such a central role is reminiscent of earlier Hobbesian
nominalism, the view is also a precursor of the view that it is possible to deal with
a variety of subject areas as they are represented in language.
Within the scope of these two broad assumptions, the heart of Whately’s view is
that logic is a ‘generalized and abstract statement of all demonstration whatever’
[1826, 34]. In terms of the sort Boole would later use, it is ‘a method of analyzing
that mental process which must invariably take place in all correct reasoning’
[1826, 11]. What makes it abstract is that, unlike those who treat the syllogism as
one kind of argument among many,21 Whately separates logic from its intended
ﬁeld of application. Thus thinking of the syllogism as a particular sort of argument
is, Whately says (in obvious reply to Locke), a “mistake no less gross than if any
one should regard Grammar as a peculiar Language, and should contend against its
utility, on the ground that many speak correctly who never studied the principles
of grammar” [1826, 11, 13/14]. In his conception, by contrast, using logic as an
abstract analytical device ‘is like using chemical analysis to examine the elements
of which any compound body is composed’ [1826, 11/12].
Perhaps the clearest example of Whately’s conception of the abstract nature of
logic can be seen in the analogy he draws between logic and mathematics:
All numbers must be numbers of some things. But to introduce into the
science any notice of the things respecting which calculations are made,
would be evidently irrelevant, and would destroy its scientiﬁc charac-
ter: we proceed therefore with arbitrary signs representing numbers in
the abstract. So does logic pronounce on the validity of a regularly con-
structed argument, equally well, though arbitrary symbols have been
substituted for the terms: and, consequently, without any regard to
the things signiﬁed by those terms. [1826, 13–14]
And,
20The word ‘force’ in the passage is likely a misprint of the word ‘form.’ Cf. [1826, 37] for a
similar passage using the latter term.
21Whately cites as an instance the rhetorician George Campbell, who juxtaposed syllogistic
and moral reasoning.

Richard Whately and Logical Theory
85
In order to trace more distinctly the diﬀerent steps in the abstracting
process by which any particular argument may be brought into the
most general form, we may ﬁrst take the syllogism stated accurately
. . . and then somewhat generalize the expression by substituting (as
in algebra) arbitrary unmeaning symbols for the signiﬁcant terms that
we originally used. [1826, 35]
Within this context, Whately considered the syllogism to be a purely formal
device for the expression of any argument, as opposed to being an argument of a
particular kind. In Whately’s words, an argument, when cast into the proper form
is called a syllogism; which is . . . not a particular kind of argument,
but only a peculiar form of expression, in which every argument may
be stated. [1826, 24]
Again, logic,
which is, as it were, the grammar of reasoning, does not bring forward
the regular syllogism as a distinct mode of argumentation, designed to
be substituted for any other mode; but as the form to which all correct
reasoning may be ultimately reduced; and which, consequently, serves
the purpose . . . of a test to try the validity of any argument. [1826,
11–12; See also 124n]
Unlike earlier theories, that is, Whately held the syllogism to be an abstract
canonical form, into which (perhaps elliptically stated) arguments may be formu-
lated for validity testing. So regarded, the syllogism has more in common with
algebraic expressions containing variables, than with arguments as they appear in
ordinary language. Whately later strengthened this conception of the syllogism as
a normal form by insisting on a completely tenseless interpretation of the copula
(see [1826, 57]).
Deﬁning the syllogism as abstract in relation to arguments permitted Whately
to adopt a somewhat more liberal approach to the relation between the syllogism
and various sorts of common arguments than that found in the 17th century texts.
He allowed, for instance, (where the earlier logicians had not) the possibility that
other sorts of arguments might have their own rules:
. . . rules have been devised for ascertaining the validity of [hypothet-
ical syllogisms] at once, without bringing them into categorical form.
[1826, 108]
And, although he held that the categorical syllogism remains the ultimate
ground for the validity of arguments, no longer were various kinds of arguments
treated as de facto incomplete syllogisms.
Whately’s formal development of the syllogism (in a section occupying less than
one ﬁfth of the whole work) bears an external resemblance to earlier logics. On

86
James Van Evra
closer inspection, however, the eﬀects of his theoretical stance are immediately
apparent. Thus he initially restricts the scope of the discussion to reasoning and
argumentation, and then only as they occur in language. In addition, while he
begins in the traditional manner with a classiﬁcation of terms, his classiﬁcation
diﬀers fundamentally from any that could be regarded as Aristotelian. He counts,
for example, the traditional distinctions (e.g.
between univocal and equivocal
terms, or terms of ﬁrst and second intention) not as classiﬁcations of terms, but of
ways in which they are used. Whately’s classiﬁcation is conﬁned to just one major
division (singular and common terms), all others being relegated to derivative
status.
One consequence of the abstract character of logic, according to Whately, was
that it has value even when it has no direct application [1826, ix, 20]. Judging
logic by its direct eﬀects (as those who held that it was an art had done), he says,
reﬂects a confusion about the nature of theories. Thus ﬁnding fault with logic for
not making people think better ‘is as if one should object to the science of optics
for not giving sight to the blind’ [1826, 12]. Obviously, Whately’s association of
logic with pure science was based on the recognition of similarities between the
structural properties of theories in areas such as optics with those in logic.
Whately’s identiﬁcation of argument forms containing variables as the proper
focus for logic now seems to be nothing more than a mundane recognition of the
obvious. In the early 19th century, it was nothing of the kind. While there had
been earlier logicians whose work included abstract components, Whately’s theory
explicitly recognized this as a deﬁning feature of logic.
3.4
Other aspects of Whately’s approach to logic
Beyond Whately’s general conception of logic as a formal science with similarities
to algebra, etc., there are two more speciﬁc features found in Elements that are
worthy of mention. The ﬁrst concerns his identiﬁcation of logical individuals as
things which are incapable of logical division, which replaces the traditional notion
of individuals as essentially simple things [1826, 68]. This interpretation is later
prominent in the works of both Boole and De Morgan). Second, he includes (for
the ﬁrst time since the Port-Royal logic), the principle of conditionalization:
A conditional proposition . . .
may be considered as an assertion of
the validity of a certain argument; since to assert that an argument
is valid, is to assert that the conclusion necessarily results from the
premisses, whether those premisses be true or not. [1826, 110]
3.5
Whately on method
Separate from the core of Elements, but appended to it, Whately includes a lengthy
section (50 pp.) entitles ‘Dissertation on the province of reasoning’, which concerns
such traditional topics as induction, the discovery of truth, and inference and proof.

Richard Whately and Logical Theory
87
Unlike earlier treatments of the same topics, in which they are run together with
logic proper, Whately explicitly separates the two:
Logic being concerned with the theory of reasoning, it is evidently
necessary, in order to take a correct view of this science, that all mis-
apprehensions should be removed relative to the occasions on which
the Reasoning-process is employed — the purposes it has in view —
and the limits within which it is conﬁned. [1826, 205]
In this way he separates logic from the substantive theory of reasoning (a point
which Mill later failed to appreciate), the former being concerned with the latter
as theory to model, i.e. in this case to typical ways in which reasoning is used
and justiﬁed. Logic itself remained for Whately the formal theory of the theory of
reasoning.
Nowhere is this separation more evident than in Whately’s treatment of induc-
tion. Attempting to establish a relationship of precedence or dependence between
logic and induction (a continual arguing point in the 17th and 18th century), is,
says Whately, a mistake:
Logic takes no cognizance of induction . . . as a distinct form of argu-
ment. . . . The essence of an inductive argument (and so of the other
kinds which are distinguished for it) consists not in the form of the Ar-
gument, but in the relation which the subject-matter of the Premises
bears to that of the Conclusion. [1826, 124]
And, as Whately notes on several occasions, the mistake of treating the syllo-
gism as a kind of argument rather than as a common logical form has a common
origin with the mistake of treating induction as a form of argument.
4
CRITICAL REACTION TO WHATELY’S THEORY
Reactions to Elements began to appear shortly after its ﬁrst monograph publica-
tion. While there was general agreement that Whately had mounted an admirable
defense of logic, and that he was responsible for stimulating new interest in the
subject, speciﬁc reaction to his revision of the context within which logic is done
fell into two groups. Those still committed to the Aristotelian style of logic with
all its accoutrements interpreted Whately as being one of them due to his reten-
tion of the syllogism, but found his conception of logic as a pure formal science
too spare. Those who had moved beyond Aristotelian logic, by contrast, tacitly
adopted his formal style, but (again owing to his retention of the centrality of the
syllogism), regarded him as still a member of the older tradition.
The ﬁrst substantial review of Elements was written by Jeremy Bentham’s
nephew, George Bentham (1800–1884). His book, entitled Outline of a new system
of logic, with a critical examination of Dr. Whately’s “Elements of logic”, [1827],
is an account of his own ideas on logic (which include the ﬁrst use of equations

88
James Van Evra
and symbolic quantiﬁers in the formalization of syllogistic premisses), combined
with a running commentary on Elements. To Bentham, Elements was simply the
‘last and most improved edition of the Aristotelian system’ [Bentham,, 1827, vii],
rather than something fundamentally new.
While Bentham lauds Whately for
having done much to ‘divest the science of that useless jargon, of those unmeaning
puerilities, with which it had been loaded by the schoolmen’, [Bentham, 1827,
v] he nonetheless ﬁnds Whately’s conception of logic too conﬁning.
Reﬂecting
older views, Bentham advocated a return to the earlier view that logic should be
concerned with the acquisition of knowledge as well as its formal representation.
Logic, he says, is the ‘branch of art-and-science which has for its object the ad-
vantageous application of the human mind to the study of any other branch of
art-and-science’ [1827, 14]. As such, logic should be concerned with both deduc-
tion and induction. Being conﬁned only to deductive reasoning, Bentham held,
Whately’s theory is too restricted to be of use.
In the following year, the young John Stuart Mill’s review of Elements appeared
in the Westminster review. Like Bentham, Mill complimented Whately for having
written a ‘clear exposition of the principles of syllogistic logic, and vindicating it
against the contemptuous sarcasms of some modern metaphysicians.22 Then, prior
to expressing reservations similar to those of Bentham, Mill makes a comment that
would be repeated in the 20th century: ‘[Whately] has written rather excellently
concerning logic, than expounded in the best manner the science itself” [1828,
138]. Mill’s criticism of Whately, repeated later in his System of logic [1843], again
concerns the abstract nature of Whately’s conception of logic. In opposition to
Whately, for instance, Mill says that logic can remove ambiguity, for the ‘analysis,
to which it subjects any process of reasoning, aﬀords the readiest and most certain
means by which a latent ambiguity in any one of the term employed, or the tacit
assumption of any false or doubtful propositions, can be detected’ [1828, 144].
Mill’s main complaint, however, was that while Whately was on solid ground
when he dealt with terms and propositions as they are used in syllogisms, ‘Aris-
totelians did not stop here, nor conﬁne within these narrow bounds the dominion
of their science’ [1828, 154]. Rather, he says, they included also instruction for
the right employment of words as an instrument for the investigation of truth. As
an alternative, Mill oﬀers the prospect of the development of a logic of induction.
Once again, Whately was being judged by the standards of the older tradition.
Even Sir William Hamilton, no friend of Oxford logic generally, grudgingly
admitted Whately’s salutary inﬂuence on the study of logic by saying that just
when logic seemed dead,
. . . a new life was suddenly communicated to the expiring study, and
hope at least allowed for its ultimate convalescence under a reformed
system. [Mill, 1828, 199]
After ascribing the revitalization to the publication of Elements, however, Hamil-
ton nonetheless dismisses Whately (and others) by saying that they relied exclu-
22[Mill, 1828, 137]

Richard Whately and Logical Theory
89
sively on Aldrich, who in turn knew little of the Aristotelian heritage of the sub-
ject. The new works, he says, show ignorance of the Greek commentaries on the
Organon, of the scholastic, Ramistic, Cartesian or Wolﬁan approaches, or the Kan-
tian dialectic.23 In addition, Hamilton accused Whately of contradicting himself
by saying that logic was about the regularities which underlie reasoning on the
one hand, and that logic is about language on the other.24 Once again, Whately’s
theory was judged to be too narrow.
One further 19th century commentator deserves mention. Robert Blakey, the
author of the ﬁrst modern work entirely devoted to the history of logic, character-
ized Whately’s legacy in the following manner:
A great change has been eﬀected in Oxford of late years, and almost
solely through the labours of Dr. Whately. Since the publication of
his Elements, many excellent works have made their appearance from
that venerable seat of learning. . . . [Blakey, 1851, 427]
By the 20thcentury, the changes Whately advocated had become so routinely
assumed that he was no longer associated with them. When he is mentioned at
all, 25 it is as a syllogistic logician who defended the subject but added nothing
to it.26 Arthur Prior’s assessment, for instance, is that ‘in the early 19th century
the common logic was rescued from oblivion by Richard Whately but was not
enlarged by him.’27 Mary Prior is equally explicit: ‘Whately’s achievement is not
so much in logic as in moral metalogic; he explained what logicians should have
been doing.’ [M. Prior, 1967, 287]
The conclusion that Whately is to be counted among the “old” logicians also
gains support from the view that he had little impact on subsequent events in
logic. Mary Prior, for instance, says that
Between 1826, the year Whately’s Elements of Logic was published,
and 1860, George Boole, De Morgan, and John Stuart Mill were writ-
ing. It is therefore natural to expect to ﬁnd adumbrations of their work
in Whately, but in his systematic and formal treatment of logic there
are remarkably few. [M. Prior, 1967, 287]
I suggest, on the contrary, that there are adumbrations of the work of later
logicians in Whately, but they are in the context in which he locates the subject
rather than in his ‘formal treatment of logic’.
23[Hamilton, 1833, 127]
24See [Hamilton, 1833, 135].
25He is mentioned, for instance, neither in the Kneale’s Development of logic [1961], nor in
Bochenski’s History of formal logic [1961]. Also interesting is the fact that while Louis Liard
[1878], and C. I. Lewis [1918], mention Bentham’s commentary on Elements, neither mentions
Elements itself.
26A conclusion drawn also in two theses which deal with Whately. See [Jongsma, 1983], and
[Brody, 1967].
27[A. Prior, 1967, 541]

90
James Van Evra
5
WHATELY’S ROLE IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF LOGIC
There are those (most noticeably Thomas Kuhn in the mid 20th century) who
think that change in a science is exclusively the result of transitions between its
major theories. Richard Whately, among others, stands as a counterexample to
such a view. He is one of those individuals who have an aﬀect on a science without
making a direct addition to the theories at its core. In this sense, his contribution
is more like Francis Bacon’s in the 17th century, or Whewell’s or Mill’s in the 19th,
than that of Newton or Frege. Inﬂuence of Whately’s sort on a science is often
all but invisible; By our standards, his conception of the broader theory of logic is
so much like our own that his role in its inception is easily forgotten. Indeed, the
extent of his contribution is obvious only in comparison with earlier conceptions
of the subject. When that comparison is made, however, Whately stands out as
having had prescient insight into what logic would eventually become.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Aldrich, 1836] H. Aldrich. 1691 Artis Logicae Compendium. See [Mansel, 1852] or [Jackson,
1836].
[Arnauld and Nicole, 1662] A. Arnauld and P. Nicole. La Logique ou l’Art de Penser, 1662. In
J. Buroker (Tr. and Ed.), Logic or the art of thinking, Cambridge, 1996.
[Ashworth, 1615] J. Ashworth. Introduction to Sanderson, 1615 [1985].
[Bacon, 1605] F. Bacon. The Advancement of Learning, 1605. In Advancement of learning and
novum organum, New York, 1899.
[Bacon, 1620] F. Bacon. Novum Organum, 1620. In [1899], above.
[Bentham, 1827] G. Bentham. Outline of a New System of Logic, 1827. Bristol: Thoemmes,
1990.
[Blakey, 1851] R. Blakey. Historical Sketch of Logic. Edinburgh, 1851.
[Bochenski, 1961] I. Bochenski. A History of Formal Logic. Notre Dame, 1961.
[Boole, 1847] G. Boole. The Mathematical Analysis of Logic . . . , 1847. Cambridge, 1952, 49–
214.
[Boole, 1854] G. Boole. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, 1854. Cambridge and London:
1954, New York.
[Boole, 1952] G. Boole. Studies in Logic and Probability, R. Rhees (ed.), London, 1952.
[Brent, 2004/5] R. Brent. Whately, Richard. Oxford dictionary of national biography. Oxford,
2004/5.
[Brody, 1967] B. Brody. The Rise of the Algebra of Logic. Diss., Princeton, 1967.
[Copleston, 1810] E. Copleston. A Reply to the Calumnies of the Edinburgh Review against
Oxford ldots. Oxford, 1810.
[Crakanthorpe, 1622] R. Crakanthorpe. Logicae Libri Quinque, London, 1622.
[De Morgan, 1847] A. De Morgan. Formal logic. London, 1847.
[De Morgan, 1860] A. De Morgan. Logic. The English Cyclopedia. London, 1860. In P. Heath
(ed.), On the Syllogism and Other Logical Writings, London, 1966.
[Duncan, 1748] W. Duncan. The Elements of Logick. London, 1748.
[Fisch, 1982] M. Fisch (gen. ed.). The Writings of Charles Sanders Peirce. Vol. 1, Bloomington,
1982 –1985.
[Garland, 1980] M. Garland. Cambridge before Darwin. Cambridge, 1980.
[George, 2002] R. George. The rise of modern logic (with J. Van Evra). In D. Jacquette (ed.),
A Companion to Philosophical Logic. Oxford, 2002.
[Hamilton, 1833] W. Hamilton. Logic, in reference to the recent English treatises on that sci-
ence. Edinburgh Review, 1833. In Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, pages 117—173,
London, 1866.
[Hiscock, 1960] W. Hiscock. Henry Aldrich, Oxford, 1960.

Richard Whately and Logical Theory
91
[Howell, 1971] W. Howell. Eighteenth Century British Logic and Rhetoric. Princeton, 1971.
[Jackson, 1836] T. Jackson (ed.). A Compendium of Logic, Translated and Abridged from
Aldrich. London, 1836.
[Jongsma, 1983] C. Jongsma. Richard Whately and the Revival of Syllogistic Logic in Great
Britain in the Early Nineteenth Century. Dissertation, Toronto, 1983.
[Kenney, 1959] W. H. Kenney. John Locke and the Oxford Training in Logic and Metaphysics.
Dissertation, St. Louis, 1959.
[Kirwan, 1807] R. Kirwan. Logick, or an Essay on the Elements, Principles and Diﬀerent Modes
of Reasoning. 2 vols., London, 1807.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Oxford, 1962.
[Lewis, 1918] C. I. Lewis. A Survey of Symbolic Logic. Berkeley, 1918.
[Liard, 1878] L. Liard. Les Logicians Anglais Contemporains. Paris, 1878.
[Locke, 1706] J. Locke. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 1706. 5th ed.; reprinted
1961, London.
[Macfarlane, 1916] A. Macfarlane. Lectures on British Mathematicians. New York, 1916.
[Machen, 1926] A. Machen. The Anatomy of Tobacco. New York, 1926.
[Mallet, 1927] C. Mallet. A History of the University of Oxford. Vol. 3, Modern Oxford, London,
1927.
[Mansel, 1852] H. Mansel. Artis Logicae Rudimenta, from the text of Aldrich. 2nd ed., Oxford,
1852.
[Mill, 1828] J. S. Mill. Review of Whately, “Elements of Logic”. Westminster Review: 137–172,
1828.
[Playfair, 1808] J. Playfair. Review of La Place, “Traite de Mechanique celeste”. Edinburgh
Review, 11: 149–284, 1808.
[Philodicaeus, 1829] Philodicaeus. A Brief Appeal to the University of Oxford on the Classiﬁ-
cation of Merit: With some Hints to the Rev. H. H. Woodgate on Logic. Oxford, 1829.
[Prior, 1967] A. Prior. Modern logic: The Boolean period. Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Macmil-
lan and Free Press, vol. 4, 541. New York, 1967.
[Prior, 1949] A. Prior. Logic and the Basis of Ethics. Oxford, 1949.
[Prior, 1967] M. Prior. Whately, Richard. Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Macmillan and Free
Press, vol.8, pages 287–288. New York, 1967.
[Reid, 1843] T. Reid. The Works of Thomas Reid. London, 1843.
[Sanderson, 1615] R. Sanderson. Logicae Artis Compendium, 1615 . E. J. Ashworth (ed.),
Bologna, Editrice CLUEB, 1985.
[Stewart, 1814] D. Stewart. Elements of the Philosophy of Human Nature. Vol.2, London, 1814.
[Vol. 1, 1792; Vol. 3, 1827.]
[Thomas, 1964] I. Thomas. Medieval aftermath: Oxford logic and logicians of the seventeenth
century. In Oxford Studies Presented to Daniel Callus (Oxford Historical Society, new series),
pages 297–311, Oxford, 1964.
[Van Evra, 1984] J. Van Evra. Richard Whately and the rise of modern logic. History and
Philosophy of Logic, 5: 1–18, 1984.
[Wallis, 1687] J. Wallis. Institutio Logicae, ad Usus Accomodata. Oxford, 1687.
[Ward, 1965] W. Ward. Victorian Oxford. London, 1965.
[Watts, 1725] I. Watts. Logick, or the Right Use of Reason. London, 1725.
[Wells, 1897] J. Wells. Oxford and its Colleges. London, 1897.
[Whately, 1875] E. J. Whately. Life and Correspondence of Richard Whately D.D.. 3rd ed.,
London, 1875.
[Whately, 1826] R. Whately. Elements of Logic. London, 1826.

This page intentionally left blank 

THE LOGIC OF SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON:
TUNNELLING THROUGH SAND TO PLACE
THE KEYSTONE IN THE
ARISTOTELIC ARCH
Ralph Jessop
1
BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION
Every learner in science, is now familiar with more truths than Aristo-
tle or Plato ever dreamt of knowing; yet, compared with the Stagirite
or the Athenian, how few, even of our masters of modern science, rank
higher than intellectual barbarians! (Hamilton, ‘Philosophy of Percep-
tion’, p. 40).1
The Enlightenment initiated the modern world as the product of a hitherto un-
surpassed devotion to reason and scepticism. The scientiﬁc successes, ideals of
progress, material advancement, hopes of social amelioration and freedom of the
Enlightenment, were accompanied by catastrophic failures, conspicuous atrocities
perpetrated in the name of reason and authority, and increasing fears of a dreadful
new age of barbarism. Several Western countries incurred massive rifts, upheavals,
wars, and profound societal changes that impinged upon or were feared to be the
results of Enlightened thought. Following the shock-waves of the American and
French revolutions, as some of the ﬁrst eﬀects of the industrial revolution were
beginning to be felt, divisions at the heart of the Enlightenment between reason
and scepticism resurfaced in varying guises in England, France, Germany, and
Scotland. During the 18th century Scotland had undergone major economic and
political changes that both weakened the country’s autonomy and yet liberalised
its intelligentsia in ways that helped foster that great ﬂourishing of intellectual
talent we now call the Scottish Enlightenment. This intellectual movement laid
the groundwork for so many succeeding cultural and material changes across the
world. A number of its leading lights were members of the University of Glasgow.
1Sir Willam Hamilton, Works of Sir William Hamilton, with an introduction by Savina
Tropea, 7 vols (Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 2001), vol. 1, Discussions. All references to Hamilton’s
articles are to this reprint edition and in this form. Page numbers correspond to, Discussions on
Philosophy and Literature, Education and University Reform, 2nd edn (London: Brown, Green
and Longmans; Edinburgh: MacLachlan and Stewart, 1853).
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

94
Ralph Jessop
It was here, in one of the homes in the Professors’ Court of this University that
William Stirling Hamilton was born on 8 March 1788.
The cultural antecedents within Hamilton’s family background are interesting.
In the late 17th century, two ancestors were leading Covenanters; in the 18th,
several became somewhat distinguished academics. One of Hamilton’s namesakes
became the Professor of Divinity and later Principal of the University of Edin-
burgh — intriguingly he ‘acquired a high reputation [. . . ] for theological erudi-
tion’ (Veitch, p. 5).2 But it was in medicine that Hamilton’s direct male ancestors
excelled. His grandfather, Thomas Hamilton, a professor of medicine at the Uni-
versity of Glasgow, was fairly close to some of the more eminent medics at the
University, such as William Cullen, Joseph Black, and William and John Hunter.
However, Thomas was also frequently in the company of Adam Smith and James
Watt, since not only were they connected through their respective roles within the
University, but they were also members of the literary Anderston Club, presided
over by the classical scholar and, to some extent still renowned, Professor of Math-
ematics, Robert Simson. Hamilton’s father followed in his own father’s academic
footsteps but, having been Professor of Anatomy from his early 20s, he died young,
aged just 31.
William Hamilton’s academic lineage, the mainly Glasgow-based Enlightenment
ﬁgures of his father’s and grandfather’s acquaintance, and the general educational
ethos contributed to by a good number of the University’s alumni and profes-
sors during the century of Hamilton’s birth, probably played important roles in
helping to mould the academic he would later become. Certainly it does seem
as though Hamilton looked back into his past and may have found there sources
of inspiration with regard to his somewhat pugilistic critical approach to philoso-
phy, his legendarily extensive erudition, distinctive and in many ways exemplary
pedagogical style, understanding of the nature of philosophy, and (in the works
of Thomas Reid and Dugald Stewart) subject matter of extensive later study.
Particularly with regard to Reid (who was the Professor of Moral Philosophy at
Glasgow and is generally recognised as the founding father of the Common-Sense
school), Hamilton’s own development of Reidian philosophy is a signiﬁcant factor
that I shall brieﬂy return to later. However, although Hamilton’s intellectual in-
heritance from mainly Glasgow-based Enlightenment scholars must have helped
shape his intellect, the educative role of his mother, Elizabeth Hamilton, should
not be forgotten.
Hamilton was just 2 years old when his father died. His mother played a crucial
role in his educational development. Elizabeth probably imbued in him a great
keenness to excel, while balancing against this her various attempts to ensure that
he did not develop too fast by, for example, returning him to school education
in England following a period at Glasgow University and aﬀording him ample
leisure time during vacations to enjoy various physical pursuits and the compan-
ionship of other boys and his younger brother Thomas (who later gained some
fame as a writer and the author of the novelistic account of pre-industrial Glas-
2John Veitch, Memoir of Sir William Hamilton (Edinburgh and London: Blackwood, 1869).

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
95
gow, Cyril Thornton (1827)).3 Hamilton’s early childhood and overall educational
experiences under the supervision of a strong mother were therefore, as it were,
the complete obverse of the deeply unpleasant regime so notoriously inﬂicted by
James Mill and Jeremy Bentham on John Stuart Mill, the man who would later
become Hamilton’s greatest antagonist (notably some nine years after his death).
Mill’s one-time famous attack on Hamilton in his longest philosophical work, the
Examination of the Philosophy of Sir William Hamilton, still stands far in excess of
virtually any other attempt to disparage his standing as a philosopher.4 Since Mill,
most commentators who in one way or another berate Hamilton, either merely add
minor footnotes to Mill’s Examination or uncritically accept his authority. Since
Mill’s Examination — peppered with numerous misreadings of Hamilton — is in
so many ways misleading, it deserves a thorough critical reassessment which I have
not judged to be appropriate or even possible within the scope of this chapter.5
Hamilton’s principal biographer, John Veitch, claims that ‘no son could cherish
greater regard or a more loyal aﬀection for a mother than he did’ (Veitch, p. 12).
However, Hamilton’s early letters to his mother often suggest a surprisingly direct
and at times high-handed manner towards her (see Veitch, pp. 25-6). Fiery, im-
perious, peremptory, Hamilton’s style of writing in these letters possibly indicates
a certain ﬁerceness of temperament tolerated or even enjoyed by his mother. Sev-
eral of his somewhat more mature letters suggest increasing tenderness towards
her (see letter to his mother, dated 27 November 1807, Veitch, p. 31). By the time
of her death in 1827, which profoundly aﬀected him, Hamilton had lived with her
for almost his whole life and there can be little doubt that he was deeply attached
to her (Veitch, pp. 134-5). Veitch claims that Hamilton wrote to his mother ‘with
the familiarity of an equal in point of years, without reserve, and often strongly’
but he credits her with having been conscious of ‘those qualities of mind which
became afterwards so remarkable’ and he accords to Elizabeth the praise of re-
solving ‘to give him every advantage of education which lay in her power’ (Veitch,
p. 27).
Hamilton’s early school education was mainly at the Glasgow Grammar School,
followed by a brief spell in the Latin and Greek classes at the University of Glasgow
in 1800. He was at this time just twelve years old. Though it was not uncommon
for boys to attend Scottish universities at such a young age, Hamilton was certainly
3Thomas Hamilton, The Youth and Manhood of Cyril Thornton, ed. by Maurice Lindsay
(Aberdeen: The Association for Scottish Literary Studies, 1990).
4John Stuart Mill, An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy and of the Prin-
cipal Philosophical Questions Discussed in his Writings (London: Longman, Green, Longman,
Roberts & Green, 1865).
5For one attempt to reconcile the logics of Mill and Hamilton prior to Mill’s Examination,
see, [Alexander Campbell Fraser], ‘Province of logic and Recent British Logicians’, North British
Review, 33 (Nov. 1860), 401-427. There were also several attempts to defend Hamilton following
Mill’s attack — for example, see, [Alexander Campbell Fraser], ‘Mill’s Examination of Sir William
Hamilton’s Philosophy’, North British Review, 43 (Sept 1865), 1-58. For a brave attempt to
defend Hamilton against Mill, though not speciﬁcally addressing his logic, see Dallas Victor Lie
Ouren, ‘HaMILLton: Mill on Hamilton: A Re-examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy’
(unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Minesota, 1973).

96
Ralph Jessop
on the younger side of the norm. But Elizabeth Hamilton decided against William
continuing his studies at Glasgow in the following academic session and he and
Thomas were therefore moved in 1801 to schools in England. After returning to
Scotland both boys entered the University of Glasgow in 1803, where William
seems to have performed well in Latin, though ‘In the classes of Logic and Moral
Philosophy Hamilton was greatly distinguished, having in each carried oﬀthe
highest honour of the year, which was then [. . . ] awarded by the votes of the
members of the class’ (Veitch, p. 21).
Hamilton’s most notable teacher from this time was Professor George Jardine
(1742-1827) in the Logic class. Jardine’s teaching made a lasting impression on
him (Veitch, p. 21). As his studies continued, he studied medicine from 1804,
studying botany and anatomy from 1805. His medical studies continued at Glas-
gow throughout 1806 and, during the winter of 1806-7, at Edinburgh. However, his
book purchases from around this time included a fairly broad array of philosoph-
ical, medical, and historical works (see Veitch, p. 24). Though greatly impressive
by today’s academic standards for undergraduates, the breadth of his reading was
very much in line with the generalist nature of Scottish educational practice and
was not particularly atypical of other students who would later become eminent
scholars and writers. By the time of Hamilton’s death he had amassed some ten
thousand volumes, around eight thousand of which were purchased by the Univer-
sity of Glasgow where they are currently held in a special collection. Within this
collection there are about one hundred and forty editions of Aristotle’s works and
a good number of the texts he reviewed, some of which display neat manuscript
marginalia at times evincing a peculiar degree of care in, for example, comparing
earlier and later editions of works by Archbishop Richard Whately — one of the
Oxford logicians whom Hamilton repeatedly criticised.
If by this time Hamilton was beginning to distinguish himself as a student of
marked ability at the University of Glasgow, probably the most conspicuous edu-
cational advantage Elizabeth bestowed upon her son, was her determination that
he should complete his university education at Oxford. In 1807 he secured a Snell
Exhibition and entered Balliol College where he continued his studies until taking
his Bachelor of Arts in 1810 — he of course obtained a First. His Oxford days
seem to have been highly stimulating — certainly he made many acquaintances
during this period and he read voraciously. The vast extent of Hamilton’s learn-
ing became somewhat legendary from around the time of his ﬁnal examination at
Oxford. According to one account, ‘He allowed himself to be examined in more
than four times the number of philosophical and didactic books ever wont to be
taken up even for the highest honours [. . . ]. Since that time [. . . ] there has been
no examination in this University which can be compared with his in respect to
philosophy’ (Veitch, p. 60). However, his ﬁrst career was not in philosophy but
instead in law.
He became a member of the Bar in 1813 and having returned to Edinburgh he
lived with his mother and his cousin, whom he later married in 1829. His wife
was a devoted companion and without her hard work as an amanuensis, perhaps

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
97
little of Hamilton’s lectures would have survived. Though as yet we know too
little about her, Lady Hamilton must have been or become through her marriage
to William, one of those many women during the 19th century whose knowledge
of literature and philosophy far excelled the attainments accredited to them by
posterity. Now that Hamilton was an advocate attempting to make a living at
Edinburgh, with rather too few cases to attend to, he began to investigate his
family history, though not as a light hobby but with a real purpose.
Family
tradition had it that William was an indirect descendant of Sir Robert Hamilton
of Preston, a staunchly ﬁerce Covenanter who died in 1701, after which time the
baronetcy was not assumed by the heir and from thenceforth had lapsed into a
mere family memory.
After three years of research Hamilton ﬁnally presented
a case to the Edinburgh Sheriﬀwhich proved that he was the heir-male to his
Covenanting ancestor. Henceforth, William Stirling Hamilton became Sir William
Hamilton, Baronet of Preston and Fingalton (Veitch, p. 69). This may seem a
curious moment in Hamilton’s personal history but no doubt he was motivated by
several practical considerations, not least of which must have had to do with social
and career advancement. From what I can gather from the occasionally sketchy
accounts of his life by Veitch and Monck, Hamilton had suﬃcient employment as
a lawyer but was only moderately successful: law was ‘but a secondary pursuit for
him’ and instead he haunted the Advocates library with the bibliophilic zeal of an
antiquarian (Veitch, p. 75).6
If he was less suited to the law than he might have been, his politics were also
an obstruction to great material success since he was a Whig, the ruling party of
the day Tory. As Veitch assesses Hamilton’s politics, he was ‘a man of progress’
and liberal principles, though little if at all involved in party politics of any kind
(Veitch, p. 78). Of course he knew and socialised with many of the leading Scots
of the day, Sir Walter Scott, Thomas de Quincey, Francis Jeﬀrey, J.G. Lockhart,
Macvey Napier, and many others, but he also had a fair number or European
friends from Russia, France, and Germany. He visited Leipzig in 1817 and again
travelled to Germany in 1820, visiting libraries in Berlin and Dresden. He was
largely instrumental in the Advocates Library’s purchase of an extensive collection
of valuable German works. His interest in German literature and philosophy, which
would later grow to unrivalled proportions among his contemporaries, dates from
around this time.
Also in 1820 Hamilton applied for the Moral Philosophy professorship at Ed-
inburgh University. Although he had strong support for this chair, not least of
all from the elderly Dugald Stewart, John Wilson (better known as the famous
‘Christopher North’ of Blackwood’s Magazine) secured the post due to the Town
Council’s patronage, though he was by no means a suitable candidate. In many
ways this was quite scandalous and seems to have been entirely due to Hamil-
ton’s Whig politics (Veitch, pp. 96-103). Hamilton had to settle for a poorly paid
Professorship of Civil History to which he was appointed in the following year
6W.H.S. Monck, Sir William Hamilton (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle & Rivington,
1881).

98
Ralph Jessop
and he had to wait for a further 15 years before he secured a post in Philosophy.
Finally, in 1836, though with only a small majority over the other candidate, he
was elected to the Chair of Logic and Metaphysics at the University of Edinburgh.
Veitch gives a fairly thorough account of Hamilton’s appointment and the strong
testimonials that supported him, but the narrowness of his majority and his fail-
ure to secure the earlier appointment of the Moral Philosophy chair indicate that
University appointments in Scotland were handled in an altogether shameful man-
ner — Hamilton was without doubt one of the most philosophically erudite and
talented men in Scotland at that time but party politics, personal preferences,
and unfounded doubts about his religious beliefs were allowed to prevail. In some
ways little had changed since the more understandable yet equally non-academic
rejection of David Hume by the University of Glasgow in the previous century,
nor since the huge debacle that erupted in 1805 when John Leslie was accused of
being an inﬁdel and as a result nearly failed to secure the Mathematics Chair at
Edinburgh in 1805 because he had endorsed Hume’s theory of causality (see Veitch
pp. 183-210).7
Though there is much to relate about Hamilton’s life from this time on, like
many scholars and dedicated teachers he led an industrious and comparatively
uneventful life, though not unmarred by damaging vicissitudes, such as the deaths
of his son in 1836, his brother Thomas in 1842, and a daughter in the winter of
1844-5. From the time of his appointment to the Logic and Metaphysics Chair
in 1836 until around the mid 40s, Hamilton was clearly working far too hard and
under a great deal of personal strain. Then, in July 1844, aged 56, he suﬀered
a physically debilitating stroke that partially paralysed him for the rest of his
life.
Two years later he became embroiled in a controversy with Augustus de
Morgan concerning their respective quantiﬁcation systems. Academically, this is
undoubtedly the most troublesome and embarrassing moment in Hamilton’s career
and several have agreed that he behaved rather foolishly. According to William
Kneale, Hamilton was ‘a pedantic Scottish baronet’ who was ‘properly ridiculed by
De Morgan’.8 General opinion about the aﬀair has been that de Morgan came out
on top. 9 Possibly the intensely desperate times of the mid 40s in Britain generally,
a prevailing sense of crisis in Scotland following the massive upheaval due to the
disruption of the Scottish Kirk in 1843, the various bereavements Hamilton had
suﬀered, and his loss of physical vigour may be factors that ought to be considered.
Hamilton may have acted in an imperious but also a somewhat desperate manner
towards de Morgan but one cannot help but wonder whether his judgment merely
faltered amidst a context of great personal and social diﬃculties.
The details of the de Morgan controversy are tediously complex, the complexity
exacerbated by Hamilton’s forensic analyses of the events and his sustained suspi-
7On Leslie see, Ralph Jessop, Carlyle and Scottish Thought (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1997),
pp. 36-9.
8William Kneale, ‘Boole and the Revival of Logic’, Mind, 57 (Apr. 1948), 149-75 (p. 152n).
9For example, see, William Kneale and Martha Kneale, The Development of Logic (Oxford:
Clarendon, 1962), pp. 353-4.

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
99
cions over some years that de Morgan had plagiarised or at least was in some way
trying to steal all credit from him. This issue lasted for many years well beyond
Hamilton’s death and although Hamilton backed down considerably from his ﬁrst
accusations of plagiarism in 1847, neither men really gave up. But, as de Morgan’s
fame rather prospered as a result of the conﬂict, Hamilton’s prestige diminished.
Peter Heath has analysed and recounted this controversy in admirable detail and
therefore I shall defer to his general understanding of the whole aﬀair, if not to
his tendency to agree that de Morgan’s assessment of Hamilton’s quantiﬁcation
is right.10 Some, though perhaps not all, of the relevant letters and other doc-
uments were collected together by Hamilton.11 In very general terms, it would
seem that both de Morgan and Hamilton did not fully understand each other’s
respective positions and arguably ‘the two systems are not only distinct from, but
opposed to each other.’12 As I shall argue later in agreement with Robert Fogelin,
de Morgan was mistaken concerning a fundamental point and Hamilton’s system
can thus be shown to be consistent and much more robust than many who sub-
scribed to de Morgan’s standpoint have assumed it to be. One of the most fruitful
and important outcomes of the controversy was the eﬀect it had on George Boole
whose interest in and subsequent mathematization of logic was in no small part
inspired by the rather public disagreement between de Morgan and Hamilton.13
Heath insightfully remarks of the de Morgan controversy, that de Morgan’s notes
‘contain the following, which might well serve (and was perhaps so intended) as
an epigraph for the whole encounter: “Two French squadrons at B — cannonaded
each other — why? Because each took the other for Russians. ‘Then why did
they ﬁght?’ Said a little girl’.14
Although Hamilton was not aﬀected mentally by the stroke he suﬀered in 1844
and managed to continue in his Chair at Edinburgh for a good many years after,
it is fair to say that he was greatly impeded by this disablement. Indeed, it is
arguable that his standing as a philosopher may have suﬀered more from this
than from Mill’s Examination, since one of the greatest problems in studying
Hamilton’s works has always been simply this: he produced no magnum opus
either in metaphysics or logic. It is reasonable, if yet somewhat whimsical, to say
that, had he not been struck down in 1844 he would have at some stage during
his remaining years brought his philosophical endeavours together in at least one
deﬁnitive and fully mature volume. But this did not happen and after his paralysis
he produced relatively little until his death at Edinburgh on 6 May 1856, aged 68.
Although Hamilton did not produce a fully deﬁnitive work on metaphysics or on
logic, he nevertheless did write rather extensively, producing material which, in the
10Peter Heath, ‘Introduction’ in, Augustus de Morgan, On the Syllogism and Other Logical
Writings (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966), vii-xxxi (pp. xii-xx).
11Miscellaneous Writings and Correspondence, Works, vol. 7.
12[H.L. Mansel], ‘Recent Extensions of Formal Logic’, North British Review, 15 (May 1851),
90-121 (p. 95n).
13See, Luis M. Laita, ‘Inﬂuences on Boole’s Logic: The Controversy between William Hamilton
and Augustus De Morgan’, Annals of Science, 36 (1979), 45-65 (p. 61; p. 65).
14Heath, p. xvi.

100
Ralph Jessop
recently reprinted edition of his works by Thoemmes Press, ﬁlls seven volumes. In
addition to this, he also produced an extraordinarily, many would say excessively
footnoted edition of the Works of Thomas Reid in which he ﬁrst published his
fragment on Logic, the ‘New Analytic of Logical Forms’ in 1846.15 His footnotes
in Reid’s Works are at times quirky and needlessly pedantic. However, by sharp
contrast with this, towards the end of his life he produced a much less cumbersome
and indeed rather elegant edition of the Works of Dugald Stewart.16 However, long
before these scholarly works Hamilton contributed a series of substantial articles for
the Edinburgh Review all of which, despite his failing health, he managed to publish
in a single volume entitled Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education
and University Reform in 1852. The ﬁrst of these essays, the ‘Philosophy of the
Unconditioned’ (1829) immediately struck readers as largely unintelligible or overly
philosophically sophisticated, mystical even in its complexity17 — but it was this
article that properly launched Hamilton’s career and ﬁrst made him famous as
the ﬁrst truly eminent Scottish philosopher since Dugald Stewart who, after many
years of ill health, had died in the previous year.
In ‘Philosophy of the Unconditioned’ Hamilton reviews the work of Victor
Cousin and his attempt to establish an eclectic philosophy of the Inﬁnito-Absolute.
The main thing to note here is that Hamilton constructs his Law of the Condi-
tioned, a law prescribing the domain of positive knowledge or the realm of what
may be said to be knowable — in some ways it might be regarded as a forerun-
ner of Ayer’s logical positivism, though Hamiltonian positivism is a far cry from
rejecting either metaphysics or theology. A full account of this article is not ap-
propriate here — suﬃce to say that Hamilton argues that all knowledge lies in a
mean between two extremes of unknowables or inconditionates, which is to say all
things that may be described as absolute or as inﬁnite comprise the boundaries
of knowledge and are thus strictly incomprehensible to us. The absolute and the
inﬁnite are posited as contradictories, neither of which can be positively construed
to the mind but one of which, on the basis of the laws of excluded middle and
non-contradiction, must obtain — though which of the two obtains is incognisable.
Hence, Hamilton inaugurates what I call his doctrine of nescience, or learned ig-
norance as the ‘consummation’ of knowledge (‘Philosophy of the Unconditioned’,
p. 38). As all thought, and hence all knowledge, is conditional, of the plural, phe-
nomenal, limited, Hamilton declares: ‘To think is to condition; and conditional
limitation is the fundamental law of the possibility of thought’ (‘Philosophy of the
Unconditioned’, p. 14).
Educated in philosophical discourses of the much more sedate and even-tempered
stateliness that typiﬁed so much earlier 18th century and contemporary philosoph-
15Thomas Reid, The Works of Thomas Reid, preface, notes, and supplementary dissertations
by Sir William Hamilton (Edinburgh: MacLachlan, Stewart; London: Longman, Brown, Green
and Longmans, 1846).
16The Collected Works of Dugald Stewart, ed. by Sir William Hamilton, 11 vols (Edinburgh:
Thomas Constable, 1854-60).
17‘Francis Jeﬀrey to Macvey Napier, 23 November, 1829’, in Macvey Napier [Jnr.], ed., Selec-
tions from the Correspondence of the Late Macvey Napier (London: Harrison, 1877), p. 68.

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
101
ical prose from Francis Hutchison, to Hume, Smith, Reid and Dugald Stewart,
few at the time may have been able to understand what Hamilton wrote. His
highly concentrated style, densely philosophical critical argumentation, frequent
references to various German philosophers including Kant, Fichte, and Hegel —
though all this must have dazzled and excluded many, few can have failed to catch
the sense of excitement that pervaded ‘Philosophy of the Unconditioned’. But
this must have been more the case with his second major article ‘Philosophy of
Perception’ (1830) which was written in an even more vigorous and racy style than
his ﬁrst. He now turned his attention to scepticism, principally to the scepticism
of Hume, though one could be forgiven for missing this since more prominently
‘Philosophy of Perception’ launches an extraordinarily vitriolic attack on the man
who had gained such a high reputation as a philosopher and who for many years
continued to be admired by established English philosophers and writers such as
John Stuart Mill and Leslie Stephen and whose job, following his death, Hamilton
failed to get in 1820 — Thomas Brown. Hamilton savaged Brown for leading phi-
losophy back into the morass of Humean scepticism and for fundamentally failing
to grasp the true import of Thomas Reid’s critical philosophy of Common Sense,
which, according to Hamilton, had given a successful, if nonetheless relatively
unsophisticated answer to Hume.
So much needs to be said about this article but I shall conﬁne myself to just
a few points: in ‘Philosophy of Perception’ Hamilton develops his own version of
Common Sense philosophy in the form of a doctrine of perception which holds that
in the act of perception the self and the not-self were instantaneously revealed in
one indivisible moment of cognition — he calls this theory of perception natu-
ral dualism or natural realism and maintains that, contradistinguished from all
representationist theories of perception that in one way or another tend towards
scepticism, natural dualism is a theory of immediate or presentative perception.
Leaving aside all consideration of just how natural dualism was proﬀered by Hamil-
ton as the best and most successful counter-argument to what some may think
of as a straw man scepticism of purely theoretic indeterminacy — the absolute
scepticism of Hume — I want to draw attention to Hamilton’s non-Kantian notion
of the relativity of knowledge by means of just one quotation:18
Relatives are known only together: the science of opposites is one.
Subject and object, mind and matter, are known only in correlation
and contrast [. . . ].
Every conception of self, necessarily involves a
conception of not-self: every perception of what is diﬀerent from me,
implies a recognition of the percipient subject in contradistinction from
18Hamilton has often been mistakenly thought of as borrowing heavily from Kant. However,
in several places he is critical of Kant and his relativity of knowledge needs to be distinguished
from Kant’s. On this see, Manfred Kuehn, ‘Hamilton’s Reading of Kant: A Chapter in the Early
Scottish Reception of Kant’s Thought’, in George MacDonald Ross and Tony McWalter, eds,
Kant and His Inﬂuence (Bristol: Thoemmes Antiquarian Books, 1990), 315–347 (pp. 333–45).
It should also be noted that Hamilton’s notion of the relativity of knowledge is more subtle and
more complex than Mill represents it as being. On this see, John Veitch, Hamilton (Edinburgh
And London: Blackwood, 1882), pp. 201–222.

102
Ralph Jessop
the object perceived. [. . . ]. In Perception, as in the other faculties, the
same indivisible consciousness is conversant about both terms of the
relation of knowledge. (‘Philosophy of Perception’, pp. 50–51).
Although the details of Hamilton’s theory of the relativity of knowledge deserve
separate examination, in the above we can see indications of a notion that is of
critical importance to understanding Hamilton’s logic, namely, the notion that
subject and object exist only in correlation with one another, such that opposites,
or the distinguishable terms of subject and predicate in a given proposition, may
be thought of as being held together in a relationship of equation or non-equation
— in this lies the germ of Hamilton’s emphasis on the relativity of concepts and
his quantiﬁcation of the predicate.
The inﬂuence that Hamilton’s two articles on the unconditioned and perception
had on Victorian thought is also a subject that deserves separate study. Noah
Porter, professor of moral philosophy and metaphysics (1846), and later president
of Yale, wrote eﬀusively and at some length in Veitch’s biography of the consid-
erable extent of Hamilton’s inﬂuence on American students (Veitch, pp. 421-8).
However, although Porter thought that Hamilton had been a positive religious
force in American thought, there is another side to this story. Emphasising the
vastness of our ignorance in ‘Philosophy of the Unconditioned’, while regarding
this as a prompt for our wonderment and faith, the most signiﬁcant direct and
lasting eﬀect of the ‘Philosophy of the Unconditioned’ is perhaps best assessed
in terms of the inﬂuence it had upon Henry L. Mansel, a prominent follower of
Hamilton who wrote several articles defending Hamilton’s logic, developed his own
version of it in his Prolegomena Logica where he speciﬁcally acknowledges his debt
to Hamilton, and, more popularly, in his Bampton Lectures, gave rise to a doctrine
of Christian Agnosticism.19 But as the agnostic movement developed during the
19th century, Hamilton’s ‘Philosophy of the Unconditioned’ in comparison with
its transmutation into Mansel’s Christian Agnosticism can also be seen as having
a profound eﬀect on anti-Christian agnostics such as Thomas Huxley (Darwin’s
bulldog). As Sheridan Gilley and Ann Loades nicely put it: ‘Huxley saw in Mansel
the suicidally honest theologian, sitting on an inn sign and sawing it oﬀ.’20 Hamil-
ton’s importance to the growth of agnosticism, although not widely known, has
certainly been established not only by more recent scholarship but also in some of
the earlier responses to Hamilton.21 Hence, though ﬁrstly, inspiring a new religious
piety and apparent salvation from scepticism, but secondly, becoming infused into
19For example, see Henry Longueville Mansel, Prolegomena Logica: An Enquiry into the Psy-
chological Character of Logical Processes (Oxford, 1851) pp.
xi–xii; ‘The Philosophy of the
Conditioned: Sir William Hamilton and John Stuart Mill’, Contemporary Review, 1 (1866), 31-
49; 185-219; [Bampton Lectures], The Limits of Religious Thought (London : John Murray,
1858).
20Sheridan Gilley and Ann Loades, ‘Thomas Henry Huxley: The War between Science and
Religion’, The Journal of Religion, 61 (1981), 285-308 (p. 297).
21Bernard Lightman, The Origins of Agnosticism:
Victorian Unbelief and the Limits of
Knowledge (Baltimore and London: John Hopkins University Press, 1987), p. 16; Robert Flint,
Agnosticism (Edinburgh and London: Wm Blackwood, 1903).

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
103
succeeding waves of religious doubt and the growth of agnostic principles more
powerfully damaging to orthodox belief than even Hume’s or Voltaire’s more full-
frontal atheistic attacks on religious belief, the full signiﬁcance that Hamilton’s
‘Philosophy of the Unconditioned’ would come to have on Victorian society, phi-
losophy, literature, and culture, was nothing short of immense.22
But Hamilton’s inﬂuence can also be seen through certain of his friends or ac-
quaintances and, of course, his students. One of his former students, who was
profoundly inﬂuenced by him, became the Professor of Moral Philosophy at the
University of St. Andrews, James Frederick Ferrier, a philosopher whose personal
and philosophical connections with Hamilton run deep and whose work is now
just as undeservedly but even less well known than that of Hamilton. In litera-
ture, Hamilton was a major inﬂuence on E. S. Dallas whose two volume work of
literary theory, The Gay Science, positively teems with Hamiltonian philosophy
— but Dallas has also now shrunk into the shadows and is barely known.23 George
Davie claims that Hamilton inspired a number of brilliant scholars including Fer-
rier and the physicist so greatly admired by Einstein, James Clerk Maxwell.24
The Maxwell connection is particularly interesting since a recent work of literary
criticism has opened up a whole new ﬁeld of study — the Victorian relativity
movement. Christopher Herbert argues in Victorian Relativity that the cultural
and philosophical antecedents of Einstein’s special theory of relativity are to be
found in a succession of Victorian philosophers and thinkers, the writings of whom
have been largely neglected for over a century. Interestingly, just as scholars who
have written on agnosticism have traced its origins in the 19th century back to
Hamilton, Herbert also ﬁnds in Hamilton’s theory of the relativity of knowledge
a signiﬁcant starting point for his study, seeing Hamilton at the beginning of a
major Victorian re-invention of the fundamentally Protagorean relativist rejection
of absolutism.25 First suggested in ‘Philosophy of the Unconditioned’, developed
in ‘Philosophy of Perception’, and, as we shall see, a key component of Hamil-
ton’s logic, Hamiltonian relativism intriguingly re-positions Hamilton as one of
the 19th-century’s key avante garde thinkers.
It is too easy to see Hamilton in caricature and as of marginal importance,
since this is where the later Victorians placed him and where scholars of the 20th
century left him. However, for all that he was hampered by a corrupt system
of university patronage and indeed may not have been the most self-promoting
of ﬁgures, within the context of British philosophy and literature of the 1830s,
22See, Ralph Jessop, ‘Carlyle’s Agnosticism: An Altar to the Unknown and Unknowable God’,
Literature and Belief, 25 (1&2) (2005), 381-433 (pp. 395-404).
23E.S. Dallas, The Gay Science (London: Chapman and Hall, 1866).
24See, George Elder Davie, The Democratic Intellect: Scotland and Her Universities in the
Nineteenth Century, Edinburgh University Publications, History Philosophy & Economics: 12
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1961; repr. 1982), p. 261; John Hendry, James Clerk
Maxwell and the Theory of the Electromagnetic Field (Bristol and Boston: Adam Hilger, 1986),
p. 112.
25Christopher Herbert,
Victorian Relativity:
Radical thought and Scientiﬁc Discovery
(Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 2001), pp. 35-7.

104
Ralph Jessop
Hamilton was a leading and highly dynamic writer who played an important part
in re-invigorating Reidian philosophy while also turning British attention arguably
in a diﬀerent but by no means unrelated direction towards German philosophy.
It must be noted that in early 19th-century Britain very few people could read
German and Hamilton was one of almost a handful of intellectuals during the 1820s
and 30s who had any direct knowledge of the works of Kant and other German
philosophers such as Hegel. Hamilton was one of a tiny number of Germanizers
who promoted the study of German philosophy and, given the rise of neo-Kantian
and neo-Hegelian philosophy in Britain amongst philosophers who owed some debt
to Hamilton, in this alone his inﬂuence was probably much more profound than
has generally been appreciated.
Another major Germanizer was Hamilton’s one-time friend, the literary man of
letters, Thomas Carlyle, who knew Hamilton from at least the late 1820s. Carlyle,
though a literary giant of the Victorian period and well beyond, of proportions it
would be diﬃcult to exaggerate, is yet another ﬁgure who is now increasingly little
known and poorly understood. Not much is positively known about their friend-
ship but at the time of its publication in 1829 Carlyle read Hamilton’s ‘Philosophy
of the Unconditioned’ with admiration and in later life he wrote a highly rever-
ent Reminiscence of Hamilton which is published in Veitch’s biography, followed
by a fairly intimate letter from Carlyle written in 1834 in which he says, ‘Think
kindly of me; there are few in Scotland I wish it more from’ (Veitch, pp. 121–7).
There are undoubtedly many interesting parallels between Carlyle and Hamilton,
some of which were detected in Carlyle’s own lifetime by his close friend David
Masson.26
I have discussed some of the interconnections between Carlyle and
Hamilton elsewhere.27
Hamilton produced a good number of other articles for the Edinburgh Review,
including the following selection: ‘On the Revolutions of Medicine in Reference
to Cullen’ (1832); ‘On the Study of Mathematics as an Exercise of the Mind’
(1836) — controversially, though rather in keeping with his Scottish predecessors
attitudes about mathematics, Hamilton did not think that mathematics was a good
exercise of the mind as part of a liberal education and instead advocated philosophy
while in several ways indicting the emphasis on mathematics at Cambridge;28 ‘On
the Patronage and Superintendence of Universities’ (1834); ‘On the State of the
English Universities with More Especial Reference to Oxford’ (1831). Several of his
articles were pointedly critical of Oxford and Cambridge and it must be said that
Hamilton undoubtedly set himself up for retributive attacks from some scholars
in response to his various denunciations of the established ancient universities of
26David Masson, Recent British Philosophy: A Review with Criticisms including some Com-
ments on Mr Mill’s Answer to Sir William Hamilton, 3rd edn (London: Macmillan, 1877),p.
69.
27For example see, Jessop, Carlyle and Scottish Thought, pp. 28-31. Also see Alex Benchi-
mol, ‘William Hamilton’ in, The Carlyle Encyclopedia, edited by Mark Cumming (Cranbury,
NJ:Farleigh Dickinson University Press, 2004), 207-9.
28For example compare, Richard Olson, ‘Scottish Philosophy and Mathematics 1750-1830’,
Journal of the History of Ideas, 32 (1971), 29-44 (pp. 41-4).

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
105
England.
More directly germane to our subject matter and also involving his
ﬁrst of many salvos against English logicians, is his ‘Logic: The Recent English
Treatises on that Science’ (1833).
In this article he gave yet another virtuoso performance that at once established
his reputation as one of the foremost logicians of his day. But, as with some of
his other slashing remarks on contemporary scholars and, as he saw it, the present
philistinism of learning in Britain, in ‘Logic’ he was unsparing in his treatment
of several Oxonian logicians. Supposedly reviewing eight recent publications on
logic, he focuses almost exclusively on Whately’s Elements of Logic, making only
brief reference to George Bentham’s Outline of a New System of Logic (1827). As
some commentators have noted, the cursory treatment of Bentham is odd since a
system for quantifying the predicate is given in the work of this nephew of the more
famous Jeremy Bentham.29 Hamilton’s paternity of this doctrine has often been
called in doubt but since most of the speciﬁc characteristics of his quantiﬁcation
are largely, if not exclusively, peculiar to him, and since his own theory is so
thoroughly grounded in a painstaking explication of the grounds for quantifying
the predicate, I shall not engage with the tortuous historical complexities and shall
instead attempt in the following sections to outline how Hamilton arrives at his
quantiﬁcation system and what that system itself is. Furthermore, it is likely that
Hamilton was so dismissive of Bentham’s Outline that he simply did not read all
of the text and cast it aside in order that he might focus on the main logician, his
principal target, Richard Whately.
Though Hamilton intimates a certain degree of respect for the natural abilities
of the authors under review, he denounces their lack of genuine originality — the
source of Hamilton’s ire is clear and is a much repeated complaint elsewhere in his
work, namely, the inadequacy of the authors’ learning:
None of them possess — not to say a superﬂuous erudition on their
subject — even the necessary complement of information.
Not one
seems to have studied the logical treatises of Aristotle; all are ignorant
of the Greek Commentators on the Organon, of the Scholastic, Ramist,
Cartesian, Wolﬁan, and Kantian dialectic. (‘Logic’, p. 129).
And so he continues to cut and hew his way through the inadequate learning of
contemporary Oxonians. But, as Whately’s Elements stood pre-eminent, it is this
work that Hamilton takes to task and he proceeds to make point after forensic point
against Whately, all the time demonstrating his own vastly superior knowledge of
swathes of the literature of logic and outlining several features of his own system
of logic.
As part of his sustained attempt to claim priority in discovering his system of
quantiﬁcation, in a much later footnote in Discussions Hamilton asserts that on
the basis of a rather vague authority — ‘the tenor of the text’– the ‘Logic’ article
shows that he ‘had become aware of the error in the doctrine of Aristotle and the
logicians, which maintains that the predicate in aﬃrmative propositions could only
29Heath, p. xvi.

106
Ralph Jessop
be formally quantiﬁed as particular’ (‘Logic’, p. 162n). More strongly, and with
much better justiﬁcation, he writes in an appendix in Discussions, ‘Touching the
principle of an explicitly Quantiﬁed Predicate, I had by 1833 become convinced
of the necessity to extend and correct the logical doctrine upon this point. In
the article on Logic [. . . ] the theory of Induction there maintained proceeds on
a thoroughgoing quantiﬁcation of the predicate, in aﬃrmative propositions’ (Dis-
cussions, p. 650). Certainly the 1833 ‘Logic’ article does suggest this but it does
not display the full quantiﬁcation system (see ‘Logic’, p. 163). As I shall indicate
later, although the quantiﬁcation system was not fully articulated until the publi-
cation of his ‘New Analytic’ in 1846, a good deal of Hamilton’s treatment of logic
in his lectures does proceed painstakingly towards the quantiﬁcation. That he was
teaching this system during the late 1830s, several years ahead of de Morgan’s
quite diﬀerent quantiﬁcation, seems to have been generally agreed and is patently
evident in the wonderfully clear account given by one of his students, Thomas
Spencer Baynes, whose winning essay written for a competition set by Hamilton
in 1846 was later published as An Essay on the New Analytic of Logical Forms in
1850.30
In ‘Logic’ Hamilton very much lays out his stall. He begins with a brief deﬁnition
of logic that he later elaborates:
Nothing, we think, aﬀords a more decisive proof of the oblique and
partial spirit in which philosophy has been cultivated in Britain, for
the last century and a half, than the combined perversion and neglect,
which Logic — the science of the formal laws of thought — has expe-
rienced during that period. (‘Logic’, p. 119).
Just a few years after writing this, Hamilton commenced his Lectures on Logic as
the Professor of Logic and Metaphysics at Edinburgh. These were posthumously
published in four volumes, two on Metaphysics in 1859 and two on Logic in 1860.
In the Lectures on Logic, Hamilton spends a lot more time carefully explaining his
above deﬁnition of logic as ‘the science of the formal laws of thought’. Though
his deﬁnition of logic in the lectures is interesting and deserves discussion, I shall
merely summarise some main points here.
Hamilton basically holds that Logic proper or Formal Logic is Abstract logic,
dealing only with necessary inference and devoid of all adventitious or extra-logical
matter or contingent considerations. However, the nature of Logic as a pure sci-
ence had been greatly misunderstood in Britain: ‘Bacon wholly misconceived its
character in certain respects; but his errors are insigniﬁcant, when compared with
the total misapprehension of its nature by Locke’ (LL.I.29).31 The British had
30Thomas Spencer Baynes, An Essay on the New Analytic of Logical Forms, Being that which
Gained the Prize Proposed by Sir William Hamilton, in the Year 1846, for the Best Exposition
of the New Doctrine Propounded in his Lectures; with an Historical Appendix (Edinburgh:
Sutherland and Knox; London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Co., 1850).
31All references in this form are to the Lectures on Logic, ed. by H.L. Mansel and John Veitch
(Edinburgh and London: Blackwood, 1860), vols I or II; vols 5 or 6 in the Thoemmes reprint
edition of Hamilton’s Works.

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
107
mistakenly departed from a certain general agreement on the formal nature of
Logic among ancient and more recent German logicians.
They had ignorantly
or perversely deviated from centuries of collective wisdom and while German lo-
gicians from the time of Leibniz had probably done more than most to further
the science, Hamilton seems to have regarded the more recent and more serious
perversions and confusions in the work of recent English authors, in particular
Whately, as a sort of further entrenchment of the very kind of misconstrual most
likely to hinder the science (LL.I.40). It was also reprehensible that such recent
British scholars should be ignorant of the German logicians: ‘Great Britain is,
I believe, the only country of Europe in which books are written by respectable
authors upon sciences, of the progress of which, for above a century, they have
never taken the trouble to inform themselves’ (LL.I.33).
Distinguishing between Special or Concrete Logic (logic in its particular ap-
plications or instantiations in the several arts and sciences) and Pure or General
or Abstract Logic, for Hamilton, Pure Logic has to be contradistinguished from
any particular subject or discipline, the object-matter of which must necessarily
be contingent due to the nature of the topics it addresses or to which Logic is
being in some sense applied or put into practice (LL.I.56). However, while Spe-
cial Logic is dismissed this is not to say that practical matters to do with Logic
must be altogether excluded from consideration (see LL.I.61-2). He coins the term
‘Modiﬁed Logic’ to describe what he argues had been improperly called Applied
Logic by Kant and some other German philosophers, deﬁning Modiﬁed Logic as
‘a science, which considers thought not merely as determined by its necessary
and universal laws, but as contingently aﬀected by the empirical conditions under
which thought is actually exerted’ (LL.I.60). Although Hamilton’s treatment of
Modiﬁed Logic in the second volume of his Lectures on Logic as the correlative
second main branch of Abstract Logic, is certainly interesting, I have chosen not
to discuss it but instead focus on what for Hamilton was clearly of much greater
immediate importance, namely, Formal or Pure Logic. He insists that Pure Logic
really comprises the whole of Abstract Logic — Modiﬁed Logic is ‘a mere mix-
ture of Logic and Psychology’; ‘There is in truth only one Logic, that is, Pure
or Abstract Logic’, ‘Modiﬁed Logic being only a scientiﬁc accident, ambiguously
belonging either to Logic or to Psychology’ (LL.I.63).
With such points in mind, he provisionally deﬁnes Logic as ‘the Science of the
Laws of Thought as Thought’ (LL.I.4). Extruding the contingent, inasmuch as
this is possible, Hamilton claims that Logic is only concerned with those phenom-
ena of formal (or subjective) thought that are necessary or ‘such as cannot but
appear’ as opposed to the contingent phenomena of thought, or ‘such as may or
may not appear’ (LL.I.24). Hence, through his ﬁnal introduction of the notion
of necessary laws being the sole province of Logic, Hamilton asserts that ‘Logic,
therefore, is at last fully and ﬁnally deﬁned as the science of the necessary forms
of thought’ (LL.I.24). Though this is Hamilton’s ﬁnal deﬁnition of Logic, he takes
care to explain the sense or ‘quality’ of ‘necessary’ by extensively quoting Wilhelm

108
Ralph Jessop
Esser’s System der Logik.32 Hence, to summarize Esser’s arguments as translated
by Hamilton: the necessity of a form of thought is contradistinguished from con-
tingency by being subjective, which is to say that a necessary form of thought
‘must be determined or necessitated by the nature of the thinking subject itself’
as opposed to being determined objectively; since we are incapable of conceiving
the possibility of its non-existence, such incapacity warrants the notion that the
form of thought in question is original to, or a constitutive feature of, the thinking
subject or human mind, and thus the subjective necessity of a form of thought
‘must be original and not acquired’; as necessary, subjective, and original in the
sense explained, the form of thought that comprises the object-matter of Logic
cannot necessitate on some occasions and not on others, and thus it must also be
universal; and ﬁnally, further enriching the sense or quality of ‘necessity’, accord-
ing to Esser, ‘if a form of thought be necessary and universal, it must be a law;
for a law is that which applies to all cases without exception, and from which a
deviation is ever, and everywhere, impossible, or, at least, unallowed’ (LL.I.24-5).
With the sense of ‘necessity’ within the phrase ‘necessary forms of thought’ hereby
explained in terms of something subjectively determined by the human mind as
subject and not objectively determined or extraneous to the mind, original and
not acquired, universal, and a law, Hamilton gives what he regards as his ‘most
explicit enunciation of the object-matter of Logic’ as: ‘Logic is the science of the
Laws of Thought as Thought, or the science of the Formal Laws of Thought, or
the science of the Laws of the Form of thought; for all these are merely various
expressions of the same thing.’ (LL.I.25-6).
Many more recent formal logicians would generally agree that formal Logic,
as contradistinguished from informal Logic and the subject matter or topics of
Rhetoric, is entirely or principally concerned with deductive arguments and thus
with valid inference and the necessary laws that pertain to or determine validity.
But we need to take notice of the state of logic in 1830s Britain as Hamilton
understood it: his contemporaries appeared to him to be woefully misguided,
unscholarly in their reading of the Aristotlean tradition, and blissfully ignorant of
the more recent German tradition in logic since the time of Leibniz. Hamilton’s
peers were, as far as he could tell, largely unaware of how the recent German
writers including and after Kant had far excelled the Oxford logicians in their
knowledge and understanding of the subject. Furthermore, it seems clear that
part of Hamilton’s crusade was against the prevailing tendency of philosophy in
Britain towards the increasingly prevalent mediocrity and barbarity of his times
that almost inevitably was following in the wake of and was implicitly collusive
with an era of rapidly advancing materialism. Pervaded from its outset by reason
and scepticism, during the early decades of the 19th century the Enlightenment
was evolving into new forms of a more socially pervasive utilitarian rationality and
sceptical subversions of faith. Acutely conscious of such trends in philosophical
32Hamilton translates for his students many passages from Esser. His inclusion of these nu-
merous quotations implies the commencement of a substantial realignment in British philosophy
with German logicians.

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
109
discourse Hamilton took considerable pains to establish his standpoint as one
much more closely in line with the German approach that regarded Logic as a
pure science.
2
DOCTRINE OF CONCEPTS
Logic [. . . ]
is exclusively conversant about thought,–about thought
considered strictly as the operation of Comparison or the faculty of
Relations; and thought, in this restricted signiﬁcation, is the cognition
of any mental object by another in which it is considered as included,–
in other words, thought is the knowledge of things under conceptions.
(LL.I.40).
Shortly after the above quotation Hamilton distinguishes between the act of con-
ceiving (conception) and the thing conceived (concept) and brieﬂy suggests a sim-
ilar distinction with regard to perception, somewhat tentatively coining the term
‘percept’ some 40 years before its ﬁrst recorded use in the Oxford English Dictio-
nary. He takes particular care to point out that Logic is concerned with ‘thought
considered as a product; that is, as a concept, a judgment, a reasoning’ (LL.I.74).
The operation of Comparison, or as he later calls it, the Faculty of Comparison,
produces Concepts, Judgments, and Reasonings. However, Hamilton argues that
Concepts and Reasonings are modiﬁcations of Judgments, ‘for the act of judging,
that is, the act of aﬃrming or denying one thing of another in thought, is that
in which the Understanding or Faculty of Comparison is essentially expressed’
(LL.I.117). This means that for Hamilton, ‘A concept is a judgment’ and as such
it collects together or is ‘the result of a foregone judgment, or series of judgments,
ﬁxed and recorded in a word,–a sign’ which may be supplemented or extended by
additional attributes, themselves judgments (LL.I.117). Thus, as a concept in a
sense ﬁxes a judgment or series of judgments, collecting together various attributes
within a single term, so also can it be analysed into these components or ampliﬁed
by the annexation of further attributes.
An important point to note here that will later be of fundamental signiﬁcance to
Hamilton’s quantiﬁcation of the predicate, is that for Hamilton an oft-ignored and
oft-violated postulate or principle of Logic is that the import of the terms used in
a judgment or reasoning should be fully understood or made explicit, which is to
say that ‘Logic postulates to be allowed to state explicitly in language all that is
implicitly contained in thought’, that Logic demands licence to make explicit the
full import of any particular concept or term, much as it attempts to do in making
overt all of the steps and relations involved in a given process of reasoning or ar-
gument. Though this fundamental postulate is simple in its statement, Hamilton
clearly regarded its signiﬁcance as central to his project to evolve or develop Logic
as a Pure science: ‘This postulate [. . . ], though a fundamental condition of Logic,
has not been consistently acted on by logicians in their development of the science;
and from this omission have arisen much confusion and deﬁciency and error in our

110
Ralph Jessop
present system of Logic’ (LL.I.114). Interestingly, in one place he makes the postu-
late more precise by replacing the term ‘implicit’ with ‘eﬃcient’ (NA.LL.II.270).33
The analysis of concepts into their often implicitly-held component attributes as
also their ampliﬁcation by means of adding new attributes, eﬀectually constitutes
an adherence to this postulate. Indeed, arguably, Hamilton’s emphasis on the im-
portance of being rigorously explicit elevates this postulate to the status of what
one might call a meta-theoretical principle of explicitness.
With reference to the Latin ‘concipere’ he explains that traditionally concep-
tion indicated ‘the process of embracing or comprehending the many into the one’,
‘the act of comprehending or grasping up into unity the various qualities by which
an object is characterised’ (LL.I.120). Within our consciousness this process is
typiﬁed by two cognitions, one immediate and ‘only of the individual or singular’,
the other ‘a knowledge of the common, general, or universal’ (LL.I.122). Thus ‘a
Concept is the cognition or idea of the general character or characters, point or
points, in which a plurality of objects coincide’ (LL.I.122, and see, 122-3). Mir-
roring his notion of the formation of language, which he outlines in his Lectures
on Metaphysics,34 as a synthesising process that moves from chaos to the con-
struction of general and universal terms which enable a complex and iterative
relationship with the individuals or particulars into which such concepts may be
analysed — a process of composition and decomposition that he occasionally de-
scribes as organic — Hamilton regards the formation of concepts as a complex
process involving human agency or the exertion of an ‘act of Comparison’ upon
an otherwise chaotic or confused array of presentations. Reminiscent of his highly
signiﬁcant relativist maxim, ‘To think is to condition’, Hamilton is thus acutely
aware of the role of human agency or volition in the process or mental activity
involved in the formation of concepts as unities consisting of various points drawn
together by an act of comparison and the implicit intentionality within this action
‘of discovering their similarities and diﬀerences’ (LL.I.123). This awareness of the
part played by human agency or volition, and the artiﬁciality and partiality of
concepts, becomes clearer when he invokes ‘the act called Attention’, by means
of which certain objects and qualities forming any given concept become strongly
highlighted (LL.I.123). As Hamilton explains the mental operations of attention
and abstraction, these two processes involved in the formation of concepts ‘are,
as it were, the positive and negative poles of the same act’, by means of which as
some objects and qualities become highlighted, others ‘are thrown into obscurity’
(LL.I.124, 123). He is claiming that the thinking subject’s point of view or per-
spective, or conditioning role is crucial to the formation of concepts, and as we
shall see later, point of view also plays an important role with regard to Hamilton’s
treatment of propositions.
What Hamilton is describing here, and in what follows this observation about
the act of abstraction and attention, is the relativity of concepts, and thereby he
33All references in this form are as above to the Lectures on Logic with ‘NA’ preﬁxed to indicate
the ‘New Analytic of Logical Forms’ as given in vol.II.249-317.
34Lectures on Metaphysics, II.327-332.

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
111
begins to point up certain implicit features of concepts that emphasise their ﬂuidity
or their adaptability, as well as their inherent inadequacy or insuﬃciently explicit
nature. For Hamilton the act of comparison combined with that of abstraction
and attention reduces in consciousness the multiple (or really diﬀering objects of
consciousness) into the unity that is a concept (see LL.I.124). By throwing out of
view the non-resembling marks or characters or points that in reality individuate
one individual from another, and by attending to the resembling points alone, we
treat these resembling points as though they were identical and thereby synthesise
them into a unity, a concept through which we think of the individuals or to which
we relate these individuals. Implicitly, in opposition to mechanistically grounded
(or mechanically modelled) theories of the mind, for Hamilton the formation of
concepts in the mental act of conception is a single or indivisible, quasi-organic
process of thought that may be analysed into components for the purpose of speak-
ing about and better comprehending concepts (see LL.I.133). No doubt integral to
or consistent with Hamilton’s natural dualism, he regards our knowledge of what
is presented and represented in consciousness — the phenomena of consciousness
— as ‘a direct, immediate, irrespective, determinate, individual, and adequate
cognition’ (LL.I.131). Such cognitions of the phenomena of consciousness, though
virtually self-suﬃcient as cognitions, do not, for Hamilton, constitute thought, or
so it would seem, since repeatedly he construes thought in terms of a relational
or relative process in which the thinking subject is more distinctively active or
operates as an agent conditioning the objects of thought. Hence, by contrast with
the mere phenomena of consciousness as self-suﬃcient cognitions, by means of
which the human mind may be thought of as, if not merely sentient, then active
but unthinkingly or non-rationally so, ‘A concept, on the contrary, is an indirect,
mediate, relative, indeterminate, and partial cognition of any one of a number of
objects, but not an actual representation either of them all, or of the whole at-
tributes of any one object’ (LL.I.131). This means that concepts are non-absolute
or ‘not capable of representation as absolute attributes’ (LL.I.137). Earlier, in
attempting to explain the inadequacy of concepts and their relativity, Hamilton
pointed up the partiality of concepts, their dependence upon selective ‘represen-
tation of a part only of the various attributes or characters of which an individual
object is the sum’ — for example, as we think Socrates through a particularly
small range of attributes, say, man, biped, animal, our representation of him will
be proportionately less adequate than when we think him through a greater range
of attributes. Hence, a concept, construed as a collection of attributes to which
the concept refers, are always one-sided or partial and to a greater or lesser extent
inadequate by contrast with the plenitude of attributes that constitute any given
individual.
However, this partiality or incompleteness of concepts, arising due to the com-
bined act of abstraction and attention that conceiving necessarily involves, while
it suggests the relativism of the thinking subject’s conditioning inﬂuence on the
objects of thought, does not seem to be the relativity that Hamilton particularly
wishes to emphasise. Instead, the relativity of concepts to which he draws our

112
Ralph Jessop
attention inheres in the relational nature that a concept does not overtly make
explicit but rather, in a sense, disguises by means of the ﬁction and even illusion
of unitariness we tend to impose upon the collection of more or less resembling
but nonetheless diﬀering individual attributes that comprise any given concept.
According to Hamilton, ‘A concept or notion, as the result of a comparison, neces-
sarily expresses a relation. It is, therefore, not cognisable in itself, that is, it aﬀords
no absolute or irrespective object of knowledge, but can only be realised in con-
sciousness by applying it, as a term of relation, to one or more of the objects, which
agree in the point or points of resemblance which it expresses’ (LL.I.128). Although
Hamilton’s account of the relativity of concepts is far from being unproblematic, he
asserts that the passage just quoted resolves ‘the whole mystery of Generalisation
and General Terms’ and thus that his notion (that a concept expresses a relation,
and is not therefore an ‘absolute or irrespective object of knowledge’) resolves the
disputes between Conceptualists and Nominalists. That concepts constitute ab-
solutes or objects of knowledge is an ‘illusion’ that fundamentally arises due to
our conversion of similarity into identity, and thereby, according to Hamilton, ‘the
real plurality of resembling qualities in nature is factitiously reduced to a unity in
thought; and this unity obtains a name in which its relativity, not being expressed,
is still further removed from observation’ (LL.I.128).
This may sound as though Hamilton is saying that concepts are fundamen-
tally fallacious; that they are fallaciously unities, actually pluralities. However,
it needs to be noted that while he may be saying that the view that concepts
are absolute objects of knowledge, or that they express unities, arises due to our
conversion of similarity into identity, the illusion of concepts as objective abso-
lutes thus generated is not due to some inherent fallaciousness within our mental
faculties. Rather, this illusion is due to an insuﬃciently rigorous attention to the
internal components, structure, and relational processes involved in any given in-
stance of conceiving as deeply integrant to the characteristic features and nature of
the product of such thought, namely, a concept. Furthermore, as he later argues,
concepts, formed by comparison and hence relative or expressive of a relation, ‘can
only be thought of in relation to some one of the individual objects they classify’,
but as such ‘they fall back into mere special determinations of the individual ob-
ject in which they are represented. Thus it is, that the generality or universality of
concepts is potential, not actual’ (LL.I.134). Though Hamilton does not go on to
explain that this implies that concepts have to be regarded always as in some sense
provisional and thereby capable of modiﬁcation, supplementation, or some other
adjustment, and available for examination from diﬀering points of view, this rel-
ativist attack on the implicit absolutism of concepts construed as non-relativistic
objects of knowledge, is further pursued by Hamilton’s excursus into the role of
language in a way that further brings to the fore the sense in which concepts are
provisional artefacts, the establishment and permanence of which is dependent on
the human subject — that concepts are necessarily subjective.
He apologizes for his digression into the extra-logical domain of metaphysics, a
metaphysics which he admittedly here only sketches (LL.I.131). However, it would

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
113
seem that, for Hamilton, in order to analyse the products of thought (concepts) as
principal components within demonstrative arguments, we need to understand the
relativity of concepts by making this explicit. To do so may involve some digression
into metaphysical discourse, and even the enunciation of a metaphysical standpoint
consistent with or ﬂowing out of Hamilton’s natural dualist position, a position
more or less contentious for some readers but of substantive interest in relation to
the Scottish Common Sense tradition in philosophy out of which Hamilton devel-
oped the term ‘natural dualism’. Clearly concerned that his constriction of Logic
to the necessary laws of thought is being violated by metaphysical considerations,
he also apologizes for digressing onto a similarly extra-logical consideration of lan-
guage. However, just as metaphysical discourse is at the interface between Logic
and the nature of the object-matter of Logic, an important part of Hamilton’s
description of the generation of concepts as illusorily absolute unities or objects of
knowledge, though actually relative, is his eloquent and fairly extensive treatment
of language. He attempts to explain how a name or term or linguistic sign some-
how ﬁxes a concept within our consciousness as though it expresses an absolute
object of knowledge and not a process or relational bundle of attributes brought
together by some contributing act or relationship of agency by means of which the
thinking subject participates with or conditions the phenomena of consciousness
to make its otherwise chaotic or confused and unﬁxed plenitude meaningful.
His digression onto the relationship between language and thought further deep-
ens the relativism of his whole approach as he brings to the fore the reciprocal
nature of language and thought: ‘Considered in general, thought and language
are reciprocally dependent; each bears all the imperfections and perfections of the
other; but without language there could be no knowledge realised of the essential
properties of things, and of the connection of their accidental states’ (LL.I.137).
He prioritises thought over speech or language but does so in such a way as to
suggest that this priority really pertains to the origination of the phenomenon of
language rather than being a necessary condition of all speech (see LL.I.138). Be
that as it may, Hamilton’s more important concern has to do with describing the
reciprocal relationship between thought and language, the process of conception
and the claim that, were it not for our ability to ﬁx ‘and ratify in a verbal sign’ all
of the constituents of a concept, it would otherwise ‘fall back into the confusion
and inﬁnitude from which it has been called out’ (LL.I.137). He illustrates this
for his students with some nice metaphors, such as the following:
You have all heard of the process of tunnelling, of tunnelling through
a sand bank. In this operation it is impossible to succeed, unless every
foot, nay almost every inch in our progress, be secured by an arch of
masonry, before we attempt the excavation of another. Now, language
is to the mind precisely what the arch is to the tunnel. The power of
thinking and the power of excavation are not dependent on the word
in the one case, on the mason-work in the other; but without these
subsidiaries, neither process could be carried on beyond its rudimentary
commencement (LL.I.139).

114
Ralph Jessop
Hamilton elaborates upon the metaphor of tunnelling through a sandbank, but
while his simple claim may be altogether unexceptionable (that without language
thought would at best remain in the most elementary and fragile state of almost
total impermanence), it is interesting to note that what his tunnelling metaphor
most strongly indicates is the relationship that the thinking subject is caught
within, a relationship between the ever-shifting sand of a multitudinous plenum
and the crafting of signs that, unlike the relative nature of concepts with regard to
their constituent parts, may seem to render in some sense or to some degree per-
manent for consciousness the collected attributes of any given concept, but which
still leaves such concepts relative and factitiously unitary. But as the thinking
subject’s struggle to secure or make permanent through language the confusion
and inﬁnitude of the phenomena of consciousness is here highlighted, Hamilton’s
awareness of Logic’s contest with a disintegrative atomism or absolute relativism,
at once suggests his consciousness of the volitional nature of reason and the abyss
of a more thoroughgoing relativism that threatens to undermine the warrantabil-
ity of his project entirely. But though this exaggerates the danger of Hamilton’s
relativism with regard to his own project, it draws to our attention the acute sense
that Hamilton has of logic’s relationship through language to the surrounding and
teeming chaos of the universe within which our intellects struggle to achieve order
— logic, like language, is for Hamilton a process of inching forward, of a tunnelling
through sand only made possible by constructing arches to hold back and make
orderly the chaos that perpetually threatens to engulf us. Any elementary con-
cepts we might have the capacity to form without the assistance of language, which
Hamilton admits may be a possibility, would be ‘but sparks which would twinkle
only to expire’, implying that without language, and we must add, without logic,
whatever thought might be possible is barely worth considering (LL.I.139). It is
therefore of the greatest moment for Hamilton that the logic we construct should
be robust and built upon proper foundations established through the most exact-
ing scrutiny of the work of others — this is not just a task for those who profess
to be logicians; it is also a task involving sound architectural skills, considerable
scholarship, the craftsmanship of the master builder, and a critical engagement
with and demolition of the crumbling and imperfect buildings of the past.
But it all must be carried out with an acute consciousness of the materials one
has to work with and the instability of the substance that only logic can hold in
place. Hamilton has, more or less wittingly, but nonetheless in a most profound
way, highlighted the imperfect, inchoate, factitious, anthropocentric, volitional,
indeterminate, and inherently relative nature of concepts. However, in doing so
he has overburdened the tenability of the ﬁxative term or word or sign to such
an extent that the permanence or ratiﬁcation he seems to claim we are capable
of establishing or ascribing to concepts — their ‘acquired permanence’ as he later
describes it (LL.I.225) — begins to look questionable. That this should be the case
— that Hamilton’s conceptualism is in fact a dismantling of Logic’s object-matter
into a purely formal kind of object that describes a process only artiﬁcially or
analogically rendered as a material object consisting of identiﬁable components —

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
115
should perhaps not greatly surprise us, given that this idealism or immaterialism
is so clearly congruent with his doctrine of nescience, and several other aspects of
his philosophical position related to this doctrine.
But this is not to say that Hamilton actually undercuts the whole point of
examining concepts and attempting to evolve a more complete science of the nec-
essary laws of thought. Rather, it is to his credit that, as he persists with his
enquiry, though the relativism and in general the perilously fragile condition of
concepts (as factitiously wholes, and indeed thereby factitiously permanent ﬁxtures
in consciousness), is brought to his students’ attention, he eﬀectually engages in a
quasi-Kantian critique of reason that at once points up the queerness, or idealism,
of Logic’s object-matter, while yet exploring what can be made determinate and
placed under the regulation of irrefragable laws with regard to thought, an entity
that he brings before us with great authenticity not as something already ﬁxed or
identical or closely analogous to material entities and physical nature (or to con-
ceptions of physical nature that construe the material mechanistically), but rather
as an object-matter evincing an indeterminacy with which it behoves exacting
logical scrutiny to engage.
Having pointed up the indeterminate and relative nature of concepts he goes on
to discuss the three main relations of concepts, namely, the relation they hold to
their objects, to their subject, and to each other. The ﬁrst relation, to their objects,
is of course encapsulated by the term ‘quantity’ since all concepts are said to consist
of a greater or lesser number of attributes (the objects of a concept). However,
as is now well known but, according to Hamilton, had been largely overlooked
by many contemporaneous and earlier logicians, the quantity of a concept can be
distinguished into two diﬀerent kinds, denominated by the terms ‘extension’ and
‘intension’ (or Hamilton’s more frequently used term ‘comprehension’). Although
the terms ‘extension’ and ‘intension’ are well known to present-day logicians, that
Hamilton regarded his contemporaries as being largely ignorant of these terms and
that their importance to his own attempts to improve traditional logic is so great,
provides at least two good reasons for elucidating his treatment of these terms
here.
He claims that the distinction between extension and intension ‘forms the very
cardinal point on which the whole theory of Logic turns’ (LL.I.119). He buttresses
this claim by repeatedly returning to the signiﬁcance of his distinction between and
treatment of extension and intension in several later lectures, for example, when he
argues that propositions can be distinguished as intensive or extensive depending
on whether the subject or the predicate is respectively the containing whole (see,
LL.I.231-3). However, as we shall see, the way in which he handles this distinction
further deepens his underlying notion concerning the relativity of concepts to show,
by demonstrating how extension and intension are correlatives of one another, that
a relativistic analysis of concepts and arguments is possible and indeed further
evolves the science of Pure Logic. However, importantly, the relativistic analysis
that Hamilton’s coordination of extension and intension enables, is one that is
nonetheless anchored in the fundamental rule of containment, namely, the axiom

116
Ralph Jessop
which ‘constitutes the one principle of all Deductive reasoning’, ‘that the part of a
part is a part of the whole’ (LL.I.119, 145, 144). It is perhaps worth pointing out
that this axiom is also given in two Latin phrases by Hamilton, one of which is:
‘Prœdicatum prœdicati est prœdicatum subjecti’. The Editor of his lectures points
out in a footnote that this is ‘A translation of Aristotle’s ﬁrst antipredicamental
rule as given in the Categories (see LL.I.144).
Hamilton’s thorough and fairly extended explication of extension and intension
in his Lecture VIII may be summarised as follows: a concept is a thought that
embraces or, in the sense explained earlier, brings into unity an indeﬁnite plurality
of characters and it is also applicable to an indeﬁnite plurality of objects about
which it may be said, or through which these objects may be thought. As such,
a concept is a quantity of two diﬀerent and opposed kinds, denoted by the terms
‘intension’ and ‘extension’ (LL.I.140-52).
‘Extension’ refers to the external quantity of a concept, being determined by
the number of objects — concepts or realities — to which the concept may be
applied or which it classiﬁes and hence under which these entities are said to be
contained (a concept’s extensive quantity is comprised of the number of objects
that can be thought mediately through the concept). The extensive quantity of a
concept is also referred to as its sphere or breadth and ‘the parts which the total
concept contains, are said to be contained under it, because, holding the relation
to it of the particular to the general, they are subordinated or ranged under it.
For example, the concepts man, horse, dog, &c., are contained under the more
general concept animal’ (LL.I.145). When these parts of a concept’s extension are
exposed, this is called Division.
‘Intension’ refers to the internal quantity of a concept, being determined by the
number of objects — concepts or realities — that constitute the concept and hence
in which these entities are said to be contained (a concept’s intensive quantity
is the conceived sum of the attributes that constitute it, formed into a whole
or unity in thought). The intensive quantity of a concept is also referred to as
its comprehension or depth and ‘the parts [. . . ] which go to constitute the total
concept, are said to be contained in it. For example, the concept man is composed
of two constituent parts or attributes, that is, of two partial concepts,–rational and
animal; for the characters rational and animal are only an analytical expression
of the synthetic unity of the concept man’ (LL.I.143-4).
When these parts or
characters of a concept’s intension are exposed, this is called Deﬁnition.
According to Hamilton, logicians ‘have exclusively developed’ the extensive
quantity of concepts. However, he asserts that the extensive and intensive quanti-
ties comprise ‘the two great branches of reasoning’ and that intension ‘is at least
of equal importance’ in comparison with extension (LL.I.144-5). This claim is sig-
niﬁcant in that, placing intension and extension on an equal footing, as two main
branches of reasoning, immediately brings the analysis of concepts under, as it
were, dual aspects or two main perspectives from which concepts may be viewed,
analysed, and through which Hamilton can further elaborate his thesis concerning
the relativity of concepts by bringing any given concept’s extensive and intensive

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
117
quantities into relation with one another — which is precisely what he does at
this stage in his Lectures as also in Discussions and his ‘New Analytic of Logical
Forms’.
Hamilton seems to suggest at this stage what he will later make much more ex-
plicit, that the axiom or fundamental and sole principle of all Deductive reasoning,
that a part of a part is a part of the whole, originates with regard to the intensive
quantity of concepts — he certainly introduces this axiom of containment by il-
lustrating how the intensive quantity of a given concept, such as is signiﬁed in the
term ‘man’, may be analysed into ever diminishing parts contained in, or implicit
within, the concept ‘man’, ‘till we reach attributes which, as simple, stand as a
primary or ultimate element, into which the series can be resolved’ (LL.I.144). If
he is suggesting that the axiom of containment has been, as it were, translated
for application to the extensive quantity by the notion expressed as ‘whatever is
contained under the partial or more particular concept is contained under the total
or more general concept’, it is unclear whether he is at all troubled by the idea
that the necessity of relation implicit in the axiom of containment, particularly as
expressed with regard to a concept’s intension, is grounded on an analogy with
physical containment that he elsewhere rejects as unwarranted — that is, with re-
gard to the assumption that mind and body are analogically related (LL.I.145).35
However, he has eﬀectually described concepts as necessarily factitious or artiﬁcial
constructions, given a kind of suﬃcient or provisionally adequate permanence by
means of language. He has also described concepts as relative continua in thought,
the analysis of which is itself, purposive or tendentiously conducted in order that
we can, as I indicated earlier, both speak about and thereby better comprehend
concepts (see LL.I.133). Thus, Hamilton can perhaps claim some licence in deploy-
ing terms such as ‘contain’ without issuing caveats to guard against some of the
assumptions antithetical to his general philosophical standpoint of natural dualism
that, as a term analogically related to physical containment, ‘contain’ itself may be
said to contain or imply. However, Hamilton is relying upon a traditional technical
language of containment to elucidate the intensive and extensive quantities which
he will later claim is better replaced by the more accurate ‘substantive verb, (is,
is not)’ to express the equation or aﬃrmation or negation of identity between a
given concept and the objects constitutive of it or to which it may be related (or
through which other concepts or particulars may be thought) (LL.I.154). As we
shall see later, he does regard the axiom or sole principle of all Deductive reasoning
(that a part of a part is a part of the whole), as rather crucially originating in
a thought unshakeably natural to us, namely, our knowledge of the quantity of
intension and the ways in which intensive containment provides as it were a natu-
ral grounding for all purely logical inference — Hamilton, strenuously striving to
craft Logic into a pure science, abstracted from all extra-logical matters, cannot
resist bringing the laws of thought into an intimate relation with the natural, the
human as irrevocably an interrelated whole consisting of the self and the not-self.
But this aside, he applies the axiom of containment to both the intensive and
35Discussions, pp. 61-2.

118
Ralph Jessop
the extensive quantities of concepts. Both may be said to contain attributes, but
they crucially diﬀer in that, while the intensive quantity is said to be contained in
a concept, the extensive is said to be contained under it. Thus, while both of the
quantities of extension and intension contain in diﬀering senses, and while both
are determined by wholes that may be identiﬁed and thereby quantiﬁed, ‘These
two quantities are not convertible. On the contrary, they are in the inverse ratio of
each other; the greater the depth of comprehension [intension] of a notion the less
its breadth or extension, and vice versa’ (LL.I.142). This inverse ratio relationship
between extension and intension is well illustrated by Hamilton as follows:
When I take out of a concept, that is, abstract from one or more of
its attributes, I diminish its comprehension [intension]. Thus, when
from the concept man, equivalent to rational animal, I abstract from
the attribute or determination rational, I lessen its internal quantity.
But by this diminution of its comprehension I give it a wider exten-
sion, for what remains is the concept animal, and the concept animal
embraces under it a far greater number of objects than the concept
man (LL.I.147).
Hamilton explains the way in which this inverse ratio operates in fuller detail,
pointing up as he does so that as we continue the analytic process outlined in
the above quotation, the diminishment of a concept’s intensive quantity, with the
correspondent ampliﬁcation or expansion of its extension, must ﬁnally result in
‘that concept which all comprehension and all extension must equally contain, but
in which comprehension is at its minimum, extension at its maximum,–I mean
the concept of Being or Existence’ (LL.I.149). And by contrast with this, when a
concept’s intension is at its maximum, its extension being then at its minimum,
the concept we must end up with is that of an individual, ‘the concept being
a complement of the whole attributes of an individual object, which, by these
attributes, it thinks and discriminates from every other’ (LL.I.148).
His notion that, when extension is at a maximum and thereby intension at a
minimum we must end with existence, raises the interesting topic of the existential
import of concepts and propositions. However, leaving this aside, it should now be
clear that, having described concepts as generally relative, Hamilton is laying bare
the sort of things that this relativity enables with regard to how we may view and
analyse concepts. In an ingenious table in his Discussions, which the editors of the
Lectures appended to the end of Lecture VIII, Hamilton further exposes how their
relational or relative nature enables us to view any given part of a concept under
diﬀerent relational aspects, for example: as species of a genus from one end, the
genus of a species from its opposite end; how the expansion of a concept’s extension
implies a coordinate reduction in its intension; the sense in which we may say that
each part ‘in opposite respects, contains and is contained’ (LL.I.153); and how ‘the
real identity and rational diﬀerences of Breadth and Depth’ become exposed, such
that it becomes more apparent that extension and intension ‘though denominated
quantities, are, in reality, one and the same quantity, viewed in counter relations

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
119
and from opposite ends. Nothing is the one, which is not, pro tanto, the other’
(LL.I.153).
When explicating these points to do with a concept’s extension and intension in
his Lectures Hamilton used ‘a circular machine’ which he had devised. Similar to a
now-familiar child’s toy consisting of a circular base with a wooden rod at its centre
onto which are placed diﬀerently coloured circular discs of various circumferences,
the discs of Hamilton’s machine represented concepts that could be placed on the
central rod representing the individual to which these concepts might refer. Each
disc was placed on the rod in the correct order to illustrate several things to do
with the relation of extension to intension, the completed device standing as an
inverted cone. This ‘machine’ is represented and discussed by Veitch (see Veitch,
pp. 250-2). As though trying to reinforce Hamilton’s claim that his doctrine of
the quantiﬁcation of the predicate had been taught in his Lectures prior to de
Morgan’s quantiﬁcation, the Editors’ insertion of the table and the explanatory
pages from his Discussions at the end of Lecture VIII reveal how his distinction
between extension (Breadth) and intension (Depth), and the way in which he
brings these two quantities into relation with one another, form the basis of his
quantiﬁcation of the predicate. That Hamilton’s editors thought it necessary to do
this, strongly suggests their awareness of how easy it might be not to grasp from
his lectures, the extent to which Hamilton’s treatment of Concepts and the two
principal quantities of extension and intension lead to and are indeed an integral
part of Hamilton’s quantiﬁcation of the predicate. However, the editors’ insertion
of this table is perhaps best understood as an attempt to bring to the fore the
very sort of thing that it may be assumed Hamilton explained at this stage in his
Lecture VIII by use of his ‘circular machine’. I have reproduced Hamilton’s table
below.
The table displays the lines of Breadth and Depth, the conceptual range as
Ideal, the objective or particular range of individuals or singulars as Real, and gives
lines of direction to indicate aﬃrmation and negation (which I shall not attempt
to explain). The table distinguishes between individuals or singulars (z, z′, z′′) and
classes (A, E, I, O, U). The highest genus or widest attribute is given as A, A, A,
etc., the subaltern genera and species as E, I, O, U, and the lowest species or
narrowest attribute as Y . Each class is represented as ‘a series of resemblances
thought as one’, symbolised by the same letter to denote that they are thought of
as one, though really distinct or diﬀering from one another in some respect(s) (this
being intimated by the vertical lines separating each letter). This is in line with
Hamilton’s notion that a concept is relative in the sense that it brings into a unity
in thought what are really discrete though resembling characters. The narrowest
attribute (Y ) is shown as a simple term constituted by the individuals z, z′, z′′.
Though simple or singular in the sense that it has no extension or has a minimal
extension, it is dichotomised by using a thick line ‘|’ to denote ‘not’ — that is to
say, if ‘Y ’ is thinkable, as a strict logical necessity one must also be able to think
‘not Y ’, but the narrowest attribute must otherwise be a singular attribute and
not a class (as in, say, U). This is not to say that some given attribute represented

120
Ralph Jessop
Table 1. Schemes of Two Quantitites
(LL.I.152; for further detail see, pp. 152-6, and Discussions, pp. 699-701).
by ‘Y ’ could not be translated into ‘A’ in another table since any ‘Y ’ is only the
least or narrowest attribute in relation to U and the other letters above this, and
the least must be in thought, if not in fact, a unity or attribute directly relatable
to the individual constituents as shown beneath it.
In other words, while the
table posits a narrowest attribute Y , as something not consisting of any other
resembling Y , closer examination of Y ’s intension could involve translating it into
another table of the same form in which it might be translated into A. As the
thick line ‘|’ denotes ‘not’ (e.g. to contradistinguish between say, ‘animal’ and ‘not
animal’, the thinner lines ‘merely discriminate one animal (A) , from another (A)’
(LL.I.156). Hamilton’s elucidation of the table more clearly begins to indicate just
how his understanding of the relativity of concepts, and what a concept consists in
with regard to the two quantities of extension and intension, combine to illustrate
the necessity of quantifying the predicate: ‘A is only A, not A, A, A, &c.; some
Animal is not some Animal; one class of Animals is not all, every, or any other;
this Animal is not that; Socrates is not Plato; z is not z′. On the other hand, E
is EA; and Y is Y UOIEA; every lower and higher letter in the series coalescing
uninterruptedly into a series of reciprocal subjects and predicates, as shown by
the absence of all discriminating lines. Thus Socrates (z′), is Athenian (Y ), Greek
(U), European (O), Man (I), Mammal (E), Animal (A)’ (LL.I.155).
This needs to be further elucidated as follows: reading from left to right, the

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
121
ﬁrst A contains under it the concepts EIOUY , and the full range of all individual
and hence actual Athenians, represented by ‘z, z′, z′′.’
However, the second A
contains under it EIOU, and not Y (‘|Y ’), and hence neither z nor z′ nor z′′. The
ﬁrst A is a term identical qua term to all of the other As in the row of As, and
it resembles (according to the thinking subject) the other As to such an extent as
to be uniﬁed in thought and ﬁxed as a unity by means of the single classiﬁcatory
or general term ‘A’.
However, just as the ﬁrst A and the second A are in all
respects identical, except that the ﬁrst A contains under it Y (and hence, in this
case, z′) whereas the second A does not, similarly each of the other As may be
diﬀerentiated from one another and from the ﬁrst A by means of reference to their
respective depths or intensive quantities. This implies that each of the terms A
is, as Hamilton puts it, ‘only A, not A, A, A, &c. [. . . ] one class of Animals is
not all’ (LL.I.155). This suggests the basis of quantiﬁcation of the subject term in
a simple proposition such as ‘Some Animals are Mammals’. But, as we shall see
shortly, it also suggests the basis of quantifying the predicate term.
Suppose that: A represents the term ‘Animal’; E represents the subordinate
or species ‘Mammal’ to A as the genus Animal; I represents the subordinate or
species ‘Man’ to E as the genus Mammal. For ease of explanation it is necessary
to follow Hamilton and ignore a reasoning that starts by quantifying the class
with the universal term ‘All’, for it can easily be seen that were we to commence,
in Breadth, with ‘All A’ (‘all Animal’) then, contained under this class are ‘All
E and some not E’ (‘all Mammal and some not Mammal’), which unnecessarily
complicates explication of how Hamilton’s table demonstrates the need to quantify
the predicate. Now, if we only attend to the range encompassed by the ﬁrst ﬁve
As, then this implies we must only be looking at some A and not all (in this case
the ﬁrst ﬁve). What is contained under these ﬁve As is the range of all Es (i.e. ‘not
E’ (‘|E’) has been excluded by abstracting or ignoring the sixth A). Translating
this selection of the ﬁrst ﬁve As and the range of Es listed under them, we have
‘some Animals are all Mammals.’
This process can of course be continued by
repeating the process of removing one attribute or class of E, so that the next
step in the reasoning process that examines what is contained under E, involves
a further abstraction or removal of, in this case, the 4th E, resulting in: ‘Some E
(Mammals) are all I (Man)’, and so on.
If this begins to illustrate how reducing the extension of a concept deepens or
expands its Depth, and vice versa — the inverse ratio principle Hamilton claims to
exist between extension and intension — the table also illustrates that, in eﬀect,
the same reasoning can be applied whether we are arguing in Depth (i.e. with
regard to the intensive quantity) or in Breadth (i.e. with regard to the extensive
quantity). This, according to Hamilton, is because, ‘Though diﬀerent in the order
of thought, (ratione), the two quantities are identical in the nature of things,
(re). Each supposes the other; and Breadth is not more to be distinguished from
Depth, than the relations of the sides, from the relations of the angles, of a triangle’
(LL.I.154). The table illustrates how the same reasoning can be applied to both
the extension and intension of a concept, so long as both the subject term and

122
Ralph Jessop
the predicate term in all of the resulting propositions are quantiﬁed consistently
in accordance with the correct understanding of what the table indicates at each
step in the reasoning with regard to containment (in or under). Hamilton’s own
illustration of this is as follows:
In eﬀect it is precisely the same reasoning, whether we argue in Depth
— “z′ is, (i.e. as subject, contains in it the inherent attribute), some Y ;
all Y is some U; all U is some O; all O is some I; all I is some E; all E
is some A — therefore, z′ is some A:” or whether we argue in Breadth
— “Some A is, (i.e. as class, contains under it the subject part), all E;
some E is all I; some I is all O; some O is all U; some U is all Y ; some
Y is z′ — therefore, some A is z′.” The two reasonings, internally
identical, are externally the converse of each other; the premise and
term, which in Breadth is major, in Depth is minor. (LL.I.154)
But, as this displays how the inverse ratio principle operates, and how so relating
extension and intension reveals that it is only externally that the two quantities
determine a diﬀerence in reasoning whereas, with each term consistently quantiﬁed
using ‘some’ or ‘all’ as appropriate, subjects and predicates can swap position to
yield formally identical conclusions (‘z′ is some A’ and ‘some A is z′’), Hamilton
is quick to point out in this more developed treatment of the topic explicating
his ‘Schemes of the Two Quantities’ table that: ‘In syllogisms also, where the
contrast of the two quantities [extension and intension] is abolished, there, with
the diﬀerence of ﬁgure, the diﬀerences of major and minor premise and term fall
likewise.’ (LL.I.154). With these few words Hamilton is touching on just how,
through examining concepts extensively and intensively to show the inverse ratio
relationship between these two quantities, the resultant quantiﬁcation of all terms
in a reasoning that hinges on the identiﬁcation of the subject and predicate terms
of a proposition, enables a signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation of traditional Formal Logic.
However, he is also touching on a claim, the signiﬁcance of which he brings to
the fore much later in his Lectures, namely, that ‘In fact, the two quantities and
the two quantiﬁcations have by logicians been neglected together’ (LL.I.155). As
attending to the quantities of extension and intension reveals their ‘real identity
and rational diﬀerences’, such that it becomes more apparent that they are ‘in
reality, one and the same quantity’, Hamilton will later show, through careful
stages of his teaching of logic in the Lectures, that this identiﬁcation of the two
quantities is highly signiﬁcant with regard to both propositions and syllogisms
(LL.I.153; compare Discussions, pp. 701–2). However, before the full relevance of
Hamilton’s inverse ratio principle with regard to extension and intension can be
illuminated with regard to propositions and syllogisms, it is necessary to outline
some of the other points he makes in his Lectures concerning concepts.
If by the end of Lecture VIII it is beginning to emerge, particularly with the ed-
itors’ helpful insertion of Hamilton’s ‘Schemes of the Two Quantities’ table given
above, that Hamilton is carefully working towards his quantiﬁcation of the predi-
cate, in some of the Lectures that follow, he still has much to say that will further

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
123
reinforce his notion that concepts are relative, not simply in the sense that they
are relational (or wholes constituted by and referring to a plurality of resembling
entities, or relative with regard to their objects), but also in the sense that our
construction and grasp of the depth (intension) and breadth (extension) of any
given concept is dependent upon a subjective interrelation of clearness/obscurity
and distinctness/indistinctness.
This introduces the notion of the quality of a
concept (see LL.I.157).
Thus, having elucidated the inverse ratio relation between the extension and
intension of a concept, he goes on to consider the subjective relation of concepts (i.e.
the relation to the subject that thinks a concept) in relation to their clearness and
distinctness as similarly relative terms determining the quality of a given concept.
He explains the terms ‘clearness’ and ‘distinctness’ at some length, acknowledging
as he does so a considerable debt to Leibniz (see LL.I.159–65).
Hamilton points out that while intensive distinctness is at a maximum when we
reach simple notions that are thereby indeﬁnable, and while extensive distinctness
is at a maximum when, to quote his translation of Esser, ‘we touch on notions
which, as individual, admit of no ulterior division’, such distinctness is only ideal
and that in fact this ideal distinctness is something we are always approaching
but never in reality attaining (LL.I.170). As this ideal distinctness is regarded
by Esser as an incentive to re-analyse the intension and extension of concepts,
it is clear that Hamilton is suggesting to his students that this relativity and
incompleteness or non-absolute condition of concepts is an important aspect of his
overall approach to the study of Logic, a crucial incorporation of an awareness of
the ultimate indeﬁnability and non-absolute dimension of Logic’s object matter.
And in this Hamilton is arguably being entirely consistent with other aspects of
his metaphysics and overall philosophical position.
In Lecture X he has more to say about the imperfection of concepts, this time
returning to the problem of language. Concepts have, as it were, a propensity to be
obscure and indistinct and these vices are due, partly to their very nature as wholes
that bind together ‘a multiplicity in unity’, and partly from their dependence upon
language as that which ﬁxes concepts in consciousness (LL.I.172). He explains the
problem of language by means of an illustrative analogy with methods of exchange
in countries lacking an established currency. Thus, language operates much like
the handing over of unquantiﬁed bags of precious metals which may or may not be
closely scrutinised to see if they yield the value they purportedly signify — on most
occasions the language user takes on trust that a particular term binds together
what it seems to claim for itself, namely, that it does in fact represent a multitude
of entities collectively amounting to a certain sum or value; but at other times,
this will not be the case. This analogy of course teems with signiﬁcance but there
seem to be two main points that Hamilton is attempting to emphasise: ﬁrstly,
‘that notions or concepts are peculiarly liable to great vagueness and ambiguity,
and that their symbols are liable to be passed about without the proper kind, or
the adequate amount, of thought’ (LL.I.173-4); and secondly, that an important
distinction, originated by Leibniz, can be made with regard to our knowledge that

124
Ralph Jessop
divides cognition into the blind or symbolical and intuitive (see LL.I.180-86). In
short, Leibniz’s notion of symbolical knowledge refers to concepts as terms taken
to signify entities obscurely and imperfectly presented to the mind but which
may potentially be exposed or made explicit, though we cannot think all of the
ingredients that comprise the symbol or term used to refer to them. By contrast
with this, intuitive knowledge is of these ingredients themselves inasmuch as this
is possible. Hamilton fails to explain the signiﬁcance of this distinction except to
claim that thereby Leibniz and his followers in Germany superseded or overcame
‘the whole controversy of Nominalism and Conceptualism,–which, in consequence
of the non-establishment of this distinction, and the relative imperfection of our
philosophical language, has idly agitated the Psychology of this country [Britain]
and of France’ (LL.I.179). However, it should be fairly obvious that by means of
this distinction between symbolical and intuitive knowledge, Hamilton is providing
a warrant for treating concepts in a purely formal manner in order to examine more
closely the relations between concepts considered blindly or symbolically, while
at the same time drawing attention to the interface between what the symbols
represent with regard to the imperfect but real condition of our intuitive knowledge
of the particulars to which concepts relate, and through which we both think these
particulars and constitute our concepts. Once again, the relativism, imperfection,
inchoateness, and mutability of concepts and the phenomenal and plural nature of
our knowledge as relative, relational, provisional, and so on, is being emphasised
by Hamilton, while at the same time he attempts to establish a domain or object
matter of Logic at once stable, constricted, and discriminated from the material
or actual, though both domains of the intuitive and symbolical are held in relation
to one another as mutually informative and only theoretically discrete.
Though Hamilton is clearly aware that his various points concerning the rel-
ativity of concepts is foregrounding matter that might easily be thought of as
extra-logical, having distinguished between symbolical and intuitive knowledge, in
Lecture XI he appropriately turns to what he regards as ‘The Relation proper’
of concepts, namely, their relation to each other — something that can be repre-
sented symbolically and diagrammatically and which thereby establishes a set of
relationships familiar to logicians. Again he discusses this in relation to the two
principal quantities of extension and intension. Taking extension ﬁrst, he outlines
ﬁve principal relations: Exclusion, Coextension, Subordination, Co-ordination,
and Intersection. All of these he illustrates with simple circle diagrams, a prac-
tice used by some earlier philosophers, such as, according to Hamilton, the late
16th century Christian Wiese, and of course developed later by John Venn. It is
needless to reproduce Hamilton’s diagrams (see LL.I.189; 256), but it is important
to note that of all of these relations between concepts considered with regard to
their extension, ‘those of Subordination and Co-ordination are of principal impor-
tance, as on them reposes the whole system of classiﬁcation’ (LL.I.189-90). He
elucidates Subordination and Co-ordination with crystal clarity. However, as yet
further evidence of his interest in and even fascination with relativism, he contin-
ues to draw into consideration: that there is no absolute exclusion in the relation

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
125
between concepts known as Exclusion (LL.I.188); the ways in which our perspec-
tive on concepts results in re-describing a genus as a species and a species as a
genus; how speculatively, if not practically, we may always divide a concept ad
inﬁnitum (LL.I.192-3); how diﬀerent abstractions result in diﬀerent relations of
genus and species in both subordination and co-ordination; and how, admitting
that there can be both a highest genus and a lowest species, neither of which
are convertible into a species nor a genus respectively, within Subordination there
are gradations of genus and species known as subalterns or intermediates such
that, the genus lower than the highest genus, can become a species, whereas the
species higher than the lowest species, can become a genus. This, as Hamilton
points out all comes from Porphyry’s Introduction to Aristotle’s Categories, but it
is nonetheless notable that Hamilton should emphasise the non-absolute aspects
of the relations between concepts and the dependence of these various reversals
of species and genus on how we regard them (LL.I.196). Point of view is indeed
something he is at pains to emphasise as important to several matters, not least
of which is the relation of whole to part and the distinction, which he regards
as erroneous, between Logical and Metaphysical wholes, these being, contra to
previous logicians, ‘equally logical’ (see LL.I.201-2).
Hamilton is evidently working towards some important claims to do with the
whole-part relationship that will give priority to the intensive quantity of concepts
which in part relies upon his notion of Involution (see LL.I.202-3). Skipping over
the various kinds of whole that Hamilton elucidates, the notion that a genus con-
tains its species either potentially or actually (see LL.I.205-6), along with various
other points of interest, it is in Hamilton’s treatment of Comprehension or the
quantity of intension in Lecture XII that he ﬁrst makes fully explicit one of his
major disagreements with traditional logic, a disagreement nevertheless that he
has been hinting at in one way or another from a fairly early stage. He claims that
the relations of Involution and Co-ordination have been:
altogether neglected by logicians: and, in consequence of this, they
have necessarily overlooked one of the two great divisions of all reason-
ing [. . . ]. In each quantity there is a deductive, and in each quantity
there is an inductive, inference; and if the reasoning under either of
these two quantities were to be omitted, it ought, perhaps, to have
been the one which the logicians have exclusively cultivated [i.e. the
deductive reasoning in extension]. For the quantity of extension is a
creation of the mind itself, and only created through, as abstracted
from, the quantity of comprehension [intension]; whereas the quantity
of comprehension is at once given in the very nature of things. The
former quantity is thus secondary and factitious, the latter primary
and natural. (LL.I.217-8).
Now, it must be noted that by the term ‘inductive’ Hamilton departs from what we
might call the standard treatment of or distinction between induction and deduc-
tion. Thus, he does not mean that kind of inference in which the conclusion may

126
Ralph Jessop
be said to exceed or amplify the content of the premises. He is not talking here
about probable reasoning or judgements that go beyond what is delivered in the
premises — his restriction of induction to a form of necessary reasoning is therefore
substantially diﬀerent from the empirical reasoning or induction of the physical
sciences. Instead, as he makes clear in a later lecture, he is treating induction in a
formal sense as diﬀerentiated from an informal or material sense, to mean a process
of reasoning from all of the parts to the whole that these parts entirely constitute
(see LL.I.319-26). This aside, that he is now distinguishing as he does in the above
quotation between extension and intension may seem to be at odds with the claim
he made earlier about concepts being factitiously unities, but really pluralities —
now it would seem they are only partially factitious, projected, mind-dependent
and mind-generated, but partially ‘primary and natural’. Also, this prioritisation
of intension seems to sit uncomfortably with his attempt to hold, by means of
his inverse ratio relation between the two quantities, that extension and intension
are non-convertible but equivalent with regard to the reasoning that we apply to
both quantities. Leaving aside this weaker objection, that he has now introduced
a distinction between extension and intension that prioritises intension as the real
and primary, creates problems for Hamilton that he does not satisfactorily resolve.
For example, is not the intensive quantity also a binding together of resembling
but nonetheless discrete entities held in a relationship of containing and contained,
and thus is not intension every bit as factitious as extension? Furthermore, how
can an abstraction from the intensive quantity be satisfactorily described as fac-
titious, given that it is just that, an abstraction from what is not factitious but
rather ‘in the very nature of things’? Perhaps, by ‘factitious’ Hamilton is merely
asserting that, in relation to the thinking subject, extension is a product of the
mental action of abstracting from the real, intensive quantity, and in this sense
the product that is a concept’s extensive quantity may be more or less arbitrarily
or selectively constructed, that extension is both factitiously a unity, really a plu-
rality of resembling attributes, and that its factiousness in relation to the reality
of a given concept’s intension is a matter of degree. That is to say, both with
regard to the degree of resemblance between a concept’s attributes in extension,
and with regard to how close its extension is to its deﬁnition, its distinctness, or
the thinking subject’s grasp of its intensive quantity, the extensive quantity may
be more or less factitious.
Be that as it may, Hamilton does seem to be making an important distinction
and claim here that may be more sympathetically understood as an attempt to
ground in reality the formation of our concepts as emanating from or evolving out
of a deeper or more intimately connected relationship of resemblance between the
parts of a whole than is tenable of the resembling attributes in extension. He does
this by pointing up the diﬀerence between the senses of ‘contain’: in extension
a concept contains under it, its various attributes in subordination; whereas in
intension, a concept contains in it, its various attributes as constitutive of and as
the deﬁnitional properties that make the concept what it is, just as the multitude
of parts go together to constitute any given individual. To distinguish between

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
127
these two diﬀerent senses of ‘contain’, Hamilton introduces the notion of Involution
mentioned above, which he explains as follows:
In the quantity of comprehension [intension], one notion is involved in
another, when it forms a part of the sum total of characters, which
together constitute the comprehension of that other; and two notions
are in this quantity co-ordinated, when, whilst neither comprehends the
other, both are immediately comprehended in the same lower concept.
(LL.I.220).
He gives two illustrations of the Involution relationship between a concept’s at-
tributes, the second of these pointing up the inter-relatedness of concepts as in-
volving and involved, such that we may be said to think a certain concept only in
and through that of another concept:
In this quantity [of intension] the involving notion or whole is the more
complex notion; the involved notion or part is the more simple. Thus
pigeon as comprehending bird, bird as comprehending feathered, feath-
ered as comprehending warm-blooded, warm-blooded as comprehend-
ing heart with four cavities, heart with four cavities as comprehending
breathing with lungs, are severally to each other as notions involving
and involved. (LL.I.223).
Suggesting as this does, a relative overlapping and even partial integration of one
concept with another, such that they mutually imply and yet collectively consti-
tute the individual or unity they deﬁne, he immediately follows this somewhat
sketchy account of Involution, by diﬀerentiating between this relativist aspect
(containing and contained) and the non-relative (since not necessarily containing
and contained) co-ordination:
Again, notions, in the whole of comprehension, are co-ordinated, when
they stand together as constituting parts of the notion in which they
are both immediately comprehended. Thus the characters oviparous
[egg producing] and warm-blooded, heart with four cavities, and breath-
ing with lungs, as all immediately contributing to make up the com-
prehension of the notion bird, are, in this respect, severally considered
as its co-ordinate parts.
These characters are not relative and co-
relative,–not containing and contained. For we have oviparous animals
which are not warm-blooded, and warm-blooded animals which are
not oviparous. Again, it is true, I believe, that all warm-blooded ani-
mals have hearts with four cavities [. . . ], and that all animals with such
hearts breathe by lungs and not by gills, But then, in this case, we have
no right to suppose that the ﬁrst of these characters comprehends the
second, and that the second comprehends the third. For we should be
equally entitled to assert, that all animals breathing by lungs possessed
hearts of four cavities, and that all animals with such hearts are warm-
blooded. They are thus thought as mutually the conditions of each

128
Ralph Jessop
other; and whilst we may not know their reciprocal dependence, they
are, however, conceived by us, as on an equal footing of co-ordination.
(LL.I.223)
Hamilton hints that the signiﬁcance of Involution and Co-ordination will come to
the fore when he later moves on to tackle the syllogism and, seemingly regarding
this as virtually a digression, his explanation of Involution in Lecture XII is un-
fortunately rather brief and might have been more fully elucidated, particularly
given that it may be much more crucial than perhaps Hamilton realised, to how we
might best understand at least one major aspect to do with the co-identity rela-
tionship within universal propositions which I shall discuss in Section 4. However,
he says just about enough to suggest what one might call a grounding relativism in
which his few words on this, though oﬀered to explain the wholeness of a concept’s
intensive quantity, verge on further pointing up the artiﬁcial nature of the funda-
mental laws of logic of identity, excluded middle, and non-contradiction. If this is
less evident in the above quotation, it is more so in how he relates the involution
within a concept’s intensive quantity to his non-linear notion of the formation or
evolution of general and particular terms:
Our notions are originally evolved out of the more complex into the
more simple, and [. . . ] the progress of science is nothing more than a
progressive unfolding into distinct consciousness of the various elements
comprehended in the characters, originally known to us in their vague
or confused totality [the condition in which they may be said to be
maximally complex].
It is a famous question among philosophers,–Whether our knowledge
commences with the general or with the individual,–whether children
ﬁrst employ common, or ﬁrst employ proper, names.
In this con-
troversy, the reasoners have severally proved the opposite opinion to
be untenable; but the question is at once solved, by showing that a
third opinion is the true,–viz. that our knowledge commences with the
confused and complex, which, as regarded in one point of view or in
another, may easily be mistaken either for the individual, or for the
general. [. . . ]. It is suﬃcient to say in general, that all objects are
presented to us in complexity; that we are at ﬁrst more struck with
the points of resemblance than with the points of contrast; that the
earliest notions, and consequently, the earliest terms, are those that
correspond to this synthesis, while the notions and the terms arising
from an analysis of this synthesis into its parts, are of a subsequent
formation. But though it be foreign to the province of Logic to de-
velop the history of this procedure; yet, as this procedure is natural to
the human mind, Logic must contain the form by which it is regulated.
It must not only enable us to reason from the simple and general to
the complex and individual; it must likewise, enable us to reverse the
process, and to reason from the complex and individual to the simple

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
129
and the general. And this it does by that relation of notions as contain-
ing and contained, given in the quantity of comprehension [intension].
(LL.I.221-2).
In short, the notion of Involution takes us once again into the relativism of Hamil-
ton’s metaphysical epistemology and theory of language which he outlines more
extensively in his Lectures on Metaphysics.36 And, if he is, perhaps rather shak-
ily, attempting to give priority to the reality of intension over and against the
factitiousness of extension, he at least does so in a way that coheres interestingly
with his theory of language with regard to the iterative or relative or non-linear
origination of general and particular terms as a natural process of thought and
indeed reasoning. It must be noted, however, that Hamilton is here attempting
to foreground not the relativity of concepts but rather, that concepts considered
intensively enable the natural tendencies in reasoning and thought generally ‘to
reason from the simple and general to the complex and individual [and also] re-
verse the process, and [. . . ] reason from the complex and individual to the simple
and the general’ — this, he clearly sees as a particular virtue of the intensive
quantity, namely, that, as contradistinguished from the extensive quantity, the
reversals in the direction of reasoning that we do in fact or naturally make, can
only legitimately be carried out with regard to the intensive quantity.
Although the somewhat fuzzy logic of this notion of Involution within, or charac-
terising, the relation of the internal components of a given concept, or its intension
(as contradistinguished from Subordination in extension), is not handled as fully
as one might wish, it does seem that Hamilton is attempting to ground in an in-
determinate reality of chaos or confusion, concepts as originating in, wrested out
of, and partaking in a signiﬁcant degree of relativism. However, I would claim
that, though ﬂuxive, quasi-organic, and arguably suggesting an indivisible and
interminably iterative process, the involution relation that Hamilton seems to be
suggesting inheres within a concept’s intension, warrants, or is itself peculiarly
suggestive of, the distinction of constituent parts comprising wholes and the de-
fensibility and inherent reasonableness of regarding such parts as being contained
in the whole such that their relations one to the other may be understood as nec-
essary and as such fundamental to Pure Logic as the science of the necessary laws
of thought. The naturalness of this reasoning as grounded in the notion that the
parts of parts involve and are involved, and thereby permit reversing the process of
reasoning, is brought out or hinted at by Hamilton in several ways. For example,
just what he seems to think of as Involution may be being suggested in what he
says about partes integrantes with regard to Mathematical, or the Quantitative, or
Integrant Whole (see LL.I.204). Perhaps the naturalness and primacy Hamilton
is trying to claim of intension, as contrasted to the factitiousness of extension,
is being indicated in the natural involutions of physical entities as we encounter
them in, say, the human body, but also as may be postulated of all material phe-
nomena as the relative, plural, and confused constituents of consciousness which,
36See, Lectures on Metaphysics, II.319-27.

130
Ralph Jessop
conditioned by thought, we naturally or inevitably collect together (or grasp) as
resembling particulars. Organised into wholes, as part of the natural processes of
thought and our conditioning propensity to cognise, these wholes avail, and indeed
require, a corresponding analysis into their particulars and a relation of these to
the concept they constitute, our act of grasping or even perceiving them as col-
lected together into the unity of the concept, being the synthetic reconstruction
of the particulars constituting it, albeit to some degree provisionally. For Hamil-
ton, it is as though a power of the mind — the faculty of comparison – is itself
reinforced by and originates in the involution relationship as something that at
once suggests the greater chaos or confused complexity into which the involutions
of the parts seem to be capable of collapsing, while also suggesting the sharper
discrimination into non-involved particulars that are thereby not constitutive of
but which rather divide a concept into its extensive quantity. If so, Involution at
once suggests and is itself the suggestion of what a concept’s intension may be
evolved into by the native processes of conception and its negative corollary, the
reasoning of an analysis only prevented from disintegrating into inﬁnite divisibility
by an aptly pragmatic limitation on the extent of this science’s explicitness, which
Hamilton explicitly imposes (see LL.I.192-3; 210).
But in order to go at least some way towards understanding why Hamilton is
now claiming that the reasoning of intension is natural, or has a basis in reality
— and indeed in a reality that he regards as otherwise confused or chaotic and
theoretically if not practically open to inﬁnite divisibility in its unconditioned state
as the raw and unorganised mere phenomena of consciousness — and hence why
he regards intension as prior or superior to the quantity of extension, we need to
note at least something of the extent to which he regards the history of logic since
Aristotle as ﬂawed. We also need to note that Hamilton quite pointedly regards his
prioritisation of intension as a signiﬁcant contribution towards placing the keystone
in the arch of the Aristotelian logic. He claims that logicians following Aristotle
rather surprisingly neglected the process of reasoning to do with intension, even
though they explicitly stated and relied upon the axiom: ‘The character of the
character is the character of the thing; or, The predicate of the predicate is the
predicate of the subject’ (LL.I.218). However, according to Hamilton, Aristotle
understood the application of this axiom:
In fact I think it even possible to show in detail, that his whole analysis
of the syllogism has reference to both quantities, and that the great
abstruseness of his Prior Analytics, the treatise in which he develops
the general forms of reasoning, arises from this,–that he has endeav-
oured to rise to formulæ suﬃciently general to express at once what
was common to both kinds;–an attempt so far beyond the intelligence
of subsequent logicians, that they have wholly misunderstood and per-
verted his doctrine. They understood this doctrine, only as applied to
the reasoning in extensive quantity; and in relation to this kind of rea-
soning, they have certainly made palpable and easy what in Aristotle
is abstract and diﬃcult. But then they did not observe that Aristotle’s

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
131
doctrine applies to two species, of which they only consider one. [. . . ].
This mistake,–this partial conception of the science,–is common to all
logicians, ancient and modern: for in so far as I am aware, no one has
observed, that of the quantities of comprehension and extension, each
aﬀords a reasoning proper to itself; and no one has noticed that the
doctrine of Aristotle has reference indiﬀerently to both. (LL.I.218-9).
3
DOCTRINE OF JUDGMENTS
In the proposition Men are animals, we should be allowed to determine
whether the term men means all or some men,–whether the term ani-
mals means all or some animals; in short, to quantify both the subject
and predicate of the proposition. This postulate [‘To state explicitly
what is thought implicitly’] applies both to Propositions and to Syllo-
gisms. (NA.LL.II.252).
In elucidating some aspects of Hamilton’s ‘Schemes of the Two Quantities’ table
and certain features of his doctrine of Concepts in the previous section, I have
so far been indicating something of how his development and understanding of
extension and intension underpinned his quantiﬁcation of the predicate. Before
examining the quantiﬁcation itself, we need to look at a selection of some of the
other construction work.
By ‘judgment’ Hamilton means ‘proposition’ or the forming of a proposition,
such as ‘water rusts iron’, by means of the process of judging (LL.I.227). What
is relative within a judgment or proposition has at least the appearance of being
much more stable than the relativity of concepts discussed at various stages above,
though the very fact that Hamilton calls attention to propositions as judgments,
keeps in focus how it is that a proposition may be regarded as at least related
to some mental agency, a judgment being the product of the act of judging (akin
to a concept being the product of conception). Introducing his students to the
standard terms of ‘subject’, ‘predicate’, and ‘copula’, he points out that the subject
is the determined or qualiﬁed notion, whereas the predicate is the determining or
qualifying notion, the relation of determination between them being signiﬁed by
the copula. He therefore deﬁnes a proposition as:
the product of that act in which we pronounce, that, of two notions
thought as subject and as predicate, the one does or does not consti-
tute a part of the other, either in the quantity of extension, or in the
quantity of Comprehension. (LL.I.229).
Hamilton is clearly regarding subject and predicate as being held in a relation
of quantity in accordance with the axiom that a part of a part is a part of the
whole, but he is also, consistent with his treatment of extension and intension,
incorporating both of these quantities, and this is how he does so:

132
Ralph Jessop
The ﬁrst great distinction of Judgments is taken from the relation of
Subject and Predicate, as reciprocally whole and part. If the Subject
or determined notion be viewed as the containing whole, we have an
intensive or Comprehensive proposition; if the Predicate or determin-
ing notion be viewed as the containing whole, we have an extensive
proposition. (LL.I.231-2).
Hence, whether a proposition is extensive or intensive depends on how we view
the Subject and the Predicate. Of course Hamilton acknowledges that in single
propositions it is rarely clear which way the proposition is to be viewed, since
it is generally unclear whether it is the Subject or the Predicate that is being
regarded as the containing whole. However, according to Hamilton, ‘It is only
when propositions are connected together into syllogism, that it becomes evident
whether the subject or the predicate be the whole in or under which the other is
contained’ — he thus regards the distinction of propositions into extensive and
intensive as highly general, though of great importance, since ‘it is only in subor-
dination to this distinction that the other distinctions [he is about to introduce]
are valid’ (LL.I.233). The other distinctions that relate to the extensive/intensive
distinction with regard to the subject and predicate relation may be summed up
as: the distinction between Categorical (or simple propositions, in which, follow-
ing the practice of Aristotle’s followers, the predicate is either simply aﬃrmed or
denied of the subject, as in ‘A is B’, or ‘A is not B’) and Conditional propositions,
Conditional propositions being further distinguished into Hypothetical (‘if A then
B’), Disjunctive (‘A or B’, or ‘D is either B, or C, or A’), and Dilemmatic or
Hypothetico-disjunctive (‘If X is A, it is either B or C’) (see LL.I.233-242).
Although it is crucial to grasp that Hamilton is showing his students how in
principle the subject and predicate terms may be viewed as reciprocally related to
one another in any given proposition as expressions solely concerned with a whole-
part relationship, either in extension or intension, it is needless to elucidate this
any further here. More importantly, is Hamilton’s major point of diﬀerence with
Aristotle and ‘The doctrine of Logicians’ concerning the division of propositions
into four classes or species, since it is in this that Hamilton may be said to be
making his most explicit statement within his Lectures so far, concerning how
his system and much if not all of his previous discourse on logic has been working
towards and in turn will rely upon a thoroughgoing quantiﬁcation of the predicate,
a quantiﬁcation which notably traditional logic had failed to achieve due, not only
to exclusively focusing on extension, but also to the establishment of a class of
proposition that admitted vagueness or ambiguity with regard to the subject term’s
quantiﬁcation and thereby disabled quantiﬁcation by failing to make explicit the
quantity pertaining to the subject term which, according to Hamilton, is ‘involved
in every actual thought’ though at times not in its linguistic expression (LL.I.244).
But, as we shall see, for Hamilton, as this notion that quantity is either explicit or
implicit enables the removal of a class of propositions in which the subject term is
not quantiﬁed in expression, it also underpins the whole notion that the predicate
term’s quantity may also be made explicit.

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
133
Following Aristotle, logicians traditionally divided propositions with regard to
their extensive quantity by categorising them as: Universal or General; Particular;
Individual or Singular; and, Indeﬁnite. According to Hamilton these terms were
applied with the following meanings: in Universal propositions ‘the subject is
taken in its whole extension’; in Particular propositions ‘the subject is taken in
a part, indeﬁnitely, of its extension’; in Individual propositions ‘the subject is
at a minimum of extension’; and in Indeﬁnite propositions, ‘the subject is not
[. . . ] overtly declared to be either universal, particular, or individual’ (LL.I.243).
With regard to quantiﬁcation generally, Hamilton claims that commonly only the
Subject is regulated, whereas the predicate ‘Aristotle and the logicians do not
allow to be aﬀected by quantity; at least they hold it to be always Particular
in an Aﬃrmative, and Universal in a Negative’ (LL.I.244). However, he claims
that this doctrine is untenable, incomplete, that it resulted in confusion, and that
this confusion and incompleteness is partly due to logicians paying insuﬃcient
heed to the fundamental principle of explicitness that I explained earlier. At this
stage in his lectures, Hamilton might have simply gone straight to quantifying
the predicate to show that, by making the quantiﬁcation of the predicate term
explicit, it is no longer requisite that we consider whether the proposition is being
considered extensively or intensively. However, he is much more careful to take
his students through the evolution of his logic as it involves a critique and a
signiﬁcant modiﬁcation of traditional logic’s assumption that the predicate term
in an aﬃrmative proposition is always Particular whereas in a negative proposition
it is always Universal.
By contrast with the Aristotelian doctrine of the logicians, which divides propo-
sitions into the four classes or species of Universal, Particular, Individual, and
Indeﬁnite, Hamilton proposes that they should be diﬀerentiated quite diﬀerently,
and he does this largely by redeﬁning ‘indeﬁnite’ and thereby eradicating as a
distinct class traditional logic’s Indeﬁnite propositions, while retaining the notion
of indeﬁniteness as describing, within any given whole, an indeterminate range
of quantities suﬃciently competent to be classed as the quantiﬁer of particularity
we normally express by the term ‘some’ — in other words Hamilton’s ‘indeﬁnite’
constitutes that species of judgments/propositions the logicians formerly called
‘Particular’.
His redeﬁnition of ‘indeﬁnite’ seems to amount to this: for the logicians ‘indeﬁ-
nite’ meant little more than that the extensive quantity of the subject (universal,
particular, or individual) was unexpressed and thus indeﬁnite in the sense of being
unclear or inexplicit; by contrast with this, for Hamilton, ‘indeﬁnite’ refers more
directly to the quantity expressed by the terms ‘some’, ‘many’, and various other
expressions so long as they designate ‘some indeﬁnite number less than the whole’.
Hence, his deﬁnition of ‘indeﬁnite’ refers to any quantity within a whole, ranging
from (possibly) a singular to a number less than the whole to which the indeﬁnite
term refers (LL.I.246). It should perhaps be noted here that Hamilton’s deﬁnition
of ‘indeﬁnite’ may not at ﬁrst sight seem to diﬀerentiate itself suﬃciently from the
quantity of Individual judgments or propositions, nor from Universal propositions.

134
Ralph Jessop
As Fogelin claims, Hamilton ‘held complicated views on the quantiﬁer some’, in
which, while he sometimes referred to ‘some’ as meaning ‘some but not all’, he
also used the deﬁnition ‘some perhaps all’, and as Fogelin argues, there seem to
be good grounds for saying that Hamilton purposely incorporates both readings
of ‘some’ (Fogelin, 153).37
These complicated views on the meaning of Particulars, as that class of proposi-
tions which are indeﬁnite, only come to the fore in Hamilton’s ‘New Analytic’ (see
NA.LL.II.279-80). However, that by ‘some’ Hamilton meant ‘some but not all’,
and that he distinguishes between Individual and Particular Propositions does
seem to be fairly clear if we conﬁne attention solely to Lecture XIII. Not only
does he give little or no indication in Lecture XIII that ‘some’ might mean ‘some
perhaps all’, but he also makes it very clear that a proposition may be expressed
using the indeﬁnite article, and thereby be classed as a Particular proposition, as in
one of his examples, ‘An Englishman generalised the law of gravitation’; whereas,
when expressed using a proper name, it will be an Individual proposition, as in
‘Newton generalised the law of gravitation’ (LL.I.247). This, however, merely il-
lustrates what is required to transform an ordinary language statement from being
a Particular proposition to an Individual one and Hamilton’s explicitness principle
ought to allow that all such indeﬁnite propositions, not involving a plurality, must
be expressible as individual or, where the ‘some’ really means ‘all’, as universal
propositions.
Though Hamilton may not have squarely tackled certain problems to do with
his deﬁnition of the quantiﬁer ‘some’, it is at least possible to detect in his virtual
eradication of the traditional logic’s class of Indeﬁnite propositions, that he is
making the treatment of the quantity of propositions more internally consistent
by accommodating the indeﬁnite within Particular propositions by removing the
obstruction to them being accommodated within Particular propositions, namely,
the mistaken condition of their failure to express whether they were universal,
particular, or individual — a failure that, Hamilton might have pointed out, was
entirely due to the logicians not grasping that, in an extensive proposition, where
the quantity of the subject is unexpressed it must either be a part (and hence
particular) of the predicate as whole; or, in an intensive proposition, its quantity
must be capable of being expressed as the containing whole determined by the
predicate as part of that whole. To re-state the quotation given earlier: ‘If the
Subject or determined notion be viewed as the containing whole, we have an
intensive or Comprehensive proposition; if the Predicate or determining notion be
viewed as the containing whole, we have an extensive proposition’ (LL.I.231-2).
By itself this will not imply what quantity ought to be appended to the subject
of a given proposition where that quantity remains unknown. However, this is
37Robert J. Fogelin, ‘Hamilton’s Quantiﬁcation of the Predicate’ in, Philosophical Interpre-
tations (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992), ﬁrst published in Philosophical Quarterly, 26
(1976), 149-65. All references to Fogelin are to this edition. Fogelin also supplies in this edition a
second article entitled ‘Hamilton’s Theory of Quantifying the Predicate — A Correction’ (166-8),
also ﬁrst published in Philosophical Quarterly, 26.

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
135
irrelevant as the traditional class of Indeﬁnite propositions regards the proposition
in extension alone, and as I have claimed in support of Hamilton, viewing the
traditional Indeﬁnite proposition as extensive, determines that the subject term
must be particular in relation to the predicate term as the determining whole
containing the subject term. What Hamilton has achieved here is the removal of an
anomalous class of propositions that is only possible by means of his understanding
of the whole-part relationship in propositions viewed extensively and intensively.
However, although much more might be said about all this, there is another crucial
factor to removing the traditional class of problematic and confusing indeﬁnite or
indeterminate propositions, namely, his introduction of the terms ‘predesignate’
and ‘preindesignate’.
It is easy to see how the application of these terms to the traditional class of
Indeﬁnite propositions warrants a discrimination between propositions that may
thereby be deemed to be either logically adequate or inadequate. When a propo-
sition (presumably considered as an external expression that may thus be more or
less precise, as contradistinguished from a judgment, construed here as the mental
process) articulates its quantity by preﬁxing terms such as ‘all’ and ‘some’, this
is a predesignate proposition; whereas when a proposition does not articulate its
quantity, the proposition is called by Hamilton, preindesignate. Hence, the subject
and predicate terms of a proposition may also be either predesignate or preindes-
ignate terms. But, for Hamilton, though in a proposition’s external expression
one or both of its terms may be preindesignate (the quantity often being ‘elided in
its expression’), the unexpressed quantity is always involved in thought (deﬁnite
or indeﬁnite ‘quantity being involved in every actual thought’, though not always
marked by a quantiﬁer) (NA.LL.II.250; LL.I.244). Hence, adhering to his princi-
ple of explicitness, such preindesignate terms may be translated into predesignate
ones — which is to say, that unexpressed quantities may always be expressed at
least in principle and indeed should be expressed in adherence to the fundamental
principle of explicitness. One might therefore say that, with regard to the tradi-
tional class of Indeﬁnite propositions, if in fact it is impossible to determine the
predesignate term(s) (as quantiﬁed in thought) of a given statement purporting
to be a proposition but which is somehow quite indeterminate in its meaning by
means of its use of a preindesignate term(s) (hence unquantiﬁed in expression),
then such a statement must be deemed to be non-propositional and inadequate
for consideration within a reasoning or argument.
The diﬀerences between propositions, with regard to quantity, according to
Hamilton, arise, on the one hand, ‘from the necessary condition of the Internal
Thought’ (when we consider them speciﬁcally as Judgments), and on the other
hand, ‘merely from the accidental circumstances of [a proposition’s] External Ex-
pression’ (when we consider them as propositions) (LL.I.243). Thus, he charac-
terises three classes of proposition as properly adequate for logical consideration:
Universal judgments or propositions, ‘in which the whole number of objects within
a sphere or class are judged of,–as All men are mortal, or Every man is mortal’;
Individual judgments or propositions, in which ‘the whole of a certain sphere is

136
Ralph Jessop
judged of, but in which sphere there is found only a single object, or collection
of single objects,–as Catiline is ambitious,–The twelve apostles were inspired’, the
individual(s) in question here constituting what Hamilton describes, with possible
oblique reference to his notion of involution, ‘determinate wholeness or totality
in the form of oneness [or] indivisible unity’; and, Particular judgments or propo-
sitions, ‘in which, among the objects within a certain sphere or class, we judge
concerning some indeﬁnite number less than the whole,–as Some men are virtu-
ous–Many boys are courageous–Most women are compassionate. The indeﬁnite
plurality, within the totality, being here denoted by the words some, many, most’
(LL.I.245-6). As he explains by means of reference to the example cited above
concerning the conversion of a Particular proposition (‘An Englishman . . . ’) into
an Individual proposition (‘Newton . . . ’), although the logicians are right to treat
Universals and Individuals as convertible, their correspondence one with the other
is not merely due to ‘the oneness of their subject’, but rather: ‘The whole distinc-
tion consists in this,–that, in Universals and in Individual Judgments, the num-
ber of the objects judged of is thought by us as deﬁnite; whereas, in Particular
Judgments, the number of such objects is thought by us as indeﬁnite’ (LL.I.246).
Hence, the major distinction between propositions in terms of quantity is between
the deﬁnite (universal or individual) and the indeﬁnite (particular). This distinc-
tion between deﬁnite and indeﬁnite quantity, Hamilton declares most forcefully in
his ‘New Analytic’: ‘deﬁnite and indeﬁnite are the only quantities of which we
ought to hear in Logic; for it is only as indeﬁnite that particular, it is only as
deﬁnite that individual and general, quantities have any (and the same) logical
avail’ (NA.LL.II.250).
Thus, bearing in mind that, since Universals and Individuals with regard to
quantity, constitute one class of deﬁnite propositions, whereas Particulars consti-
tute the only alternative quantity and thus class of indeﬁnite propositions, all that
needs to be added to this twofold deﬁnite (Universal and Individual) and indeﬁnite
(Particular) distinction between propositional forms to yield the traditional (yet
Hamiltonized) fourfold distinction, is the standard distinction between aﬃrmation
and negation, known as the quality of the proposition. Hamilton brieﬂy outlines
the notion of quality, which he regards as an unfortunately ambiguous and yet gen-
erally accepted term to denote aﬃrmation and negation (LL.I.250). Important to
his quantiﬁcation of the predicate, he sensibly argues against some contemporary
and earlier logicians who held that aﬃrmation and negation properly belong to
the copula and not to the subject nor to the predicate terms. Drawing attention to
the non-literal or non-grammatical sense in which the copula should be regarded
as expressing the form of the relation between subject and predicate, he argues
against certain previous and some modern logicians, that negation does not belong
to the predicate term but rather to the copula, allowing him to treat subject and
predicate as being held together in a reciprocal relation of whole to part, such that
in a negative judgment a part is taken out of a whole, whereas in an aﬃrmative
judgment a part is put into a whole (see LL.I.251-4). All that thus belongs to the
subject and to the predicate, for Hamilton, is their respective deﬁnite (Universal or

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
137
Individual) or indeﬁnite (Particular) quantities; but as this enables a distinction
between propositional forms according to their quantity (deﬁnite or indeﬁnite),
traditionally given as Universal or Particular, when these are both distinguished
according to their quality (aﬃrmative or negative), this results in the traditional
fourfold A, E, I, O distinction of propositional forms: A (universal aﬃrmative); E
(universal negative); I (particular aﬃrmative); O (particular negative).
He represents the forms A, E, I, O by using simple circle diagrams (see LL.I.255).
I shall not provide these since they merely illustrate the quantity and quality as-
pects of the four propositional forms and since I shall shortly provide one of Hamil-
ton’s later tables from the ‘New Analytic’ which, by deleting one of the diagrams
as redundant and adding one that expresses co-extension, incorporates these circle
diagrams into a new set of four ﬁgures to which he relates both the traditional
forms A, E, I, O, and his additional forms. Although it is highly likely that Hamil-
ton pointed out to his students the quantiﬁcations of the predicate and the subject
terms implied by the diagrams, for example, that the Universal Aﬃrmative (A)
in traditional logic implied an indeﬁnite or Particular predicate, the text does
not at this stage make any explicit reference either to the assumptions concerning
quantiﬁcation nor does it advance the thoroughgoing quantiﬁcation that results in
Hamilton doubling the traditional four propositional forms A, E, I, O. It must be
noted, however, that much later in the Lectures he does assert that ‘The nineteen
useful [syllogistic] moods admitted by logicians, may [. . . ] by the quantiﬁcation of
the predicate, be still further simpliﬁed, by superseding the signiﬁcance of Figure’
(LL.I.402). Although his quantiﬁcation of the predicate does not seem to have
been made fully explicit, he was clearly at the very least intimating aspects of it
to his students some years before his controversy with de Morgan.
Lecture XIV is the last lecture on Hamilton’s doctrine of Judgments. Before he
terminates the lecture, he makes at least one signiﬁcant claim worth mentioning,
namely, his rejection of Modal propositions as a separate class and his argument
that, for example, the modal proposition ‘Alexander conquered Darius honourably’
ought to be treated as merely a complex proposition in which the mode is regarded
as part of the predicate. As Hamilton points out, the predicate can be more or
less complex and there is no need for the Aristotelian logic’s modal propositions
as ‘modiﬁed by the four attributions of Necessity, Impossibility, Contingence, and
Possibility. [. . . ] in regard to these, the case is precisely the same; the mode is
merely a part of the predicate, and if so, nothing can be more unwarranted than on
this accidental, on this extra-logical, circumstance to establish a great division of
logical propositions’ (LL.I.257). Once again Whately comes under ﬁre concerning
this, as also when Hamilton moves on to discuss and outline some basic points
concerning the subject of the conversion of judgments or propositions, such as
when the subject and predicate are transposed in a categorical proposition (see
LL.I.258–9; 262–3). I shall come back to the subject of conversion brieﬂy later,
but for the time being I shall leave Hamilton’s lectures and the commencement of
his introduction to reasoning and the syllogism, and instead leap forward to his
later work in the fragmentary but nonetheless insightful and more mature work, his

138
Ralph Jessop
‘New Analytic of Logical Forms’. For, within Lecture XIV Hamilton has arrived at
a signiﬁcant stage in laying the groundwork for his quantiﬁcation of the predicate.
Although by this stage he has yet much more to construct, it would seem that he
has reached a critical point that has by now established a warrant for providing
the thoroughgoing quantiﬁcation that I shall illustrate in the following section.
4
QUANTIFICATION OF THE PREDICATE
THIS NEW Analytic is intended to complete and simplify the old —
to place the keystone in the Aristotelic Arch. (NA.LL.II.249)
It is abundantly clear in the ‘New Analytic’ that Hamilton’s principle of explic-
itness, or rather the thoroughness of his adherence to this principle, is a major
driving force behind his quantiﬁcation of the predicate. He cites the postulate
or principle as something insisted upon by Logic, but insuﬃciently adhered to by
previous logicians, claiming on the basis of this principle, ‘that, logically, we ought
to take into account the quantity, always understood in thought, but usually, and
for manifest reasons, elided in its expression, not only of the subject, but also of
the predicate, of a judgment’ (NA.LL.II.250; and see p. 252). Making explicit
the quantities of both the subject and the predicate in a judgment or proposition
facilitates regarding the subject and predicate terms as comprising ‘an equation’.
It is important to understand how it can be said that the whole-part relationship
in extension or intension may be thought of as constituting either an equation or
non-equation. Though in some places Hamilton does not seem to be as clear as
he might have been on this point, at other places his explanation is substantially
more helpful than the often rather submerged hints in the Lectures. For example,
in the ‘New Analytic’ Hamilton’s treatment of the subject of the Conversion of
Categorical propositions clariﬁes what he thinks erroneous in traditional logic’s
Conversion of propositions with regard to quantity.
He regards the doctrine of Conversion as ‘beset with errors’ but that these errors
are generated from two principal ones — Hamilton is worth quoting at length here:
The First cardinal error is,–That the quantities are not converted with
the quantiﬁed terms. For the real terms compared in the Convertend
[the original proposition], and which, of course, ought to reappear with-
out change, except of place, in the Converse [the proposition converted],
are not the naked, but the quantiﬁed terms. This is evident from the
following considerations:
1o, The Terms of a Proposition are only terms as they are terms of
relation; and the relation here is the relation of comparison.
2o, As the Propositional Terms are terms of comparison, so they are
only compared as Quantities,–quantities relative to each other.
An
Aﬃrmative Proposition is simply the declaration of an equation, a
Negative Proposition is simply the declaration of a non-equation, of its

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
139
terms. To change, therefore, the quantity of either, or of both Subject
and Predicate, is to change their correlation,–the point of comparison;
and to exchange their quantities, if diﬀerent, would be to invert the
terminal interdependence, that is, to make the less the greater, and
the greater the less.
3o, The Quantity of the Proposition in Conversion remains always the
same; that is, the absolute quantity of the Converse must be exactly
equal to that of the Convertend.
It was only from overlooking the
quantity of the predicate [. . . ] that two propositions, exactly equal
in quantity, in fact the same proposition, perhaps, transposed, were
called the one universal, the other particular, by exclusive reference to
the quantity of the subject.
4o, Yet was it of no consequence, in a logical point of view, which of
the notions collated were Subject or Predicate; and their comparison,
with the consequent declaration of their mutual inclusion or exclu-
sion, that is, of aﬃrmation or negation, of no more real diﬀerence than
the assertions,–London is four hundred miles distant from Edinburgh,–
Edinburgh is four hundred miles distant from London. In fact, though
logicians have been in use to place the subject ﬁrst, the predicate last,
in their examples of propositions, this is by no means the case in ordi-
nary language, where, indeed, it is frequently even diﬃcult to ascertain
which is the determining and which the determined notion. [. . . .]
The Second cardinal error of the logicians is, the not considering that
the Predicate has always a quantity in thought, as much as the Sub-
ject; although this quantity be frequently not explicitly enounced, as
unnecessary in the common employment of language; for the deter-
mining notion or predicate being always thought as at least adequate
to, or co-extensive with, the subject or determined notion, it is sel-
dom necessary to express this, and language tends ever to elide what
may safely be omitted. But this necessity recurs, the moment that, by
conversion, the predicate becomes the subject of the proposition; and
to omit its formal statement is to degrade Logic from the science of
the necessities of thought, to an idle subsidiary of the ambiguities of
speech. [. . . .]
1o, That the predicate is as extensive as the subject is easily shown.
Take the proposition,–All animal is man, or, All animals are men. This
we are conscious is absurd, though we make the notion man or men as
wide as possible; for it does not mend the matter to say,–All animal is
all man, or, All animals are all men. We feel it to be equally absurd as
if we said,–All man is all animal, or, All men are all animals. Here we
are aware that the subject and predicate cannot be made coextensive.
If we would get rid of the absurdity, we must bring the two notions
into coextension, by restricting the wider. If we say,–Man is animal,

140
Ralph Jessop
(Homo est animal), we think, though we do not overtly enounce it, All
man is animal. And what do we mean here by animal? We do not
think,–All, but Some, animal. And then we can make this indiﬀerently
either subject or predicate. We can think,–we can say, Some animal is
man, that is, Some or All Man; and, e converso,–Man (some or all) is
animal, viz. some animal.
It thus appears that there is a necessity in all cases for thinking the
predicate, at least, as extensive as the subject.
Whether it be ab-
solutely, that is, out of relation, more extensive, is generally of no
consequence; and hence the common reticence of common language,
which never expresses more than can be understood — which always,
in fact, for the sake of brevity, strains at ellipsis. (NA.LL.II.257-9)
This lengthy quotation brings several things to our attention: that Hamilton re-
gards the quantifying terms as integrant components of the ‘naked’ terms or con-
cepts or judgments used in any given proposition — and hence whenever the
‘naked’ terms are transposed in some conversion, their clothing (the quantiﬁer)
goes with them; the terms of a proposition only exist qua terms as related to one
another by a comparison of their respective quantities, and that their quantities
will be identical or equated in an aﬃrmative proposition, non-identical or not
equated, but rather related by some conﬂiction to do with their quantities, in a
negative proposition — violation of this relation of comparison or equation/non-
equation is to change without warrant the relation being asserted in their very
predication; that it is mistaken to deem a proposition to be Universal or Par-
ticular solely by attending to the status of the quantiﬁcation of its subject; and,
Hamilton’s reliance on his principle or postulate of explicitness as the fundamental
principle of Logic is invoked as warranting exposure of what must (on pain of oth-
erwise thinking an absurdity) be thought with regard to the predicate’s quantity
and thereby its relation of equation or non-equation with the quantiﬁed subject.
This last point concerning how in thought if not in linguistic expression (due to
our propensity in linguistic expression to elide quantities into the ‘naked’ terms)
strongly suggests a mental and in this sense private language of subject-predicate
equation/non-equation, a mental relation of the respective quantities of both sub-
ject and predicate, that is often but not always behind the scenes and tantamount
to the fundamental necessary laws of logic themselves. However, Hamilton seems
to be at pains to describe these laws as in some sense natural, informing actual
discourse, and in turn operating as the standard against which rhetorical utter-
ance may be tested and to which rhetoric may be reduced without attempting to
modify logic’s laws to suit grammar: ‘We should not do as the logicians have been
wont,–introduce and deal with [‘the rhetorical enouncements of common speech’]
in their grammatical integrity; for this would be to swell out and deform our sci-
ence with mere grammatical accidents; and to such fortuitous accrescences the
formidable volume, especially of the older Logics, is mainly owing. In fact, a large
proportion of the scholastic system is merely grammatical’ (NA.LL.II.262). The

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
141
tendency in Hamilton’s logic to correct and simplify traditional logic, thus marks
a major departure from regarding logic as an attempt to capture the vagaries and
complexities of grammatical rules, real-life argumentation, and rhetoric in order
to keep logic focused on the laws of necessary inference. However, although this
approach warrants the unnatural sounding expressions that result from quantify-
ing the predicate, as in ‘All men are some mortal’, Hamilton is not such a purist as
to eschew utterly the notion of Pure Logic’s relevance to and capacity to translate
‘the rhetorical enouncements of common speech’, nor is his quantiﬁcation of the
predicate justiﬁed solely by means of reference to a merely dogmatic assertion that
quantity is ‘always understood in thought’ though often elided in its linguistic ex-
pression, since his arguments in support of quantifying the predicate incorporate
appeals to common instances in which the quantiﬁcation is made explicit: ‘in fact,
ordinary language quantiﬁes the Predicate so often as this determination becomes
of the smallest import’ (NA.LL.II.259).
Be all that as it may, it becomes clear in the ‘New Analytic’ that one of Hamil-
ton’s major achievements with regard to the complex and, as he often asserts,
confusing doctrines, rules, and practices of the logicians has to do with how his
system eﬀectually sweeps away various diﬀerent types of conversion. With the
establishment of his quantiﬁcation of the predicate the only defensible type of
conversion is the simple conversion he advocates.
His simple conversion relies
wholly upon the predicate’s quantiﬁcation being made as explicit as the quan-
tiﬁcation of the original subject term. Hence, simple conversion merely involves
whatever transposition of terms is possible so long as the respective quantiﬁers of
the original subject and predicate terms remain attached to these terms in order
to retain in conversion any given proposition’s meaning as an equation or non-
equation of the quantities of the two terms in the original proposition. Over and
again Hamilton emphasises the erroneousness of earlier species of conversion, both
with regard to aﬃrmative and negative propositions (see NA.LL.II.256-76). The
logicians had missed ‘the one straight road’ of conversion, simple conversion, and
Hamilton makes the ambitious but clearly defensible claim that if, by means of
his quantiﬁcation of the predicate, he is right in having reduced all species of con-
version to the simple conversion he advocates, then ‘the whole doctrine of logical
Conversion is superseded as operose and imperfect, as useless and erroneous. The
systems, new and old, must stand or fall with their doctrines of the Conversion of
propositions’ (NA.LL.II.276).
Though some elements of Hamilton’s construction of his system of quantifying
the predicate have been overlooked above, I think I have given an ample outline of
his notions concerning the quantiﬁcation and how this radically supersedes much
of the traditional logic while yet incorporating and building upon at least some
part of it. However, we now need to look at Hamilton’s quantiﬁcation procedure
in some more detail and the best place to commence this is by examining the table
supplied at Appendix V section (d) in the second volume of his Lectures on Logic,
which, with only a few minor adjustments, I have replicated below as Table 2.
The only signiﬁcant modiﬁcation I have made to Hamilton’s table, is to adopt

142
Ralph Jessop
Table 2. Application of Doctrine of Quantiﬁed Predicate to Propositions
New Propositional Forms — Notation
Fig.l.
Fig. 2.
Fig. 4.
Fig. 3.
Affirmative.
(1) 
[A
(ii)
(3)
(iv)
Negative,
(v)
(6)
(vii)
[A
[Ii
[I
[A
[A
[I i
fA]
f l ]
A]
f l ]
nA]
nl]
l A ]
C
C
A
C
C
c
B
(8) 
[I n I] 
C.
: F 
All Triangle is all Trilateral [fig. 1].
A 
All Triangle is some Figure (A) [fig. 2].
:C 
Some Figure is all Triangle [fig. 2].
•, B 
Some Triangle is some Equilateral (I) [fig. 4].
: D 
Any Triangle is not any Square (E) [fig. 3].
•, B 
Any Triangle is not some Equilateral [fig. 4].
: C 
Some Equilateral is not any Triangle (O) [fig. 4].
, B 
Some Triangle is not some Equilateral [tig. 4].
Key:
1,3,6,8 
= Hamilton's forms
ii, iv, v, vii 
= Aristotelic or traditional forms. Hence, using the scholastic letters A, E, I, O: A
(Universal affirmative) = ii; E (Universal negative) = v; I (Particular affirmative) =
iv; O (Particular negative) = vii.
A = universal; I = particular; f = affirmation; n = negation;, = some; : = all.
= the affirmative copula (is)
= the negative copula (is not)
The two arrow lines above indicate which of the terms is subject and which predicate thus: where the
proposition is being read in Extension, the thick end of the arrow line denotes the subject, the thin end
the predicate; where the proposition is being read in Intension, subject and predicate are reversed and
hence the thick end of the arrow line denotes the predicate, the thin end the subject.
To illustrate how to read Hamilton's symbolic representation of a proposition in Table 2, note that the
following should be read thus:
C: B»^~,A
Extensively: All C is some A — i.e. All C is contained tinder some A
Intensively: Some A is all C - i.e. Some A contains in it all C.

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
143
his later method of symbolising the Universal and Particular terms using the letters
A for Universal, and I for Particular (enclosed in square brackets). This alteration
should also be of some help to readers who may wish to make comparisons between
Table 2 and Hamilton’s more detailed ‘Table of the Mutual Relations of the Eight
Propositional Forms on Either System of Particularity’ to which I shall refer later
(see NA.LL.II.284).
Table 2 is interesting in several ways. Firstly, the various conﬁgurations of A
(universal/deﬁnite) and I (particular/indeﬁnite) under Aﬃrmative and Negative
regularly display all of the possible permutations of a thorough quantiﬁcation of
both subject and predicate as neatly displayed in the symbols given in square
brackets such as [A f A]. Secondly, the arrow lines indicate which of the terms
is the subject and which the predicate, depending on whether the proposition is
to be read as extensive or intensive — hence, the terms may be easily transposed
according to Hamilton’s method of simple conversion without any alteration in
the proposition’s meaning using the same symbolic notation for both an extensive
and an intensive reading (though it must be said that by this stage in Hamil-
ton’s logic, having made so much of extension and intension to establish the dual
perspectives from which propositions may be viewed, how thus the subject and
predicate terms may be transposed, and how the number of syllogistic forms can
thereby be ampliﬁed, the extension-intension distinction seems to fall out of ac-
count as superseded by the full quantiﬁcation itself). Thirdly, using Hamilton’s
own terminology and categorisation, the four circle diagrams need to be thought
of as expressing not four but three possible principal relations of: Toto-total Coin-
clusion (ﬁg. 1); Toto-total Coexclusion (ﬁg. 3); and, brought together under one
class of counter-related relations, Incomplete Coinclusion and Coexclusion (ﬁg. 2
and ﬁg. 4). Fourthly, Hamilton’s example of proposition (1) uses the symbol ‘Γ’,
but since it only appears in this proposition, it is not immediately clear which
of the other propositions may be said to be its contradictory or negation, though
with a simple change of terms proposition (v), describing the relation of Toto-total
Coexclusion (ﬁg. 3), seems to be the most obvious contradictory of proposition (1)
as describing Toto-total Coinclusion (ﬁg. 1). These last two points require further
explanation and as we shall see this will involve some discussion of a major source
of diﬃculty and controversy concerning Hamilton’s quantiﬁcation.
Firstly, my third point above: in Hamilton’s system the relationship between
subject and predicate in each proposition needs to be thought of as a relationship
of mutuality. This becomes much more clear when we take note of Hamilton’s
‘Observations on the Mutual Relation of Syllogistic Terms in Quantity and Quality’
at Appendix V (e) in the Lectures on Logic (see NA.LL.II.285). With reference to
the circle diagrams in Table 2 above, these relations can be given as follows:
1. Toto-total Coinclusion (ﬁg. 1) — the relation of ‘coidentity, ab-
solute convertibility or reciprocation’.
2. Toto-total Coexclusion (ﬁg. 3) — the relation of ‘non-identity,
absolute inconvertibility or non-reciprocation.

144
Ralph Jessop
3. Incomplete Coinclusion and its counter-relation Incomplete Coex-
clusion (ﬁg. 2 and ﬁg. 4) — the relations of ‘partial identity and
non-identity, relative convertibility and non-convertibility, recip-
rocation and non-reciprocation’. Under this counter-related pair
of Incomplete Coinclusion and Coexclusion, Hamilton details all
of the propositional forms he regards as intermediaries between
the extreme opposites of proposition (1) Toto-total Coinclusion,
and proposition (v) Toto-total Coexclusion as:
(ii)
Toto-partial coinclusion (ﬁg. 2)
(3)
Parti-total coinclusion (ﬁg. 2)
(iv)
Parti-partial coinclusion (ﬁg. 4)
(6)
Toto-partial coexclusion (ﬁg. 4)
(vii) Parti-total coexclusion (ﬁg. 4)
(8)
Parti-partial coexclusion (ﬁg. 4)
(see NA.LL.II.285)
As Hamilton argues in his Lectures, in keeping with traditional logic a universal (A
or E) may be treated as an individual or as a universal proposition — hence, the
Toto-total Coinclusion and Coexclusion relations represented in Table 2’s propo-
sition (1) [ﬁg.
1], and proposition (v) [ﬁg.
3] respectively, may be translated
in two ways as referring either to: two single/individual entities (A and B) that
are (1) identical or (v) non-identical; or, two groups (collections) of things, all of
which in each collection (A and B) are suﬃciently resembling to be asserted as
(1) identical or (v) non-identical — hence Fogelin seems to be right to claim that
‘Hamilton develops his theory of universal propositions on an existential (rather
than a Boolean) interpretation)’, though arguably, as seems to be the case with
his speciﬁc illustrations of propositions (1) and (v), he does also accommodate a
priori truths constituted by wholes that may be thought of as having no existential
import as physical realities, the whole and thus individual that is ‘All Triangle’
existing in thought, though its ontological status, as a purely ideal whole, is by no
means unrelated to the whole that might be any more or less complete collection
of real triangles as instantiations of the unity of thought that is ‘All Triangle’ (see
Fogelin, p. 152). Incidentally, the complex and interesting topic of Hamilton’s un-
derstanding of the existential import of propositions, which I have merely touched
on here, is not perhaps as one at might ﬁrst think, since Hamilton is conscious that
‘the Logician has a right to suppose any material impossibility, any material fal-
sity; he takes no account of what is objectively impossible or false, and has a right
to assume what premises he please, provided they do not involve a contradiction
in terms’ (LL.I.322; also see, p. 338; p. 360).
Though in his Lectures Hamilton seems to keep to just one sense of the quanti-
ﬁer ‘some’ it becomes clear in the ‘New Analytic’ that particulars, though in each
and every case an indeﬁnite quantity, may be indeﬁnite in two diﬀerent senses,

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
145
either: as Indeﬁnite Deﬁnitude, in the sense expressed by ‘some, at least’ (which
is to say, ‘at least one, possibly more, but not all’); or, as Deﬁnite Indeﬁnitude, in
the sense of ‘some, at most’ (which is to say, ‘some, perhaps all, but not less than
one’) — hence, the Incomplete Coinclusion and Coexclusion relations represented
in Table 2’s ﬁg. 2 and ﬁg. 4, may also be translated in two diﬀerent ways to ac-
commodate this diﬀerence in the possible senses of the Particular quantiﬁer ‘some’.
The signiﬁcance of these points should become clear later, but in the meantime, I
want to claim that while Hamilton made a great deal of the importance of Logic
as a Pure science that must not become intermixed with any grammatical, linguis-
tic, rhetorical, or other material concern (inasmuch as this is practically possible),
as Fogelin rightly points out, ‘Hamilton acknowledges both interpretations of the
quantiﬁer some, but only insists that each interpretation must be examined in
order to capture all the everyday inference patterns a logician should study’ (see
Fogelin, p. 153). It does seem as though Hamilton is attempting to make his
system suﬃciently accommodating, such that it can encompass diﬀerent readings
of ‘some’ (or can embrace diﬀerent degrees of indeﬁniteness). His system can also
be applied, not simply to both individual and universal quantities (as the only
deﬁnite quantities), but also, on the one hand: to a priori truths or universals,
the wholeness of which is as an unanalysable individual/singular, their ontological
status being ideal and thus potentially existing only in thought, though actually
never out of relation to, real entities; and, on the other hand and more conspicu-
ously, his system can be applied to those universals that we might better describe
as general terms, the a posteriori nature of which implies that at best they are
only approximate or provisional universals which may admit of some exceptions
without nevertheless losing their applicability in a syllogistic reasoning as universal
terms.
Now, to come to the second main observation I want to make about Table 2:
Hamilton’s proposition (1) is diagrammatically represented by ﬁgure 1 in Table 2
and ﬁgures 2, 3, and 4 all look as though they illustrate relations that must stand
counter to proposition (1), but since the example Hamilton gives uses a term ‘Γ’
that he does not replicate elsewhere in Table 2, it is not immediately clear which
of the other propositions may be said to be its contradictory or negation. Figure
1 absolutely equates C with Γ and thus describes an absolute identity or Toto-
total coinclusion relation between C and Γ. This is also illustrated by Hamilton’s
example of a possible proposition that might express this relation between the
judgments or concepts C and Γ: ‘All Triangle is all Trilateral’. However, surely
both C and Γ collect together respectively the entire class of C (all possible shapes
and sizes of triangles) and Γ (all possible Trilateral ﬁgures) and, linked by the
copula, the proposition ‘All C is all Γ’ brings these two quantities into a relation
of comparison? If so, does this mean that de Morgan’s interpretation of proposi-
tion (1) is right, namely, that it expresses a complex proposition constructed by
compounding ‘every C is Γ’ and ‘every Γ is C’ (de Morgan, p. 257)?
In Fogelin’s ﬁrst attempt to express the meaning of Hamilton’s proposition
(1), he accepts de Morgan’s interpretation and (though shown using A and B

146
Ralph Jessop
as terms) Fogelin thus translates proposition (1) as ‘All C is Γ and all Γ is C’
(Fogelin, p. 151). On this reading of proposition (1), according to de Morgan, it
is contradicted by one of either proposition (6) or (vii), which we may here give,
not as in the illustrative propositions given in Hamilton’s Table 2 but, to conform
to the letter symbols used in proposition (1), as follows: (6), ‘some Γs are not
Cs’; (vii), ‘some Cs are not Γs’ — these are, for de Morgan, the contradictories of
proposition (1), ‘All C is all Γ’ (de Morgan, p. 257). To be sure, as is clearly seen
simply by comparing ﬁgure 1 (illustrating proposition (1)) and ﬁgure 4 (illustrating
propositions (6) and (vii)), both (6) and (vii) must stand in a negative relation to
proposition (1). In a helpful but somewhat complex and possibly inaccurate table,
Hamilton asserts that (6) and (vii) stand as what he calls unilateral contraries of
(1) — this seems to suggest that he would accept that (6) and (vii) do severally
contradict (1). However, as contraries neither (6) nor (vii) properly constitute a
contradiction of (1) (see, NA.LL.II.284). Now, it might at ﬁrst sight seem odd
that neither Fogelin nor (in his original critique of Hamilton) de Morgan, mention
proposition (v) as the contradictory of (1), since, translating this into symbols
consistent with (1) and in line with de Morgan’s reading, proposition (v) should
be read as stating ‘No C is Γ’ and indeed, to be consistent with de Morgan’s
translation of proposition (1), he ought to have translated this as ‘No C is Γ and
No Γ is C’. However, de Morgan does mention proposition (v) in a later footnote
as being oﬀered as the contradictory of (1) by ‘an eminent defender’ of Hamilton’s
system (de Morgan, p. 258n1). But de Morgan brushes this aside as not being
‘in the system’. Quite what de Morgan means by this is rather unclear, especially
since as Fogelin points out, ‘de Morgan is just wrong in suggesting that the system
of propositions do not pair up into proper contradictories’, and he goes on to list,
(1) and (8); (ii) and (vii); (3) and (6); (iv) and (v) as contradictory pairs. But still,
it may seem puzzling why (1) Toto-total coinclusion and (v) Toto-total coexclusion
should not be thought of as contradictories. Proposition (v)’s relation to (1), is
displayed in one place by Hamilton in such a way as to suggest that (v) and (1)
mutually contradict one another (see NA.LL.II.286). However, in another place
Hamilton gives their relation as one of bilateral contraries — this is to say that
both the Toto-total coinclusion of the terms in (1) as shown in ﬁgure 1 of Table 2,
and the Toto-total coexclusion of the terms in (v) as shown in ﬁgure 3 of Table 2,
stand not as contradictories of one another but both potentially false; which is of
course to say, that if (1) is true though (v) must be false and vice versa, since (1)
and (v) may both be false they are not strictly contradictories (see NA.LL.II.284).
Be all that as it may, as Fogelin rightly points out, the trouble lies with proposi-
tion (8) which de Morgan rejects as having no contradictory within the system. To
establish against de Morgan’s rejection of proposition (8) that Hamilton’s system
is comprehensive and not inconsistent, we need to be able to answer the question:
what is the true contradictory of (8) in the system? This is an important ques-
tion since if there is no contradictory of (8) within the system, de Morgan is right
to assert that it has not been generated from any necessary laws of thought but
rather, as de Morgan so derisorily claims, on the basis of ‘an arbitrary extension

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
147
of the application of language’ (de Morgan, p. 258n1). However, as intimated
above, Fogelin ably answers de Morgan’s rejection of (8) by arguing that its true
contradictory is (1). Incidentally, although de Morgan can be fulsome in his praise
of Hamilton — but then so can Mill — de Morgan’s treatment of Hamilton’s
quantiﬁcation scheme is at times rather scurrilously worded. It would seem that
both de Morgan and Mill were, rather excessively, much given to resort to more
or less veiled abusive ad hominem attacks on Hamilton, and I cannot help but
comment here that while Hamilton’s frequent denunciations of others, including
de Morgan, must have to some extent provoked such responses, his achievements
and reputation as a logician have most certainly suﬀered unduly from the cheap
rhetorical tricks of opponents whose conduct ought to have been exemplarily fair,
not solely as a mark of respect for Hamilton’s considerable endeavours but also as
a generally more virtuous way of conducting their discourse — paradoxically, it
would seem that rather too often winning the argument is much more important
to those who should be most concerned with striving to resolve it satisfactorily.
Fogelin’s defence of Hamilton is an incisive attempt to redress the balance and
although I shall not rehearse the full extent of his critical examination of Hamil-
ton’s system, to date it stands as one of the strongest defences of Hamilton’s
quantiﬁcation of the predicate. Fogelin’s defence is carried out in part by translat-
ing the controversial proposition (8), which de Morgan also claims with complete
disdain was erroneously, and, so he implies, foolishly oﬀered by one of Hamilton’s
defenders as the true contradictory of (1) (de Morgan, p. 259n3). As Fogelin
rightly says about proposition (8), ‘it is this proposition that has been the con-
stant source of confusion’ (Fogelin, 151). However, as Fogelin rightly attempts
to show in his ﬁrst article on Hamilton’s quantiﬁcation, proposition (8) is indeed
the contradictory of proposition (1). But, Fogelin’s second article on Hamilton
makes an important correction to his ﬁrst attempt to establish that proposition
(8) genuinely contradicts proposition (1), and it is therefore to this second article
that I shall now refer.
According to Fogelin’s reading of proposition (1) this should be interpreted as:
‘Anything that is an A is identical with anything that is a B’ — which ‘means
that there is but one thing that is an A, one thing that is a B, and these things
are identical’ (Fogelin, p. 167). This is to say, as Fogelin argues, that de Morgan’s
interpretation of proposition (1) — ‘All A is B and all B is A’ — is wrong.
However, de Morgan was right in his interpretation of proposition (8) and hence
(8) can be stated as ‘Some A is not some B’, which may then be translated as the
contradictory of (1) as: ‘Something that is an A is not identical with something
that is a B’. Fogelin goes on to demonstrate just how this interpretation renders a
certain syllogism (which on his previous interpretation of proposition (8) is invalid),
can be shown to be valid using his second (and de Morgan’s original) reading,
thereby proving that Hamilton’s system is ‘saved from inconsistency’ (Fogelin, p.
168). Although the relation of Hamilton’s quantiﬁcation system to syllogisms is
of course important, instead of looking at this I want to enrich Fogelin’s argument
somewhat by considering his interpretation of proposition (1) as meaning ‘that

148
Ralph Jessop
there is but one thing that is an A, one thing that is a B, and these things are
identical’.
To return to Hamilton’s own example, ‘All Triangle is all Trilateral’: as express-
ing the relation of Toto-total coinclusion, this expresses the nearest thing (along
with Toto-total coexclusion) Hamilton would call an absolute, which is to say that
the subject and predicate terms are co-inclusively related as maximally similar
such that they may be said to be absolutely convertible one with the other — they
are thus absolutely reciprocal. Whatever, if anything, might be said to diﬀerentiate
‘all Triangle’ from ‘all Trilateral’, such that they can be clearly if not distinctly
separated into two entities (and this may merely be that the terms themselves are
diﬀerent signs both of which signify the same single entity), as two terms brought
into a mutual relation of coidentity, this coinclusion is nonetheless one in which all
material diﬀerence has been abstracted from thought, such that the co-identities
are indeed absolute and the proposition that articulates this is thus eﬀectually an
implicit denial of their non-identity. Hence, such propositions asserting Toto-total
coinclusion that involve merely a terminal diﬀerential assert a co-identity between
two terms, and as such these propositions can be most directly contradicted by
the assertion of the most minimal diﬀerence in their quantity, since with regard to
their quantity alone their co-identiﬁcation implies a unity or singularity — hence
the assertion of parti-partial coexclusion in proposition (8) is this most direct
contradiction of the unity expressed by proposition (1) in terms of two unities
being co-identical, since the very ground of (1) being the expression of absolute
identity is at once negated by proposition (8)’s assertion that the co-identities are
co-excluding.
But, we need to keep in mind that, for Hamilton, there is no absolute exclusion
in that relation between concepts known as Exclusion. Since he rejects absolute
exclusion, but also since Hamilton so permeates his system with correlations of
one sort or another, it seems fair to regard his system as ultimately one in which,
as there can be no absolute exclusion, there can also be no absolute inclusion or
perfect identity/unity. Rather, the universals of, say, the Toto-total Coinclusion
proposition (1), as relating at least two terms together, are assertions of either:
an approximate (adequate) but non-maximal co-identiﬁcation; or, an absolute co-
identiﬁcation that is total, but only to the extent that the subject and predicate
being equated in the proposition rely upon some merely nominal/terminal dif-
ferential.
For Hamilton it would seem that some diﬀerential is the minimum
requirement for any concept, judgment, or reasoning to be possible, whether this
diﬀerential is actual (thus rendering the universal approximate), or is so crucially
dependent upon the merely terminal as to render all other distinction between
them impossible. Even when proposition (1) may seem to be an aﬃrmation or
assertion of perfect identity, for (1) to exist as a proposition or material expression
of the unity of thought in which A is identiﬁed with B, it must consist of at least
two entities. As such, ‘All A is all B’ is most directly contradicted by the assertion
of the sole proposition that most adequately breaches or contradicts the relation
of coinclusion aﬃrmed by ‘All A is all B’. For (1) and (8) to be contradictories,

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
149
the ‘all’ in (1) quantiﬁes both subject and predicate as individuals absolutely co-
identiﬁed (though the ‘absolute’ here, must involve some diﬀerential), while the
‘some’ in (8) must quantify the subject and predicate of (8) to be at least the
individuals referred to in (1) also, which (8) must then be asserting are coexclu-
sive to an extent beyond the necessary diﬀerential making (1) possible, such that
these individuals in (8), contradicting (1), may be said to be co-exclusive. The
contradictory of proposition (1), as before, is hence the assertion of Parti-partial
Coexclusion in proposition (8), ‘Some A is not some B’, or as Fogelin interprets
this, ‘Something that is an A is not identical with something that is a B′.
Now, the unity of A and B’s coinclusion or co-identiﬁcation in thought, being
expressed as a coinclusion relationship between the two terms ‘A’ and ‘B’, is the
expression of a bringing into unity concepts which, as Hamilton took much trou-
ble to explain in his Lectures, are themselves relative, since a concept consists of
disparate entities thought as one by means of the degree of resemblance between
their several attributes — this is why in the bulk of actual cases of proposition
(1) expressing Toto-total coinclusion we need to think of their co-identity as ap-
proximate. However, the best examples of proposition (1) may be thought of as
propositions in which the subject and predicate terms are concepts or singular-
ities/individuals in which the constituents that respectively deﬁne them, which
is to say their intensive quantities, are not mere bundles of pluralities possibly
thought erroneously or merely approximately as constituting two unities. Instead,
in a best case example of proposition (1) the subject and predicate terms will be
constituted by attributes that so overlap or co-inform one another in meaning that
they comprise what one might just as well call a true whole, a whole the parts of
which are as notions involving and involved. Thus, the intensive quantities of both
the subject term and the predicate term in a best case example of proposition (1)
will be involuted wholes, which are in turn related to one another by Involution
to form what we might call a true whole. Such true wholes are best exempliﬁed
by a priori truths in which each of the terms is involved and involving in each
other. Now, while this may not be fully satisfactory, some such extrapolation from
at least Hamilton’s notion of involution and some other elements of his work on
Logic, seem to go a long way to justify Fogelin’s reading of the real meaning of
proposition (1), namely, that it is the assertion that there is but one thing that
is an A, and one thing that is a B, and these things are identical. The unities
co-identiﬁed in a best case example of proposition (1), as involuted wholes, them-
selves both involved and involving one another, bespeak the nearest true whole or
unity that Hamilton can admit into his system. Hence, the only possible and most
eﬃcient and immediate contradiction of the coidentity of A and B, yet again, must
be the assertion of Parti-partial coexclusion between ‘A’ and ‘B’ as expressed in
proposition (8), for this is not to ﬁnd a mere single exception within A or B that is
not a co-identical attribute of both, but rather this is to declare the non-identity or
co-exclusion of the two things that are A and B, and thus (8) is the contradiction
of the unity that proposition (1) asserts.

150
Ralph Jessop
However, this story, complicated enough, is not yet fully resolved. For Hamilton
lists propositions (1) and (8) as Compossible, which is to say, that they are mutually
but not existentially contradictory of one another (i.e. though contradictory they
can coexist). Intriguingly this Leibnizian notion of compossibility is expressed by
means of empty spaces in the relevant columns of Hamilton’s ‘Table of the Mutual
Relations of the Eight Propositional Forms’ (see NA.LL.II.284). But if (1) and (8)
are compossible does this not run contra to Fogelin’s strong defence of Hamilton’s
system? As I understand it, on Fogelin’s reading, the contradictoriness of (1) and
(8) is existential. So, how can Hamilton be right to class (1) and (8) as compossible
if they must be regarded as existentially contradictories?
What we are looking for is an interpretation of (1) and (8) that shows that
they mutually contradict one another and yet may be said to be coexistent. One
way in which (1) and (8) may be said to be compossible has to do with the sense
in which (1) expresses an absolute unity, and the sense in which (8) expresses
indeﬁniteness. For Hamilton, (8) expresses either one of two diﬀerent species of
indeﬁnitude. Thus, all that (8) may be asserting against (1) is the very diﬀerential
implicit within (1)’s terminal diﬀerence between its subject and predicate. For,
while (8) may operate in some instances and be used within a syllogism as if it is the
existential contradictory of (1), as soon as it in fact loses its Particular/indeﬁnite
status and becomes either an individual or a universal in both quantities — as soon
as we know that its terms have to be quantiﬁed as universal/individual (hence def-
inite) — it must immediately be transformed into proposition (v), ‘Any A is not
any B’/‘No A is any B’. Of course, were we able to introduce, as a known, partial
deﬁnitude, (8) would similarly metamorphose into either (6) or (vii). Thus, while
(1) and (8) do mutually contradict one another as conﬂicting assertions, the indef-
initeness of (8) and the strictly non-absolute nature of even a best case example of
(1) does not warrant knowledge of existential contradiction (mutual annihilation),
though such coexistence may be for us unimaginable or inconceivable.
But this does not resolve the problem since it seems to amount to saying that
we can regard (8) as functionally the existential contradiction of (1) though possi-
bly not its true contradictory but rather the condition of (1)’s existence and vice
versa, and hence that (1) and (8) are propositions the compossibility of which is
dependent on our epistemological limitation. Now, granted that (1) is the asser-
tion of unity, (8) the assertion of divisibility, it might be the case that Hamilton’s
classiﬁcation of (1) and (8) as compossible simply serves to remind us of the very
epistemological limitation — our nescience — with regard to anything absolute
and anything inﬁnite similar to what he enounced in ‘Philosophy of the Uncon-
ditioned’ by means of his Law of the Conditioned. But, the problem with this
is that if Hamilton’s classiﬁcation of (1) and (8) as compossible relies solely on
the possibility that their mutual contradiction is already inherent within both of
these propositional forms, then the attribution of compossibility is pointless since
it merely reiterates what we might regard as an implicitly admissible distinct-
ness between the subject and predicate terms in (1), and were it the case that (8)
only functioned to perform this reiteration, as Hamilton himself suggests, (8) itself

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
151
would be useless (see Discussions, p. 695).
But these points notwithstanding, the compossibility of (1) and (8) may reside
quite simply in Hamilton’s principle of explicitness, as follows: in logic we must be
allowed to express what we must be allowed to think and therefore we can think and
express the contradiction even of that which seems to disallow contradiction (for
example, ‘All Triangle is all Trilateral’) — and in this sense (8) is the expression
of what contradicts (1), even though its contradiction (‘Some Triangle is not some
Trilateral’) may be or seem to us to be an expression lacking all existential import
and merely derived as the incomprehensible negative of an assertion of a necessary
truth and absolute unity. If this is so, then the compossibility of (1) and (8) is
simply the coexistence of what formally contradicts but does not thereby entail
existential contradiction. This does not rule out that in fact a given particular
instance of (1) and (8) may existentially contradict one another, but since the
indeﬁnite status of (8) cannot provide positive knowledge, excepting that it asserts
co-exclusion where (1) asserts co-identity, (1) and (8) have to be regarded as
formally compossible.
For all its seeming weirdness, baulked at and ridiculed by de Morgan, and for
all the diﬃculty of attempting to resolve this problem of compossibility, I think
Hamilton is right to defend proposition (8) as importantly the declaration that
a whole of any kind is divisible, or that the assertion of an indivisible unit may
be negated by the assertion of divisible plurality (see Discussions pp. 695-6). As
such (8) does contradict or is the negation of proposition (1) as the declaration
or ‘judgment of indivisibility, of unity, of simplicity’ (see Discussions, p. 695).
However, retaining (1) and (8) as formally compossible draws attention to a certain
freedom of thought within Hamilton’s system that underscores the importance of
being able to think and thus express our ability at least to entertain the negation
of any assertion of an absolute or indivisible whole.
This liberal approach is
one that endorses the enormous importance of the dialectical nature of logic and
argumentation as it recalls from obscurity the seemingly innocent, impotent, and
merely theoretic, but sophisticated, potent, and practically useful parti-partial
negative of otherwise unquestionable absolutes. If I am right so to interpret at least
part of the signiﬁcance of Hamilton’s defence of proposition (8), and thus of the
complete range of his thoroughgoing quantiﬁcation system, what we seem to have
between (1) and (8) is something akin to the contradictory relationship between
absolute and inﬁnite that, as it ﬁrst brought Hamilton fame with his controversial
and yet highly potent and profoundly inﬂuential Law of the Conditioned, placed
the conditioned nature of legitimate thought within a frame or ﬁeld of reference
at once vertiginously complex and yet competent to enable a rational negotiation
with and within an awareness of this complexity.

152
Ralph Jessop
5
THE SYLLOGISM: SOME IMPLICATIONS
The science now shines out in the true character of beauty,–as One at
once and Various. Logic thus accomplishes its ﬁnal destination; for as
‘Thrice-greatest Hermes,’ speaking in the mind of Plato, has expressed
it — ‘The end of Philosophy is the intuition of Unity.’ (NA.LL.II.252)
Hamilton’s treatment of the syllogism deserves a whole chapter in its own right —
I shall only be able to deal with it rather brieﬂy in this section. In the Lectures
Hamilton takes a considerable amount of time to explain many detailed aspects of
the syllogism to his students. He distinguishes and displays four diﬀerent classes
of syllogism — the Categorical, Disjunctive, Hypothetical, and the Hypothetico-
disjunctive (see LL.I.291-2). The categorical syllogism is also displayed in both
extensive and intensive forms, something he will later capture in his symbolic
notion as indicted in Table 2 earlier and as fully detailed in the ﬁnal table of the
second volume of Lectures (LL.I.295-300).38
Importantly, in drawing attention
to the diﬀerent reasonings between extensive and intensive syllogisms, where the
copula signiﬁes respectively ‘contains under’ and ‘contains in’, Hamilton makes
the point that from what can be observed of the inverse ratio relation between
extension and intension with regard to syllogisms, ‘it is not to the mere external
arrangement of the terms, but to the nature of their relation, that we must look in
determining the character of the syllogism’ (LL.I.300; and compare, p. 348). This
is important to how he will proceed to regard the syllogism within the lectures
but it also bears within it the necessity of quantifying the predicate, even though
at this stage he does not seem to have produced the full system of quantiﬁcation
as given in Table 2 earlier. With extensive and intensive syllogisms diﬀerentiated,
Hamilton constructs three rules, in place of Whately’s six, three for extensive, and
three for intensive syllogisms, the intensive merely inverting the extensive rules
(see LL.I.305-6; 315).
In all this we can see Hamilton working, as it were, from the ground up — as we
shall see shortly, his ultimate position will be even more simple or general as, on the
basis of his thoroughgoing quantiﬁcation system, he develops a single general rule
or Canon governing all valid syllogisms in both aﬃrmative and negative moods.
With regard to what is happening in the Lectures it is therefore important to
remember both their instructional function and that some aspects in the Lectures
are later superseded, such as, for example, his later rejection of the Rule of Reason
and Consequent in favour of just three main Rules of Identity, non-Contradiction,
and Excluded middle (see LL.I.290n).
In his treatment of the syllogism in the Lectures, Hamilton introduces his stu-
dents to the usual suspects: the four ﬁgures, moods, the ingenious mnemonics of,
for example, Barbara, Celarent, Darii, the formal fallacies, and so on, a great deal
38Compare William Thomson, An Outline of the Necesary Laws of Thought: A Treatise on
Pure and Applied Logic, 3rd edn.
(London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans, 1854),
pp.
245–9.
Thomson fully endorses and oﬀers some explanation of this table which he also
reproduces.

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
153
of which he lays out with painstaking detail (see LL.I.394-468). He also discusses
the various forms of conversion, but since I have already touched on this subject in
the previous section and how Hamilton’s quantiﬁcation eﬀectually displaces other
kinds of conversion with his simple conversion, it is needless to say anything more
about his treatment of it in the Lectures (see LL.I.262-5; NA.LL.II.264-76). Using
simple circle diagrams to illustrate the relations between the extremes or subject
and predicate terms of the conclusion and the middle term, his explanations of
syllogisms must have given his students an excellent grounding in the diﬀering
ﬁgures and moods. However, as so often occurs in Hamilton’s expositions of the
traditional logic, he marks some signiﬁcant diﬀerences between his treatment and
that of both his predecessors and contemporaries. One major example of this is
his rejection of the fourth ﬁgure which is, of course, simply shown, in extension,
as follows:
P is M
M is S
S is P
He argues that, though the fourth ﬁgure can be shown to be valid, ‘the logicians,
in consequence of their exclusive recognition of the reasoning in extension, were
not in possession of the means of showing that this ﬁgure is a monster undeserving
of toleration, far less of countenance and favour’ (LL.I.424). I shall not rehearse
Hamilton’s arguments against the fourth ﬁgure, except to note that he shows
that in this ﬁgure there is an unwarranted switch from reasoning in extension to
intension or vice versa and thus it performs ‘a feat about as reasonable and useful
in Logic, as the jumping from one horse to another would be reasonable and useful
in the race-course. Both are achievements possible; but, because possible, neither
is, therefore, a legitimate exercise of skill’ (LL.I.427). But, Hamilton’s principal
reason for rejecting the fourth ﬁgure is that it involves a mental process ‘which is
not overtly expressed’ — in other words, when we adhere rigidly to the principle of
explicitness, the fourth ﬁgure’s reliance upon an intermediary conclusion becomes
evident (see LL.I.427-8).
There are many other interesting features in the lectures worth mentioning,
such as his treatment of the diﬀerence between Induction and Deduction, which I
brieﬂy touched on in Section 2 above. He discards what is now much more typ-
ically classed as Inductive argument, instead regarding Deduction and Induction
both as formal forms of demonstrative reasoning — logicians had ‘corrupted and
confounded’ logical deduction ‘governed by the necessary laws of thought’ with
contingent matter and probability (LL.I.325; and see 319–26). This formal ap-
proach, according to Hamilton, is more in keeping with Aristotle’s understanding
of induction (see LL.I.325–6). It also has important implications for how Hamilton
regards both the Sorites and Enthymeme, both of which he discusses in terms of
their formal characters as syllogisms. He does of course explain that the Sorites
became associated with that sophism or informal fallacy commonly referred to or
illustrated by means of the examples of piling up grains of sand until what was

154
Ralph Jessop
once maintained to be a small quantity becomes large (a Progressive Sorites), and
also the famous bald man example (Regressive Sorites) (see LL.I.376–8; 464–6).
According to Hamilton, the Sorites only became associated with such sophistic
or fallacious reasoning some time in the 15th century and the failure of logicians
to incorporate the Sorites as a legitimate chain-syllogism was all down to their
exclusive concentration on extension and not keeping in mind that, for Aristotle
‘all our general knowledge is only an induction from an observation of particulars’
(LL.I.377; 380; and see, 366–85).
His treatment of the Enthymeme is similarly interesting and informative, ar-
guing that it is only the external form of the enthymeme that may be said to be
imperfect or incomplete. As Hamilton rightly shows, an enthymeme is not merely
an argument in which one of the premises is missing or suppressed; it may also
be that the conclusion has been suppressed/omitted. But, whether the major or
minor premise or the conclusion is not made explicit, this does not, for Hamilton,
warrant calling an enthymeme a special or defective syllogism — it ‘constitutes no
special form of reasoning’, nor did Aristotle maintain that it did (LL.I.387). The
enthymeme illustrates an important principle that pervades so much of Hamilton’s
approach to logic, namely, that the mere verbal accident of elision (or in the case of
the enthymeme we might say more or less deliberate omission, often serving pur-
poses of persuasion which Hamilton somewhat oddly does not address directly)
is something that the logician, in staunchly adhering to the principle of explicit-
ness, can make explicit as something that is in thought, though not in expression
(for Hamilton’s treatment of the enthymeme, see LL.I.386-94). He provides some
nice examples of enthymemes but I shall only quote one of these since it involves
a nice quip against Hegel that suggests something of Hamilton’s capacity for at
least occasional touches of humour: ‘There is recorded [. . . ] a dying deliverance of
the philosopher Hegel, the wit of which depends upon [its] ambiguous reasoning.
‘Of all my disciples,’ he said, ‘one only understands my philosophy; and he does
not.’ But we may take this for an admission by the philosopher himself, that the
doctrine of the Absolute transcends human comprehension’ (LL.I.398). There is
in this also more than a hint of not only Hamilton’s opposition to Hegel but also
to absolutism more generally.
To his credit Hamilton reminds his students of certain points he made much
earlier in the lectures to do with the status of propositions with regard to their
discrete components, pointing out that a syllogism is an integrated mental act and
that it ought therefore to be thought of not in a merely mechanical manner:
It is [. . . ]
altogether erroneous to maintain, as is commonly done,
that a reasoning or syllogism is a mere decompound whole, made up
of judgments; as a judgment is a compound whole, made up of con-
cepts. This is a mere mechanical mode of cleaving the mental phe-
nomena into parts; and holds the same relation to a genuine analysis
of mind which the act of the butcher does to that of the anatomist.
It is true, indeed, that a syllogism can be separated into three parts
or propositions; and that these propositions have a certain meaning,

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
155
when considered apart, and out of relation to each other. But when
thus considered, they lose the whole signiﬁcance which they had when
united in a reasoning; for their whole signiﬁcance consisted in their
reciprocal relation,–in the light which they mutually reﬂected on each
other. We can certainly hew down an animal body into parts, and con-
sider its members apart; but these, though not absolutely void of all
meaning, when viewed singly and out of relation to their whole, have
lost the principal and peculiar signiﬁcance which they possessed as the
coeﬃcients of a one organic and indivisible whole. It is the same with
a syllogism. The parts which, in their organic union, possessed life and
importance, when separated from each other, remain only enunciations
of vague generalities, or of futile identities. Though, when expressed
in language, it be necessary to analyse a reasoning into parts, and to
state these parts one after another, it is not to be supposed that in
thought one notion, one proposition, is known before or after another;
for, in consciousness, the three notions and their reciprocal relations
constitute only one identical and simultaneous cognition. (LL.I.275-6).
The notion of interrelation and simultaneity in the above is important to how
Hamilton will go on to view the syllogism’s structure as, for example, something
in which it is only mere convention that always places the conclusion last, and
that the relative positions of major and minor premise themselves can easily be
switched around without any loss of meaning. However, I have quoted the above
passage at length since it eloquently apprises us of an important general dimension
of Hamilton’s whole approach to Logic — for all that he is striving for a rigorously
pure science free from the extra-logical and although he will later in the ‘New
Analytic’ speak of a ‘Symbolic Notation [that will display] the propositional and
syllogistic forms, even with a mechanical simplicity’, Hamilton constantly opposes
the mechanical or rigidly structural in favour of considering the syllogism less like
a dismembered material body or constructed building and more like a process —
multiplex, organic, interrelated, and even ﬂuid — and his logic needs to be seen
as an attempt to capture, not only the dual perspectives aﬀorded by extension
and intension, but also a greater sense of the richness and complexity of formal
reasoning (NA.LL.II.251).
In the previous section I referred to Hamilton’s ‘Observations on the Mutual
Relation of Syllogistic Terms in Quantity and Quality’ at Appendix V (e) in the
Lectures on Logic (see NA.LL.II.285). In this ‘Observations’ section, he provides
the relations between any given proposition’s subject and predicate terms and,
by inverting the order of the negative propositional forms given in the previous
section in Table 2, he displays the best-worst quantiﬁcation relationships between
each of the four aﬃrmative propositions and their corresponding negatives (see
NA.LL.II.286). I have reconﬁgured Hamilton’s presentation of these relations as
follows:

156
Ralph Jessop
The signiﬁcance of this schema becomes clear when we note how Hamilton’s system
of quantiﬁcation brings into consideration certain aspects of syllogistic reasoning
formerly ignored by Aristotelian logic. According to Hamilton:
Former logicians knew only of two worse relations,–a particular, worse
than a universal, aﬃrmative, and a negative worse than an aﬃrma-
tive. As to a better and worse in negatives, they knew nothing; for
as two negative premises were inadmissible, they had no occasion to
determine which of two negatives was the worse or better.
But in
quantifying the predicate, in connecting positive and negative moods,
and in generalising a one supreme canon of syllogism, we are compelled
to look further, to consider the inverse procedures of aﬃrmation and
negation, and to show [. . . ] how the latter, by reversing the former,
and turning the best quantity of aﬃrmation into the worst of negation,
annuls all restriction, and thus apparently varies the quantity of the
conclusion. (NA.LL.II.285-6).
I shall not attempt to explain this in detail. Suﬃce to say that the above schema
of best-worst quantiﬁcation relationships is used by Hamilton to construct what
he calls his ‘General Canon’ to determine the relationship between the subject (S)
and predicate (P) of the conclusion in a syllogism, on the basis of a best-worst
comparison between the relationships between the subject term and middle term
(M), and the middle term and predicate term of the syllogism. Hence, depending
on the relationship between the subject and predicate terms of a syllogism, the
relationship between S and P in the conclusion will be, for example, totally coex-
clusive, or partially coexclusive, or toto-partially coexclusive, and so on. Hamilton’s
‘one supreme canon of syllogism’ is given as follows:
General Canon. What worst relation of subject and predicate, subsists
between either of two terms and a common third term, with which
one, at least, is positively related; that relation subsists between the
two terms themselves. (NA.LL.II.285)
He translates this ‘General Canon’ into twelve clear rules governing 36 syllogistic
moods in the ﬁrst three ﬁgures (the fourth ﬁgure having been rejected as pointed

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
157
out above), plus 24 negative moods — these forms are detailed in the ﬁnal table
given at the end of the Lectures on Logic (see LL.II.475). However, it might be
better to think of these not as rules but rather as instantiations of his General
Canon since, once one has grasped how Hamilton’s system operates, each of them
can be translated from this Canon with relative ease (see NA.LL.II.285-9). I shall
not discuss these instantiations in any detail but will instead use just one of them
to illustrate how Hamilton’s General Canon operates, using an example which
Fogelin uses to demonstrate the correctness of his reading of propositions (1) and
(8) as discussed in the previous section.
Fogelin gives the following syllogism as an example that he claims Hamilton’s
system allows as valid, yet which can be shown, using a Venn diagram, to be
invalid if translated using his earlier translation of proposition (8), though valid
using de Morgan’s interpretation of this parti-partial coexclusion proposition:
Some P is not any M
Some S is some M
∴
Some S is not some P
Having already accepted Fogelin’s treatment of the above syllogism which shows
how it can be read as valid (and hence what proposition (8) expressing Parti-
partial coexclusion means, or can be read as meaning), all I want to do here is
merely illustrate how Hamilton’s General Canon can be invoked to produce from
the two premises the conclusion as given. I think that all this will demonstrate is
that Fogelin is right that the above syllogism would be declared valid in Hamilton’s
system as he asserts. However, I am not entirely sure that Hamilton’s table and list
of interpretations of his General Canon are completely free from anomalies, and it
must be said that to check this thoroughly, given the complexities of co-ordinating
various mixtures of extensive and intensive readings with Hamilton’s own symbolic
representation of the negative moods, is beyond the scope of this chapter. Hence,
I shall simply give Fogelin’s example as unequivocally exemplifying adherence to
Hamilton’s General Canon, even though by treating this so simplistically I may be
overlooking certain niceties and complexities concerning how it ought to be used:
Fogelin’s Example:
Relation:
Hamilton’s
rule
from
General Canon:
some P is not any M
Parti-total coexclusion
VII.a: A term
parti-totally coexclusive,
and a term partially
coinclusive, of a third
[M], are partially
coexclusive of each other.
(NA.LL.II.288)
some S is some M
Parti-partial conclusion
some S is not some P
Parti-partial coexclusion
From what I have been so far able to ascertain, though not articulate in full,
certain possible anomalies (or doubts that I still have) notwithstanding, Hamilton’s
General Canon does seem to work.

158
Ralph Jessop
If, in agreement with Fogelin, I am right about this, Hamilton’s system marks a
most signiﬁcant advancement in the treatment of the syllogism that almost entirely
replaces the previous systems which Hamilton so often decried as being imperfect,
ﬂawed, confused, and misleading. No wonder that Fogelin, though acknowledging
that Hamilton’s achievement may not seem important ‘from a modern point of
view’, regards his quantiﬁcation system as ‘a radical departure from traditional
theory’ (Fogelin, pp. 163–4). If Hamilton’s ultimate regulation or General Canon
of syllogistic forms is fully adequate, comprehensive, suﬃciently general, and ﬂex-
ible, his treatment of the syllogism arguably marks the considerable improvement
on and replacement of traditional logic’s treatment of the syllogism that he himself
believed it did. In place of numerous logical rules and botched attempts to bring
the Aristotelic system out of the chaos in which Hamilton found it, by judiciously
interpreting but not slavishly falling under the spell of Aristotle’s enormous au-
thority, Hamilton may well have developed, albeit within certain limitations, a
system of formal logic that, as it culminated in a simple mechanism for making
all quantities in both aﬃrmative and negative propositions explicit, only required
the capstone of his single or supreme canon of the syllogism, to warrant his grand
claim that he had produced a system whose beauty resided in the very naturalness
of being ‘as One at once and Various.’
6
CONCLUSION
A mere knowledge of the rules of Rhetoric can no more enable us to
compose well, than a mere knowledge of the rules of Logic can enable
us to think well. (LL.I.48-9)
Augustus de Morgan misunderstood the complexities that Hamilton’s system could
either accommodate or was pointing towards. As Fogelin claims, though de Mor-
gan clearly did try to understand Hamilton’s system ‘he failed to do so and com-
mentators since have hardly done better’ (Fogelin, p. 162). According to Fogelin
this has much to do with the strangeness of Hamilton’s language, such as we ﬁnd in
his non-standard exchanges of ‘all’ for ‘any’. True, these things do create problems,
as also do Hamilton’s now strange symbolism, dense tables, and the fragmentary
nature of much of his work on Logic, excepting the Lectures which are abundantly
clear, always informative, and even occasionally somewhat entertaining.
How-
ever, I suspect that the linguistic diﬃculties have more to do with Hamilton’s
enormous ability to compress the language of his texts into an often overly taut,
quasi-litigious style that is at ﬁrst oﬀ-putting and certainly at times not for the
faint-hearted. However, there are some more substantial reasons why de Morgan
and others have ﬂoundered and in the end did Hamilton a great disservice.
In order to gain more than a foothold in Hamilton’s logic it would seem that
one also has to have a foothold in and possibly be to some extent persuaded by
his metaphysical standpoint of natural dualism, for in this doctrine’s opposition
to absolutism — not least of all in its opposition to absolute scepticism — inheres

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
159
Hamilton’s relativity and the germ of what becomes a much more pervasive cor-
relativism throughout so much of his writing. Hamilton’s relativity places subject
and predicate into simple relations of equation and non-equation, distinguishes
indeﬁnite quantities into two kinds or degrees of indeﬁniteness, and is founded
on recognising the signiﬁcance of perspective with regard to a given concept’s
dual quantiﬁcation dimensions of extension and intension. All this seems to be
an attempt to frame subject and predicate as the unity of thought from which
they originate. However, the frame is really much larger, and herein lies a great
part of the problem and yet potential of Hamilton’s system. A part of Hamil-
ton’s relativism also brings into play not just perspective (and thereby diﬀerent
possible readings of propositions), but both the relations between a concept’s at-
tributes and the conditioning nature of the human subject’s agency. The relations
between logic (the laws that constitute the conditions of thought) and language
(the terms without which we would otherwise be incapable of participating in any
productive thought, argument, discourse, analysis, or articulation of logic’s laws,
propositional forms, and so on), and the surrounding chaos or ever-shifting sands
against, and yet in relation to which, logic and language comprise our attempts
to make whole, divide, and recombine this otherwise unintelligible plenum of in-
determinate entities under which we are continually at risk of being submerged
— as these relations form the frame or ﬁeld within which Hamilton’s logic is con-
ducted, he was constructing a logical system both highly suggestive of a deeper
relativism he eschewed, and yet which he virtually postulated was the condition
within which logic had to operate as the very function of logic and language had
to do with stabilising the multiple within unity. This, perhaps more than anything
else, makes his writing complex. However, much more simply, Hamilton’s enor-
mous erudition — also a factor in the diversity he attempts to bring into order
— remains an intimidating force that few, excepting some of his more devoted
students and followers, have found a congenial companion.
Hamilton regarded philosophy — particularly logic and metaphysics — as the
greatest gymnastic of the mind and with such a conception of his subject matter
providing a large part of philosophy’s raison d’ˆetre, he was attempting to set his
students on a course of study that would challenge their intellectual abilities to
their utmost through his attempts to make the study of Logic measure up to and
(it must have been his hope) compete with the higher educational, intellectual,
and scholarly standards that had been demanded on the Continent. The Ger-
man logicians in particular, made even the Professors of Britain’s one-time most
prestigious university, Oxford, appear to Hamilton’s eyes as little better than in-
tellectual philistines or dilettantes. In his deﬁnition of Logic as a pure science of
the necessary laws of thought, single-handedly Hamilton was laying the ground-
work for improving upon and in many ways replacing the traditional Aristotelian
logic that he regarded as having been sunk into a mass of confusion by centuries
of almost slavish or insuﬃciently critical adherence to the Stagirite, coupled with
numerous misinterpretations of the true nature of their subject.
Within the boldness of Hamilton’s emphatic assertions and robust denunciations

160
Ralph Jessop
of the errors and confusions that he argues arose due to ‘the passive sequacity of
the logicians [in following] obediently in the footsteps of their great master’, Aris-
totle, there is a genuine sense of his excitement concerning this claim that his
system supersedes all previous systems new and old (NA.LL.II.262). By this stage
in his work on logic it must have seemed to Hamilton as though, after many long
years of arduous industry during which he had been diligently examining, sum-
marising, and critically assessing the logics of others written mainly in Greek,
Latin, English, and German, at last the numerous errors and confusions riddling
centuries of Aristotelian logic could be removed. Through the earlier works of
ancient and scholastic logicians, these errors and confusions had continued to sift
themselves, but they also permeated the work of his Oxonian contemporaries.
But now, after years of clearing away the detritus of former ages and chastising
the dilettantism of more recent logicians, he could with one ﬁnal push radically
brush aside those aspects of the traditional logic that had signiﬁcantly impeded
its development or evolution into a system at once more complex and yet more
orderly (see NA.LL.II.252). At last he had constructed a robust system that he
could proudly advocate as the ‘keystone in the Aristotelic Arch’, and while this
keystone had doubled the number of propositional forms, these forms constituted
a structural whole based on the logic of Aristotle and thus at once the tradi-
tional logic was brought one signiﬁcant step closer to the beauty and perfection
which Aristotle’s work seemed to promise but had not realised (see NA.LL.II.249).
However, Fogelin rightly counters Hamilton’s claim that his ‘New Analytic’ com-
pletes traditional Aristotelian logic — for, instead of merely placing the keystone
in the Aristotelic arch, ‘By introducing an entirely diﬀerent system of classifying
propositions in virtue of their potential roles in syllogisms, Hamilton made a rad-
ical departure from traditional theory’ (Fogelin, p. 163). The keystone that is
Hamilton’s quantiﬁcation of the predicate one might thus say, is far from being a
pretentious claim to glory undeserved — rather, Hamilton’s ‘keystone’ is an overly
modest description for a much more radical, yet substantial and more stable con-
struction that involved the destruction and removal of logical ruins from bygone
ages, though it is plain to see that at least some of the foundations were incorpo-
rated to support Hamilton’s arch. But with a ﬁnal and ﬁtting twist of irony, all
too quickly the course of logic would develop during the 19th century in ways that
left so much of Hamilton’s endeavour far behind as a curiously ﬂawed relic.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Baynes, 1850] Thomas Spencer Baynes. An Essay on the New Analytic of Logical Forms, Being
that which Gained the Prize Proposed by Sir William Hamilton, in the Year 1846, for the
Best Exposition of the New Doctrine Propounded in his Lectures; with an Historical Appendix
(Edinburgh: Sutherland and Knox; London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Co., 1850)
[Benchimol, 2004] Alex Benchimol. William Hamilton. In The Carlyle Encyclopedia, edited by
Mark Cumming (Cranbury, NJ:Farleigh Dickinson University Press, 2004), 207-9
[Dallas, 1866] E. S. Dallas. The Gay Science (London: Chapman and Hall, 1866)
[Davie, 1961] George Elder Davie. The Democratic Intellect: Scotland and Her Universities in

The Logic of Sir William Hamilton
161
the Nineteenth Century, Edinburgh University Publications, History Philosophy & Economics:
12 (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1961; repr. 1982)
[de Morgan, 1966] Augustus de Morgan. On the Syllogism and Other Logical Writings, edited
with an introduction by Peter Heath (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966)
[Flint, 1903] Robert Flint. Agnosticism (Edinburgh and London: Wm Blackwood, 1903)
[Fogelin, 1992] Robert J. Fogelin. Philosophical Interpretations (Oxford:
Oxford University
Press, 1992)
[Fraser, 1865] A. C. Fraser. Mill’s examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy. North
British Review, 43, 1–58, September 1865.
[Fraser, 1860] A. C. Fraser. Province of logic and recent British logicians. North British Review,
33, 401–427, November 1860.
[Gilley and Loades, 1981] S. Gilley and A. Loades. Thomas Henry Huxley: The War between
Science and Religion, The Journal of Religion, 61 (1981), 285-308
[Hamilton, 1853] Sir William Hamilton. Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Educa-
tion and University Reform, 2nd edn (London: Brown, Green and Longmans; Edinburgh:
MacLachlan and Stewart, 1853)
[Hamilton, 1860] Sir William Hamilton. Lectures on Logic, ed. H. L. Mansel and J. Veitch.
(Edinburgh and London: Blackwood, 1860).
[Hamilton, 2001] Sir William Hamilton. Works of Sir William Hamilton, with an introduction
by Savina Tropea, 7 vols (Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 2001)
[Hamilton, 1860] Sir William Hamilton. Lectures on Logic, ed. by H.L. Mansel and John Veitch
(Edinburgh and London: Blackwood, 1860)
[Hamilton, 1990] Thomas Hamilton. The Youth and Manhood of Cyril Thornton, ed. by Maurice
Lindsay (Aberdeen: The Association for Scottish Literary Studies, 1990)
[Hendry, 1986] John Hendry. James Clerk Maxwell and the Theory of the Electromagnetic Field
(Bristol and Boston: Adam Hilger, 1986)
[Herbert, 2001] Christopher Herbert. Victorian Relativity: Radical thought and Scientiﬁc Dis-
covery (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 2001)
[Jessop, 2005] Ralph Jessop. Carlyle’s Agnosticism: An Altar to the Unknown and Unknowable
God, Literature and Belief, 25 (1&2), 381-433, 2005.
[Jessop, 1997] Ralph Jessop. Carlyle and Scottish Thought (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1997)
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] William Kneale and Martha Kneale, The Development of Logic (Ox-
ford: Clarendon, 1962)
[Kneale, 1948] William Kneale. Boole and the Revival of Logic, Mind, 57 (Apr. 1948), 149-75,
1948.
[Kuehn, 1990] Manfred Kuehn. Hamilton’s Reading of Kant: A Chapter in the Early Scottish
Reception of Kant’s Thought, in George MacDonald Ross and Tony McWalter, eds, Kant and
His Inﬂuence (Bristol: Thoemmes Antiquarian Books, 1990), 315-347
[Laita, 1979] Luis M. Laita. Inﬂuences on Boole’s Logic: The Controversy between William
Hamilton and Augustus De Morgan, Annals of Science, 36 (1979), 45-65
[Lightman, 1987] Bernard Lightman. The Origins of Agnosticism: Victorian Unbelief and the
Limits of Knowledge (Baltimore and London: John Hopkins University Press, 1987)
[Mansel, 1851] H. L. Mansel. Recent Extensions of Formal Logic, North British Review, 15 (May
1851), 90-121
[Mansel, 1866] H. L. Mansel. The Philosophy of the Conditioned: Sir William Hamilton and
John Stuart Mill, Contemporary Review, 1 (1866), 31-49; 185-219
[Mansel, 1851] H. L. Mansel. Prolegomena Logica: An Enquiry into the Psychological Character
of Logical Processes (Oxford: William Graham, 1851)
[Mansel, 1858] H. L. Mansel. The Limits of Religious Thought (London : John Murray, 1858)
[Masson, 1877] David Masson. Recent British Philosophy: A Review with Criticisms including
some Comments on Mr Mill’s Answer to Sir William Hamilton, 3rd edn (London: Macmillan,
1877)
[Memoir, 1869] Memoire of Sir William Hamilton London: Sampson Low, Marston, Sarl &
Rivington, 1881)
[Mill, 1865] John Stuart Mill. An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy and of
the Principal Philosophical Questions Discussed in his Writings (London: Longman, Green,
Longman, Roberts & Green, 1865)
[Monck, 1881] W. H. S. Monck. Sir William Hamilton (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle
& Rivington, 1881)

162
Ralph Jessop
[Napier, 1877] Macvey Napier, Jnr, ed. Selections from the Correspondence of the Late Macvey
Napier (London: Harrison, 1877)
[Olson, 1971] Richard Olson. Scottish Philosophy and Mathematics 1750–1830, Journal of the
History of Ideas, 32 (1971), 29-44
[Ouren, 1973] Dallos Victor Lie Ouren. HaMILLton: Mill on Hamilton: A Re-examination of Sir
William Hamilton’s Philosophy (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Minesota, 1973)
[Reid, 1846] Thomas Reid. The Works of Thomas Reid, preface, notes, and supplementary
dissertations by Sir William Hamilton (Edinburgh: MacLachlan, Stewart; London: Longman,
Brown, Green and Longmans, 1846)
[Stewart, 1854-60] Dugald Stewart. The Collected Works of Dugald Stewart, ed. by Sir William
Hamilton, 11 vols (Edinburgh: Thomas Constable, 1854-60)
[Thomson, 1854] William Thomson. An Outline of hte Necessary Laws of Thought: A Treatise
on Pure and Applied Logic, 3rd edition (London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans,
1854)
[Veitch, 1882] John Veitch. Hamilton (Edinburgh And London: Blackwood, 1882)

“THE WHOLE BOX OF TOOLS”: WILLIAM
WHEWELL AND THE LOGIC OF INDUCTION
Laura J. Snyder
William Whewell (1794–1866), well-known polymath, has been criticized for his
view of inductive logic ever since publishing it. His friend, the logician Augustus
DeMorgan, may or may not have intended a cruel reference to Whewell’s lowly
social origins as the son of a master carpenter when he complained, in his 1847
textbook on logic, about certain writers incorrectly using the term “induction” as
including “the whole box of [logical] tools.” Other writers on logic, from John Stu-
art Mill on, have similarly claimed that Whewell did not present a valid inductive
logic. Mill accused Whewell of allowing “no other logical operation [in scientiﬁc
discovery] but guessing until a guess is found that tallies with the facts”. In the
twentieth century, followers of Karl Popper made that criticism a compliment,
claiming that Whewell had “anticipated” Popper’s anti-inductive methodology of
conjectures and refutations. Whewell’s response to later criticisms of DeMorgan
is, I believe, as apt as it was then: “I do not wonder at your denying [my induc-
tion] a place in Logic; and you will think me heretical and profane, if I say, so
much the worse for logic”.1 As I will show in this chapter, Whewell’s method of
discoverers’ induction is, as he always claimed, an inductive logic, one that was
strongly inﬂuenced by Whewell’s reading of Francis Bacon. Though Whewell’s
inductive logic does include the “whole box of tools”, this is a beneﬁt, rather than
a liability, of his view.
1
WHEWELL’S EDUCATION AND CAREER
Whewell was born in 1794 in Lancaster, England, the eldest child of a master
carpenter. His prodigious abilities were recognized early. As a child, the master
of the local grammar school saw his potential and oﬀered to teach him for free
at his facility. Soon after, Whewell was examined by a tutor from Trinity Col-
lege, Cambridge, who predicted that the young boy would one day place among
the top six wranglers (the holders of ﬁrst-class degrees). Whewell was then sent
to the Heversham Grammar School in Westmorland, some twelve miles to the
north, where he would be able to qualify for a closed exhibition to Trinity. In the
nineteenth century and earlier, these “closed exhibitions” or scholarships were set
aside for the children of working class parents. Whewell studied at Heversham
1William Whewell to Augustus DeMorgan, January 18, 1859, in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 417].
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

164
Laura J. Snyder
for two years, and received private coaching in mathematics from John Gough,
the blind mathematician to whom reference is made in Wordworth’s “Excursion”.
Although Whewell did win the exhibition it did not provide full resources for a
boy of his family’s means to attend Cambridge; money had to be raised in a public
subscription to supplement the scholarship money. He thus came up to Trinity in
1812 as a “sub-sizar” (scholarship student).2
When he arrived at Trinity, Whewell became involved with the Analytical So-
ciety, formed the year before by Charles Babbage, John Herschel and others. The
Analytical Society had been founded for the purpose of reforming the teaching
and practice of mathematics at Cambridge. The members of the society wished to
introduce continental methods of mathematics to a university which had excluded
progress since the time of Newton (speciﬁcally, they hoped to introduce Lagrange’s
algebraic and formalistic version of the calculus, which included replacing Newton’s
ﬂuxion dot notation with Leibniz’s “d” notation) (see [Fisch, 1994] and [Becher,
1980].) In addition to his involvement with the Analytical Society, Whewell’s years
as a Cambridge undergraduate were enriched by his friendships with Richard Jones
(the future political economist) and Herschel, each of whom had great eﬀect on his
future thinking about science. He also formed friendships with Hugh James Rose,
Julius Charles Hare, and Connop Thirlwall, men greatly interested in and inﬂu-
enced by the German Romantic movement. Whewell ﬁnished his studies in 1816
as Second Wrangler and Second Smith’s Prizeman. After a short post-graduate
period as a private tutor, Whewell won a college fellowship in 1817.
After winning his fellowship, Whewell was assistant tutor from 1818 until 1823,
and tutor from 1823 until 1838. He was elected to the Royal Society in 1820, and
ordained a priest — as required for Trinity Fellows to maintain their position after
an initial seven year period — in 1825. He took up John Henslow’s Chair in Miner-
alogy in 1828 (when Henslow vacated it for the Botany Professorship), and resigned
it in 1832. During the early 1830s Whewell was instrumental in the formation of
the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS), the Statistical
Section of the BAAS, and the Statistical Society of London. In 1833, at a meeting
of the BAAS, he invented the word “scientist”, an achievement emblematic of his
broader inﬂuence upon science and culture. In 1838 Whewell became Professor
of Moral Philosophy. Shortly after his marriage to Cordelia Marshall on 12 Oc-
tober 1841, he was named Master of Trinity College, having been recommended
to Queen Victoria by Prime Minister Robert Peel. He was Vice-Chancellor of the
University in 1842 and again in 1855. In 1848 he played a large role in establishing
the Natural and Moral Sciences Triposes at the University. Whewell engaged in
scientiﬁc research, winning a medal from the Royal Society for his work on the
science of the tides. He corresponded with the most eminent scientists of his day.
He published his own translations of German novellas and poetry, and, with his
popular translations of Plato’s dialogues, was partly responsible for a “Platonic
revival” in Britain in the 1850s (see [Turner, 1981, 371–2]). Towards the end of
2Whewell’s status as a sub-sizar meant that he had to serve the other boys at dinner. See
[Garland, 1980, 11], and [Rothblatt, 1981].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
165
his life Whewell was asked to tutor the young Prince of Wales (the future Edward
VII) in political economy.
As this brief summary of his life indicates, Whewell’s rise from what we would
probably call the middle (or lower-middle) class to the intellectual and social elite
was spectacular. If this rise tended to make him a bit arrogant, and even imperious,
in his later life, it also I think imbued him with a sense of mission. Whewell very
much saw himself as having a “calling” to reform philosophy; he refers to this as
his “vocation”.3 As we will see in the next sections, Whewell’s project, throughout
his career, was to reform inductive philosophy, and to do so by revising Francis
Bacon’s inductive logic.
2
REFORMING INDUCTION
From his days as an undergraduate at Trinity College, to his ﬁnal years spent
as Master of that institution, Whewell considered his project to be the reform
of the inductive philosophy, a reform that was intended to apply to all areas
of knowledge. Whewell intended that his reformed inductive philosophy would
provide the groundwork for the reshaping of more than natural science: morality,
politics, and economics would also be transformed. In this chapter, however, I will
focus only on Whewell’s renovation of induction (details about how he intended
this reform to be applied to the other areas can be found in my [Snyder, 2006]).
Whewell and his friend Richard Jones together planned to reform induction,
and saw their task as consisting in two parts. The ﬁrst was deﬁning a “true idea
of induction”. In an early notebook entry, Whewell lamented “that the true idea
of induction has not been generally ﬁxed and agreed upon must I think be very
obvious”.4 The second task was “to get the people into a right way of thinking
about induction”;5 that is, to publicize the nature and value of induction in all
areas of thought. In one of his many letters to Jones, Whewell refers to induction
as the “true faith”, wondering how it can “best be propagated”.6
Whewell and Jones framed their reforming mission as a battle against those
they referred to as the “downwards mad”, that is, those who preferred a deductive
approach to the logic of the natural and moral sciences.7 One of these “deductive
savages” was Richard Whately, fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, who became arch-
bishop of Dublin in 1831.8 Early that year Jones wrote to Whewell after seeing
3In his 1831 review of Herschel’s Preliminary Discourse, Whewell referred to “the history and
philosophy of physical science” as his “vocation” (see [Whewell, 1831, 374]). Later, he wrote to
Herschel that “the reform of our philosophy is the work to which I have the strongest vocation,
and which I cannot give up if I were to try” (letter to Herschel, 9 April 1836, in [Todhunter,
1876, 2: 234]).
4See notebook dated 28 June 1830, WP R.18.17 f. 12, pp. v–ix.
5William Whewell to Richard Jones, 25 February 1831, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 99.
6William Whewell to Richard Jones, 25 February 1831, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 99.
7See William Whewell to Richard Jones, 20 January 1833, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 149; and 22
July 1831, Add.Ms.c.51 f. 110.
8William Whewell to Richard Jones, 19 February 1832, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f.129.

166
Laura J. Snyder
the third edition of Whately’s Elements of Logic, objecting to Whately’s “strange
notion” that induction was a type of deductive reasoning.9 Indeed, Whately had
claimed that all forms of reasoning could be assimilated to the syllogism [Whately,
1827, 207]. Induction, for example, was said to be reasoning in which the major
premise, which is generally suppressed, can be expressed as “what belongs to the
individual or individuals we have examined, belongs to the whole class under which
they come” [Whately, 1827, 209]. Thus, to take Whately’s example, if we ﬁnd,
from an examination of the history of several tyrannies, that each of them lasted
a short time, we conclude that “all tyrannies are likely to be of short duration”.
In coming to this conclusion we make use of a suppressed major premise, namely,
“what belongs to the tyrannies in question is likely to belong to all” [Whately,
1827, 209]. Whately admitted that some would complain that his notion of in-
duction was too narrow, in that it did not account for how the minor premises
are obtained; i.e., for how it was ascertained that each of the examined tyrannies
were “short-lived”. But he distinguished between “logical discoveries”, which oc-
cur when syllogistic reasoning alone is used to deduce a conclusion from known
premises, and “Physical Discoveries”, which involve more than syllogistic reason-
ing because various methods are used for ascertaining the premises — including
observation, experiment, the selection and combination of facts, abstraction of
principles, and others [Whately, 1827, 234–6]. On Whately’s view logic was con-
cerned only with reasoning from premises, not with ascertaining the premises.
Thus inductive logic was also only concerned with reasoning from premises, or
what Whately called logical, as opposed to physical, discovery.10
Whewell and Jones saw Whately’s characterization of induction as more than
just a point of logic.
Rather, it presented a potential obstacle for the reform
of philosophy they sought. They realized that many people associated induction
with scientiﬁc method, even if they were unclear about the precise meaning of
the term. If people accepted Whately’s deﬁnition of induction, they might be led
to the erroneous conclusion that science is essentially deductive, concerned only
with deducing conclusions from assumed “ﬁrst principles”. Whewell and Jones
linked this deductive view of science with that of the scholastic Aristotelians;
indeed, Whately had explicitly framed his work as a defense of Aristotelian logic
against the “confused” views of induction that resulted from its connection with
Bacon.11 But Jones and Whewell were eager to endorse a renovated version of
9Richard Jones to William Whewell, 24 February 1831, WP Add.Ms.c.52 f.20.
10As Pietro Corsi notes, Whately thus distinguished between two senses of induction: one
having to do with the collection of facts, the other being a form of inference. The ﬁrst was not
of concern to Whately. Rather, his aim was to demonstrate that the second was “under the
dominion of logic” [Corsi, 1988, 151]. This aim arose out of the context of attacks on the Oxford
curriculum from those, such as John Playfair, who argued that progress in the mathematical
sciences had been impeded by the reliance on Aristotelian logic.
Whately and his teacher,
Edward Copleston, defended the curriculum and the prominence of Aristotelian logic within it
(see also [McKerrow, 1987]).
11See [Whately, 1827, ix and 9] and [McKerrow, 1987, 172]. In a letter to Jones, Whewell
claimed that Whately and his followers were even worse than Aristotle, “far more immersed in
verbal triﬂing and useless subtilty” (7 April 1843, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 227). Pietro Corsi has

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
167
Baconian inductivism. From their undergraduate days, they referred to Bacon
as the “Master”, and framed their task in terms of revising and popularizing his
inductive logic. Although his view was not without ﬂaws, it was the closest thing
to a true inductive logic. Certainly, it was a vast improvement over the logic of
the scholastic Aristotelians.
Because of their emphasis on the syllogism, Whewell complained, the scholas-
tics “talked of experiment” but “showed little disposition to discover the truths
of nature by observation of facts” [Whewell, 1860, 48]. In a notebook from 1830,
Whewell wrote of the Aristotelian method that such a method “could lead to no
such truths, and in the development of physical science especially was entirely
barren. . . . The business of speculative men became, not discovery, but argumen-
tation”.12 Later, in his History of the Inductive Sciences, Whewell would refer to
the Middle Ages as a “stationary period” in science. Whewell and Jones believed
that the correct, Baconian view of induction needed to be brought before the pub-
lic in order to prevail against sterile deductive approaches to scientiﬁc knowledge.
Whewell expressed his “conﬁdence” to Jones that “by and by the whole world will
think [the deductive deﬁnition of science] as nonsensical as we do”. But before
this could happen, he and Jones would need to spread the “true faith”.13
3
WHEWELL’S ANTITHETICAL EPISTEMOLOGY
The early inﬂuence of Bacon strongly inclined Whewell toward an inductive, em-
pirical view of epistemology. At the same time, however, Whewell had a deep
appreciation for a priori, deductive forms of reasoning, due to his interest in math-
ematical sciences. His early work in mechanics exposed him to a physical science
which seemed to incorporate both empirical and a priori elements.14 But it was
his experience studying mineralogy abroad that struck Whewell with the need to
combine empirical and a priori elements in an epistemology and scientiﬁc method-
ology. In 1825, when Henslow vacated the chair of Mineralogy at Cambridge to
take up the Botany Professorship, Whewell announced himself a candidate for
the position. Although he had published mathematical papers on crystallogra-
phy, Whewell did not have much empirical knowledge of mineralogy; thus he went
abroad to study with experts such as Friedrich Mohs. (This was not unusual at
the time. When Adam Sedgwick was elected to the Woodwardian professorship of
geology in 1818, he knew little of the discipline and needed to learn it quickly) (see
noted that Whately and the “Oxford Noetics” used Stewart’s writings in defense of Oxford’s
educational system, with its emphasis on Aristotelian logic, a position opposed to Stewart’s own
[Corsi, 1987].
12William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.18.17 f. 12, p. 94. See also a notebook dating from
1831-2 (WP R.18.17 f. 15, p. 24). Thirty years later, in the ﬁnal edition of the Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences, Whewell criticized Descartes on similar grounds. See [Whewell, 1860, 163].
13William Whewell to Richard Jones, 25 February 1831, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 99.
14Whewell’s ﬁrst book was a textbook on dynamics, published in 1819. He went on to produce
four more textbooks on mechanics, a book on analytical statics, and a text on the diﬀerential
calculus.

168
Laura J. Snyder
[Garland, 1980, 96]). Whewell was strongly impressed with the “German school”
in mineralogy, especially with the elegant mathematical treatment given by Mohs
of a science which Whewell had previously considered to be purely empirical. He
wrote to his friend Hugh James Rose that “I am afraid . . . that I may not bring
back my faith as untainted as you have done: for I ﬁnd my mineralogical super-
naturalismus giving way in some respects. It may be possible to bring about a
union between the two creeds [i.e., the a priori and the empirical], which I hope
will not be such a thing in science as you hold it to be in faith”.15
Whewell eventually reconciled the empirical and a priori elements of science
in an epistemology that is “antithetical”, in that it expressed what Whewell
called the “Fundamental Antithesis”, or dual nature, of knowledge.16
Accord-
ing to Whewell’s mature epistemology, all knowledge involves both an ideal, or
subjective, element, as well as an empirical, or objective, element. Although his
experience with mineralogy had sparked Whewell’s desire to “bring about a union
between the two creeds” of empiricism and a priorism, Whewell’s notebook writ-
ings on induction prior to 1831 present induction as a purely empirical process,
consisting in enumerative induction of observed instances.17 He had not, up to this
point, found a way to synthesize the a priori elements of scientiﬁc knowledge with
the empirical epistemology he wished to follow Bacon in endorsing. By February
of 1831, while working on his review of John Herschel’s Preliminary Discourse
on the Study of Natural Philosophy, Whewell for the ﬁrst time used a metaphor
indicating his initial attempt to combine these empirical and a priori or purely
rational elements of science. Whewell explained that
Induction agrees with mere Observation in accumulating facts, and
with Pure Reason in stating general propositions; but she does more
than Observation, inasmuch as she not only collects facts, but catches
some connexion or relation among them; and less than pure Reason
. . .
because she only declares that there are connecting properties,
without asserting that they must exist of necessity and in all cases.
If we consider the facts of external nature to lie before us like a heap
of pearls of various forms and sizes, mere Observation takes up an
indiscriminate handful of them; Induction seizes some thread on which
a portion of the heap are strung, and binds such threads together.
[Whewell, 1831, 379]
He asked Jones to look over his draft.18 Jones’s assessment proved to be valuable
for Whewell:
15William Whewell to H.J. Rose, 15 August 1825, in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 60]. See also [Fisch,
1991, 67].
16Whewell’s epistemology is referred to as “antithetical” in [Fisch, 1985] and [Fisch, 1991].
17See especially the earliest draft of Philosophy, dated 28 June 1830, where his view of induction
sounds much like the view expressed later by Mill in his System of Logic, a view that Whewell
strongly criticized (WP R.18.17 f. 12, 98, 104).
18William Whewell to Richard Jones, 11 February 1831, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 98.

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
169
I go along with you in your use of the word induction only I fear to
a certain extent — I do not myself like to oppose it to or contrast it
with either observation or pure reason — Induction according to me
and Aristotle (admire my modesty) is the whole process by which the
intellect gets a general principle from observing particulars or individ-
uals and in that process both observation and pure reason have a part
— when observation has collected the facts abstraction. . . . seizes on
the law or principle and then the inductive process is compleat in all
its parts.19
In this passage Jones suggested to Whewell a way to synthesize the empirical
and the ideal in his epistemology: namely, by seeing induction as an act that
includes both observation and pure reason. Whewell seems to have been inspired
by this characterization of induction.
He soon began to describe induction as
a process involving observation and reason.
The rational element of induction
was provided by certain “conceptions of the mind”. In a notebook dated 1831-2,
Whewell for the ﬁrst time characterized induction as involving such conceptions:
“induction supposes a power of clearly representing phenomena by the mind as
subordinate to the conceptions of space, number, etc.”20 In another notebook of
this period Whewell described the importance of distinctly conceiving conceptions
in order to make proper inductions,21 and added what appears to be his ﬁrst
list of conceptions regulating diﬀerent sciences.22 By 1833 Whewell had come to
believe that, as he explained in a notebook entry, “knowledge implies passive sense
[i.e., observation] and active thought [i.e., reason]”.23 In an address to the British
Association for the Advancement of Science in that same year, Whewell claimed
that “a combination of theory with facts . . . is requisite” in order to discover new
truths” [Whewell, 1834a, xx]. And in a letter to Jones in 1834 Whewell described
his “Philosophy of Induction”, claiming that “you will see that a main feature is
the assertion of ideas and facts as equally and conjointly necessary to science”.24
By 1837, Whewell was ready to formulate more systematically this position,
and to express it publicly. He did so in his “Remarks on the Logic of Induction”,
which was appended to his textbook Mechanical Euclid. In this essay Whewell
explained that induction requires both an idea provided by the mind and facts
provided by the world [Whewell, 1838, 181]. A “general idea”, which is not given
by the phenomena but “by the mind”, is “superinduced upon the observed facts”
[Whewell, 1838, 178]. In his History of the Inductive Sciences, published that same
year, Whewell similarly noted that both facts and ideas are requisite for the “for-
mation of science”. “Real speculative knowledge”, Whewell claimed, “demands
the combination of the two ingredients” [Whewell, 1857a 1: 5–6]. By the time
19Richard Jones to William Whewell, 7 March 1831, WP Add.Ms.c.52 f. 26, emphasis added.
20William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.17.18 f. 13, p. 54.
21William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.17.18 f. 15, p. 2.
22William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.17.18.f. 15, p. 47, in an entry dated 2 July 1831.
23William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.18.17 f. 8, facing p. 20.
24William Whewell to Richard Jones, 5 August 1834, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 174.

170
Laura J. Snyder
he published the ﬁrst edition of the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences in 1840,
he had worked out more details of the position, and developed an argument sit-
uating his epistemological view as a “middle way” between stark empiricism and
full-blown rationalism.
Because of the dual or antithetical nature of knowledge, Whewell claimed, gain-
ing knowledge requires attention to both Ideas and Sensations. Both are required
for knowledge: “without our ideas, our sensations could have no connexion; with-
out external impressions, our ideas would have no reality; and thus both ingredients
of our knowledge must exist” [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 58]. An exclusive focus on one or
the other side of the antithesis is to be avoided. Whewell criticized both Kant and
the German Idealists, for their exclusive focus on the ideal or subjective element,
and Locke and his followers of the “Sensationalist School”, for their exclusive focus
on the empirical, objective element.
Whewell generally referred to these ideas, which comprise the ideal or subjec-
tive element in his antithetical epistemology, as “Fundamental Ideas”. Whewell
explained that “I call them Ideas, as being something not derived from sensation,
but governing sensation, and consequently giving form to our experience; — Fun-
damental, as being the foundation of knowledge, or at least of Science” [Whewell,
1860, 336]. They are supplied by our minds in the course of our experience of the
external world; they are not simply received from our observation of the world
[Whewell, 1858a, 1: 91]. This is why Whewell claimed that the mind is an active
participant in our attempts to gain knowledge of the world, not merely a passive
recipient [Whewell, 1860, 218].
Although these Ideas are supplied by our minds, they are such that they enable
us to have real knowledge of the empirical world. They do so by connecting the
facts of our experience; this occurs because the Ideas provide the general relations
that really exist in the world between objects and events. These relations include
Space, Time, Causation and Resemblance, among numerous others. By enabling
us to connect the facts under these relations, the Ideas provide a structure or form
for the multitude of sensations we experience [Whewell, 1847, 1: 25]. Thus, for
example, the Idea of Space allows us to apprehend objects as existing in space,
in spatial relations to each other, and at a particular distance from us. Indeed,
we need these Ideas in order to be able to make sense of our sensations: “our
sensations, of themselves, without some act of the mind, such as involves what
we have termed an Idea, have not form. We cannot see one object without the
Idea of Space; we cannot see two without the idea of resemblance or diﬀerence;
and space and diﬀerence are not sensations” [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 40].
Every
science, Whewell believed, has one or more Fundamental Ideas particular to it,
which provide the structure for all the facts with which that science is concerned
([Whewell, 1858b, 137] and [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 3]). The Idea of Causation is
especially associated with the science of Mechanics, while the Idea of Space is the
Fundamental Idea of Geometry. Whewell explained further that each Fundamental
Idea has certain “conceptions” included within it; these conceptions are “special

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
171
modiﬁcations” of the Idea applied to particular types of circumstances.25
For
example, the conception of force is a modiﬁcation of the Idea of Cause, applied to
the particular case of motion (see [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 184–5, 236]).
Thus far, this discussion of the Fundamental Ideas may suggest that they are
similar to Kant’s forms of intuition and categories, and there are indeed some
similarities. Because of this, numerous commentators argue that Whewell’s epis-
temology was derived from his reading of Kant, or perhaps a view of German
philosophy refracted through the writings of Coleridge and the Coleridgian circle
at Cambridge, which included Whewell’s close friends Rose and Julius C. Hare.26
However, although there are some similarities between his view of the Fundamen-
tal Antithesis and certain notions of Kant’s and Coleridge’s, there are important
diﬀerences, which are frequently overlooked by commentators on Whewell.
On the one hand, Whewell did read and appreciate Kant, in a time when Ger-
man philosophy was not terribly popular in England (see [Wellek, 1931]). He knew
German well enough to publish translations of German prose and poetry,27 and, if
a story related by his student Isaac Todhunter is true, well enough to pass in Ger-
many as a native-speaker.28 A notebook from 1825 contains reading notes of the
Critique of Pure Reason.29 Like Kant, Whewell was interested in how it is possible
for us to have knowledge which has a universality and necessity that experience
alone can not give it. And his answer, like Kant’s, involves certain conceptions
and ideas which are in some sense a priori, because they are not derived from
experience. As he wrote to Herschel, “My argument is all in a single sentence.
You must adopt such a view of the nature of scientiﬁc truth as makes universal
and necessary propositions possible; for it appears that there are such, not only
in arithmetic and geometry, but in mechanics, physics and other things. I know
no solution of this diﬃculty except by assuming a priori grounds”.30 Moreover,
Whewell rather modestly admitted that his discussions of the Fundamental Ideas
of Space and Time are mere “paraphrases” of Kant’s discussion of the forms of
intuition in the ﬁrst Critique [Whewell, 1860, 335]. A contemporary translator of
Kant claimed, in fact, that in his Philosophy Whewell “more elegantly expressed”
certain doctrines of Kant.31 These most basic Ideas of Space and Time (in some
25[Whewell, 1858b, 187]. Whewell was not always consistent in maintaining the distinction
between Ideas and conceptions.
For instance, in this work he referred both to the “Idea of
Number” (p. 54) as well as the “conception of number” (pp. 50 and 56).
26On readings of Whewell as a “British Kantian”, see [Butts, 1965a], [Buchdahl, 1991], [Ruse,
1979], and [Marcucci, 1963]. Claims that Whewell’s view is closely linked to that of Coleridge
can be found in [Preyer, 1985], [Cantor, 1991], [Cannon, 1976], and [Sloan, 2003].
27In 1847, Whewell edited English Hexameter Translations from Schiller, Goethe, Homer,
Callinus, and Meleager, which contained Whewell’s translation of Goethe’s Herman and
Dorothea.
28Isaac Todhunter quotes a letter from the scientist Alexander von Humboldt, who bemoaned
the fact that he had “lost the pleasure” of seeing Whewell in Potsdam because he had told his
servant to admit an English gentlemen, but Whewell was turned away because “you have spoken
German like an inhabitant of the country!” (see [Todhunter, 1876, 1: 411].)
29See William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.18.9 f. 13, p. 19.
30William Whewell to John Herschel, 22 April 1841, in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 298].
31In Whewell’s library there is a translation of the Kritik der reinen Vernunft by Francis

172
Laura J. Snyder
works, Whewell includes the Idea of Cause among these) do function in Whewell’s
epistemology as similar to Kant’s forms of intuition in being conditions of our hav-
ing any knowledge of the world; indeed, Whewell referred to them as “conditions
of experience” [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 268] and “necessary conditions of knowledge”
[Whewell, 1841, 530]. For instance, on his view, experiencing objects as having
form, position and magnitude requires the Idea of Space (see [Whewell, 1844b,
487]). Because of these similarities, Whewell was accused by his contemporaries
(not all of whom had themselves studied Kant) of trying to import Kant into
British philosophy; in his review of the Philosophy DeMorgan expressed surprise
that “the doctrines of Kant and Transcendental Philosophy are now promulgated
in the university which educated Locke” [DeMorgan, 1840, 707]. The logician H.
L. Mansel — who was the closest thing to a British Kantian in those days —
thought Whewell had not gone far enough, criticizing him for his “stumble on the
threshold of Critical Philosophy” [Mansel, 1860, 258].
However, this was a threshold that Whewell did not intend to cross. There are
important diﬀerences between Kant’s transcendental philosophy and Whewell’s
antithetical epistemology. Whewell did not follow Kant in distinguishing between
the a priori components of knowledge provided by intuition (Sinnlichkeit), the Un-
derstanding (Verstand) and the faculty of Reason (Vernunft). Thus Whewell drew
no distinction between “precepts”, or forms of intuition, such as Space and Time,
the categories, or forms of thought, in which Kant included the concepts of Cause
and Substance, and the transcendental ideas of reason. Further, Whewell included
as “Fundamental Ideas” many which function not as conditions of experience but
as conditions for having knowledge within their respective sciences: although it is
certainly possible to have experience of the world without having a distinct Idea
of, say, Chemical Aﬃnity, we could not have any knowledge of certain chemical
processes without it ([Whewell, 1858a, 2: 2-3] and [Whewell, 1860, 349]). Unlike
Kant, Whewell did not attempt to give an exhaustive list of these Fundamental
Ideas; rather, he believed that there are others which will emerge in the course
of the development of science. Moreover, and perhaps most importantly for his
philosophy of science, Whewell rejected Kant’s claim that we can only have knowl-
edge of our “categorized experience”. The Fundamental Ideas, on Whewell’s view,
accurately represent objective features of the world, independent of the processes
of the mind, and we can use these Ideas in order to have knowledge of these ob-
jective features.32 Indeed, Whewell criticized Kant for viewing external reality as
Hayward (1848) inscribed “The Rev. Dr. Whewell/With the Translator’s respects”. In the text,
the translator added a note to Kant’s Preface to the 2nd edition: Kant wrote “If the intuition
must regulate itself according to the property of the objects, I do not see how one can know
anything with regard to it, a priori, but if the object regulates itself, (as objects of the senses,)
according to the property of our faculty of intuition, I can very well represent to myself this
possibility” (pp. xxv-xxvi). The added note reads “See Whewell’s Philosophy of the Sciences,
vol. ii, p. 479, where this is more freely translated and more elegantly expressed” (p. xxvi).
32In 1865 Charles Peirce expressed a similar view of Whewell’s divergence from Kant’s view:
“Dr. Whewell has usually been considered a Kantian. Up to a certain point this is true. He
accepts Kant’s division of the matter and form of our knowledge and also his theory of space
and time but he seems to have cast away from the doctrine of the limits of our knowledge which

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
173
a “dim and unknown region” [Whewell, 1860, 312]. Whewell’s justiﬁcation for the
presence of these concepts in our minds takes a very diﬀerent form than Kant’s
transcendental argument. For Kant, the categories are justiﬁed because they make
experience possible. For Whewell, though the categories do make experience (of
certain kinds) possible, the Ideas are justiﬁed by their origin in the mind of a
divine creator. And ﬁnally, the type of necessity that Whewell claimed is derived
from the ideas is very diﬀerent from Kant’s notion of the synthetic a priori (we
will return to this ﬁnal point in section VIII).
Thus we should take seriously Whewell’s frequent denials that his epistemology
is identical or even particularly similar to Kant’s. In his response to DeMorgan’s
review, a privately-published pamphlet, Whewell noted that his critic had gone
too far in associating him with the Kantian philosophy: “It might have occurred
to him, . . .
that by the very circumstance of classing many other ideas with
those of space and time, I entirely removed myself from the Kantian point of
view” [Whewell, 1840b, 4].
In his reply to Mansel, later published as part of
the Philosophy of Discovery, Whewell clearly noted that he never intended to
follow Kant’s view, and pointed out ways in which his philosophy diﬀers from
Kant’s [Whewell, 1860, 335–46]. What he particularly admired of Kant’s work
was his having shown the untenable nature of the account of knowledge given by
the Lockean school [Whewell, 1860, 308]. Whewell’s dislike of Locke began early,
even before his 1825 reading of the ﬁrst Critique: in 1814 he wrote to his former
headmaster, the Reverend G. Morland, that while reading Locke he “grew out of
humour with [him]”.33 In his chapter on “The Inﬂuence of German Philosophy
in Britain” in the ﬁnal edition of the Philosophy, Whewell set up a tripartite
division showing himself to be in between the idealism of the Germans and the
strict empiricism of Mill, standing in here for the Lockean school. Speaking of
himself in the third person, Whewell wrote: “Kant considers that Space and Time
are conditions of perception, and hence sources of necessary and universal truth.
Dr. Whewell agrees with Kant [only] in placing in the mind certain sources of
necessary truth; he calls these Fundamental Ideas, and reckons, besides Space and
Time, others, as Cause, Likeness, Substance, and several more. Mr. Mill, the
most recent and able expounder of the opposite doctrine, derives all truths from
Observation, and denies that there is such a separate source of truth as Ideas”.34
Whewell was, as he insisted, seeking a “middle way” between the excesses of Locke
and Kant.
It is noteworthy that, while working out his theory, there are no references
to Kant or uses of technical Kantian terminology such as “forms of intuition”,
“categories”, “analytic and synthetic truths” in his letters to Jones, his notebooks,
is the essence of the critical philosophy” [Peirce, 1982, 205].
33William Whewell to George Morland, n.d., April 1814, in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 2].
34[Whewell, 1860, 336]. Buchdahl claims in his [1991] that Whewell shares Kant’s “idealist”
or “subjectivist” approach to the Ideas, and therefore also to the knowledge we gain using them.
Butts [1994, 278] maintains that Whewell “owes his theory of science to Kant”. Fisch has a more
nuanced view, claiming that there are “Kantian undertones” in Whewell’s epistemology, but less
than generally supposed (see his [1991, 105]).

174
Laura J. Snyder
or his early drafts of the Philosophy.35 This suggests that Kant was not explicitly
on Whewell’s mind as he strove to develop an epistemology that could incorporate
both empirical and ideal elements of knowledge. While there are, as we have seen,
some aspects of Whewell’s view that are similar to Kant’s epistemology, it is not
necessarily the case that Whewell derived these directly from his reading of Kant in
1825. Whewell certainly appreciated Kant’s critique of the Sensationalist school,
and took note of his ideal solution. But his reading of Dugald Stewart, Thomas
Reid and other Scottish philosophers similarly impressed Whewell, and may well
have ﬁrst exposed him to the type of ideal solution given by Kant.36 Whewell
expressed an appreciation of the work of the Scottish philosophers as early as
1814, when he sent a letter full of their praise to Morland.37 Years later, when
he published the Philosophy, Whewell applauded the “intelligent metaphysicians
in Scotland”, including “Reid, Beattie, Dugald Stewart, and Thomas Brown”, for
arguing against the “sensationalism” of Hume and Locke (see [Whewell, 1860, 214]
and [Whewell, 1847, 2: 309]. He noted that their shared view, “according to which
the Reason or Understanding is the source of certain simple ideas, such as Identity,
Causation, Equality, which ideas are necessarily involved in the intuitive judgments
which we form, when we recognize fundamental truths of science, approaches very
near in eﬀect to [my] doctrine . . .
of fundamental ideas . . . ” [Whewell, 1860,
215] (see also [Whewell, 1847, 2: 310–11]). Stewart had argued, for example, that
every act of observation involves an “interpretation of nature”. In his Elements
of the Philosophy of the Human Mind, he explained that “without theory or, in
other words, without general principles inferred from a sagacious comparison of
a variety of phenomena, experience is a blind and useless guide” (cited in [Corsi,
1987, 97]). It seems likely that Stewart was at least as much an inﬂuence upon
the development of Whewell’s epistemology as Kant.
Similarly, Coleridge’s writings did not inspire Whewell’s antithetical epistemol-
ogy.
Commentators have made much of the network of friendships at Trinity
including classical and German scholars inﬂuenced by Coleridge and German phi-
losophy such as Hare, Rose, Thirwall, F.D. Maurice and John Sterling, and men
of science such as George Peacock, G.B. Airy, Sedgwick, Herschel, and Whewell
(see [Preyer, 1985] and [Cantor, 1991, especially p. 77]. However, friendship, in
these cases, did not imply philosophical agreement. Whewell was especially close
to Hare and Rose, but he did not join them in their enthusiasm for the Romantic
movement in general or its speciﬁc views of education, history, poetry or philoso-
phy. Whewell particularly objected to the way the Romantics set up an opposition
between reason and feeling or “enthusiasm”, elevating the latter over the former.
He argued this point with Rose. “Why will you not see that in speculative matters,
though Reason may go wrong if not guided by our better aﬀections, you cannot
35This point is also noted by [Fisch, 1991, 105].
36Pietro Corsi has suggested, for example, that Whewell’s earliest views of space and time
as conditions of experience may have been sparked initially by his reading of Dugald Stewart’s
Philosophical Essays, prior to his reading of Kant (see [Corsi, 1988, 155]).
37William Whewell to George Morland, 15 June 1814, in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 6].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
175
do without her? All your eﬀorts not to reason at all will only end in your rea-
soning very ill . . . Finding that Reason alone cannot invent a satisfactory system
of morals or politics, are you not quarrelling with her altogether, and adopting
opinions because they are irrational?”38 In a notebook entry from 1816-17, con-
taining reading notes on Coleridge’s On the Constitution of the Church and State
According to the Idea of Each, Lay Sermons, Whewell accused Coleridge of trying
to “make reason commit suicide” by ceding ground to enthusiasm.39
At ﬁrst glance, however, there are similarities between Whewell’s epistemology
and the view expressed by Coleridge in his Preliminary Treatise on Method (1817),
which served as the general introduction of the Encyclopedia Metropolitana. Unlike
some Cambridge admirers of Coleridge, such as Whewell’s friend Rose, Coleridge
himself did not disparage natural science, and intended his treatise on method to
illustrate the application of his philosophy to the scientiﬁc study of nature.40 Co-
leridge noted that discoveries of truth are not made by accident, but by the distinct
presentation of an Idea. He claimed that the science of Electricity had progressed
more rapidly than that of Magnetism because the former contained a clear Idea
of Polarity, while the latter had no clear regulative Idea [Coleridge, 1849, 17–21].
Coleridge described the “perfect” scientiﬁc method as involving the placing of par-
ticulars under a general conception, which becomes their “connective and bond of
unity” [Coleridge, 1849, 54]. So far, this is not opposed to Whewell’s view of the
role of fundamental ideas in our knowledge. Yet, as Whewell perceived, Coleridge
was attempting to “separate the poles of the Fundamental Antithesis”, by assert-
ing an absolute division between the ideal and the empirical parts of knowledge
[Whewell, 1860, 424–5]. Coleridge drew a distinction between “Metaphysical” and
“Physical” Ideas, explaining that “Metaphysical Ideas, or those which relate to
the essence of things as possible, are of the highest class . . . Physical Ideas are
those which we mean to express, when we speak of the nature of a thing actu-
ally existing and cognizable by our faculties” [Coleridge, 1849, 20]. Metaphysical
Ideas, then, have nothing to do with empirical experience, while Physical Ideas ex-
clusively concern empirical experience. In his Aids to Reﬂection and The Friend,
Coleridge asserted further that there are two distinct faculties, the Understand-
ing and the Reason, claiming that these diﬀerent faculties are responsible for our
having knowledge of diﬀerent types [Coleridge, 1965-80, 9: 252n and 4: 158]. The
Understanding, according to Coleridge, is the “conception of the Sensuous, or the
faculty by which we generalize and arrange the phenomena of perception”; it is the
faculty that deals with our perceptions of material objects, which we gain through
the senses [Coleridge, 1965-80, 4: 156]. The faculty of Reason is “the organ of the
38William Whewell to H.J Rose, 29 December 1823, in [Stair Douglas, 1882, 95].
39See a notebook entry from 1816-17, containing reading notes on Coleridge’s On the Con-
stitution of the Church and State According to the Idea of Each, Lay Sermons.
Quoted in
[Todhunter, 1876, 1: 349].
40See [Coburn, 1975]. Although, to my knowledge, Whewell never referred explicitly to Co-
leridge’s Preliminary Treatise in his letters to Rose or in his notebooks, he surely must have
read it, given his interest in scientiﬁc method and given that Rose was one of the editors of the
Encyclopedia Metropolitana.

176
Laura J. Snyder
Super-sensuous”, in that it does not depend on the senses. Rather, Reason is the
source of necessary and universal principles of mathematics and science, as well
as the laws of thought. Understanding is the faculty that leads us to Theories,
which, according to Coleridge, describe relations that are only contingent, being
“the result of observation”. Reason is the faculty that leads us to Laws, which he
claims describe necessary relations between things.41 Thus Coleridge maintained
that the Ptolemean system and the Newtonian system were developed by diﬀerent
faculties: the Ptolemean system by the Understanding, the Newtonian system by
Reason [Coleridge, 1965-80, 9: 252–3].
Whewell pointedly criticized Coleridge’s view of the discoveries of Ptolemy and
Newton, calling it “altogether false and baseless”. He noted that “the Ptolemaic
and the Newtonian system do not proceed from diﬀerent faculties of the mind,
but from the same power, exercised more and more completely” [Whewell, 1862,
122]. As we have seen, Whewell believed that all knowledge requires the use of
both sensations and conceptions; he explained that “there is in science no faculty
which judges according to sense without doing more; and no creative or suggestive
faculty which must not submit to have its creations and suggestions tested by
the phenomena” [Whewell, 1862, 123]. Further, Whewell objected to Coleridge’s
denigration of the understanding by associating it with the instinct of animals
(in Aids to Reﬂection Coleridge compares this faculty to the instinct of bees and
ants). In this way Coleridge made even more explicit his disdain for the faculty of
perception and the empirical facts with which it deals in the attainment of human
knowledge.42 Like Plato, whom Whewell also criticized, Coleridge was guilty of
“disparaging or neglecting facts” [Whewell, 1860, 11]. After writing one of his
papers on Plato, Whewell sent it to DeMorgan, writing “I hope you will think
that in the paper I send you I have demolished the Coleridgean account of Reason
and Understanding”.43
4
WHEWELL’S DISCOVERERS’ INDUCTION
Once he had developed his antithetical epistemology, Whewell was able to con-
struct an inductive methodology that accounted for the discovery of laws while in-
corporating both empirical and a priori elements. Whewell’s ﬁrst explicit, lengthy
discussion of this inductive method — which he called (in an 1859 letter to De-
Morgan) “Discoverers’ Induction” — appeared in the 1840 ﬁrst edition of the
Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, Founded Upon Their History.44 His view
of inductive method remained essentially unaltered through his publication of the
41[Coleridge, 1849, 21]. As we will see below, on Whewell’s view this distinction between laws
and theories is invalid, because there is no fundamental division between necessary truth and
empirical truth
42See [Coleridge, 1965-80, 9: 243–5] and [Whewell, 1862, 123–6]. See also Whewell’s notes on
Coleridge’s Aids to Reﬂection (WP R.G.13 f. 39, p. 21, quoted in [Levere, 1996, 1686–89]).
43William Whewell to Augustus DeMorgan, 2 February 1858, WP O.15.47 f. 23.
44William Whewell to Augustus DeMorgan, January 18, 1859, in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 417].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
177
second edition of the Philosophy in 1847, and the third and ﬁnal edition, which
appeared as three separate works between 1858 and 1860 (The History of Scien-
tiﬁc Ideas, in two volumes [1858], the Novum Organon Renovatum [1858] and the
Philosophy of Discovery [1860]). In describing Discoverers’ Induction, Whewell
began by noting that the standard view of induction holds that it is “the process
by which we collect a General Proposition from a number of Particular Cases”
[Whewell, 1847, 2: 48]. However, Whewell rejected this overly narrow notion of
induction, casting induction in the light of the Fundamental Antithesis by arguing
that, in scientiﬁc discovery, it is not the case that “the general proposition results
from a mere juxta-position [sic] of the cases” (that is, from simple enumeration
of instances) [Whewell, 1847, 2: 48]. Rather, Whewell explained that “there is a
New Element added to the combination [of instances] by the very act of thought
by which they were combined” [Whewell, 1847, 2: 48]. As Jones had suggested
years before, induction was described by Whewell in the various editions of the
Philosophy as an “act of the intellect” which includes both observation and rea-
soning.45 In the Philosophy, Whewell coined the term “colligation” to describe
this “act of thought”.
Colligation, Whewell explained, is the mental operation of bringing together a
number of empirical facts by “superinducing” upon them a fundamental conception
that unites the facts and renders them capable of being expressed by a general law.
The conception provides the “true bond of Unity” tying together the phenomena,
by providing a property shared by the known members of a class (note that,
in the case of causal laws, this can be the property of sharing the same cause)
[Whewell, 1847, 2: 46]. We have already seen that, in his 1831 review of Herschel’s
Preliminary Discourse, Whewell used a metaphor suggesting that the facts of
nature are like pearls, and the conception is the string upon which the pearls can
be threaded. Without the string we have nothing but an “indiscriminate” heap
of pearls, while with the string we have something ordered and beautiful. In all
editions of the Philosophy, Whewell continued to believe that laws are formed by
connecting facts with a uniting conception.
In order to colligate facts with a conception, we must ﬁrst have suitable facts.
Whewell noted that it is necessary to have “already obtained a supply of deﬁnite
and certain Facts, free from obscurity and doubt” [Whewell, 1847, 2: 26]. It is
useful at this point to consider what Whewell precisely meant by a “fact”. In some
places Whewell oversimpliﬁed matters, as when he claimed that the colligation
of facts involves the establishing of a connection “among the phenomena which
are presented to our senses”.46
This suggests that “facts” are simply observed
phenomena. However, the situation is complicated for Whewell by his antithetical
epistemology. As we have seen, his view of the nature of knowledge entails that
all observation is mediated by our Ideas and conceptions; thus there can be no
45See [Whewell, 1858b, 36], and compare to letter from Richard Jones, 7 March 1831, WP
Add.Ms.c.52 f. 26.
46[Whewell, 1847, 2: 36]. He was being sloppy here, as the passage follows the pages in which
he described the need to decompose facts.

178
Laura J. Snyder
conception-free observation [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 32].
One consequence of this,
Whewell explained, is that we cannot easily separate in our perceptions of things
the element that our mind contributes and the element that comes from outside
our mind [Whewell, 1847, 2: 27]. It is, indeed, impossible to do so [Whewell, 1847,
2: 30]. Nevertheless, we can attempt to make explicit the Ideas and conceptions
that are involved in our perception of speciﬁc phenomena. Once we do so, we can
use those facts that have reference to the more “exact Ideas” of Space, Time, and
Cause, or the conceptions associated with these Ideas, such as Position, Weight,
Number, as the “foundation of Science” [Whewell, 1847, 2: 30–2]. This is useful
because these Ideas and conceptions are particularly deﬁnite and precise [Whewell,
1847, 2: 38]. The operation by which we separate complex facts into more simple
facts exhibiting the relations of Space, Time and Cause, is called the Decomposition
of Facts [Whewell, 1847, 2: 33]. Whewell described it as a method of “render[ing]
observation certain and exact” [Whewell, 1847, 2: 35]. He outlined a number of
“Methods of Observation” which can be used in this process.47
Once we have decomposed facts, Whewell explained, we can examine them with
regard to other Ideas and conceptions. We can bind together the facts by applying
to them a “clear and appropriate” conception; although such a conception may not
be as exact and precise as the conceptions associated with Space, Time and Cause,
it must still be clear enough to be capable of giving “distinct and deﬁnite results”
[Whewell, 1847, II: 39]. It is necessary to “explicate conceptions”, that is, clarify
them and render them as precise as possible.
Conceptions used in colligation
must be not only clear, but also “appropriate” to the facts involved. As Whewell
pointed out, attention is generally not given to this aspect of discovery. He noted
that “the defect which prevents discoveries may be the want of suitable ideas,
and not the want of observed facts” [Whewell, 1840b, 7]. An “appropriate” or
“suitable” conception is one which expresses a property or cause shared by the facts
which it is used to unify. As Whewell put it, conceptions must be “modiﬁcations
of that Fundamental Idea, by which the phenomena can really be interpreted”
[Whewell, 1858b, 30]. Often scientists apply an inappropriate conception to a set
of facts, as when astronomers prior to Kepler applied the conception of epicycles
to colligate planetary motions. This was not the appropriate conception, because
it does not describe the way that planets do, in fact, move. Scientiﬁc discoveries
are made not merely when accurate observations are obtained, as was the case
after Tycho Brahe’s observations of the orbit of Mars, but when in addition to
accurate observations the appropriate conception is used, as when Kepler applied
the conception of an ellipse rather than that of the epicycle. Whewell observed
that ﬁnding this correct conception is often the most diﬃcult part of discovery, the
part that gives it its “scientiﬁc value”. As Whewell noted, Tycho Brahe already
47[Whewell, 1847, 2: 337–58]. Whewell’s interest in methods of observation was not merely
theoretical, but also practical. In the mid-1830s, Whewell organized a vast international project
of tidal observations for the Royal Society, which awarded him a gold medal in recognition of
this work in 1837. As part of this enterprise Whewell wrote a Memorandum and Directions for
Tide Observations. For more on Whewell’s work on tidal science, see [Snyder, 2002; Cartwright,
1999].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
179
had access to the “facts”, but only Kepler was able to determine that these facts
could be correctly colligated by the conception of an ellipse. Another example
used by Whewell is Aristotle’s inability to account for the mechanical forces in the
lever by attempting to use the conception of a circle to colligate the known facts
regarding the proportion of the weights that balance on a lever. Archimedes later
showed that this was an inappropriate conception, and instead used the idea of
pressure to colligate these facts [Whewell, 1847, 1: 71–2]. The problem with other
notions of induction — most notably Whately’s — is that they omit precisely this
crucial and diﬃcult step of ﬁnding the appropriate conception (or, in Whately’s
terms, the minor premise).
How does a scientist discover the appropriate conception with which to colligate
a group of facts? Whewell believed that this was an essentially rational process,
but one that was not susceptible of being put in algorithmic form. What is most
important to this process is that the discoverer’s mind contains a clariﬁed or
“explicated” form of the appropriate conception. The explication of conceptions is
necessary because, although Whewell claimed that the Ideas and their conceptions
are provided by our minds, they cannot be used in their innate form. Indeed, in
an 1841 paper read before the Cambridge Philosophical Society, “Demonstration
that all Matter is Heavy”, Whewell denied that his Fundamental Ideas were innate
ideas in the typical sense of the term.
Unlike innate ideas, the Fundamental
Ideas are not “self-evident at our ﬁrst contemplation of them” [Whewell, 1841,
530]. Later, Whewell introduced the term “germs” to describe the original form
of the conceptions in our minds. In the third edition of the Philosophy, Whewell
explained that “the Ideas, the germ of them at least, were in the human mind
before [experience]; but by the progress of scientiﬁc thought they are unfolded
into clearness and distinctness” [Whewell, 1860, 373] (see also [Whewell, 1858b,
30–49] and [Snyder 2006, 55–60]).
Whewell is a realist about our knowledge of the world, as he reassured Herschel
(who had questioned his commitment to realism in his review of the Philosophy
and the History [Herschel, 1841]).48
Our Idea of Space, Whewell explained, is
what enables us to conceive things as existing in space with spatial characteristics;
but the reason we conceive things as so existing in space is that “they do so exist”
[Whewell, 1844b, 488]. Objects in the world really do exist in spatial relations
to each other, and with spatial characteristics of size and shape. By the 1850s,
Whewell came to argue that our Fundamental Ideas correspond to the world be-
cause both Ideas and world have a common origin in a divine creator. Our minds
contain the germs of these ideas because God “implanted” these germs within
our minds. Eventually, then, Whewell placed his epistemology on a theological
foundation.
This theological foundation for Whewell’s epistemology was inspired by the work
48When a person has knowledge about something, Whewell elsewhere claimed, “we conceive
that he knows it because it is true, not that it is true because he knows it” [1844a, 479]. I thus
disagree with Buchdahl’s reading of Whewell in his [1991].

180
Laura J. Snyder
of his childhood friend, the comparative anatomist Richard Owen.49 In the early
to mid-40s, Owen developed his theory of the archetypal vertebrate.50 Owen ﬁrst
published his theory in 1846 in his work on the Anatomy of Fishes and developed it
further in On the Archetype and Homologies of the Vertebrate Skeleton (1848) and
On the Nature of Limbs (1849). Owen argued that individual vertebrate animals
could be seen as modiﬁed instantiations of patterns or archetype forms that existed
in the Divine Mind. This “unity of plan” view allowed Owen to explain homologies,
that is, similar structures that have quite diﬀerent purposes, such as the wing of a
bird and the forelimb of a quadruped. According to Owen, the similarity of these
structures that were used in such diﬀerent ways was a consequence of their being
variations on the vertebrate archetype.
Similarly, structures without apparent
purpose, such as male nipples, did not contradict the claim that all of creation
was designed; rather they were the result of the application of general archetypes
(for more on Owen, see [Rupke, 1994]).
Whewell applied Owen’s archetype theory to his epistemology in ﬁve chapters
originally written for the Plurality, which Whewell deleted at the last moment
before publication.51 (Whewell took this drastic step on the advice of his friend
Sir James Stephen, who had been Regius professor of history at Cambridge since
1849, and who was concerned that these chapters were too “metaphysical” for
the general reader.) Whewell added a discussion of this point in the last volume
of the ﬁnal edition of the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, the Philosophy
of Discovery, published in 1860; presumably, the intended audience for this book
could be expected to follow metaphysical expositions (see [Whewell, 1860, chapters
30 and 31]).
Whewell argued that there were many archetypical Ideas in the
Divine Mind, in accordance with which the universe was created. As he put it,
God “exempliﬁed” in his creation certain Ideas existing in His mind, by creating
the universe in accordance with these Ideas.52 For example, God exempliﬁed an
Idea of Space in his universe by creating all physical objects as having spatial
characteristics, and as existing in spatial relations to each other.
The Idea of
Space, then, became on Whewell’s view an archetypical Divine Idea similar to the
Idea of the vertebrate skeleton: it was no less embodied in the physical world. In
creating us in his own image, God implanted us with the germs of the Divine Ideas.
Whewell claimed that “our Ideas are given to us by the same power which made
the world”. We can know the world because God has created us with the Ideas
needed to know it. More precisely, our minds are created with the “germs” from
which the Ideas can develop [Whewell, 1860, 373]. God, then, has implanted within
49In his [2003], Sloan argues that Whewell’s philosophy was an inﬂuence upon Owen’s devel-
opment of his archetype theory, speciﬁcally Owen’s concept of the archetype as both empirical
and transcendental (see pp. 58–9).
50For more details regarding the development of Owen’s theory and its appearances in his
lectures in the early 40s, before its publication, see [Sloan, 2003, 55–7].
51See William Whewell’s letter to Richard Jones, 30 December 1853, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 278.
52[Whewell, 1860, 371–379], and Of the Plurality of Worlds, printer’s proofs including ﬁve
chapters not included in the published version, WP Adv.c.16 f.27, p. 277. These chapters are
included in the edition of the Plurality of Worlds edited by Michael Ruse [Whewell, 2001].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
181
us the germs that need to be unfolded into Ideas representing those archetypical
Divine Ideas upon which the universe was created. Gaining a clear view of these
Ideas enables us to have knowledge of both the natural world and its Creator.53
Because the Fundamental Ideas exist innately within us only in the form of
germs which must be unfolded, the explication of Ideas and conceptions is a nec-
essary part of science. Explication of conceptions is a necessarily social process,
proceeding by “discussion” and “debate” among scientists; explication is not a pro-
cess that can take place solely within the mind of an individual genius. Whewell
noted that disputes concerning diﬀerent kinds and measures of Force were impor-
tant in the progress of mechanics, and the conception of the Atomic Constitution of
bodies was currently being debated by chemists [Whewell, 1847, 2: 6–7]. Whewell
explained that by arguing in favor of a particular meaning of a conception, sci-
entists are forced to clarify and make more explicit what they really mean. This
is beneﬁcial, whether or not the original expression prevails. If it does not, then
it is replaced by a more accurate or clearer expression of the conception. If it
does, the original expression has been improved by the scientists’ eﬀorts. Thus,
like Bacon, Whewell argued that “the tendency of all such controversy is to diﬀuse
truth and to dispel error. Truth is consistent, and can bear the tug of war; Error
is incoherent, and falls to pieces in the struggle” [Whewell, 1847, 2: 7]. Whewell
claimed that the explication of conceptions is a “necessary part of the inductive
movement” [Whewell, 1858b, vii]. Indeed, a large part of the history of science
is the “history of scientiﬁc ideas”; i.e., the history of their explication and sub-
sequent use as colligating concepts [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 16]. This is why, even
though Whewell worried about his philosophy being considered too metaphysical
by Jones and Herschel, ultimately he believed that metaphysics is a necessary part
of science at all stages; he explained that “the explication or . . . the clariﬁcation
of men’s ideas . . . [is] the metaphysical aspect of each of the physical sciences”
[Whewell, 1858b, vii]. Disagreeing with Auguste Comte, who had claimed that
at its highest level of advancement the intellect becomes “scientiﬁc” by purging
itself of metaphysics, Whewell argued that successful discoverers diﬀer from “bar-
ren speculators” not by rejecting metaphysics, but by having “good metaphysics”
rather than bad [Whewell, 1858b, vii].
Although the explication of conceptions is a process that occurs by discussion
and debate among groups of scientists, scientiﬁc discoveries are, Whewell noted,
generally made by individuals. Why is it that particular individuals are able to dis-
cover the appropriate conception to apply to a set of facts? Whewell pointed to a
facility for “invention”, the quality of “genius”; yet he strongly denied that there is
anything “accidental” about scientiﬁc discoveries. Whewell explicitly opposed the
view popularized by David Brewster in his Life of Newton (1831) that the discov-
ery of the law of universal gravitation was a “happy accident”. Whewell stressed
that discovery is always preceded by much intellectual and scientiﬁc preparation.
53Just as Owen’s archetype theory was supplanted by Darwin’s theory of evolution, so too
could Whewell’s theological foundation for his epistemology be replaced by an evolutionary epis-
temology. For an early attempt, see [Snyder, 1996].

182
Laura J. Snyder
Thus, Whewell noted that Kepler was able to discover the elliptical orbit of Mars
because his mind contained the clear and precise Idea of Space, and the conception
of an ellipse derived from this Idea. Whewell explained that “to supply this con-
ception, required a special preparation, and a special activity in the mind of the
discoverer . . . To discover such a connection, the mind must be conversant with
certain relations of space, and with certain kinds of ﬁgures” [Whewell, 1849, 28–
9]. The fact that Kepler’s mind was more “conversant” with the long-explicated
conceptions derived from the Idea of Space, such as that of the ellipse, explains
why he was able to recognize that the ellipse was the appropriate conception with
which to colligate the observed points of the Martian orbit, while Tycho Brahe
(who had made the most precise observations) was not.54
Another useful quality for the discoverer is a certain facility in generating a
number of possible options for the appropriate conception. Often, before the ap-
propriate conception is applied to the facts, the discoverer must call up in his
mind a number of possibilities. Whewell sometimes used the term “guesses” to
describe this stage of the discovery. Because of this, twentieth-century commenta-
tors, for the most part, have incorrectly viewed Whewell’s methodology as similar
to the “method of hypothesis” (or, as it is now known, the “hypothetico-deductive”
method). (For examples of this interpretation, see [Achinstein, 1992], [Buchdahl,
1991], [Butts, 1987], [Hanson, 1958], [Hempel, 1966], [Laudan, 1971], [Laudan,
1980], [Niiniluoto, 1977], [Ruse, 1975], [Wettersten, 1994], and [Yeo, 2004].) On
that view, there is no rational inference to a hypothesis; its formation is generally
described as a “guess”. However, Whewell claimed that the application or the
selection of the appropriate conception, in Kepler’s case and in all cases of dis-
covery, is not a matter of guesswork. Whewell described this process as being one
in which “trains of hypotheses are called up and pass rapidly in review; and the
judgment makes its choice from the varied group” [Whewell, 1847, 2: 42, emphasis
added]. Thus, even though at a certain point in his investigation (i.e., once he had
inferred that the Martian orbit was some type of oval) Kepler called up in his
mind “nineteen hypotheses” of possible ovals, his choice of the appropriate ellipse
conception was based on “calculations”, and hence on a rational process (and,
certainly, his conclusion that the orbit was oval involved much rational inference).
Nor is the selection of an appropriate conception a matter of mere observation.
Whewell claimed that to choose the appropriate conception requires more than
this: “there is a special process in the mind, in addition to the mere observation
of facts, which is necessary” [Whewell, 1849, 40]. (See also [Whewell, 1831, 379]
and [Whewell, 1860, 256–7].) This “special process of the mind” is inference. In
order to colligate facts with the appropriate conception, “we infer more than we
see”, Whewell explained [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 46]. Whewell claimed that, in the
case of choosing the conception of force to colligate the observed motions of a
needle towards a magnet, an inference, or an “interpretative act” of the mind, is
required (see [Whewell, 1858a 1: 31 and 45]). Inference is required before we see
54For a more detailed discussion of how Kepler’s discovery conformed to Whewell’s methodol-
ogy, see [Snyder, 1997].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
183
that “force” is the appropriate conception with which to colligate magnetic phe-
nomena. Since the selection of the appropriate conception with which to colligate
the facts involves inference, Whewell noted that discoveries are made “not by any
capricious conjecture of arbitrary selection” [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 29], that is not
by guesswork.
Indeed, selecting the appropriate conception typically requires not just one in-
ference, but a series of inferences. This is why Whewell claimed that discoverers’
induction is a process, involving a “train of researches” [1857a 1: 326]. (See also
[Lugg, 1989].) Whewell explicitly opposed limiting inductive discovery to enumer-
ative inference, writing that “induction by mere enumeration can hardly be called
induction” [1850, 451]. Indeed, enumerative inference could not, in most cases, ac-
count for the discovery of the appropriate conception with which to colligate the
data. Rather, Whewell allowed that any form of valid inference could be used. He
especially stressed the power of analogical reasoning. He extolled the importance
of analogical inference in two reviews from the early thirties, his review of Her-
schel’s Preliminary Discourse and his discussion of the second volume of Lyell’s
Principles of Geology (see [Whewell, 1831, 385] and [Whewell, 1832, 110]. See
also [Whewell, 1837, 2: 391]). Decades later, in his Plurality of Worlds, Whewell
more systematically discussed the importance of deﬁning the varying degrees of
precision and relevance to diﬀerent kinds of analogies [Whewell, 1855]. Not ev-
eryone was pleased with this liberal notion of inductive reasoning. As we have
seen, DeMorgan complained about certain writers using the term “induction” as
including “the use of the whole box of tools” [DeMorgan, 1847, 216].
Although inductive discovery is not a matter of accident, according to Whewell,
there is no “logic of discovery” in the sense of an algorithmic procedure. According
to Whewell, “no maxims can be given which inevitably lead to discovery.
No
precepts will elevate a man of ordinary endowments to the level of a man of genius”
[Whewell, 1858b, 94]. As we have seen, Whewell’s antithetical epistemology entails
the need for the existence of clear conceptions in the mind of the discoverer; and,
while there are methods to aid in the clariﬁcation and selection of the appropriate
conception, there is no algorithm or mechanical method for this process. This
is why invention requires “genius”. However, the fact that Whewell denied the
possibility of a mechanical method of discovery does not entail his rejection of a
rational discovery-method. His discoverers’ induction is a rational method for the
discovery of laws, even though it is not purely mechanical. His method does not
contain rules that are universally applicable but does oﬀer rational “instruments”
for aiding in discovery. Thus, in a letter to DeMorgan, Whewell noted that it
is possible to have an “Art of Discovery”; he quipped “if I had £20,000 a year
which might be devoted to the making of discoveries, I am sure that some might
be made”.55
55William Whewell to Augustus DeMorgan, 14 February 1859, in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 416].

184
Laura J. Snyder
5
CONFIRMATION OF THEORIES
Once Discoverers’ Induction results in a new hypothesis, Whewell claimed that
there were three ways to conﬁrm it. These conﬁrmation criteria are ﬁrst, that
“our hypotheses ought to fortel phenomena which have not yet been observed;
at least phenomena of the same kind” as those which the hypothesis originally
colligated [Whewell, 1858b, 86]; second, that they should “explain and determine
cases of a kind diﬀerent from those which were contemplated in the formation”
of the hypotheses [1858b, 88]; and third that hypotheses should “become more
coherent” over time [1858b, 91]. These veriﬁcation criteria are known respectively
as prediction, consilience, and coherence.
On Whewell’s view, prediction includes a temporal element: a “successful pre-
diction” occurs when some fact unknown at the time that the theory was discovered
is predicted by the theory, and is afterwards found to be true. Such predictions,
when they turn out to be successful, are evidence in favor of the hypothesis. (How-
ever, contrary to Mill’s assertion in his [1963-91, 7: 501], Whewell did not argue
that successful predictions were conclusive evidence for a theory; indeed, as exam-
ples of hypotheses that led to successful predictions, Whewell included several that
were already known to be false, such as the epicycle theory.) Moreover, Whewell
claimed even more strongly that successful predictions were better evidence than
mere explanations of known facts. He maintained that “to predict unknown facts
found afterwards to be true is . . . a conﬁrmation of a theory which in impressive-
ness and value goes beyond any explanation of known facts” [Whewell, 1857a 2:
464].
Whewell argued for his two claims about predictive success by invoking an
analogy between constructing a true theory and breaking a code. “If I copy a long
series of letters of which the last half-dozen are concealed, and if I guess these
aright, as is found to be the case when they are afterwards uncovered, this must
be because I have made out the import of the inscription” [Whewell, 1860, 274].
Successful prediction of formerly unknown facts, more so than the colligation or
explanation of known facts, Whewell thus argued, is proof that we have broken
the code of Nature, that we have “detected Nature’s secret” [Whewell, 1858b,
87]. Additionally, he compared our ability to colligate facts into hypotheses by his
methodology to knowing the alphabet of the language of Nature. As in learning a
new language, however, this is not enough; we must also know how to construct
intelligible words and sentences using the alphabet, and thus learn how to use
“the legislative phrases of nature” [Whewell, 1858b, 87]. Whewell noted that it is
easier to learn the alphabet than to use these legislative phrases; thus successful
predictions of unknown facts serve as better evidence than colligations of known
facts. Our prediction of some new fact is analogous to the attempt of a language
student to form a proper sentence in her new language. When our prediction is
conﬁrmed, as when the attempted sentence elicits an appropriate response from a
native speaker, it is a sign that we have spoken correctly: Nature is “respond[ing]
plainly and precisely to that which we utter, [and] we cannot but suppose that we

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
185
have in great measure made ourselves masters of the meaning and structure of her
language” [Whewell, 1858b, 87].
Whewell’s view of the power of prediction seemed to be borne out in 1846, when
a successful prediction appeared to provide stunning evidence for the truth of New-
ton’s theory. In that year, the planet Neptune was discovered after its existence,
position and even its mass had been predicted mathematically. Perturbations in
the orbit of Uranus expected on Newtonian theory had led some to conclude that
there must be an unobserved planetary body external to Uranus’ orbit exerting an
additional gravitational force on the planet. Using Newton’s theory, the French
mathematician U.J.J. Le Verrier calculated mathematically the mass and orbit of
this postulated planet.56 Acting upon Le Verrier’s calculations, astronomers at
the Berlin Observatory found the planet less than one degree from its expected
location. From Newton’s theory, then, it was possible to predict successfully the
existence, position and mass of a previously unexpected planet. This success was
considered further and quite strong evidence for Newton’s theory of Universal
Gravitation. Whewell praised the discovery as a triumph of astronomy, which he
termed the “Queen of the Sciences”. He argued that predictive success is strong
conﬁrmation of a theory, because the agreement of the prediction with what is
found to be true is “nothing strange, if the theory be true, but quite unaccount-
able, if it be not” [Whewell, 1860, 273–4]. If Newtonian theory were not true,
Whewell was suggesting, the fact that from the theory we could correctly predict
the existence, location and mass of Neptune would be bewildering, and indeed
miraculous, equivalent to the feat of a non-speaker of Russian forming an intelli-
gible and meaningful question in that language which elicited a proper response
from a native speaker.
Whewell did not oﬀer an argument for his claim about the superiority of “new
evidence” over “old evidence”, that is, of successful predictions over explanations
of known facts.
He merely stated that “If we can predict new facts which we
have not seen, as well as explain those which we have seen, it must be because
our explanation is not a mere formula of observed facts, but a truth of a deeper
kind” [Whewell, 1849, 60]. The intuition behind this claim, which has been made
by numerous modern commentators, is that if a theorist knows what fact must
be explained by his theory, it is simple for him to “cook” the theory in order to
somehow explain the known fact; whereas, on the other hand, if a theory pre-
dicts a novel (unknown) fact it is not due to the ingenuity of the theorist, but
to the truth of the theory. However, this intuition has been contested in recent
years (see [Brush, 1989; Snyder, 1998]). Interestingly, the discovery of Neptune,
Whewell’s paradigmatic case of a novel prediction, may be considered not only as
a prediction of a new fact, but equally well as an explanation of a known fact,
namely the perturbations of the planet Uranus. The problem for Newton’s theory
was described in this way by Airy in his report to the BAAS in 1832: “I need
56At roughly the same time an Englishman, James Couch Adams, also made these calculations,
which very nearly caused an international priority war between the British and the French after
the planet was discovered (see [Smith, 1989]).

186
Laura J. Snyder
not mention that there are other subjects (the theory of Uranus, for instance)
in which the existence of diﬃculties is known, but in which we have no clue to
their explanation” [Airy, 1833, 189]. Thus whether the postulation of an unseen
planet is considered an explanation of a known fact or the prediction of a new
fact depends upon the way it is described, not on any objective features of the
evidence itself or of its relation to the theory. So it would be odd, to say the least,
if the way of describing the evidence made a diﬀerence to its evidential value. It
should be noted that Whewell only supported the thesis about the superiority of
new evidence in very strong cases of predictive success, such as the discovery of
Neptune; he explained of such success that “It is a conﬁrmation which has only
occurred a few times in the history of science, and in the case only of the most
reﬁned and complete theories, such as those of Astronomy and Optics” [Whewell,
1857a 2: 464].
Whewell’s next, and most interesting, conﬁrmation test is consilience. Whewell
explained that “the evidence in favour of our induction is of a much higher and
more forcible character when it enables us to explain and determine cases of a kind
diﬀerent from those which were contemplated in the formation of our hypothesis.
The instances in which this have occurred, indeed, impress us with a conviction
that the truth of our hypothesis is certain” [Whewell, 1858b, 87–8].
Whewell
called this type of evidence a “jumping together” or “consilience” of inductions.
To understand what Whewell means by this, it may be helpful to schematize the
“jumping together” that occurred in the case of Newton’s law of universal grav-
itation, Whewell’s exemplary case of consilience. In book III of the Principia,
Newton listed a number of “propositions”. These propositions are empirical laws
that were inferred from certain “phenomena” (which are described in the preced-
ing section of book III). The ﬁrst such proposition, inferred from phenomena of
“satellite motion”, is that “the forces by which the circumjovial planets are con-
tinually drawn oﬀfrom rectilinear motions, and retained in their proper orbits,
tend to Jupiter’s centre; and are inversely as the squares of the distances of the
places of those planets from that centre”. The result of another, separate induc-
tion from the phenomena of “planetary motion” is that “the forces by which the
primary planets are continually drawn oﬀfrom rectilinear motions, and retained
in their proper orbits, tend to the sun; and are inversely as the squares of the
distances of the places of those planets from the sun’s centre”. Newton saw that
these laws, as well as other results of a number of diﬀerent inductions, coincided
in postulating the existence of an inverse-square attractive force as the cause of
various phenomena.57 According to Whewell, Newton saw that these inductions
“leap to the same point”; i.e., to the same law [Whewell, 1858b, 88]. Newton was
then able to bring together inductively (or “colligate”) these laws, and facts of
57See [Newton, 1968].
As Ernan McMullin notes, the notion of the “attractive force” was
problematic for Newton; he was never satisﬁed in his search for an “agent cause” of gravitational
behavior, a “cause of gravity”, as Newton put it. But Newton did succeed in causally unifying
disparate phenomena by the concept of this attractive force (see [2001, 296]). It is this aspect of
Newton’s theory that Whewell pointed to as the exemplar of consilience.

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
187
other kinds (for example, the event kind “falling bodies”), into a new, more gen-
eral law, namely the universal gravitation law: “All bodies attract each other with
a force of gravity which is inverse as the squares of the distances”. By seeing that
an inverse-square attractive force provided a cause for diﬀerent kinds of events —
for satellite motion, planetary motion, and falling bodies — Newton was able to
perform a more general induction, to his universal law.
As I have argued elsewhere [Snyder, 2005; 2006], understanding Whewell’s no-
tion of natural kinds is useful for comprehending his notion of consilience. Whewell
believed that there are natural kinds of objects, such as minerals and species, but
also natural kinds of events, such as diﬀraction and planetary motion. Consilience
occurs when a theory brings together members of diﬀerent kinds, showing that
they belong to a more general classiﬁcation.
In the case of event kinds, indi-
vidual types of events are members of the same kind when they share the same
cause.58 Newton discovered that what makes “the orbit of Mars” a member of
the class “planetary motion” is that it is caused to have the properties it does by
an inverse-square attractive force of gravity between Mars and the other bodies in
the universe. He also found that other event kinds share this kind essence. What
Newton did, in eﬀect, was to subsume these individual event kinds into a more
general kind comprised of sub-kinds sharing a kind essence, namely being caused
by an inverse-square attractive force. Consilience of event kinds results in causal
uniﬁcation. More speciﬁcally, it results in uniﬁcation of natural kind categories
based on a shared cause. Phenomena that constitute diﬀerent event kinds, such as
“planetary motion”, “satellite motion”, and “falling bodies”, were found by New-
ton to be members of a uniﬁed, more general kind, “phenomena caused to occur
by an inverse-square attractive force of gravity” (or, “gravitational phenomena”).
In such cases, according to Whewell, we learn that we have found a “vera causa”,
or a “true cause”, i.e. a cause that really exists in nature, and whose eﬀects are
members of the same natural kind.59 Moreover, by ﬁnding a cause shared by phe-
nomena in diﬀerent sub-kinds, we are able to colligate all the facts about these
kinds into a more general causal law. Whewell claimed that “when the theory, by
the concurrences of two indications . . . has included a new range of phenomena,
we have, in fact, a new induction of a more general kind, to which the inductions
formerly obtained are subordinate, as particular cases to a general population”
[Whewell, 1858b, 96]. He noted that consilience is the means by which we ef-
fect the successive generalization that constitutes the advancement of science (see
[Whewell, 1847 2: 74]).
Note that consilience is importantly diﬀerent from the type of reasoning known
as “inference to the best explanation”, even when the “best explanation” is de-
ﬁned as a causal hypothesis. The causal law expressing the essence of diﬀerent
event kinds is not one postulated merely because it explains or accounts for these
58For more details of Whewell’s notion of natural classiﬁcation, see [Snyder, 2006, chapter
three].
59See [Whewell, 1860, 191]. Ruse [1976, 232] agrees that Whewell’s notion of the vera causa
lies at the center of his criterion of consilience. See also [Butts, 1977, 81] and [Ruse, 1975, 161–2].

188
Laura J. Snyder
diﬀerent classes of facts. Rather, in the case of each class, the law has emerged
from a process of inductive reasoning following Whewell’s methodology. Thus the
causal law is not imposed from above as a means of tying together diﬀerent event
kinds. Instead, it wells up from beneath in each separate case. What is important
in the case of consilience, then, is not merely that a single causal mechanism or
law can explain or account for diﬀerent event kinds (as the inference to the best
explanation allows), but rather that separate lines of induction lead from each
event kind to the same causal mechanism or law, that there is a convergence of
distinct lines of argument. At each step, there is inductive warrant for the causal
law besides its explanatory utility.
Whewell discussed a further, related test of a theory’s truth:
“coherence”
[Whewell, 1858b, 91]. Coherence occurs when we are able to extend our hypothesis
to colligate a diﬀerent event kind without ad hoc modiﬁcation of the hypothesis;
that is, without suppositions which are added merely for the purpose of saving the
phenomena, for which there is no independent evidence. When Newton extended
his theory regarding an inverse-square attractive force, which colligated facts of
planetary motion and lunar motion, to the natural class “tidal activity”, he did not
need to add any new suppositions to the theory in order to colligate correctly the
facts of this event kind (facts about particular tides).60 The situation was rather
diﬀerent for phlogiston theory (which explained combustion, before the discovery
of oxygen, by the presence of an “essence” in the burning body called “phlogis-
ton”). According to Whewell, phlogiston theory colligated facts about “chemical
combination”.
But when the theory was extended to colligate facts about the
weight of bodies, it was unable to do so without an ad hoc and implausible modiﬁ-
cation (namely, the assumption that phlogiston has “negative weight”) [Whewell,
1858b, 92–3]. The emission or particle theory of light was claimed by its adherents
to be capable of colligating the facts of diﬀerent kinds (indeed, the same facts that
the wave theorists claimed they could colligate). However, according to Whewell
and other proponents of the wave theory, the particle theory could do so only by
the admission of suppositions that were ad hoc or implausible. For example, in
order to account for the facts of the velocity of light (in particular, the uniformity
of velocity), the particle theorists needed to suppose that light particles are emit-
ted with diﬀerent velocities based on the mass of the luminous body, but that, as
Humphrey Lloyd acerbically put it, “among these velocities is but one which is
adapted to our organs of vision” [Lloyd, 1835, 300–1. See also 296]. (Of course,
the wave theorists were themselves accused of postulating an implausible or ad
hoc “luminiferous ether”; it was argued by Whewell and others that there was
independent evidence for the ether’s existence, and hence that it was not an ad
hoc supposition.) In non-coherent cases such as these, the modiﬁcations have no
independent evidence; they are added to the theory solely because they are needed
60Facts about the tides were not known systematically, until Whewell engaged in his tidology
research program. Part of the importance of his project, Whewell believed, was to strengthen the
claim that Newton’s law could colligate these facts without modiﬁcation (see [Whewell, 1834b,
15–17).

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
189
to colligate a new or problematic set of facts. As this discussion suggests, coher-
ence is closely related to consilience. The distinction between them is as follows.
In cases of consilience, two independent colligations of diﬀerent event kinds yield
the same conclusion. In cases of coherence, the result of one or more colligations
of one or more event kinds is extended, without ad hoc modiﬁcation, to another
event kind. This latter process generally occurs over time as theoretical systems
are developed.61
Consilience, then, tells us that we have found a law that colligates members
of a natural kind — either members of a natural object kind or a natural event
kind.62 In the case of object kinds, consilience is, Whewell suggested, evidence
for the truth of a non-causal empirical law such as “all metals are crystalline
when solid”, and thus is evidence that we have grouped certain individuals into
a kind (“metals”) that is natural and hence supportive of the law. In the case
of event kinds, consilience is evidence for having found a causal law, such as the
inverse-square law discovered by Newton. This is at the same time evidence for
the naturalness of the kind “gravitational phenomena”.
We are now in a position to see why a common argument against Whewell’s
criterion of consilience is ﬂawed. A number of commentators have proposed that
consilience is fundamentally a relativistic or contextual criterion. According to this
view, whether some theory is consilient depends upon our knowledge-state with
respect to the classes involved; speciﬁcally, whether we know that certain classes of
facts are members of the same general type of thing (see [Laudan, 1971]; [Forster,
1988]; [Harper, 1989] and [Morrison, 1990]). One critic notes that for Descartes,
planetary and terrestrial motions were phenomena of the same type, because both
were the result of vortices; thus, relative to the Cartesian system, Newton’s theory
was not consilient [Laudan, 1971, 374] (see also [Butts, 1977, 74–5; Fisch, 1985;
Morrison, 1990]). However, as we have seen, the criterion for consilience is that a
theory connects two (or more) diﬀerent natural kinds into a more general natural
kind in virtue of inductively inferring the same cause for each natural sub-kind.
The issue, then, is not the relativistic one of whether or not we previously knew
or suspected that these sub-kinds all belong to a more general kind, but rather
with whether they do all ﬁt into the same more general kind in virtue of sharing
the same cause, and whether we have reached this conclusion by the proper sort
of inductive reasoning (thus conferring on the conclusion inductive warrant), and
not merely by postulating a common cause hypothetically.
Whewell famously
believed that Descartes did not reach his conclusion by proper reasoning. On the
other hand, Newton’s theory was consilient because it satisﬁed both conditions.
This erroneous criticism of Whewell’s criterion of consilience may arise from a
confusion of Whewell’s view with that of Herschel. Herschel’s brief discussion of
61[Whewell, 1858b, 90–1]. The claim that consilience results in coherence can be found in
[Forster, 1988] and [Harper, 1989].
However, it is more accurate to say that consilience and
coherence are similar means for obtaining the same result, namely simpliﬁcation in the sense of
(causal) uniﬁcation.
62Herschel recognized this in his review of Whewell’s History and Philosophy [Herschel, 1841,
227]. See also [Ruse, 1976, 240].

190
Laura J. Snyder
consilience in the Preliminary Discourse focuses on the subjective, psychological
aspects of consilience, and does not explicitly include the requirement of causal
uniﬁcation under more general natural kinds (see [Herschel, 1830, 170]). Herschel
explained that “the surest and best characteristic of a well-founded and exten-
sive induction . . . is when veriﬁcations of it spring up, as it were, spontaneously,
into notice, from quarters where they might be least expected, or even among
instances of that very kind which were at ﬁrst considered hostile to them” [1830,
170]. Herschel’s view of consilience is prone to the relativistic criticism. Like Her-
schel, Whewell did at times stress the psychological aspect of consilience, noting
the impact of “the unexpected coincidence of results” [Whewell, 1847, 2: 67]. Nev-
ertheless, he emphasized the logical aspect of consilience, which does not depend
upon the psychological. Whewell’s consilience not only concerns the psychological
element of surprise, but also the logical element of causal uniﬁcation of diﬀerent
event or process kinds into more general kinds, in virtue of sharing a common
cause.
Whewell justiﬁed this criterion by claiming that consilience is “a criterion of
reality, which has never yet been produced in favour of falsehood”. Elsewhere
he noted that “there are no instances, in which a doctrine recommended in this
manner has afterwards been discovered to be false” (see [Whewell, 1858b, 90] and
[Whewell, 1860, 192]. He can thus be seen as making an inductive argument in
favor of the conﬁrmation value of consilience: namely, the argument that, since
consilient theories in the past have all turned out to be true, we can infer that
(probably) all consilient theories are true, and thus that our current consilient
theories are (probably) true.63 Whewell has been much ridiculed for this induc-
tive argument by Mill and his twentieth-century followers (see, for example, [Van
Fraassen, 1985, 267]). As Whewell’s detractors today like to point out, the one
positive instance strongly adduced by Whewell for his inductive argument has
been shown to be a counter-instance: Newton’s theory, which seemed irrefutable
in Whewell’s time, has since been shown to be false. Newton’s theory employs
conceptions that, it turns out, are not true of the world, such as absolute space
and absolute time. The cause postulated by the theory, the inverse-square attrac-
tive force of gravity propagated through space and time, is also non-existent (it
is not a vera causa). Thus, although Newton’s theory was highly consilient, more
so than any other theory of Whewell’s time — it brought together diﬀerent event
kinds, by having inductive warrant for the inference that they shared a common
cause — it turned out to be false. Whewell’s inductive argument does seem to fail
in establishing any conﬁrmatory value for consilience.
However, even though Newton’s theory turned out to be false, there is something
about the theory which has not been disconﬁrmed. Newton’s theory still seems to
have been correct in bringing together event kinds that belong to a more general
63Whewell also made an additional argument for consilience’s value: he claimed that consilience
is like the coinciding testimony of two witnesses. In my [2005], I show how this argument can be
understood as a form of “common-cause argument”. But I here focus on the argument Whewell
most relied upon.

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
191
kind, showing something true about the natural kind structure of the physical
world, although it was wrong about what the shared kind essence of the natural
kind was. Newton showed that the phenomena of free fall, pendulum motion, lunar
acceleration, satellite motion and planetary motion share a cause, and in this way
constitute a general event kind. This insight has not been proved false, although
the particular shared cause he postulated has been rejected. Einstein’s general
theory of relativity proposed instead that the cause of these phenomena (and
others) is the curved structure of space-time. It may well be that this proposed
cause will be replaced by another; but so far it seems unlikely that a later theory
will separate these diﬀerent phenomena and attribute to each of them diﬀerent
causal structures or mechanisms. These event kinds do seem to be sub-kinds of
a more general kind that is connected in nature. Thus the one truly consilient
theory endorsed by Whewell is still considered to have gotten things right, at least
in terms of the natural kind structure of the physical world.64
Of course, the fact that Newton’s theory was wrong about the particular cause
he postulated does show that Whewell went too far in claiming that consilience is
conclusive evidence for a theory, in the sense of proving that a theory will never be
shown to be false. And it is certainly possible that even the natural kind structure
Newton’s theory proposed might turn out to be wrong. It would have been more
accurate — as well as more consistent with his general view of the progress of
science — for Whewell to have claimed that hypotheses satisfying the condition of
consilience are our best theories, but are still subject to correction. He suggested
this kind of revision when he asserted, referring to Newton’s Rules of Reasoning in
Book Three of the Principia, that “the really valuable part of the Fourth Rule is
that which implies that a constant veriﬁcation, and, if necessary, rectiﬁcation, of
truths discovered by induction, should go on in the scientiﬁc world. Even when the
law is, or appears to be, most certainly exact and universal, it should be constantly
exhibited to us afresh in the form of experience and observation” [Whewell, 1860,
196, emphasis added].
6
CONSILIENCE AND DARWIN’S ORIGIN OF SPECIES
The power of Whewell’s criterion of consilience was appreciated by Charles Dar-
win, who appealed to consilience in his Origin of Species, though not by name.
Darwin was acquainted with both Whewell and his writings; he made extensive
notes in his copy of Whewell’s Bridgewater Treatise and the History of the In-
ductive Sciences, and probably knew details of Whewell’s Philosophy by reading
Herschel’s review of it for the Quarterly Review.
While writing the Origin of
Species, Darwin often expressed his concern that his theory would be criticized for
not being suﬃciently “inductive”.65 It is therefore not surprising he would present
his theory as conforming to the method of justifying inductive theories proposed
64See my [2005] where I show how Whewell’s criterion of consilience can be used to argue for
a natural-kind realism.
65See, for instance, his letter to Asa Gray, 29 November 1857, in [Darwin, 1983-2004, 6: 492].

192
Laura J. Snyder
by one of the acknowledged scientiﬁc experts of the day. In successive editions
of the Origin (as his expectations of the criticisms were met and exceeded) Dar-
win strengthened the appeal to consilience. By the sixth edition of 1872 Darwin
explained that: “It can hardly be supposed that a false theory would explain, in
so satisfactory a manner as does the theory of natural selection, the several large
classes of facts above speciﬁed . . . It is a method used in judging of the common
events of life, and has often been used by the greatest natural philosophers. The
undulatory theory of light has thus been arrived at”.66
Darwin’s method of justifying his theory in the Origin is similar to Whewell’s
notion of consilience in several ways. First, Darwin’s theory explains not just many
facts, but many kinds of facts. That is, the theory provides an explanation for facts
in the realms of classiﬁcation, geography, paleontology, embryology, comparative
anatomy, and geology. Indeed, before writing the Origin, Darwin spent much time
observing, experimenting, and collecting data on the diﬀerent kinds of phenomena
and phenomenal laws that he wanted his theory to explain (see [Ospovat, 1981,
170]). In the sixth edition, Darwin added a chapter on “Miscellaneous Objections
to the Theory of Natural Selection”, in which he outlined more explicitly the
classes of facts that can be explained by his theory but not by the theory of
special creation.
It is clear that Darwin was impressed with the ability of his
theory to explain facts of diﬀerent kinds, rather than just many facts of one class.
It is possible to see these “classes of facts” as similar to Whewell’s event kinds.
For example, the adaptation of organisms to their environment can be seen as
a kind, whose members (the polar bear’s white fur, the woodpecker’s thin beak)
share a single cause, which the special creationists claimed was God’s intentional
design, while Darwin claimed it was evolution by natural selection. Another way
in which Darwin’s strategy is similar to consilience is that he wanted to include
in his theory the laws or theories accepted by the experts in various ﬁelds, much
as Whewell believed that a consilient theory includes (by causally unifying) the
already-known phenomenal laws of various kinds [Ospovat, 1981, 114 and 148–9].
Thus, Darwin stressed that his theory explained phenomenal laws such as the law
of embryonic resemblance (see [Ospovat, 1981, 165]).
Moreover, Darwin believed his theory to be superior not only because it provided
an explanation for many diﬀerent kinds of facts, but because it provided a causal
explanation, one framed in terms of natural causes similar to those appealed to in
science. For instance, his theory provided a cause for the observed cases of homo-
logical structures. Darwin claimed that neither Lamarckian evolutionary view nor
the doctrine of special creation gave a natural cause of this phenomenon. But, as he
noted, his theory did provide an explanation: because homologous structures de-
scended from a common ancestor, and because the changes that eventually resulted
66Darwin, Origin of Species, 6th edition, in [Darwin, 1986-89, 16: 438–9]. In a letter to Asa
Gray in 1859, Darwin already expressed his conﬁdence about the theory in these terms: while
admitting that there were still some diﬃculties with the theory, Darwin noted that “I cannot
possibly believe that a false theory would explain so many classes of facts, as I think it certainly
does explain” (11 November 1859, in [Darwin, 1983-2004, 7: 369).

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
193
in the branching oﬀof diﬀerent species happened gradually, the main pattern of
structure remained the same [Darwin, 1859, 434–5].
Darwin’s theory provided
the causal uniﬁcation of Whewell’s criterion of consilience as applied to classes of
phenomena, by showing that all these diﬀerent kinds of phenomena share a com-
mon cause, namely the alteration of original organisms by gradual modiﬁcation,
through the mechanism of natural selection. Darwin is an example of an eminent
scientist of Whewell’s own time who embraced a key part of his methodology.
However, this is not to say that Whewell believed Darwin had successfully
proven his theory. Indeed, Whewell continued to reject evolutionary theory un-
til his death seven years after the publication of the Origin of Species. Darwin’s
nephew Francis spread the story that the Master of Trinity had even kept the
book out of the college library, due to his religious prejudices against evolution.
However, this is an oversimpliﬁed and inaccurate understanding of Whewell’s re-
action to Darwin’s theory as well as of his view of the relation between religion
and science.
Whewell had always believed that “all truths must be consistent
with other truths”: that truths of natural science and truths of theology do not
conﬂict, even if we do not have full insight into how they coincide.67 Moreover, he
held that apparent conﬂict between science and scripture did not necessarily mean
that science was to blame. In his Philosophy, Whewell had noted that “when a
scientiﬁc theory, irreconcilable with [the Bible’s] ancient interpretation, is clearly
proved, we must give up the interpretation, and seek some new mode of under-
standing the passage in question, by means of which it may be consistent with
what we know. . . ”. [Whewell, 1840a, 2: 148]. Indeed, in 1864 Whewell refused an
invitation to sign a “Declaration of students of the natural and physical sciences”,
which claimed to support a “harmonious alliance between Physical Science and
Revealed Religion”, but which was seen by many scientists as attempting to put
theological restraints on scientiﬁc inquiry. (Of Whewell’s old friends and acquain-
tances, only Sedgwick and Brewster signed; De Morgan and Herschel were quite
vocal in their public denunciations of the document) (see [Brock and Macleod,
1976]). For this reason, when he read Darwin’s book Whewell wrote to him, “You
will easily believe that it has interested me very much, and probably you will not
be surprised to be told that I cannot, yet at least, become a convert to your doc-
trines. But there is so much of thought and fact in what you have written that it
is not to be contradicted without a careful selection of the ground and manner of
the dissent. . . ”.68
However, Whewell did not believe that Darwin’s theory was yet fully consilient,
and he had legitimate grounds for this view. Indeed, Whewell had at least four
reasons for doubting the consilient status of Darwin’s theory. First, while evolution
by natural selection did explain diﬀerent kinds of phenomena, it is not so clear
that Darwin reached this theory by numerous inductions from each of these facts.
67Whewell expressed this view privately in a letter to H. J. Rose in 1826 (12 December; WP
R.2.99 f.27) and publicly in his [1857a 3: 487]; this claim also appeared in the 1837 ﬁrst edition.
68William Whewell to Charles Darwin, 2 January 1860, in [Darwin, 1983-2004, 8: 6, emphasis
added].

194
Laura J. Snyder
Recall that, for Whewell, it was the convergence of separate lines of induction
that was important: the reading of the cause independently from each class of
facts. This was necessary to ensure that, in each case, the assertion of the cause
as a cause for a particular event kind has high inductive warrant (is more likely
than not). Otherwise, on Whewell’s view, we cannot be certain that we have a
vera causa. Darwin did not emphasize that separate processes of induction led
him to his mechanism of natural selection.
Indeed, Darwin believed that any
hypothesis, no matter how it was ﬁrst obtained, could be proven to be probably
true by explaining numerous facts. In a letter of 1860 he explained that “it seems
to me fair in Philosophy to invent any hypothesis and if it explains many real
phenomena it comes in time to be admitted as real”.69 Thus it may well have
seemed to Whewell that Darwin, like Herschel, was using consilience as a means
to justify a bold hypothesis, rather than a true induction.
Moreover, although Whewell was a proponent of the wave theory of light, he
expressed some ambivalence about the degree to which it was consilient. Though
this theory did causally unify numerous optical phenomena, Whewell believed it
had not attained the truly consilient status of Newton’s law of universal gravita-
tion, in part because it was unable to give a speciﬁc causal law which explained
this uniﬁcation. Darwin’s theory suﬀered from the same problem: he was not
able to give the causal law by which variations in organisms are produced, nor the
causal mechanism by which they are inherited by oﬀspring. Darwin admitted that
“Our ignorance of the laws of variation is profound” [Darwin, 1859, 167]. Without
the causal laws of genetics, Darwin’s theory could have had, at best, a status for
Whewell similar to that of the wave theory of light. And, thirdly, Darwin’s theory
had not yet stood the test of time in order to become coherent, the way the wave
theory had done, even without a causal law.
Whewell had a ﬁnal reason for believing that Darwin’s theory was not fully
consilient. In his 1838 Presidential address to the Geological Society, Whewell had
laid out the challenge for any naturalistic account of man’s origin. “Even if we had
no Divine record to guide us”, Whewell argued, “it would be most unphilosophical
to attempt to trace back the history of man without taking into account the most
remarkable facts in his nature” [Whewell, 1839, 642]. Whewell claimed that it was
not possible to account adequately for the origin of humans without accounting
for our nature as intellectual and moral beings. When he referred to Darwin’s
Origin pf Species as a “most unphilosophical book”, he was indicating the fact
that Darwin had not explained how an evolutionary view could account for the
appearance of a rational and moral creature. As he had written in his Plurality of
Worlds six years before the appearance of the Origin, “the introduction of reason
and intelligence upon the Earth is no part nor consequence of the series of animal
forms. It is a fact of an entirely new kind” [Whewell, 1855, 164]. Whewell believed
that Darwin’s theory did not colligate the most important fact about man, and so
could not be fully consilient.70
69Darwin to Charles James Fox Bunbury, 9 February 1860, in [Darwin, 1983-2004, 8: 76].
70Darwin himself recognized the need to explain how man’s reason and morality could arise

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
195
7
RENOVATING BACON
Whewell explicitly framed his reformist project in Baconian terms; he wished
to “renovate” Bacon’s inductive logic (indeed, one volume of the third edition
of his Philosophy is entitled Novum Organon Renovatum).
Yet it might seem
that Whewell’s discoverers’ induction, because of the antithetical epistemology
underlying it, is inherently opposed to Bacon’s inductivism. Herschel, who shared
Whewell’s desire to renovate Bacon, thought that Whewell’s epistemology under-
cut his Baconianism. Later commentators have read Whewell in a similar way,
as having rejected inductivism for some kind of hypothetical methodology by the
time he published the Philosophy (if not sooner).71 However, as we have seen, this
is not the case. In the Philosophy, Whewell clearly endorsed an inductive view of
discovery. Moreover, Whewell continued to support an inductive methodology in
later works. In Of Induction (1849), his work responding to Mill’s criticisms of
him in System of Logic, Whewell noted, in opposition to Mill’s characterization
of Kepler, that new hypotheses are properly “collected from the facts”, and not
merely guessed [Whewell, 1849, 17]. In his Plurality of Worlds, ﬁrst published
in 1853, Whewell strongly criticized the “bold assumptions”, both “arbitrary and
fanciful”, that led some people to claim we had good reason to believe that there
was intelligent life on other worlds. Since we have no inductive evidence for this,
Whewell claimed, we should not engage in such “conjectures” and “speculations”
[Whewell, 1855, 41, 122, 141, and passim]. In his 1857 review article of the Sped-
ding, Ellis and Heath edition of the collected works of Bacon, Whewell continued
to praise Bacon for his emphasis on the gradual successive generalization which
Whewell believed characterized the historical progress of science. He also stressed
this in the third edition of his History of Inductive Sciences, published the same
year. In his “Additions” to the ﬁrst volume, Whewell explained that “laborious
observation, narrow and modest inference, caution, slow and gradual advance,
limited knowledge, are all unwelcome eﬀorts and restraints to the mind of man,
when his speculative spirit is once roused: yet they are the necessary conditions
of all advance in the Inductive Sciences”. He criticized the “bold guesses and fan-
ciful reasonings of man unchecked by doubt or fear of failure” [Whewell, 1857a, 1:
339–40]. And, to take one ﬁnal example, in his Philosophy of Discovery, published
in 1860, Whewell referred to the belief that “the discovery of laws and causes of
phenomena is a loose hap-hazard sort of guessing”, and claimed that this type
of view “appears to me to be a misapprehension of the whole nature of science”
by evolution by natural selection; he did so in his Descent of Man, published ﬁve years after
Whewell’s death. I am not suggesting that Whewell, had he still been alive then, would have
changed his mind about Darwin’s theory. In fact, he seems to have prejudged the issue, believing
that man’s intellectual faculty could not arise from other organic beings (see, e.g., [Whewell,
1845, 43–4]). I merely note that, during his lifetime, Whewell had methodological grounds for
questioning the probable truth of Darwin’s theory.
71Richard Yeo has argued that, by the time of writing his review of Herschel’s Preliminary
Discourse, Whewell had already abandoned an early endorsement of inductivism in favor of a
hypothetical method (see [Yeo, 1993, 98–9). Fisch similarly argues in his [1991] that Whewell
abandoned his early commitment to Baconianism at an early stage of his career.

196
Laura J. Snyder
[Whewell, 1860, 274].
Moreover — importantly for someone so concerned with the role of language
in science — Whewell consistently continued to call himself an inductivist, and
his philosophy an inductive one. It seems unlikely that Whewell, who argued that
scientiﬁc terminology “ﬁxes” discoveries by connoting deﬁnitions of explicated con-
ceptions, would continue to characterize his view as “inductive” if he had decided
it was really hypothetical or “deductive” instead.
Thus, Whewell never abandoned his commitment to some form of Baconian
inductivism, although he certainly believed that his own view had improved upon
Bacon’s.
I will here show that there are several central aspects of Whewell’s
discoverers’ induction that mirror Bacon’s inductive methodology. (More details of
the comparison between Bacon and Whewell can be found in [Snyder, 1999]). First,
and most importantly, Whewell agreed with Bacon in claiming that hypotheses are
invented by inference from the data, and in rejecting the method of anticipation,
which “leaps” too quickly to wide generalizations. As a means of protecting against
such hasty and illicit generalizations, Whewell agreed with Bacon’s emphasis upon
the “gradual and continuous ascent” to hypotheses (see [Whewell, 1860, 130, 131,
145]. See also [Whewell, 1857a, I: 7–8]. Whewell claimed that Bacon’s emphasis
upon such a gradual inferential process is where his importance and originality
lie, not in the claim that knowledge must be sought in experience, which many
others prior to Bacon had professed [Whewell, 1857b, 158]. Whewell’s conception
of science followed the gradualism of Bacon in two respects. First, the method
of inventing hypotheses from data involves a “connected and gradual process”
of inference, namely discoverers’ induction. The second way in which Whewell
followed Bacon’s gradualism concerns Whewell’s view of the history of science.
Whewell claimed that the progress of science over time is slowly cumulative, in
the sense that theories of progressively greater generality are derived from less
general theories once those are proven to be true. In this way, Whewell noted,
Kepler’s law of planetary motion, invented by discoverers’ induction, was used by
Newton to derive a law of greater generality, the universal inverse-square law of
gravitation [Whewell, 1860, 182] (see also [Yeo, 1985, 273]. The development of the
theory of electromagnetism is another case in the history of science pointed to by
Whewell as exemplifying the Baconian process of gradual generalizing [Whewell,
1857b, 159–60].
Whewell’s own ”Inductive Tables” are meant to illustrate the
successive generalization that occurs over the history of science.
In his earlier
works Whewell even called them “Inductive Pyramids”, echoing Bacon’s use of the
term “Pyramids of Knowledge” to describe the process of successive generalization
in the sciences (indeed, Whewell explicitly drew this comparison in his [1860,
132]).
Whewell’s Inductive Tables can be constructed only for sciences which
have achieved a large degree of generality, that is, where phenomenal laws have
been subsumed under causal laws of greater generality, and these causal laws are
themselves seen as instances of laws of even greater generality. The two sciences
able to support the formal structure of the inductive tables, thus far, according to
Whewell, are astronomy and (to a certain extent) optics. So central to Whewell

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
197
discoverers’ induction is its gradualism that Whewell claimed these inductive tables
present the “Logic of Induction, that is, the formal conditions of the soundness of
our reasoning from the facts” [1860, 207]. He suggested by such comments that
the soundness of our reasoning from facts to law is the greater the more gradual
is the generalization, and that this soundness is therefore exhibited in the formal
structure of the tables.72
Whewell’s discoverers’ induction shares another important feature of Bacon’s
method of interpretation:
namely, the claim that the inference from data to
hypothesis is not limited to inductive generalization.
We have seen that, on
Whewell’s view, the selection of the appropriate conception with which to col-
ligate the data involves an inferential process, and that this process can involve
any type of inference. Bacon too argued that mere enumerative induction was not
suﬃcient; he criticized the “logic of the schoolman” as being “puerile”. Nor was
it enough to add eliminative induction. In particular, Bacon, like Whewell after
him, emphasized analogical inference.73 Analogical inference plays several impor-
tant roles in Bacon’s method. First, it is a crucial element in the construction of
the “Natural History” the philosopher must construct for the property of things
under study. A natural history consists of a table of presence, listing instances
that share the property in question, a table of absences, which lists instances that
are each similar to one of the instances on the table of presences but which diﬀer
in lacking the property in question, and a table of variations, in which the inves-
tigator describes instances in which the property is varying to greater or lesser
degrees. The construction of a table of absences involves both positive and neg-
ative analogy. Positive analogies are used in determining the instances that are
similar to those on the table of presence, while negative analogies are used in de-
termining which of these instances lack the property in question. So, for example,
in the investigation into the property of heat, the table of presence includes rays
of the sun, which have this property. Positive analogy is used to suggest that rays
of the moon are similar enough to rays of the sun to be included in the table of
absence; these diﬀerent types of rays share the properties of being rays of light
and emanating from celestial bodies. Negative analogy suggests that rays of the
moon do not share with rays of the sun the quality of heat, because we feel often
warm when we are in the sunlight but not when we are in the moonlight. Another
role for analogical inference arises in Bacon’s discussion of “learned experience”
(experientia literata). In this type of reasoning, an investigator argues by analogy
from a situation in which a particular kind of experiment was fruitful, to another,
similar situation in which the same kind of experiment might yield informative
results. In the case of the rays of the sun and moon, experientia literata suggests
that the known experimental result of passing sun rays through a magnifying lens
72See also [Whewell, 1860, 134], [Whewell, 1858b, 115], and Whewell’s letter to DeMorgan, 18
January 1859, in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 416–17]. Indeed, Whewell criticized Bacon for not being
suﬃciently gradualist in his depiction of science. See [Whewell, 1860, 136–7].
73Bacon’s use of analogical inference is discussed in more detail in [Snyder, 2006] and [Snyder,
1999].

198
Laura J. Snyder
in order to intensify the heat and thus set combustible material on ﬁre might be
applied to the rays of the moon, in order to see if heat is thus increased. Analogical
inference is also a crucial part of what Bacon called “prerogative instances” (see,
for example, [Bacon, 1877-89, 4: 203]). Although Whewell does not explicitly dis-
cuss the use of analogical reasoning by Bacon, it is likely that his view on this topic
was inﬂuenced by that of his young friend and prot´eg´e J. D. Forbes, who wrote an
essay on the importance of analogical reasoning in Bacon’s inductive philosophy a
few years before meeting Whewell in 1831.74
Another similarity between the views of Whewell and Bacon is that both in-
sist that hypotheses obtained inductively must be tested by their empirical conse-
quences. And like Bacon, Whewell believed that science can yield knowledge about
the unobservable part of the natural world. Bacon claimed that his interpretation
of nature could discover the unobservable forms of simple natures. Whewell, as we
have seen, intended his method to allow for the discovery of hypotheses referring
to unobservable entities and properties. For example, he claimed that Fresnel and
the other wave theorists had good inductive grounds for postulating the existence
of unobservable light waves in an unobservable ether, and scoﬀed at Mill’s rejection
of the wave theory on the basis of its postulation of these unobservable entities.
Although I have shown that Whewell correctly considered his discoverers’ in-
duction as following in the tradition of Bacon’s inductivism, he certainly also rec-
ognized that their views were not identical. From the time of his earliest notebooks
on induction, Whewell expressed the need to improve upon Bacon’s inductivism.
In 1836, he wrote to Herschel that the Novum Organum “requires both to be ac-
commodated to the present state of thought and knowledge, and to have its vast
vacuities gradually supplied”.75 Indeed, he believed himself to be renovating —
i.e., improving upon — Bacon’s method. This renovation takes the form of graft-
ing his antithetical epistemology onto Bacon’s empirical methodology. However,
this does not constitute a contradiction of Bacon’s view; for, as we will see, there
are seeds of an antithetical epistemology already in Bacon’s works, as Whewell
often pointed out.
Whewell’s epistemology entails that certain ideal conceptions, as well as facts,
are necessary materials of knowledge. We have already seen two ways in which
conceptions are crucially involved in the discovery of empirical laws according
to Whewell.
First, conceptions are involved in the very process of perception;
Whewell claimed that all perception is “conception-laden”. Second, conceptions
are necessary to form theories from facts in the process of colligation. The ap-
propriate conception must be superinduced upon, or applied to, the facts in order
to bring the facts together under a general law.
But there is a third way in
which Whewell emphasized the role of conceptions in science. He noted that some
74J. D. Forbes, “On the Inductive Philosophy of Bacon, His Genius, and Atchievements [sic]”,
quoted in [Olson, 1975, 225–26].
A later paper, [Forbes, 1835], which Whewell discussed in
letters to Forbes, argued for the importance of analogical reasoning in scientiﬁc discovery. See
letters from Forbes to Whewell in [Shairp et al., 1873, 115–17], and from Whewell to Forbes in
[Todhunter, 1876, 2: 203–4].
75William Whewell to John Herschel, 9 April 1836, in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 234].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
199
conceptual framework is necessary in order to serve as a guide in the collection of
empirical data. In his Address to the British Association meeting in 1833, Whewell
claimed that “it has of late been common to assert that facts alone are valuable
in science . . . [But] it is only through some view or other of the connexion and
relation of facts, that we know what circumstances we ought to notice and record”
[Whewell, 1834a, xx]. That is, we cannot and do not collect facts blindly, without
some theory or conception guiding our choices for what to include and exclude
from the collection of data.76
At times, Whewell argued that Bacon did not adequately take note of the an-
tithetical nature of knowledge; Bacon did not “give due weight or attention to
the ideal element in our knowledge” [Whewell, 1860, 135]. Other times, Whewell
claimed that Bacon did not ignore the conceptual side of knowledge altogether.
The problem is that Bacon never was able to complete his task of reforming phi-
losophy: “if he had completed his scheme, [he] would probably have given due at-
tention to Ideas, no less than to Facts, as an element of our knowledge” [Whewell,
1860, 136]. It has been suggested that Whewell more or less invented this reading
of Bacon in order to “detach” the British inductive tradition from French posi-
tivism [Yeo, 1993, 247] (on this point see also [Perez-Ramos, 1988, 26]). However,
this conceptual element can be found in Bacon’s writings in various ways, though
not as explicitly as it is developed in Whewell’s philosophy.
Bacon claimed, for instance, that he “established for ever a true and lasting
marriage between the empirical and the rational faculty” [Bacon, 1877-89, 4: 19].
He elaborated on this marriage in his famous aphorism urging the scientist to
emulate the bee:
Those who have handled sciences have been either men of experiment
or men of dogmas. The men of experiment are like the ant; they only
collect and use: the reasoners resemble spiders, who make cobwebs
out of their own substance. But the bee takes the middle course; it
gathers its material from the ﬂowers of the garden and of the ﬁeld,
but transforms and digests it by a power of its own. Not unlike this is
the true business of philosophy; for it neither relies solely or chieﬂy on
the powers of the mind, nor does it take the matter which it gathers
from natural history and mechanical experiments and lay it up in the
memory whole, as it ﬁnds it; but lays it up in the understanding altered
and digested. Therefore from a closer and purer league between these
two faculties, the experimental and the rational, (such as has never yet
been made) much may be hoped. [Bacon, 1877-89, 4: 92–3]. (See also
[Rossi, 1984, 255].)
76For example, Whewell explained that “the laws of the tides have been in a great measure
determined by observations in all parts of the globe, because theory pointed out what was to
be observed. In like manner the facts of terrestrial magnetism were ascertained with a tolerable
completeness by extended observations, then, and then only, when a most recondite and profound
branch of mathematics had pointed out what was to be observed, and most ingenious instruments
had been devised by men of science for observing” [1860, 155].

200
Laura J. Snyder
Notice that the “blind” gathering of facts that Whewell criticized is characteris-
tic of the “men of experiment”, or the “empirics”, whose methods Bacon rejected
in the above passage.77 Moreover, Bacon pointed to the importance of the con-
ceptual side of knowledge — in a way similar to Whewell — when he cautioned
that forms cannot be discovered until conceptions or “notions” are clariﬁed (see
[Bacon, 1877-89, 4: 49–50 and pp. 61–2]). Such comments evoke Whewell’s claim
that, as we saw above, laws cannot be discovered until conceptions are clariﬁed or
explicated. Whewell was aware that Bacon made this point; indeed he chastised
Bacon for ignoring his own advice. Whewell complained that, in his investigation
into heat, “his collection of instances is very loosely brought together; for he in-
cludes in his list the hot taste of aromatic plants, the caustic eﬀects of acids, and
many other facts which cannot be ascribed to heat without a studious laxity in
the use of the word” [Whewell, 1860, 139].
There is, however, one real diﬀerence in their respective views on the role of
conceptions in science, and that concerns Whewell’s claim that perception itself is
conception-laden. Bacon famously warned against the imposition of our internal
concepts upon the external world.
He admonished that “. . .
all depends on
keeping the eye steadily ﬁxed upon the facts of nature and so receiving their
images simply as they are. For God forbid that we should give out a dream of
our imagination for a pattern of the world” [Bacon, 1877-89, 4: 32–3]. Bacon
claimed that in constructing our natural histories we must record phenomena
that correspond as much as possible to pure, non-conception-laden observations;
moreover, he believed that the correspondence can be quite high.78
His “new
way”, the method of interpretation, is intended to begin “directly from the simple
sensuous perception” [Bacon, 1877-89, 4: 40]. Human-derived conceptions cannot,
according to Bacon, aid us in understanding a God-made world [Bacon, 1877-89,
4: 110]. In contrast to this view, Whewell believed, as we have seen, that our
conceptions aid us in perceiving and understanding the created world precisely
because they correspond in some degree to Ideas in the Divine mind. Whewell
rejected the straightforwardly empiricist epistemology of Bacon, for the reasons
he rejects the views of Locke and the “Sensationalist School”. He replaced this
purely empiricist epistemology with his antithetical epistemology. But as we have
seen, there are elements of Bacon’s view that seem to allow for the importance of
the conceptual, as well as the empirical, side of knowledge. Whewell had reason
to believe that this epistemological alteration was more of an organic extension of
Bacon’s philosophy, than an outright rejection of it.
77See [Bacon, 1877-89, 4: 91; see also pp. 70 and 81], and [Rossi, 1996] and [Rossi, 1984, 250].
In a footnote added to De Augmentis, James Spedding rejected the proposal that Bacon intended
fact-collecting to occur in the absence of any theory [Bacon, 1877-89, 1: 623n.1].
Spedding
suggested that Bacon’s notion of experientia literata was meant to provide a provisional theory
of the collection of facts. [Jardine 1990, 60 and 63n.15] agrees with this point. See also [Sargent,
1995, 34].
78See [Jardine, 1974, 135]. There seems, however, to be a conﬂict between this optimism and
his claim that the Idols of the Cave and of the Tribe cause us almost inevitably to “distort and
discolor” our sense experience of nature.

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
201
Because Bacon did not adequately cultivate the conceptual side of knowledge,
Whewell claimed, he was led into another error: namely the false notion that there
can be a purely mechanical method of discovery [Whewell, 1860, 138].
Bacon
began his work with the claim that what was new about his Novum Organum was
the realization that “the entire work of the understanding [must] be commenced
afresh, and the mind itself be from the very outset not left to its own course,
but guided at every step; and the business be done as if by machinery” [Bacon,
1877-89, 4: 40]. He compared his task to that of providing a compass for the
purpose of enabling any person to draw a perfect circle [Bacon, 1877-89, 4: 62–3].
Such comments have been taken to suggest that Bacon sought to develop what
his follower Robert Hooke later called a “philosophical algebra”. Yet, as we have
seen, Whewell denied that there could be a mechanical discovery method.
However, it is not clear that Bacon’s goal was, indeed, to give a “philosophical
algebra”. Many of the elements of his method of interpretation cannot be reduced
to a mechanical rule. The construction of the tables of presence, absence and varia-
tion cannot be; Bacon himself described experientia literata, which is a crucial tool
in their construction, as “rather a sagacity, and a kind of hunting by sense, than
a science” [Bacon, 1877-89, 4: 241]. Moreover, after the more or less mechanical
exclusion is performed, it is still not obvious what the true form is. One needs to
postulate a provisional form, seemingly by analogical reasoning, for which Bacon
gives us no mechanical algorithm. Bacon’s comments about creating a discovery
“machine” can perhaps be read as expressing the intention to create a machine
that we may use to supplement our creative rationality, not to supplant it, just as
a compass aids the hand in drawing a circle but does not render the hand itself
unnecessary (on this point see also [McMullin, 1990, 83]). Such a view is suggested
by the following passage in the Preface to the Novum Organum: “Certainly if in
things mechanical men had set to work with their naked hands, without help or
force of instruments, just as in things intellectual they have set to work with little
else than the naked forces of the understanding, very small would the matters have
been which. . .they could have attempted or accomplished” [Bacon, 1877-89, 4:
40]. This is not so far from Whewell’s own view.
8
NECESSARY TRUTHS IN EMPIRICAL SCIENCE
Whewell not only wished to describe how scientists discover empirical laws. He
also sought to account for how scientists come to know necessary truths. This
was a problem that concerned Whewell from 1819, while he was completing his
ﬁrst textbook on mechanics. By the time he published the Philosophy in 1840,
Whewell believed he had solved what he referred to in a letter to Herschel as the
“ultimate problem” of philosophy of science, by showing that necessary truths
can emerge in the course of empirical science [Whewell, 1844b, 489]. This is a
rather striking claim and has not been well-understood by other commentators
(see [Butts, 1965a; 1965b; Fisch, 1985; 1991; Morrison, 1997; Walsh 1962]). Com-
prehending Whewell’s solution requires viewing it in the context of his antithetical

202
Laura J. Snyder
epistemology (for a more detailed exposition of what follows, see [Snyder, 1994]).
One way in which Whewell described the antithetical nature of knowledge was
by claiming that “there is no ﬁxed and permanent line” to be drawn between the
empirical and ideal elements of knowledge [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 23]. For example,
as we have seen, sensations cannot be entirely diﬀerentiated from Ideas. Whewell
claimed further that there is no permanent line to be drawn between fact and
theory; facts are joined together by the use of an Idea to form a theory, but a true
theory is itself a fact, and can be used to form theories of even greater generality.79
The fact/theory distinction is only relative, then, because where we draw the line
between them changes as we discover that our theories are true (and thus that
they are “facts”). Whewell implied that the same relation holds for the pair “ex-
periential and necessary truth” [Whewell, 1844a, 465]. Although there is no “ﬁxed
and permanent line” between experiential and necessary truth, Whewell did allow
that they can be distinguished philosophically, for the purposes of understanding
them (as can the pairs “fact and theory” and “sensation and Idea”). Experiential
truths are laws of nature that are knowable only empirically [Whewell, 1858a, 1:
26]. Necessary truths, for Whewell, are propositions expressing laws which “can be
seen to be true by a pure act of thought” [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 60]. That is, they
are knowable a priori, without any experience. Further, experiential truths are
recognized by us as being contingent; they are such that “for anything which we
can see, might have been otherwise” [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 25]. Necessary truths, by
contrast, are those “of which we cannot distinctly conceive the contrary” [Whewell,
1844a, 463]. These distinctions between experiential and necessary truths are epis-
temic, grounded upon how we come to know a truth, and whether we can conceive
of its contrary. But there is also a non-epistemic distinction: Whewell claimed that
necessary truths “must be true” — whether we recognize this or not [Whewell,
1858a, 1: 25–6]. Moreover, Whewell suggested that the epistemic criteria are re-
liable tests for this non-epistemic necessity. If a general proposition satisﬁes the
epistemic criterion for necessary truth, then we can be certain that it must be true.
Note that Whewell did not imply the converse. That is, a proposition might be
necessary in the non-epistemic sense even if it does not meet the epistemic criteria
(only, in that case, we would not know it was a necessary truth).
Like facts and theories, however, experiential and necessary truths “are not
marked by separate and prominent features of diﬀerence, but only by their present
opposition, which is only a transient relation” [Whewell, 1860, 305]. There is,
Whewell claimed, merely a temporary division between truths which are experi-
ential and those which are necessary. Whewell believed that science consists in a
process called the “idealization of facts”, whereby experiential truths are “trans-
ferred to the side” of necessary truths [Whewell, 1860, 303]. The same proposition
79William Whewell [1844a, 467]; see also [1860, 305].
Whewell characterized the relation
between facts and theories in this way as early as his 1830 book on architecture. In this work,
Whewell referred to theories as “general facts”, and expressed the hope that his architectural
descriptions would be intelligible to “those who prefer facts to theories, that is, particular facts
to general ones”. See the third edition [1842, 40].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
203
moves from one side of the fundamental antithesis to the other — hence the di-
viding line between them is “transient”. Whewell claimed that, by this process,
“a posteriori truths become a priori truths” [Whewell, 1860, 357–8]. Truths which
are ﬁrst knowable only empirically become knowable a priori. Self-evident truths,
then, become self-evident. In order to understand how this can occur, it is impor-
tant to grasp the relation between necessary truths and the fundamental Ideas.
Whewell believed that necessary truths, or the “axioms” of science, can be
known a priori from the fundamental Ideas, because they are “necessary conse-
quences” of these Ideas [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 99]. As we have seen, every science
is organized by one or more fundamental Ideas. Each Fundamental Idea has sev-
eral axioms which follow from it. Axioms are necessary consequences of an Idea
in the sense that they express the meaning of the Idea. Whewell explained that
the axioms “in expressing the primary developments of a fundamental Idea, do in
fact express the Idea, so far as its expression in words forms part of our science”
[Whewell, 1858a, 1: 75] (see also [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 58; Whewell, 1858b, 13]).
For example, one of the three axioms of the Idea of Cause is “every event must
have a cause”; and Whewell noted that “this axiom expresses, to a certain extent
[because it is only one of the axioms] our Idea of Cause” [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 185].
The connection between an Idea and its axioms seems to be that the meaning
of the axiom is contained in the meaning of the Idea, and expresses nothing but
what is already contained in the Idea. The proposition “Causes are such that every
event has a cause” is therefore analogous to the proposition “bachelors are never-
married men”, where the predicate (“never-married men”) expresses only what
is already contained in the subject (“bachelors”). (Kant called such statements
“analytic judgments”.) As we have seen, Whewell argued that a crucial part of
science is the “explication” of Ideas and their conceptions. By explicating Ideas
scientists gain an explicit, clariﬁed view of the meaning of the Idea — it becomes
“distinct”. Once an Idea is distinct enough that its meaning is understood, the
scientist can see that the axioms are necessary consequences of the Idea, in virtue
of the fact that they express part of this meaning.80 That is, when the scientist’s
mind contains an explicated form of the Idea of Cause, she will know that it must
be true that every event has a cause.
The two epistemic criteria Whewell gave for necessary truths follow from this
understanding of the relation between the Ideas and the axioms. Once the mean-
ing of the concept “bachelor” is understood, no empirical knowledge is required to
know the truth of the proposition “bachelors are never-married men”: this propo-
sition follows from the meaning of the concept, and hence can be known a priori.
(On the other hand, if the meaning of “bachelor” is not understood, the truth
of this proposition will not be knowable a priori.) Further, once the meaning of
bachelor is understood, it will not be possible to conceive of someone who is both
a bachelor and married. Similarly, Whewell claimed, only someone with a distinct
understanding of the Idea of Space can know a priori that two straight lines cannot
80This is why the ability to recognize the necessity of axioms is one test for the distinctness of
our Ideas. See [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 101], and [Whewell, 1835b].

204
Laura J. Snyder
enclose a space; moreover, a person who does know this a priori would be unable
to conceive of two lines that are straight but yet contradict this necessary truth.81
Thus, Whewell’s notion of necessary truth is opposed to Kant’s conception
of the synthetic a priori (contra [Butts, 1965a; Fisch, 1991; Metcalfe, 1991; Stoll,
1929]). Whewell disagreed with Kant’s claim that necessary truths of mathematics
are synthetic a priori. Kant explained of the truth “5+7=12” that “this concept
of 12 is by no means already thought in merely thinking this union of 7 and
5; and I may analyze my concept of such a possible sum as long as I please,
still I shall never ﬁnd the 12 in it” (see [Kant, 1929, 53]).
That is, for Kant,
“5+7=12” is not an analytic judgment such that merely by knowing the meaning
of “5+7” we can know the truth and necessity of “5+7=12”. Whewell was certainly
aware of Kant’s view; in one of his notebooks he transcribed this discussion of the
synthetical nature of mathematical principles in the ﬁrst Critique.82 In published
work, nevertheless, Whewell presented the opposing position. Using the similar
example “7+8=15”, Whewell claimed that “we refer to our conceptions of seven,
of eight, and of addition, and as soon as we possess the conceptions distinctly, we
see that the sum must be 15”.83 Merely by knowing the meanings of “seven”,
“eight”, and “addition”, we see that it follows necessarily that “7+8=15”. Hence,
for Whewell, mathematical truths (like all necessary truths) are analytic and not
synthetic in Kant’s sense.The Kantian Mansel duly complained that
Dr.
Whewell lays too much stress on clearness and distinctness of
conceptions as the basis of the axiomatic truths of science. But the
clearness and distinctness of any conception can only enable us more
accurately to unfold the virtual contents of the concept itself; it cannot
enable us to add a priori any new attribute.
In other words, the
increased clearness and distinctness of a conception may enable us to
multiply to any extent our analytic judgments, but cannot add a single
synthetical one. [Mansel, 1860, 258]
Whewell’s view of mathematical truth also diﬀers from the position of William
Hamilton and Dugald Stewart. They had argued that the axioms of mathematics
are conventional or “hypothetical”, because axioms are deductive consequences
of deﬁnitions that are not themselves necessary (see [Whewell, 1838, 151] and
[Whewell, 1858a, 1: 107–8].
Mathematical truths such as “two straight lines
cannot enclose a space” are necessarily true (within Euclidean geometry) only be-
cause of how Euclidean geometry deﬁnes “straight line” (i.e., “a straight line is
that which lies evenly between its extreme points”). The axiom would not even
be true, let alone necessary, if our geometry deﬁned “straight line” as one which
81For the contrary claims of other commentators, and my arguments against these claims, see
[Snyder, 1994].
82William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.18.19 f.13, p. 10. Although the entry is undated, based
on the date of an earlier entry it appears to originate from the mid-1820s.
83[Whewell, 1844a, 471].
Whewell made the same claim for the axioms of geometry: “the
meaning of the terms being understood, and the proof being gone through, the truth of the
proposition must be assented to” [1844a, 462, emphasis added].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
205
lies unevenly between its extreme points. Importantly, their view suggests that we
might have chosen to deﬁne “straight line” diﬀerently. But Whewell rejected this
merely hypothetical necessity. On his view, the necessary truths that follow from
deﬁnitions are necessary because they are deductive consequences of deﬁnitions
which are themselves necessary. Mathematical deﬁnitions are not merely conven-
tional.84 Rather, they are “descriptive” (on this point see [Richards, 1988, 22–3]).
On Whewell’s view the deﬁnitions of geometry and arithmetic describe the prop-
erties of certain mathematical conceptions such as point, line, circle and number.
These conceptions are necessary consequences of the Ideas of Space and Time (see
[Whewell, 1858b, 30–1; 1858a, 1: 74]). Like the axioms, the conceptions of an
Idea are “included” in the meaning of the Idea (hence their deﬁnitions express
part of its meaning) [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 75]. When we verbalize the deﬁnition of
“straight line” we are not conventionally assigning the properties of straight lines,
but are expressing or describing what these properties really are.85 We could not
correctly deﬁne straight line in any other way. Like most British thinkers prior to
the late 1870s, Whewell considered geometrical deﬁnitions to be descriptive not
only of mathematical conceptions that exist in our minds, but of physical reality as
well; geometry was thus held to have an ontological foundation. As we have seen,
Whewell’s Fundamental Ideas correspond to the structure of the physical world.
The Idea of Space which conforms to the geometry of physical space is (according
to classical Newtonian physics) Euclidean.86 On Whewell’s view, only deﬁnitions
which follow from this Idea of Space can serve as the source of necessary truths
of geometry. This is why Whewell claimed that it is not the case that a necessary
truth of mathematics “merely expresses what we mean by our words”; rather, it
expresses a truth about some fundamental feature of physical reality as well.87
84See [Whewell, 1858b, 36 and 39; 1858a, 1: 74–5], and Whewell’s letter to Frederic Myers,
6 September 1845, in [Stair Douglas, 1882, 327]. For Hamilton’s view see his [1836]. Hamilton
denied Whewell’s claim that mathematics is an important subject of study for university students;
Hamilton’s view of mathematics entailed that it was too purely formal to be of use in developing
basic reasoning skills.
85Whewell claimed that “a deﬁnition, to be admissible, must necessarily refer to and agree with
some conception which we can distinctly frame in our thoughts”. See [Whewell, 1838, 153–5].
Like the axioms, these deﬁnitions are recognized by us as being correct and necessary when our
Ideas are adequately distinct.
86It was not until the late 1870s — ten years or so after Whewell’s death — that British
thinkers began to question the assumption that the nature of geometry was deﬁned by Euclidean
geometry (see [Richards, 1988, chapter two]). But we may still speculate upon what Whewell’s
reaction would have been to non-Euclidean geometries. Since the structure of physical space was
still considered to be Euclidean, Whewell would have maintained that only Euclidean geometry
is “science”, in the sense of containing necessary truths which conform to the nature of physical
reality. However, Whewell would have needed to address the question of how geometers, who
seem to have a distinct Idea of Euclidean Space, can nevertheless distinctly conceive propositions
contrary to the Euclidean axioms.
87[Whewell, 1858a, 1: 59, emphasis added]. By denying the conventionality of mathematical
truths, Whewell did not thereby deny their analyticity, as some commentators have claimed.
Analyticity need not be limited to truths of conventional deﬁnition, but can apply to deﬁnitions
that describe the true nature of physical reality. For opposing views see [Butts, 1965a, 167] and
[Fisch, 1991, 155–7].

206
Laura J. Snyder
To understand this assertion, we must recall Whewell’s theological justiﬁcation
for the claim that the Ideas existing in our minds correspond to the nature of
physical reality. As we have seen, this justiﬁcation is based on the notion that
our Ideas and the world share a Divine creator. In his Philosophy of Discovery,
Whewell explicitly asked how it is possible that propositions we know a priori are
informative about, and indeed necessarily true of, the physical world. Answering
this question, Whewell claimed, required asking another: “how did things come
to be as they are?” [Whewell, 1860, 354–5 and 358]. Whewell answered this with
the claim that God created the physical universe in accordance with certain of
his “Divine Ideas”. For example, God made the world such that it corresponds
to the Idea of Cause partially expressed by the axiom “every event has a cause”.
Hence in the universe every event conforms to this Idea, not only by having a
cause but by being such that it could not have occurred without one. Whewell’s
necessary truths are not logically necessary, in the sense of being true in all possible
worlds (here I disagree with [Ruse, 1977, 251–2]). On Whewell’s view, God could
have chosen to create the world in accordance with diﬀerent Ideas, in which case
diﬀerent axioms would be necessary truths. Even the axioms of mathematics are
not logically necessary: “the propositions of space and number and the like, must
be supposed to be what they are by an act of the Divine Mind”, i.e., by the act of
God choosing one set of Ideas over another.88 Given the Ideas God did choose, the
axioms are necessarily true of the world, because they follow necessarily from the
meanings of these Ideas. But this is not a view of hypothetical truth in the sense
that Hamilton and Stewart proposed for mathematics. We do not conventionally
assign meanings to the Ideas; now that the world has been created, only one set
of meanings is possible.
We are at last in a position to understand what Whewell meant by claiming
that a proposition that is at ﬁrst knowable only empirically can become knowable
a priori — that is, how it is possible to “idealize the facts”. Since necessary truths
follow necessarily from the meaning of our Ideas, the a priori intuition of necessary
truths is possible only once our Ideas are distinct: when this is the case, we appre-
hend that an axiom is necessarily true because the meaning of the axiom is, in fact,
contained in the meaning of a Fundamental Idea to which the universe necessarily
conforms (given God’s choice of Ideas to use as archetypes in creating it). But if
our Idea is not distinct, we do not — and indeed cannot — apprehend this. We
have already discussed the explication of conceptions and Ideas which occurs in
the course of empirical science, and by which Ideas are made distinct. Once an
Idea is distinct — once we understand its meaning — truths which we may have
discovered empirically are seen actually to follow from the meaning of the Idea.
That is, the experiential truth becomes knowable a priori from the now-understood
meaning of the Idea; the experiential truth has been “idealized” into a necessary
truth. The a priori intuition of necessary truths is “progressive”, then, because
our Ideas must be explicated before it is possible for us to know their axioms a
88See printer’s proofs of Plurality of Worlds, WP Adv.c.16 f. 27, chapter XII, p. 276 and
[Whewell, 2001].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
207
priori. This is why Whewell claimed that necessary truths become knowable a
priori and not merely known a priori. Thus, for example, Whewell argued that
“though the discovery of the First Law of Motion was made, historically speaking,
by means of experiment, we have now attained a point of view in which we see
that it might have been certainly known to be true independently of experience”
[Whewell, 1847, 2: 221]. The First Law of Motion, then, is a necessary truth
that has undergone the process of idealization: though it was ﬁrst knowable only
empirically, it has become knowable a priori.89
We have seen that, by the process of idealization of facts, experiential truths
come to satisfy the criteria of necessary truths. That is, they become knowable
a priori from a distinct Idea, and it becomes impossible (for those who have the
Idea in its distinct form) to conceive clearly their contraries. But recall that these
epistemic criteria are intended to be reliable tests of a deeper kind of necessity. If
a law satisﬁes these epistemic criteria, then we know that the law “must be true”.
Yet it is not the case that laws change their status regarding this non-epistemic
necessity. These truths which become necessary in the epistemic sense, are always
necessary in the non-epistemic sense. As discussed earlier, the non-epistemic sense
in which an axiom must be true is that it follows as a necessary consequence of
one of the Divine Ideas used by God in creating the world. Since God created
the world to conform to a particular Idea of Cause, the axioms which express the
meaning of this Idea, and the necessary truths which are a priori derivable from
these axioms, must be true of the objects and events of the world: and this is so
even if we have not explicated our Idea of Cause enough to see their necessity.
Thus, through the idealization of facts, truths become necessary truths in the
epistemic sense, which were always necessary in the non-epistemic sense. There is
a rather interesting and important consequence of this understanding of the ideal-
ization of facts. Recall that this discussion began with the fundamental antithesis,
according to which no ﬁxed line divides experiential and necessary truths. We now
see how it is that the line we draw between them, like that between fact and the-
ory, is a relative one, based upon epistemic distinctions that change as our Ideas
become more distinct. As we explicate our Ideas, we recognize empirical truths
to be necessary consequences of these Ideas; and the truths are thus transferred
from the empirical to the necessary side of the antithesis. But since there is no
ﬁrm division between these two classes of truths, any experiential truth can, in
89Whewell’s view of necessary truth altered between the writing of his [1835a] and his [1840].
In the earlier work, he claimed that the laws of motion were experiential truths, while in the later
one he characterized the ﬁrst law of motion as a necessary truth. In [1835, 573] he argued that
the reason to be cautious about considering the laws of motion to be necessary truths is that “we
know that, historically speaking, men did at ﬁrst suppose the laws of motion to be diﬀerent from
what they are now proved to be”, and this would be “impossible” if the laws were necessary and
“self-evident”. See also [1833a, 179]. By 1840, however, Whewell had come to hold his mature
view that — as he put it later — the intuition of a priori truths require “a certain growth and
development of the human mind”, and thus that there is no contradiction in supposing a law to
be a necessary truth even if previous science did not recognize it as such (see [1860, 347]). Those
who have focused only on the earlier essay have consequently misunderstood Whewell’s mature
position.

208
Laura J. Snyder
principle, become knowable a priori (and therefore it will become impossible to
conceive distinctly its contrary). Since satisfying the epistemic criteria is a reliable
test for truths which are necessary in the non-epistemic sense, it follows that every
experiential truth is, in fact, necessary in this sense. That is, every law of nature
is a necessary truth, in virtue of following necessarily from some Idea used by God
in creating the universe.
Whewell’s view thus destroys the line traditionally drawn between laws of nature
and the axiomatic propositions of the pure sciences of mathematics; mathematical
truth is granted no special status. Mansel seems to have had this consequence
in mind when he argued against Whewell that the diﬀerence between a priori
principles and empirical laws “is not one of degree, but of kind; and the separation
between the two classes is such that no conceivable progress of science can ever
convert the one into the other” [Mansel, 1860, 275]. For Whewell, there is no such
separation. In virtue of their connection to the Divine Ideas, the laws of nature
have the same rigorous necessity as geometrical axioms (see [Whewell, 1835b,
160]). Moreover, the axioms of geometry and arithmetic are themselves laws of
nature, “established by the Creator of the Universe”.90 In principle, then, it is
possible to idealize all experiential truths into necessary truths knowable a priori.
Hence, Whewell claimed it was possible (again, and importantly, only in principle)
for all science to become purely deductive, like the mathematical sciences. Once
all the axiomatic laws of a science are knowable a priori, the only task left for the
scientist would be to deduce further theorems from these laws. Eventually this
would mark the end of empirical science. However, there is still much work left for
the empirical scientist; Whewell vehemently disagreed with Mill’s claim that most
remaining scientiﬁc work is deductive [Whewell, 1849, 73–6]. Indeed, it is clear
that Whewell believed we will never, in fact, idealize all empirical laws. Many such
laws will be seen by us only as experiential truths, as being what they are “not by
virtue of any internal necessity which we can understand” [Whewell, 1833a, 165].
9
WHEWELL’S DEBATE WITH MILL
In the twentieth-century, Whewell was “rediscovered” as the antagonist of John
Stuart Mill in a debate about induction (they also publicly argued about moral
philosophy and political economy). Because of the widespread inﬂuence of the Sys-
tem of Logic, the view of induction presented within its pages became the standard
view of induction, remaining so today. It is thus because of Mill that Whewell’s
inductive logic, which diﬀers from Mill’s, is generally interpreted as being non-
inductive. Indeed, as we have seen, Mill is the original source for the claim that
Whewell’s methodology is identical to that later endorsed by twentieth-century
hypothetico-deductivists. In System of Logic, Mill wrote that “Dr. Whewell . . .
allows of no logical process in any case of induction other that . . . guessing until
90William Whewell, Of the Plurality of Worlds, WP Adv.c.16 f.27, p. 274. See a;sp [Whewell,
2001].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
209
a guess is found which tallies with the facts, and accordingly . . .
he rejects all
canons of induction, because it is not by means of them that we guess” [Mill,
1963-91, 7: 304].
Mill’s characterization of Whewell’s view as non-inductive is due to Mill’s denial
that there is any contribution of the mind in induction; leaving room for any such
contribution was thought by Mill to open the door to intuitionism, a philosophical
position he associated with conservative political views. Indeed, as he indicated
in his Autobiography, Mill’s motivation for writing System of Logic was primarily
political. As he explained,
The notion that truths external to the mind may be known by intu-
ition or consciousness, independently of observations and experience,
is, I am persuaded, in these times, the great intellectual support of
false doctrines and bad institutions. . . . There never was such an in-
strument devised for consecrating all deep seated prejudices. And the
chief strength of this false philosophy in morals, politics, and religion,
lies in the appeal which it is accustomed to make to the evidence of
mathematics and of the cognate branches of physical science. To expel
it from these, is to drive it from its stronghold . . . .In attempting to
clear up the real nature of the evidence of mathematical and physi-
cal truths, the “System of Logic” met the intuition philosophers on
ground on which they had previously been deemed unassailable. [Mill,
1963-91, 1: 233-5]
Thus, as I discuss elsewhere, Mill’s philosophy of science as a whole must be
read in the light of his political concerns (this point is a central contention in my
discussion of Mill in [Snyder, 2006]).
In attacking Whewell’s view of induction, Mill criticized his characterization
of Kepler as an inductive discoverer. Whewell often praised Kepler as being an
exemplary discoverer.91 Speciﬁcally, he commended Kepler’s discovery of the el-
liptical orbit of Mars, considering it a model use of discoverer’s induction. In his
System of Logic, Mill used the example of Kepler in order to argue that Whewell’s
discoverers’ induction was not, in fact, a form of induction. He explained that
induction “is a process of inference from the known to the unknown; and any
operation involving no inference, and any process in which what seems the con-
clusion is no wider than the premises from which it is drawn, does not fall within
the meaning of the term”.92 However, Whewell’s discoverers’ induction, Mill ar-
gued, does not satisfy this deﬁnition. Mill concentrated his attack on Whewell’s
notion of colligation. According to Mill, what Whewell called “colligation” is noth-
ing more than a matter of observation and description, and thus it does not go
91See, for example, Whewell’s earliest Induction notebook (WP R.18.17 f. 10, p. 49), [Whewell,
1858a, 1: 318], and [Whewell, 1860, 121].
92[Mill, 1963-91, 7: 288]. Thus Mill, like Jones and Whewell, rejected Whately’s claim that
inductive inference can be reduced to the syllogism. This rejection reﬂects a change of position
from his 1828 review of Whately’s Logic, in which Mill endorsed Whately’s view.

210
Laura J. Snyder
beyond the premises (i.e., the observations) themselves. In this way he denied
Whewell’s claim that colligation, as in the example of Kepler’s discovery, involves
inference. He made a series of arguments against Whewell’s position. First, Mill
argued that ﬁnding a shared property in a set of facts is typically a matter of
direct observation. When we assert “all observed crows are black”, we are sim-
ply summarizing numerous observations of black crows; we are not going beyond
these observations as in an ampliative inference. (Of course, Mill would agree that
the projecting of this property, to reach the conclusion “all [observed and unob-
served] crows are black”, is an ampliative inference.) Similarly, to determine the
curve deﬁned by the observed positions of Mars, Mill insisted, “there was no other
mode than that of direct observation” [Mill, 1963-91, 7: 292–3]. Thus Mill accused
Whewell of “confounding a mere description, by general terms, of a set of observed
phenomena, with an induction from them” [Mill, 1963-91, 7: 288]. In this way
he suggested that Kepler found the property shared by the observed positions by
simple curve-ﬁtting; that is, that Kepler determined that the observed points of
the orbit share the property of lying on an elliptical curve merely by plotting the
observations of Mars and then “connecting the dots”, as it were, in order to see
what curve included them. Far from being impressed by Kepler’s achievement,
as Whewell was, Mill sniﬀed that “the only wonder” was that no one had made
this discovery before, once Tycho-Brahe’s accurate observations had been recorded
[Mill, 1963-91, 8: 652].
However, Mill’s claim ignores the obvious fact that our observations are from the
vantage point of the Earth, whereas determining the orbital path of Mars requires
determining its path around the Sun. Observations made from the Earth do not
yield an ellipse. Kepler needed to develop a theory of the Earth’s motions before
he could infer the true path of Mars from its Earth-observed positions (on this
point see [Wilson, 1968, 5–10; Stephenson, 1987, 49–61; Kozhamthadam, 1994,
155–61]). Further, even if Kepler’s theory of the Earth plus the observations could
have yielded “connectable dots”, or points of the orbit around the Sun, this itself
would not have enabled Kepler to see the orbital path as being elliptical, since
this particular ellipse is very nearly circular. In certain places in System of Logic,
Mill (inconsistently with his other claim) seemed to acknowledge that the elliptical
property of Mars’ orbit could not be determined by direct observation, because we
are not in a privileged position to see its path around the sun. Mill wrote that, in
the case of Kepler’s discovery, “the facts [were] out of the reach of being observed,
in any such manner as would have enabled the senses to identify directly the path
of the planet” [Mill, 1963-91, 7: 296]. Nevertheless Mill continued to reject the
view that Kepler’s discovery of the ellipse required any inference. He oﬀered a sec-
ond argument against Whewell’s claim. Sometimes, Mill explained, a conception
can be obtained from earlier experience and applied to present observations. In
Kepler’s case, the property of lying on an elliptical curve was “derived from his
former experience”, presumably from his experience of mathematical curves [Mill,
1963-91, 8: 651]. However, Mill neglected to explain why the discovery that this
property is shared by the members of the set of observed points of Mars’ orbit does

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
211
not constitute an inference; obviously, to apply a property not directly observed
in the facts to these facts is to go beyond premises about what is observed.
Mill’s argument here relies on a curious counterfactual. He noted that if we had
adequate visual organs, or if the planet left a visible track as it moved through
the sky, and if we occupied a privileged position with which to view this path,
we could directly observe the planet’s orbital path [Mill, 1963-91, 7: 297]. Mill
suggested that Kepler’s discovery that the observed positions of Mars share a
property “derived from his former experience” did not constitute an inference
because it was merely an “accident”, or a contingent fact, that this property was
not directly observed by him. Thus he explained that “if the path [of the planet]
was visible, no one I think would dispute that to identify it with an ellipse is to
describe it: and I cannot see why any diﬀerence should be made by its not being
directly an object of sense” [Mill, 1963-91, 7: 296]. Later, in Book VI, Mill made
a similar point [1963-91, 8: 651].
This strange argument of Mill’s obviously does not defeat Whewell’s claim that
Kepler’s discovery of the ellipse required inference from the known to the unknown.
The problem with Mill’s argument is that it invalidly narrows the scope of am-
pliative inference. Whewell claimed that Kepler’s hypothesis required an inference
from the observed positions of Mars to what was, in fact, unobserved — namely,
the shape of an orbital path that included these positions. The shape of such a
curve was not directly observed by Kepler. Mill’s argument against considering
this operation to be a type of inference from the known to the unknown is that this
property would be observable under certain conditions (if we were at the proper
viewing angle, if the planet left a visible trail). But this is surely irrelevant to the
question of inference. What matters is what is, in fact, observed. This is so in the
case of enumerative induction as well. After all, every individual crow is observ-
able, yet we (and Mill) still allow that the conclusion “all crows are black” can be
reached only by ampliative inference if it is the case that every crow has not been
observed. It is exactly because Kepler did not see the orbit’s path directly and
at the correct angle that he needed to make an inference to a property shared by
the points of the orbit; the fact that this property may be, under some idealized
conditions, “observable”, is irrelevant.
Mill realized that he needed to explain what type of non-inferential procedure
could be used to obtain the true description of the facts when the conception con-
necting them is not directly observed. He argued that, in such cases, a conception
may be applied to a set of facts by non-rational guesswork. Thus he wrote that
Kepler’s discovery of the ellipse involved nothing but “guessing until a guess is
found which tallies with the facts” [Mill, 1963-91, 7: 304]. He claimed that Kepler
merely made a series of non-rational guesses, using previously observed concep-
tions, until he found the conception which best ﬁt the observed positions of Mars.
That is, he supplied the ellipse conception “hypothetically . . .
from among the
conceptions he had obtained from other portions of his experience” [Mill, 1963-91,
7: 296]. There are, however, two problems with this claim about Kepler. First, it
is clear that Kepler did not merely guess his ellipse hypothesis. As Whewell cor-

212
Laura J. Snyder
rectly claimed, Kepler made a series of rational inferences to his discovery; even
if one wanted to say, with Newton, that he “guessed” the orbit to be elliptical,
clearly Kepler used inference to arrive to the oval, and this was, to a great degree,
the more diﬃcult and revolutionary part of his discovery. The second problem
with Mill’s claim is that it is inconsistent with his own claims about the role of
hypotheses in science. Mill frequently argued that a hypothesis merely guessed
at can have only a heuristic role in science; it cannot be proven to be true or
likely merely by being found to ﬁt the data — even if it leads, in addition, to a
successful prediction of an unexpected consequence. Here, however, Mill seems to
be claiming that hypotheses may be proven to be true solely by testing whether
they conform to the observations.
Mill rather oddly claimed that “Dr. Whewell . . . pass[ed] over altogether the
question of proof” [Mill, 1963-91, 7: 304]. But Mill’s analysis of Whewell’s position
is grounded in his mistaken belief that Whewell allowed hypotheses with no induc-
tive support to be conﬁrmed by predictive success. Mill himself required successful
prediction for theories as part of his so-called “deductive method”, where the ﬁrst
step was the induction to a theory, the next was the deduction of consequences,
and the third was verifying testing of them. But he emphasized that the second
two steps were useless without the ﬁrst; this was what he disdainfully called the
“hypothetical method”. Since Whewell’s view was seen by Mill as hypothetical,
Mill believed that he had no proper method for testing inductive theories.
In 1849 Whewell published a work devoted to responding to Mill: Of Induction,
with especial reference to Mr. J. Stuart Mill’s “System of Logic”. More than one
quarter of this work is devoted to a critique of Mill’s view of Kepler’s discovery. Ac-
cording to Whewell, Mill illegitimately attempted to set up a distinction between
description and induction. Whewell characterized Mill as arguing in the following
way: “when particular facts are bound together by their relation in space, Mr. Mill
calls the discovery of this connection Description, but when they are connected by
other general relations, as time, cause and the like, Mr. Mill terms the discovery
of the connection Induction”. Mill asserted that the discovery of Mars’ orbit, in
which the particular facts were connected with the spatial property of an elliptical
curve, was merely a description, while the discovery that the planetary orbits are
connected by the causal property of being acted upon by the Sun’s gravitational
force, was an induction [Mill, 1963-91, 7: 299]. Whewell claimed that there is no
obvious argument to warrant such a distinction. If inference is needed to discover
the property connecting particular facts, then it is wrong to call the act a mere
(non-inferential) description, whether the property is a spatial one such as an el-
liptical curve or a causal one such as gravitational force. Whewell noted “that the
orbit of Mars is a Fact — a true description of the path — does not make it the
less a case of Induction”, because inference was needed in order to discover this
true description [Whewell, 1849, 23].
As we have seen, Mill’s claim about Kepler arose from his desire to reject any
internal or subjective element in knowledge. Whewell recognized that the real
point of contention between them here had to do with the source of a conception

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
213
or colligating property used in inference. Recall that, in Whewell’s antithetical
epistemology, the conceptions are modiﬁcations of Fundamental Ideas that are
supplied by our minds in our contemplation of the world around us. Thus the
conceptions used in colligating particular facts have an ideal, subjective source,
yet correspond to the relations that exist in the physical world.
Mill strongly
denied this claim.
“Conceptions”, he wrote, “do not develop themselves from
within, but are impressed from without”. That is, “the conception is not furnished
by the mind till it has been furnished to the mind” [Mill, 1963-91, 8: 653 and
655]. This is why he insisted, as we have seen above, that ﬁnding a colligating
conception is merely a matter of describing what is observed outside the mind,
rather than being an inference involving conceptions provided from within. In his
response to Mill, Whewell claimed that Mill was ignoring how diﬃcult it often
is to ﬁnd the appropriate conception with which to colligate a set of particular
facts; indeed, as we have seen, Mill rather naively believed that Kepler’s task in
discovering the elliptical orbit was an almost trivially simple one (see [Whewell,
1849, 31]). Mill claimed that Whewell’s “Colligation of the Facts by means of
appropriate Conceptions, is but the ordinary process of ﬁnding by a comparison
of phenomena, in what consists their agreement or resemblance” [Mill, 1863-91, 8:
648]. Whewell rather archly responded by noting that “of course” discovering laws
involves ﬁnding some general point in which all the particular facts agree, “but it
appears to me a most scanty, vague, and incomplete account” to suggest that the
commonality is found merely by observation, with no inference at all [Whewell,
1849, 41–2].
Moreover, Whewell protested Mill’s mischaracterization of his view as being a
non-realist one. Mill wrongly accused Whewell of believing that these conceptions,
because they are supplied by the mind, are merely ideal, mental constructs that
correspond to nothing in the world but simply organize our experience in useful
ways. Mill asserted, for instance, that Whewell held that the conception of an
ellipse “did not exist in the facts themselves” [Mill, 1963-91, 7: 294]. Whewell had
argued against this understanding of his view in his response to Herschel’s review
of his works. Contrary to the way in which Herschel and Mill interpreted his view,
Whewell believed that our conceptions do “exist in the facts”, in the sense that
they provide shared properties and relations that really exist between objects and
events, even though it takes an “act of the intellect” to ﬁnd them there. Of the
conception of the ellipse, Whewell wrote, “Kepler found it in the facts, because
it was there” [Whewell, 1849, 23]. Drawing upon an analogy earlier employed by
Bacon, Whewell claimed that Nature is a book, and her laws are written within
it, but we cannot read these laws without knowing the language in which they
are written. The laws exist “in the facts”, but our acquisition of knowledge of
the laws requires that we develop and use the rules of grammar that exist in our
minds [Whewell, 1849, 34]. Mill was therefore wrong to claim that Whewell was
a non-realist.
Whewell also objected to the radically empiricist tenor of Mill’s philosophy.
Whewell recognized that Mill’s inductivism rejected inference to theories referring

214
Laura J. Snyder
to unobservable entities or properties.
Indeed, Whewell complained that “Mr.
Mill rejects the hypothesis of a luminiferous ether, ‘because it can neither be
seen, heard, smelt, tasted, or touched”’ [Whewell, 1849, 34]. In two later works,
Whewell associated Mill with Comte, whom Whewell criticized for “rejecting the
inquiry into causes” (see [Whewell, 1866, 356] and [Whewell, 1860, chapter 21]).
Whewell’s method, in contrast, did allow for the inquiry into unobservable causes;
like Bacon, he believed this to be the ultimate aim of science. Thus Whewell noted
that “to exclude such inquiries, would be to secure ourselves from the poison of
error by abstaining from the banquet of truth. . . ” [1860, 233]. The history of
science shows that it is both possible and important to seek these kinds of causes.
Further, Whewell strongly criticized Mill for the methodology he developed
based on this radically empiricist epistemology. Whewell rejected “Methods of Ex-
perimental Inquiry” as extreme oversimpliﬁcations of scientiﬁc discovery [Whewell,
1849, 44]. Mill had noted that the method of diﬀerence can only be applied in
controlled laboratory settings; and he was correct that the method could be useful
in such cases, as it is today, along with the other methods, in devising studies in
medical research.93 However, Mill had also called these methods “the only possible
modes of experimental inquiry”, and suggested that they are not diﬃcult to apply,
at least in the physical sciences [Mill, 1963-91, 7: 406]. Indeed, Mill claimed that
he wanted to ﬁnd rules of induction analogous to the rules of the syllogism; that
is, something like a “discovery machine”, in the very sense that Whewell rejected
[Mill, 1963-91, 283].
But the main complaint Whewell had of Mill’s methods concerned Mill’s means
of justifying them. “Who will carry these formulae through the history of the
sciences, as they have really grown up; and shew us that these four methods have
been operative in their formation. . . ?” [1849, 45]. Mill himself had not justiﬁed
his methods by showing that they have, in fact, been used to make successful dis-
coveries. Instead of surveying the history of science to ﬁnd whether scientists have
used his methods of experimental inquiry, Mill focused his examples on a narrow
range of not-well understood cases. He spent much time on Wells’ researches on
Dew, which Herschel had discussed in the Preliminary Discourse. Whewell blamed
Herschel for suggesting that one or two examples are suﬃcient to understand sci-
entiﬁc discovery. As he wrote to Jones, “tell Herschel he has something to answer
for in persuading people that they could so completely understand the process of
discovery from a single example”.94 Moreover, the Wells example was inappro-
priate to illustrate inductive methods, according to Whewell, because it was not
really an original discovery, but rather a deduction of particular phenomena from
already-established principles (see [Whewell, 1849, 50]). Mill’s other favorite exam-
ple concerns the work of Liebig in physiological chemistry, speciﬁcally his theories
regarding the cause of death. But, as Whewell noted, there are two problems with
93Interestingly, though, Mill himself claimed that his methods of experimental inquiry were
not useful in medical science because of the intermixture of eﬀects (see [1963-91, 7: 451]).
94William Whewell to Richard Jones, 7 April 1843, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 227.

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
215
the example of Liebig. First, Liebig’s theories were not yet veriﬁed, so Mill could
not know whether they were real discoveries [1849, 47]. As Whewell complained
to Jones, these theories were so recent that “the most sagacious physiologists and
chemists cannot yet tell which of them will stand as real discoveries”.95 Moreover,
the science of physiology was a new and not well-established one. Whewell ex-
claimed, “nor can I think it judicious to take so large a proportion of our examples
from a region of science in which, of all parts of our material knowledge, the con-
ceptions both of ordinary persons and men of science themselves, are most loose
and obscure, and the genuine principles most contested. . . ”.96 Whewell believed
that it was only possible to understand the process of reaching truths by examining
ﬁelds of knowledge in which truth is uncontested. Thus he held that “the philoso-
phy of science is to be extracted from the portions of science which are universally
allowed to be the most certainly established . . . .The ﬁrst step towards shewing
how truth is to be discovered, is to study some portion of it which is asserted to
as beyond controversy”. For this reason Whewell also objected to Mill’s introduc-
tion of moral and political subjects into his discussion of induction in the Logic
even though Whewell himself was quite concerned with these topics (indeed, his
original plan for the Philosophy included the “hyperphysical branches” of science,
including morality and political economy) [Whewell, 1849, 5–6].
10
SCIENTIFIC METHOD AND THE HISTORY OF SCIENCE
These last criticisms of Mill grew out of Whewell’s view of the relation between
philosophical discussion of scientiﬁc method and the history of science. Whewell
claimed to have developed his philosophy of science from his study of the history
of science; thus, he wrote his History of Inductive Sciences (1837) before the
Philosophy (1840), claiming that any philosophy of the sciences must be “founded
upon their history”. As he put it in the preface to the History, “it seemed to
me that our study of the modes of discovering truth ought to be based upon a
survey of the truths which have been discovered” [Whewell, 1857a, 1: viii]. Some
commentators have claimed that, on the contrary, Whewell ﬁrst developed an a
priori philosophy of science and then shaped his History of the Inductive Sciences
to conform to his own view (for example, see [Stoll, 1929] and [Strong, 1955]).
To a limited extent this is no doubt true.
As we have seen, from his days as
an undergraduate at Trinity College Whewell considered his “vocation” to be the
advancement of the inductive method in the sciences. So from the very beginning
Whewell had an inductive view of scientiﬁc method, which inﬂuenced his writing
of the History in one important sense: by leading him to the view that learning
about scientiﬁc method must be inductive and therefore historical. As he wrote
to Jones in 1831, “I do not believe the principles of induction can be either taught
95William Whewell to Richard Jones, 7 April 1843, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 227.
96[Whewell, 1849, 48.] See also letters to Jones, 5 August 1834 [WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 174] and
21 August 1834 in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 185–188].

216
Laura J. Snyder
or learned without many examples”.97
Examples, then, are needed to ﬁll out the details of this broadly inductive view,
and they are to come both from knowledge of current science and knowledge of
the history of science. That these examples were expected to come from both
sources is indicated in numerous letters as well as in Whewell’s early induction
notebooks. Whewell’s earliest attempt at a draft of a work on induction appears
in a notebook dated 1830. In this notebook Whewell claimed that in order to
judge the methodology of Bacon, it was necessary “to shew how this method has
been exhibited and exempliﬁed since it was ﬁrst delivered”. In order to do so
it is necessary to discuss the history of science: this may explain why Whewell
put aside this draft and began working on his history of science.98 In this note-
book and in several which follow over the next three to four years there are many
notes on recent discoveries in science, as well as citations from contemporary sci-
entiﬁc works in which scientists express a view of proper scientiﬁc method.99 Yet
there are also numerous entries describing the histories of various scientiﬁc ﬁelds.
These entries are interwoven with Whewell’s early thoughts on an inductive phi-
losophy of science. In one of these notebooks alone, Whewell took reading notes
on Davy’s Elements of Chemical Philosophy, Gilbert’s De Magnete, Brewster’s
book on Newton, as well as works by Cuvier, Copernicus, Galileo, da Vinci, and
Harvey; described recent discoveries in Optics by Biot, Young, Fresnel, Arago, and
Airy; and discussed historical material, giving details about the work of Aristotle,
Euclid, Plato, Alhazen (ibn al-Haytham), Newton, Roger Bacon, Brahe, Kepler
Huyghens, and Fraunhofer. Whewell then used this examination of the history
of Optics and current research in the ﬁeld to outline the “Steps of the Induction
of the Theory of Light”.100 In a notebook dated 1831-32, a discussion of the use
of conceptions in induction includes notes on the scientiﬁc work of Archimedes,
Pascal, Aristotle, Descartes, Mersenne, Galileo and Torricelli.101 In another note-
book, dated December 1833, Whewell discussed Herschel’s Preliminary Discourse,
pointing out one problem with his friend’s work: namely, that “we do not here ﬁnd
the view of physical science to which we hope to be led:–that if its history and past
progress be rightly studied we shall acquire conﬁdence in truth of all kind. . . ”.102
Moreover, in several letters to Jones in 1834 Whewell described himself as eager
to get to his philosophy of science but determined to ﬁnish the history ﬁrst.103
97William Whewell to Richard Jones, 25 February 1831, WP Add.Ms.c.51 f. 99.
98See William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.18.17. f. 12; for quotation see p. xv.
99For example, in an entry dated July 1831 there is a quote from Dalton followed by a comment
by Whewell: “[this is] an excellent description of induction and a good proof of the diﬃculty in
presenting things inductively” (WP R.18.17 f. 15, p. 40). In the induction notebook of 1830
there is an extensive discussion of recent discoveries in Geology (WP R.18.17 f. 12; pp. xxiv-xxv
and 1ﬀ).
100See William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.18.17 f. 13; the notebook is undated but it is headed
“Induction IV”; the other induction notebooks are dated from 1826-1832.
101William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.18.17. f. 15.
102William Whewell, Notebook, WP R.18.17 f. 8.
103ee William William Whewell to Richard Jones, 27 July, 5 August and 6 August 1834; WP
Add.Ms.c.52 f. 173, f. 174 and f. 175.

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
217
It is important to note that, while writing both the History and the Philoso-
phy, Whewell attempted to ensure he had a real understanding of the scientiﬁc
work he was describing. Contrary to Robert Brown’s sneer about Whewell (“yes,
I suppose that he has read the prefaces of very many books”104), Whewell did
more than simply read: he actively engaged in scientiﬁc research in several areas.
For example, at the time Whewell announced himself a candidate for the Chair
in Mineralogy, he had already published a paper on crystallography, and two on
three-dimensional geometry, which later set the foundation for mathematical crys-
tallography (see [Whewell, 1822], [Whewell, 1825], [Whewell, 1827], [Becher, 1986]
and [Deas, 1959]). But he did not have much empirical knowledge of mineral-
ogy, so he went to Berlin and Vienna to study with Mohs. While in Germany
Whewell was impressed by the natural classiﬁcation system in mineralogy, and
rejected the artiﬁcial system then in vogue in England. He published a mono-
graph on mineralogy, and several more papers (see [Whewell, 1828b] and [Becher,
1986]). Whewell also performed experiments with his friend (and future Royal
Astronomer) G.B. Airy, in order to determine the mean density of the earth. In
June of 1826 Whewell and Airy went to Cornwall, where they spent time in the
Dolcoath copper mine comparing the eﬀect of gravity on pendulums at the surface
and at a depth of 1200 feet (Bacon had suggested this experiment in his Novum
Organum) [Whewell, 1828a]. Some years later, Whewell became interested in tidal
research, based in part on his friend John Lubbock’s work on the topic (it was also
an area that had greatly interested Bacon, who wrote an essay “On the Ebb and
Flow of the Sea”).105 Whewell helped Lubbock get grants from the newly-formed
BAAS for his research, and suggested the term “cotidal lines” to him, to designate
lines joining high water times (see [Cartwright, 1999, 111] and [Whewell, 1833b].
Whewell also pushed for a large-scale research project of tidal observations. Aided
by Captain (later Admiral) Beaufort, Hydrographer of the Navy, and with the
support of the Duke of Wellington, Whewell managed to organize simultaneous
observations of tides at 100 British coast guard stations for two weeks in June 1834.
In June 1835 he organized three weeks of observations along the entire coast of
N.W. Europe and Eastern America, including 101 ports in 7 European countries,
28 in America from the mouth of the Mississippi to Nova Scotia, and 537 in the
British Isles, including Ireland.106 This resulted in over 40,000 readings; Whewell
104Reported by Charles Darwin in his [1958, 131]. Darwin related this story in order to illustrate
the point that Brown, though possessing some positive qualities, “was rather given to sneering
at anyone who wrote about what he did not fully understand: I remember praising Whewell’s
History of the Inductive Sciences to him, and he answered, ‘yes, I suppose that he has read the
prefaces of very many books’.”
105In this essay, Bacon had postulated a northward progressing tide over the whole globe (see
[Bacon, 1877-89, 5: 443–58]). But he realized that there was not enough empirical data to sup-
port this supposition strongly, and he urged mariners to record tidal times along the coast of West
Africa, among other places. After Bacon, in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, anal-
ysis of the tides became mainly mathematical, utilizing models which were overly-idealized, such
as that of Laplace which postulated an ocean covering the whole globe. But by the nineteenth
century even the scant empirical data which existed showed the inadequacy of such models.
106Whewell noted that the observations were made from June 8-28, and occurred in 28 places

218
Laura J. Snyder
himself reduced all the data [Whewell, 1836, 291]. Eventually Whewell presented
16 papers to the Royal Society and several summary reports to the BAAS on the
topic of the tides between 1833 and 1850. In recognition of his work in tidal re-
search, Whewell was awarded a gold medal by the Royal Society in 1837 [Cannon,
1964, 183].
Whewell, then, had ﬁrst-hand knowledge of the methods of empirical research.
But he was also up-to-date on the discoveries of other scientists. Indeed, Whewell
consulted scientists about their own discoveries or those of others throughout the
history of their respective ﬁelds, and sent proof sheets of the History to them for
their approval. For instance, Whewell asked his friend Airy to look over his sec-
tion on the history of Astronomy and to send references to French works on the
polarization of light.107 He sent queries on physics to Forbes108 and on anatom-
ical science to Owen. While Whewell was revising his History, he asked Faraday
whether there were any errors describing his work in the ﬁrst edition.109 (Faraday
responded by saying there were no errors that he could see.)
So, while it would be an overstatement to say that Whewell had no ideas about
philosophy of science until after he completed all three volumes of the History, it
would also be a vast understatement to suggest that the History was written to
conform to a fully ﬂeshed-out a priori methodological position. Knowledge of both
current scientiﬁc practice and the history of science were important to Whewell in
developing his philosophy of science.
On the other hand, Mill’s relationship with science was rather less intimate, as
he admitted, prompting Whewell’s dismissal of Mill’s scientiﬁc abilities, in a letter
to Herschel soon after the publication of System of Logic: “Though acute and
able”. Whewell wrote of Mill, “ he is ignorant of science”.110 Yet Whewell did not
focus on whether Mill inferred his philosophy of science from his own knowledge
of science and its history. Rather, Whewell criticized Mill for the fact that his
methods were not applied to a large number of appropriate historical cases. He
complained that “if Mr. Mill’s four methods had been applied by him . . . to a
large body of conspicuous and undoubted examples of discovery, well selected and
well analysed, extending along the whole history of science, we should have been
better able to estimate the value of these methods” [Whewell, 1860, 264–5]. On
Whewell’s view, even though Mill did not infer his philosophy from science and
its history, it should be possible, if his methods are valid, to ﬁnd examples of their
use in actual scientiﬁc practice throughout the history of science.
This sheds some light on what Whewell held to be the important relation be-
tween science and philosophy of science. What is important according to Whewell
in America, 7 in Spain, 7 in Portugal, 16 in France, 5 in Belgium, 18 in the Netherlands, 24 in
Denmark, 24 in Norway, 318 in England and Scotland, and 219 in Ireland [Whewell, 1836]. See
also [Cartwright, 1999, 112-14].
107See letters from G.B. Airy, 11 October 1856 (WP Add.Ms.a.200 f. 114) and 21 April 1831
(WP Add.Ms.a.200 f. 9).
108See, e.g., William Whewell to J.D. Forbes, 19 February 1840, WP O.15.47 f. 51a.
109See William Whewell to Michael Faraday, 7 August 1846, WP O.15.49 f. 56.
110William William Whewell to John Herschel, 8 April 1843, in [Todhunter, 1876, 2: 315].

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
219
is not whether a philosophy of science is, in fact, inferred from knowledge of past
and present scientiﬁc practice, but rather, whether a philosophy of science is infer-
able from such knowledge. Any well-founded philosophy of science must be shown
to be exempliﬁed in actual scientiﬁc practice throughout the history of science.
Thus, even though Bacon did not infer his philosophy of science from a study of
the history of science — and indeed, as Whewell noted, he did not have much
history of modern science behind him — his philosophy can still be found to be
legitimate if it is shown to be exempliﬁed in the science that has come since him.
(To some extent this is the project Whewell himself had taken on.)111 Even if
Whewell did not develop his philosophy of science only after his study of the his-
tory and practice of science was completed, he showed us in his works — through
numerous apt examples — that his philosophy has been embodied in the practice
of science throughout its history. Mill was unable to do so.
11
CONCLUSION: RECEIVED VIEWS OF WHEWELL
As I have already noted, most commentators have claimed, following Mill, that
Whewell presented a view similar to what is known today as “hypothetico-
deductivism”. However, I have shown this claim to be incorrect. Whewell be-
lieved that before his “tests of hypotheses” could be applied, the hypothesis must
have been invented by some inductive reasoning process. Some commentators have
proposed instead that Whewell’s methodology resembles the view proposed in the
late nineteenth century by Charles Peirce, initially called “abductivism” and later
known as “retroductivism” (see, for example, [Fisch, 1991, 168n.13] and [Laudan,
1971, 370]). Peirce himself admired Whewell greatly, and suggested that his own
methodology was following in the tradition of Whewell’s [Peirce, 1982]. Peirce’s
view of the impossibility of any pure observation, apart from theory, may also have
been informed by his reading of Whewell’s work on the Fundamental Antithesis;
Peirce came to share Whewell’s view that “there is a mark of theory over the whole
face of nature” [Whewell, 1858a, 1: 46]. But the methodology Peirce endorsed is
not equivalent to Whewell’s discoverers’ induction. Peirce referred to abduction
as a form of reasoning, classifying it, along with induction and deduction, as the
three types of logic. Moreover, he maintained that testing the consequences of a
hypothesis could only occur after abductive reasoning prior to testing.112 However,
he also claimed that abductive reasoning amounted to a kind of “guessing”. In
abductive reasoning, a set of surprising facts gives rise to a hypothesis that would,
if true, explain these facts. But as Peirce stresses, the abduction itself “has no pro-
111Whewell saw this as his project from the beginning; see the notebook entry dated 28 June
1830, WP R.18.17. f. 12, p. xv.
112See Peirce, 1960, 7: 124.
A very diﬀerent characterization of “retroduction” is given by
Ernan McMullin in his [1992].
McMullin recognizes that his characterization of retroduction
is broader than the form of inference called retroduction by Peirce and his twentieth century
followers such as N.R. Hanson. In fact, McMullin’s version of retroductivism shares important
features with Whewell’s discoverers’ induction.

220
Laura J. Snyder
bative force”. It is merely a method of “engendering” new ideas. Any abduction is
worthy of inductive and deductive testing, as long as it fulﬁlls certain “economies
of research”. As we have seen, however, Whewell’s discoverers’ induction is not
a form of guesswork. While it shares certain attributes of Peirce’s abduction —
especially the introduction of a new conception or idea — it diverges from Peirce’s
method in requiring the use of diﬀerent forms of inductive reasoning.113
What is the reason for these common mischaracterizations of Whewell’s view?
Certainly, the fact that Whewell’s works are peppered with the terms “guess” or
“conjecture” has contributed to the misinterpretations. However, the use of these
terms by itself does not entail the hypothetical-deductive methodology, especially
if we read them (as we must) in the context of Whewell’s complete writings and
the common meanings of these terms in his own time. We have already seen that
sometimes Whewell uses the term “guesswork” in connection with the generation
of numerous possible conceptions, yet he considers the selection of the appropriate
one for colligating certain facts to be a matter of inference. Other times, he uses
the term “guess” or “conjecture” to refer to a conclusion that is simply not yet
conﬁrmed. For instance, in speaking of Kepler’s move from his discovery of Mars’
elliptical orbit to his ﬁrst law of planetary motion, Whewell claimed that “When
he had established his premise, that ‘Mars does describe an Ellipse around the
Sun,’ he does not hesitate to guess at least that . . . ‘All the Planets do what Mars
does”’ [1858b, 75]. But surely this was no mere guess on Kepler’s part, but was,
rather, a generalization of a property found to exist in one member of the class
of planets to all its members. Although such an inference may be a rather weak
one, because he was inferring from a single case to a universal generalization, in
this instance Kepler surely had additional rational support for inferring that all
the planets shared the property of the elliptical orbit from the premise that one of
them had this property; there would be strong analogical and causal reasons for
thinking that the planetary orbits all lie on the same type of curve (because it was
reasonable to suppose that each orbit is caused by the same physical mechanism).
Whewell used the term “conjecture” in a similar way. Whewell’s employment of
these terms is consistent with ways they were used prior to the twentieth century,
when “conjecture” was often used to connote not a hypothesis reached by non-
rational means, but rather one which is “unveriﬁed”, or which is “a conclusion
as to what is likely or probable” (as opposed to the results of demonstration).
Writers whose work was well-known to Whewell, including Bacon, Kepler, New-
ton and Stewart, utilized the term in this way. This common usage of the term
explains why Whewell was not interpreted by nineteenth-century reviewers (be-
sides Mill) as advocating the method of hypothesis. Indeed, his sometime-nemesis
David Brewster criticized him for not proposing such a view, claiming that, contra
Whewell, “It cannot, we think, be questioned that many of the ﬁnest discoveries
in science have been the result of pure accident” [Brewster, 1837, 121]. And as we
have seen, DeMorgan criticized Whewell for including too many forms of reasoning
in his inductive method.
113Further work remains to be done in tracing the inﬂuence of Whewell on Peirce.

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
221
Another reason for the view that Whewell proposed a non-inductive logic sim-
ilar to twentieth-century hypothetico-deductivism is that modern commentators
tend to read his work through the lens of Mill. One legacy of the inﬂuence of
Mill’s System of Logic is the notion that “induction” refers to a narrow logical
operation involving only enumerative or eliminative forms of reasoning, as deﬁned
by Mill’s famous “Methods of Experimental Inquiry”. Indeed, in the twentieth
century, this legacy led to the delineation of a false dichotomy: between a narrow
Millian inductivism and hypothetico-deductivism. It was argued by some propo-
nents of hypothetico-deductivism that scientiﬁc discovery could not be a matter
of merely calculating enumerations of observed instances, perhaps together with
some eliminative process; there was, rather, an element of creativity involved, so
that discovery could not proceed by a logical “rule-book”. Further, it was often
noted that theoretical entities were an important part of modern science, and,
since Mill’s methods could not reach theoretical entities, these methods could
not be the proper path to discovery. In this way it was concluded that scien-
tiﬁc discovery was not, and could not be, inductive. Instead, it must consist in
a non-inferential process, one that does not involve any “logic”. Mill’s inﬂuence,
ironically, resulted in the position popular among a number of philosophers that
any methodologist proposing a means for inventing theories about unobservables
was proposing a hypothetical method, and Whewell’s theory was read in this light.
But Mill’s deﬁnition of “induction” involved a narrowing of the term, whose earlier
more Baconian uses allowed a broader scope for various methods of reasoning. On
his classiﬁcation, Whewell proposed a non-inductive method. But why should we
apply Mill’s deﬁnition of induction to Whewell?
Whewell believed himself to be proposing an inductive method and, in the sense
that it was a rational method for discovering theories, one that relied heavily on
analogical inference, it was inductive. Moreover, it is a view that provides an in-
teresting and fruitful way to view scientiﬁc reasoning today. Because of its broader
notion of inductive logic, Whewell’s view of method allows for the rational inference
to unobservable entities and properties; thus it defuses one criticism of inductive
methods by the proponents of hypothetico-deductivism. Because of Whewell’s in-
tensive survey of the history of science, and his own scientiﬁc researches, it is a
method that draws upon much knowledge of the actual workings of scientists, par-
ticularly in the physical sciences. It is not surprising that a number of scientists in
Whewell’s day — not only Darwin, but also Faraday and Maxwell — thought his
view was a valuable one, and consistent with certain aspects of scientiﬁc discovery
and justiﬁcation.114 Indeed Whewell’s view of inductive logic remains valuable for
those interested in scientiﬁc reasoning. If we follow Mill in his reductive view of
inductive logic, Whewell’s riposte to DeMorgan is still apropos: so much the worse
for logic.
114For the relation between Whewell and Faraday, see [Snyder, 2002]. For Whewell and Maxwell,
see [Fisch, 1988] and [Harman, 1998].

222
Laura J. Snyder
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
For more on Whewell and his debate with Mill, see [Snyder, 2006].
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Achinstein, 1992] P. Achinstein. Inference to the best explanation:
Or, who won the Mill-
Whewell debate? Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 23: 349–64, 1992.
[Achinstein, 2005] P. Achinstein. Scientiﬁc Evidence: Philosophical Theories and Applications.
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 2005.
[Airy, 1833] G. B. Airy. Report on the progress of astronomy during the present century. Report
on the First and Second Meetings of the British Association for the Advancement of Science,
p. 189. John Murray, London, 1833.
[Bacon, 1877–89] F. Bacon. The Works of Francis Bacon. Collected and edited by J. Spedding,
R. L. Ellis, and D. D. Heath. 14 vols. Longman and Co., London, 1857-61. New edition,
1877–89.
[Becher, 1980] H. W. Becher. Woodhouse, Babbage, Peacock and modern algebra. Historia
Mathematica, 7: 389–400, 1980.
[Becher, 1981] H. W. Becher. William Whewell and Cambridge mathematics. Historical Studies
in the Physical Sciences, 11:1–48, 1981.
[Becher, 1986] H. W. Becher. Voluntary science in Nineteenth-Century Cambridge University
to the 1850s. British Journal for the History of Science, 19: 57–87, 1986.
[Beer, 1975] J. Beer (ed.). Coleridge’s Variety:
Bicentenary Studies. Pittsburgh University
Press, Pittsburgh, 1975.
[Brewster, 1837] D. Brewster. On the history of the inductive sciences. Edinburgh Review, 74:
110–51, 1837.
[Brock and Macleod, 1976] W. H. Brock and R. M. Macleod. The scientists’ declaration: Re-
ﬂections on science and belief in the wake of Essays and Reviews, 1864-5. British Journal for
the History of Science, 9: 39–66, 1976.
[Brown and Mittelstrass, 1989] J. R. Brown and J. Mittelstrass (eds.). An Intimate Relation.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1989.
[Brush, 1989] S. G. Brush. Prediction and theory-evaluation: The case of light-bending. Science,
246: 1124–29, 1989.
[Buchdahl, 1991] G. Buchdahl. Deductivist versus inductivist approaches in the philosophy of
science as illustrated by some controversies between Whewell and Mill. 1991. In [Fisch and
Schaﬀer, 1991, 311–44].
[Butts, 1965a] R. E. Butts. Necessary truth in Whewell’s theory of science. American Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 2: 161–81, 1965.
[Butts, 1965b] R. E. Butts. On Walsh’s reading of Whewell’s view of necessity. Philosophy of
Science, 32: 175–81, 1965.
[Butts, 1967] R. E. Butts. Professor Marcucci on Whewell’s idealism. Philosophy of Science, 34:
175–83, 1967.
[Butts, 1977] R. E. Butts. Consilience of inductions and the problem of conceptual change in
science. 1977. In [Colodny, 1977, 71–88].
[Butts, 1987] R. E. Butts. Pragmatism in theories of induction in the Victorian era: Herschel,
Whewell, Mach and Mill. 1987. In [Stachowiak, 1987, 40–58].
[Butts, 1994] R. E. Butts. Induction as Uniﬁcation: Kant, Whewell and Related Developments.
1994. In [Parrini, 1994, pp. 273-89].
[Cannon, 1976] S. F. Cannon. The Whewell-Darwin controversy. Journal of the Geological So-
ciety of London, 132: 377–84, 1976.
[Cannon, 1964] Walter F. [later Susan F.] Cannon. William Whewell: Contributions to science
and learning. Notes and Records of the Royal Society, 19: 176–91, 1964.
[Cantor, 1991] G. Cantor. Between rationalism and romanticism: Whewell’s historiography of
the inductive sciences. 1991. In [Fisch and Schaﬀer, 67–86].
[Cartwright, 1999] D. E. Cartwright. Tides: A Scientiﬁc History. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1999.

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
223
[Churchland and Hooker, 1985] P. M. Churchland and C. A. Hooker (eds.). Images of Science:
Essays in Realism and Empiricism. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1985.
[Coburn, 1975] K. Coburn. Coleridge: A bridge between science and philosophy. 1975. In [Beer,
1975, 81–100].
[Coleridge, 1849] S. T. Coleridge. Preliminary Treatise on Method: General Introduction to the
“Encyclopedia Metropolitana” , 3rd edition. J. J. Griﬀen, London, 1849.
[Coleridge, 1965-80] S. T. Coleridge. The Collected Works of Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Edited
by K. Coburn and B. Winer. 16 vols. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London and Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 1965-80.
[Colodny, 1977] R. G. Colodny (ed.). Logic, Laws and Life. University of Pittsburgh Press,
Pittsburgh, 1977.
[Corsi, 1987] P. Corsi. The heritage of Dugald Stewart: Oxford philosophy and the method of
political economy, 1809–1832. Nuncius, 2: 89–144, 1987.
[Corsi, 1988] P. Corsi. Science and Religion: Baden Powell and the Anglican Debate, 1800–
1860. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1988.
[Curd and Cover, 1998] M. Curd and J. A. Cover (eds.). Philosophy of Science: The Central
Issues. W. W. Norton and Co., New York, 1998.
[Darwin, 1859/1964] C. Darwin. On the Origin of Species. A facsimile of the ﬁrst edition with
an introduction by Ernst Mayr. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1964.
[Darwin, 1958] C. Darwin. Autobiography. Edited by N. Barlow. Collins, London, 1958.
[Darwin, 1983-2004] C. Darwin. The Correspondence of Charles Darwin.
Edited by F. H.
Burkhardt et al., 14 vols. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983–2004.
[Darwin, 1986-89] C. Darwin. The Works of Charles Darwin. Edited by P. H. Barrett and R.
B. Freeman. 29 vols. William Pickering, London, 1986–89.
[Deas, 1959] H. Deas. Crystallography and crystallographers in England in the early 19th cen-
tury: A preliminary survey. Centaurus, 6: 129–48, 1959.
[DeMorgan, 1840] A.
DeMorgan.
Review
of
the
Philosophy
of
the
Inductive
Sciences.
Athenaeum, no. 672: 707–9, September 12, 1840.
[DeMorgan, 1847] A. DeMorgan. Formal Logic; or, The Calculus of Inference. Taylor and Wel-
ton, London, 1847.
[Fattori, 1984] M. Fattori (ed.). Francis Bacon: Terminologia e Fortuna nel XVII Secolo. Edi-
zioni dell’Ateneo, Rome, 1984.
[Fisch, 1982] M. H. Fisch, ed. Writings on Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition. First
volume. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 1982.
[Fisch, 1985] M. Fisch. Necessary and contingent truth in William Whewell’s antithetical theory
of knowledge. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 16: 275–314, 1985.
[Fisch, 1988] M. Fisch. A physicist’s philosopher:
James Clerk Maxwell on mathematical
physics. Journal of Statistical Physics, 51: 309–19, 1988.
[Fisch, 1991] M. Fisch. William Whewell, Philosopher of Science. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford, 1991.
[Fisch, 1994] M. Fisch. ‘The Emergency Which Has Arrived’:
The problematic history of
Nineteenth-Century British algebra — A programmatic outline. British Journal for the His-
tory of Science, 27: 247–76, 1994.
[Fisch and Schaﬀer, 1991] M. Fisch and S. Schaﬀer (eds.). William Whewell: A Composite Por-
trait. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1991.
[Forbes, 1835] J. D. Forbes. On the refraction and polarization of heat. Transactions of the
Royal Society of Edinburgh, 13: 131–68, 1835.
[Forster, 1988] M. R. Foster. Uniﬁcation, explanation, and the composition of causes in Newto-
nian mechanics. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science, 19: 55–101, 1988.
[Garland, 1980] M. M. Garland. Cambridge Before Darwin: The Ideal of a Liberal Education.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1980.
[Hamilton, 1836] W. Hamilton. Review of [Whewell’s] Thoughts on the Study of Mathematics
as Part of a Liberal Education. Edinburgh Review, 62: 218–52, 1836.
[Harman, 1998] P. M. Harman. The Natural Philosophy of James Clerk Maxwell. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1998.
[Hanson, 1958] N. R. Hanson. Patterns of Discovery: An Inquiry into the Conceptual Founda-
tions of Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1958.
[Harper, 1989] W. Harper. Consilience and natural kind reasoning. 1989. In [Brown and Mittel-
strass, 1989, 115–52].

224
Laura J. Snyder
[Heidelberger and Stadler, 2002] M. Heidelberger and F. Stadler (eds.). History of Philosophy
of Science: New Trends and Perspectives. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2002.
[Hempel, 1966] C. G. Hempel. Philosophy of Natural Science. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs,
NJ, 1966.
[Herschel, 1830] J. F. W. Herschel. Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy.
Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown and Green and John Taylor, London, 1830.
[Herschel, 1841] J. F. W. Herschel. Whewell on inductive sciences. Quarterly Review, 68: 177–
238, 1841.
[Jardine, 1974] L. Jardine. Francis Bacon: Discovery and the Art of Discourse. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1974.
[Jardine, 1990] L. Jardine. Experientia Literata or Novum Organum? The dilemma of Bacon’s
scientiﬁc method. 1990. In [Sessions, 1990, 47–67].
[Jones, 1859] R. Jones. Literary Remains Consisting of Lectures and Tracts on Political Econ-
omy, by the Late Rev. Richard Jones. Edited by W. Whewell. John W. Murray, London,
1859.
[Kant, 1929] I. Kant. Critique of Pure Reason. Edited by N. K. Smith. London, 1929.
[Kozhamthadam, 1994] J. Kozhamthadam. The Discovery of Kepler’s Laws: The Interaction
of Science, Philosophy and Religion. Notre Dame University Press, Notre Dame, IN, 1994.
[Laudan, 1971] L. Laudan. William Whewell on the consilience of inductions. Monist, 55: 368–
91, 1971.
[Laudan, 1980] L. Laudan. Why was the logic of discovery abandoned? 1980. In [Nickles, 1980,
173–83].
[Levere, 1996] T. R. Levere. Samuel Taylor Coleridge on nature and reason: With a response
from William Whewell. The European Legacy, 1: 1683–93, 1996.
[Lindberg and Westman, 1990] D. C. Lindberg and R. S. Westman (eds.). Reappraisals of the
Scientiﬁc Revolution. Cambridge University Press, New York, 1990.
[Lloyd, 1835] H. Lloyd. Report on the progress and present state of physical optics. Report of the
Fourth Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, Held in Edinburgh
in 1834, pages 295–413. John Murray, London, 1835.
[Lugg, 1989] Lugg. History, discovery and induction: Whewell on Kepler on the orbit of Mars.
1989. In [Brown and Mittelstrass, 1989, 283–98].
[Mansel, 1860] H. L. Mansel. Prolegomena Logica: An Inquiry into the Psychological Character
of Logical Processes. 2nd edition. Gould and Lincoln, Boston, 1860.
[Marcucci, 1963] S. Marcucci. L’ “Idealismo” Scientiﬁco di William Whewell. Pubblicazioni
dell’Istituto di Filosoﬁa, Pisa, 1963.
[Marcucci, 1970] S. Marcucci. William Whewell: Kantianism or Platonism? Physis, 12: 69–72,
1970.
[McKerrow, 1987] R. E. McKerrow. Richard Whately and the revival of logic in Nineteenth-
Century England. Rhetorica, 5: 163–85, 1987.
[McMullin, 1990] E. McMullin. Conceptions of science in the scientiﬁc revolution. 1990. In [Lind-
berg and Westman, 1990, 27–92].
[McMullin, 1992] E. McMullin. The Inference that Makes Science. Marquette University Press,
Milwaukee, 1992.
[McMullin, 2001] E. McMullin. The impact of Newton’s Principia on the philosophy of science.
Philosophy of Science, 68: 279–310, 2001.
[Metcalfe, 1991] J. E. Metcalfe. Whewell’s developmental psychologism: A Victorian account of
scientiﬁc progress. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 22: 117–39, 1991.
[Mill, 1963-91] J. S. Mill. The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill. J. M. Robson, ed. 33 vols.
University of Toronto Press, Toronto and Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1963–91.
[Morrison, 1990] M. Morrison. Uniﬁcation, realism and inference. British Journal for the Phi-
losophy of Science, 41: 305–32, 1990.
[Morrison, 1997] M. Morrison. Whewell on the ultimate problem of philosophy. Studies in the
History and Philosophy of Science, 28: 417–37, 1997.
[Newton, 1968] I. Newton. Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. 1687. Translated by
A. Motte, 1729, with an introduction by I. Bernard Cohen. 2 vols. Dawson, London, 1968.
[Nickles, 1980] T. Nickels (ed.). Scientiﬁc Discovery: Case Studies. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1980.
[Niiniluoto, 1977] I. Niiniluoto. Notes on Popper as a Follower of Whewell and Peirce. Ajatus,
37:272–327, 1977.

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
225
[Olson, 1975] R. Olson. Scottish Philosophy and British Physics, 1750–1880. Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton NJ, 1975.
[Ospovat, 1981] D. Ospovat. The Development of Darwin’s Theory. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1981.
[Paradis and Postlewait, 1985] J. Paradis and T. Postlewait (eds.). Victorian Science and Vic-
torian Values: Literary Perspectives. Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ, 1985.
[Peirce, 1960] C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. Edited by C. Hartshorne
and P. Weiss. Vol. I. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1960.
[Peirce, 1982] C. S. Peirce. Lecture on the theories of Whewell, Mill, and Comte. 1982. In [Fisch,
1982, 205–23].
[Peltonen, 1996] M. Peltonen, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Bacon. Cambridge University
Press, 1996.
[Perez-Ramos, 1988] A. Perez-Ramos. Francis Bacon’s Idea of Science and the Maker’s Knowl-
edge Tradition. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1988.
[Preyer, 1985] R. O. Preyer. The romantic tide reaches Trinity: Notes on the transmission and
diﬀusion of new approaches to traditional studies at Cambridge, 1820–40. 1985. In [Paradis
and Postlewait, 1985, 39–68].
[Richards, 1988] J. L. Richards. Mathematical Visions: The Pursuit of Geometry in Victorian
Britain. Academic Press, Boston, 1988.
[Rossi, 1984] P. Rossi. Ants, spiders, epistemologists. 1984. In [Fattori, 1984, 245–60].
[Rossi, 1996] P. Rossi. Bacon’s idea of science. 1996. In [Peltonen, 1996, 25–46].
[Rothblatt, 1981] S. Rothblatt. The Revolution of the Dons: Cambridge and Society in Victo-
rian England. 2nd edition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1981.
[Rupke, 1994] N. Rupke. Richard Owen:
Victorian Naturalist. Yale University Press, New
Haven, 1994.
[Ruse, 1975] M. Ruse. Darwin’s debt to philosophy: An examination of the inﬂuence of the
philosophical ideas of John F.W. Herschel and William Whewell on the development of Charles
Darwin’s theory of evolution. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 6: 159–81, 1975.
[Ruse, 1976] M. Ruse. The scientiﬁc methodology of William Whewell. Centaurus, 20: 227–57,
1976.
[Ruse, 1977] M. Ruse. William Whewell and the argument from design. Monist, 60: 244–68,
1977.
[Ruse, 1979] M. Ruse. The Darwinian Revolution: Science Red in Tooth and Claw. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1979.
[Ruse, 1991] M. Ruse. William Whewell: Omniscientist. 1991. In [Fisch and Schaﬀer, 1991,
87–116].
[Sargent, 1995] R.-M. Sargent. The Diﬃdent Naturalist: Robert Boyle and the Philosophy of
Experiment. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1995.
[Sessions, 1990] W. Sessions (ed.). Francis Bacon’s Legacy of Texts. AMS Press, New York,
1990.
[Shairp et al., 1873] J. C. Shairp et al. (ed.). Life and Letters of James David Forbes, FRS.
Macmillan, London, 1873.
[Sloan, 2003] P. R. Sloan. Whewell’s philosophy of discovery and the archetype of the vertebrate
skeleton: The role of German philosophy of science in Richard Owen’s biology. Annals of
Science, 60: 39–61, 2003.
[Smith, 1989] R. Smith. The Cambridge network in action: The discovery of Neptune. Isis, 80:
395–422, 1989.
[Snyder, 1994] L. J. Snyder. It’s all necessarily so: William Whewell on scientiﬁc truth. Studies
in History and Philosophy of Science, 25: 785–807, 1994.
[Snyder, 1996] L. J. Snyder. The method of induction. Ph.D. diss., Johns Hopkins University,
1996.
[Snyder, 1997] L. J. Snyder. Discoverers’ induction. Philosophy of Science, 64: 580–604, 1997.
[Snyder, 1998] L. J. Snyder. Is evidence historical? 1998. In [Curd and Cover, 1998, 460–80].
[Snyder, 1999] L. J. Snyder. Renovating the Novum Organum: Bacon, Whewell and induction.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 30A: 531–57, 1999.
[Snyder, 2002] L. J. Snyder. Whewell and the scientists: Science and philosophy of science in
19th Century Britain. 2002. In [Heidelberger and Stadler, 2002, 81–94].
[Snyder, 2005] L. J. Snyder. Consilience, conﬁrmation, and realism. 2005. In [Achinstein, 2005,
129–48].

226
Laura J. Snyder
[Snyder, 2006] L. J. Snyder. Reforming Philosophy: A Victorian Debate on Science and Society.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2006.
[Stachowiak, 1987] H. Stachowiak (ed.). Pragmatik: Handbuch Pragmatishchen Denkens. F.
Meiner, Hamburg, 1987.
[Stair Douglas, 1882] J. M. Stair Douglas. The Life and Selections from the Correspondence of
William Whewell, D.D.. C. Kegan and Paul, London, 1882.
[Stephenson, 1987] B. Stephenson. Kepler’s Physical Astronomy. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1987.
[Stoll, 1929] M. R. Stoll. Whewell’s Philosophy of Induction. Lancaster Press, Lancaster PA,
1929.
[Strong, 1955] E. W. Strong. William Whewell and John Stuart Mill: Their controversy over
scientiﬁc knowledge. Journal of the History of Ideas, 16: 209–31, 1955.
[Todhunter, 1876] I. Todhunter. William Whewell, D.D. An Account of His Writings, with
Selections from His Literary and Scientiﬁc Correspondence. 2 vols. Macmillan, London, 1876.
[Turner, 1981] F. M. Turner. The Greek Heritage in Victorian Britain. Yale University Press,
New Haven, 1981.
[Van Fraassen, 1985] B. Van Fraassen. Empiricism in philosophy of science. 1985. In [Churchland
and Hooker, 1985, 245–308].
[Walsh, 1962] H. T. Walsh. Whewell on Necessity. Philosophy of Science, 29: 139–45, 1962.
[Wellek, 1931] R. Wellek. Immanuel Kant in England: 1793–1838. Princeton University Press,
Princeton NJ, 1931.
[Wettersten, 1994] J. Wettersten. Discussion: William Whewell; problems of induction vs. prob-
lems of rationality. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 45: 716–42, 1994.
[Whately, 1827] R. Whately. Elements of Logic, with Additions. 2nd edition. London, 1827.
[WP, ] Whewell Papers. Archive of Trinity College, Cambridge.
[Whewell, 1822] W. Whewell. On the double crystals of Flour Spa. Transactions of the Cam-
bridge Philosophical Society I, pt. II: 331–42, 1822.
[Whewell, 1825] W. Whewell. A general method of calculating the angles made by any plane of
crystals, and the laws according to which they are formed. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, 115, pt. I: 87–130, 1825.
[Whewell, 1827] W. Whewell. On the angle made by two planes, or two straight lines, referred
to three oblique coordinates. Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 2, pt.
I:197–202, 1827.
[Whewell, 1828a] W. Whewell. Account of Experiments Made at Dolcoath Mine, in Cornwall,
in 1826 and 1828. J. Smith, Cambridge, 1828.
[Whewell, 1828b] W. Whewell. An Essay on Mineralogical Classiﬁcation and Nomenclature;
with Tables of the Orders and Species of Minerals. J. Smith, Cambridge, 1828.
[Whewell, 1831] W. Whewell. Modern science — Inductive philosophy. Quarterly Review, 45:
374–407, 1831.
[Whewell, 1832] W. Whewell. Lyell’s Principles of Geology, Volume 2. Quarterly Review, 103–
32, 1832.
[Whewell, 1833a] W. Whewell. Astronomy and General Physics Considered with Reference to
Natural Theology. William Pickering, London, 1833.
[Whewell, 1833b] W. Whewell. Essay towards a ﬁrst approximation to a map of cotidal lines.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 123, pt. I: 147–236, 1833.
[Whewell, 1833c] W. Whewell. Memorandum and Directions for Tide Observations. Hobson
and Brown, Cambridge, 1833.
[Whewell, 1834a] W. Whewell. Address. Report of the Third Meeting of the British Association
for the Advancement of Science, Held at Cambridge in 1833, pages xi-xxvi. John W. Parker,
London, 1834.
[Whewell, 1834b] W. Whewell. On the empirical laws of the tides in the port of London; with
reﬂexions on the theory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 124, pt.
I:15–45, 1834.
[Whewell, 1835a] W. Whewell. On the nature of the truth of the laws of motion. Transactions
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 5, pt. II: 149–72, 1835. Reprinted in [Whewell, 1847,
II: 573-94].
[Whewell, 1835b] W. Whewell. Thoughts on the Study of Mathematics as Part of a Liberal
Education. J. and J. J. Deighton, Cambridge, 1835.

“The Whole Box of Tools”: William Whewell and the Logic of Induction
227
[Whewell, 1836] W. Whewell. Researches on the tides — 6th series. On the results of an exten-
sive system of tide observations made on the coasts of Europe and America in June 1835.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 126, pt. II: 289–341, 1836.
[Whewell, 1837] W. Whewell. The History of the Inductive Sciences, from the Earliest to the
Present Time. 3 vols. John W. Parker, London, 1837.
[Whewell, 1838] W. Whewell. Mechanical Euclid, 3rd edition, corrected, with “Remarks on
Mathematical Reasoning and on the Logic of Induction.” J. and J. J. Deighton, Cambridge;
John W. Parker, London, 1838.
[Whewell, 1839] W. Whewell. Presidential address. Proceedings of the Geological Society of Lon-
don, 3: 624–49, 1839.
[Whewell, 1840a] W. Whewell. Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, Founded upon Their His-
tory. 2 vols. John W. Parker, London, 1840.
[Whewell, 1840b] W. Whewell. Remarks on the review of the Philosophy of the Inductive Sci-
ences. Athenaeum, 672: 3–8, 1840.
[Whewell, 1841] W. Whewell. Demonstration that all matter is heavy. Transactions of the Cam-
bridge Philosophical Society, 7, pt. II: 197–208. Reprinted in [Whewell, 1860, 523–31].
[Whewell, 1842] W. Whewell. Architectural Notes on German Churches, with Notes Written
during an Architectural Tour in Picardy and Normandy. 3rd edition. J. and J. J. Deighton,
Cambridge, 1842.
[Whewell, 1844a] W. Whewell. On the fundamental antithesis of philosophy. Transactions of
the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 8, part II: 170–81, 1844. Re[romted om [Whewell, 1860,
462–81].
[Whewell, 1844b] W. Whewell. Remarks on a review of the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.
Letter to John Herschel. Reprinted in [Whewell, 1860, 482–91].
[Whewell, 1845] W. Whewell. Indications of the Creator. John W. Parker, London, 1845.
[Whewell, 1847a] W. Whewell. The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, Founded upon Their
History. 2nd edition. 2 vols. John W. Parker, London, 1847.
[Whewell, 1847b] W. Whewell. Verse Translations from the German,
Including Berger’s
“Lenore,” Schiller’s “Song of the Bell,” and Other Poems. Murray, London, 1847.
[Whewell, 1849] W. Whewell. Of Induction, with Especial Reference to Mr. J. Stuart Mill’s
System of Logic. John W. Parker, London, 1849.
[Whewell, 1850] W. Whewell. Criticism of Aristotle’s account of induction. Paper presented to
the Cambridge Philosophical Society, Februay 11, 1850. Reprinted in [Whewell, 1860, 449–61].
[Whewell, 1855] W. Whewell. Of the Plurality of Worlds: An Essay. Also, A Dialogue on the
Same Subject. 4th edition. John W. Parker, London, 1855.
[Whewell, 1856] W. Whewell. Of the intellectual powers according to Plato. Paper presented to
the Cambridge Philosophical Society November 1856. Reprinted in [Whewell, 1860, 440–48].
[Whewell, 1857a] W. Whewell. The History of the Inductive Sciences, from the Earliest to the
Present Time. 3rd edition, with additions. 3 vols. John W. Parker, London.
[Whewell, 1857b] W. Whewell. Spedding’s complete edition of the works of Bacon. Edinburgh
Review, 106: 287–322, 1857.
[Whewell, 1858a] W. Whewell. The History of Scientiﬁc Ideas. 2 vols. John W. Parker, London,
1858.
[Whewell, 1858b] W. Whewell. Novum Organon Renovatum. John W. Parker, London, 1858.
[Whewell, 1859] W. Whewell. Prefatory notice to [Jones, 1859, ix–xl].
[Whewell, 1860] W. Whewell. On the Philosophy of Discovery: Chapters Historical and Critical.
John W. Parker, London, 1860.
[Whewell, 1862] W. Whewell. Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy, 2 nd Edition, with
Additional Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy. Deighton, Bell and Company, Cam-
bridge, 1862.
[Whewell, 1866] W. Whewell. Comte and positivism. Macmillan’s Magazine, 13: 353–62, 1866.
[Whewell, 2001] W. Whewell. Of The Plurality of Worlds. Facsimile of the ﬁrst edition, with
previously unpublished material. Edited by M. Ruse. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
2001.
[Wilson, 1968] C. Wilson. Kepler’s derivation of the elliptical path. Isis, 59: 5–25, 1968.
[Yeo, 1985] R. Yeo. An idol of the marketplace: Baconianism in Nineteenth Century Britain.
History of Science, 23: 5–31, 1985.

228
Laura J. Snyder
[Yeo, 1993] R. Yeo. Deﬁning Science: William Whewell, Natural Knowledge, and Public Debate
in Early Victorian Britain. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993.
[Yeo, 2004] R. Yeo. William Whewell. Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, 2004.
http://www.oxforddnb.com/view/article/29200.

THE LOGIC OF JOHN STUART MILL∗
Fred Wilson
John Stuart Mill argued that the highest human aim was the promotion of the
general happiness of humankind, and was the greatest defender of social reform in
the nineteenth century He argued that the promotion of liberty was essential to
human happiness, and that one could promote liberty and the general happiness
only through clear thinking and the development of reasonable policies. The person
who thought for him- or herself was better for that reason, better for their own
self and better for their fellows. We all err, and sometimes error is dangerous:
our aim should be to eliminate it. The latter in turn requires critical debate, the
tool of which was logic – deductive logic to keep our thought consistent, inductive
logic as the basis for the search after truth, and a knowledge of the ways in which
fallacies might arise so that they can be uncovered and avoided. He argued, in his
Inaugural Address as Rector of St. Andrews University, that “in the operations of
the intellect it is much easier to go wrong than right,” and that
Logic is the great disperser of hazy and confused thinking; it clears up
the fogs which hide from us our own ignorance, and which make us
believe that we understand a subject when we do not.1
He developed his “system of logic” with these aspirations to guide him.
John Stuart Mill was born in 1806 in Pentonville which was then a suburb of
London. He was the eldest child of James Mill, who trained for the ministry in
his native Scotland but who had come to London to earn his living as a writer
and later in the employ of the East India Company.
In London he had come
under the inﬂuence of the utilitarian philosopher Jeremy Bentham. He became,
with Bentham, a leading advocate of political reform. He began the education of
his son when the latter was very young – lessons in Greek and arithmetic began
when he was three and by the time he was six he was enjoying Hume and Gibbon.
The education was based on the principles of associationist psychology defended
by Bentham and his father. The younger Mill was raised to become the leader
of the reformers. This he did become and his inﬂuence in Victorian Britain was
enormous. However, in 1826 he went through a state of depression in which he
questioned himself and his values. He emerged from the depression (through the
reading of Wordsworth) a changed person and a changed philosopher. He never
abandoned the basic associationist and utilitarian framework of Bentham and his
∗References to John Stuart Mill are to the editions in the Collected Works, ed. J. Robson
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1963-). Cited as “CW ”.
1Inaugural Address, CW, vol. 21, p. 238.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

230
Fred Wilson
father, but he modiﬁed it considerably to accommodate what he came to see were
the insights of such thinkers as Coleridge and Carlyle. He published many essays in
major reviews, including a serious review (1828) of Richard Whately’s Elements
of Logic,2 and his ﬁrst major work was his System of Logic, Ratiocinative and
Inductive (1843).3
In his Autobiography, he tells how his father had him read Aristotle’s Organon
when he was 13, followed by several scholastic texts and Hobbes Computation
sive Logica, and later records4 how he and a few friends studied logic in the early
1820’s. They began with Aldrich’s textbook on logic, which had been for a century
the standard text used in Oxford. Mill and the others in his group found it seri-
ously deﬁcient as a book in logic (which indeed it was – then [as now] Oxford was
seriously out of date in logic). They turned to a better book on scholastic logic,
by Phillippe Du Trieu, Manuductio ad logicam (which however, while better, was
only a little better), then took up Whately (which was much better), and (again)
Hobbes’ Computatio sive Logica (which was also a good logic, and provided as a
metaphysical context a nominalism that opposed Whately’s Platonism). Mill also
spent coonsiderable time and eﬀort in editing Bentham’s Rationale of Judicial
Evidence, which gave him a practical knowledge of the rules of evidence as well
as a knowledge of the many fallacies to be found in English law.5 The issues he
discussed and studied with his friends were of course logic in the narrow sense, but
also (as Mill says in the Autobiography) “metaphysical”. Certainly, in the Logic,
and already in the review of Whately, Mill not only articulates a set of rules for
determining validity (logic in the narrow sense) but locates them in a metaphys-
ical context in which they can be defended. We are therefore not surprised to
ﬁnd further comments on the nature of logic and of logical inference in his only
purely metaphysical work, An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy
(1865).6 The System of Logic itself is subtitled as “a connected view of the prin-
ciples of evidence and of the methods of scientiﬁc investigation,” and consistently
with that purpose it contains not what we would refer now to as “logic”, that is,
deductive logic but also an inductive logic and a well developed “philosophy of
science,” including the social sciences. Nor is Mill simply content to expound a set
of principles, but he undertakes to defend them, against, on the one hand, critics
such as the earlier empiricists, Locke for example, or Reid, who denigrated logic
as useless, and against, on the other hand, representatives of the rationalist, or
what he calls the intuitionist school, who would aggrandize logic at the expense
2“Whately’s Elements of Logic,” CW, vol. 21, pp.3-35. The review is of Richard Whately,
Elements of Logic (London: Mawman, 1826).
3System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, CW, vols. 7-8. The text here is the eighth
edition of 1872, Mill’s last revised version; it contains all variants through the various editions
from the ﬁrst on. The editor of the series provides an informative introduction, describing the
history of the composition and the history of the various editions. There is also a philosophical
introduction by R. F. McCrae.
4Autobiography, CW, vol. 1, ch. i and iv.
5Autobiography, CW, vol. 1, ch. iv.
6An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy, CW, vol. 9.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
231
of empirical research methods, that is, such thinkers as Sir William Hamilton or
William Whewell7 or, for that matter, also Richard Whately, though he does give
great (and deserved) credit to the latter for producing a readable and competent
text on logic, including what we would now call informal logic. Mill’s discussion
of formal logic cannot be separated from his account of empirical science and the
nature of inductive inference, and also from his view that the principles of rea-
soning must be a guide to forms of evidence and rational discourse in the pursuit
of truth. The latter aims imply, for Mill, that any complete exposition of any
system of logic should include an account not only of correct reasoning but also
an account of bad reasoning, and those aims therefore also imply that an account
of the logical fallacies has (as it had for Whately) an important place in the ex-
position of any system of logic. There is thus a breadth to the treatment of logic
in Mill’s System of Logic (supplemented by the work in the Examination) that is
seldom to be found in standard treatments. At the same time, it must be said
that Mill was hardly a visionary in the development of formal logic, which, even
as he wrote the Logic, was beginning to undergo its ﬂourishing growth that led to
what we now recognize as (the science of) formal logic – Mill does not mention
Boole nor Jevons in any edition, the two references to Venn are to his work in
probability, and the references to de Morgan are not to his brilliant contributions
to formal logic. But again, a qualiﬁcation must be made, for Mill’s logic and the
framework he provided are such that those developments could in them ﬁnd a
natural place and defence. And so the empiricism expounded by Bertrand Russell
in second decade of the twentieth century is essentially Mill supplemented by the
new formal and mathematical logic.
1
DEFINITION OF LOGIC
Mill argues that “Logic ... is the science of the operations of the understanding
which are subservient to the estimation of evidence.”8 It is a science, not an art,
and insofar as it can be taken as an art, it is, like all arts, subservient to its
background science. As a science it is concerned with inferences, not with those
truths of individual fact known by intuition, that is, observation by sense or by
inner awareness. Observation knows facts immediately, and not by inference, and
there is therefore no logic for this part of our knowledge.
These facts are the
starting point for knowledge; what we know is known by observation or by in-
ference therefrom. Their study is more properly the domain of metaphysics than
it is of logic. But some metaphysics cannot be avoided in developing a system
7Mill, in the System of Logic, refers often and critically to William Whewell, History of the
Inductive Sciences, 3 vols. (London: Parker, 1837) and The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences,
2 vols. (London: Parker, 1840). Whewell replied to Mill in later editions, and Mill replied to
these replies in later editions of the Logic. The history of the debate can be followed in the
edition of the Logic in the Collected Works. Whewell was a defender of the a priori in science,
intuitionism in ethics, and unreformed universities; it has been said that, if Whewell had not
existed, Mill would have had to invent him.
8System of Logic, Intro., § 7, CW, vol. 7, p. 12.

232
Fred Wilson
of logic, since logic has been rooted in a particular metaphysical tradition. This
tradition claimed that there are, besides those truths known by observation, other
truths known by non-sensory intuition, synthetic necessary truths about the on-
tological structure of the universe. Mill aims to free logic from these metaphysical
constraints: knowledge, he argues, starts in, and ends in, observable individual
facts.
Inferences are made as part of the search after truth.
There are two kinds
of inference. On the one hand, there are inferences to propositions from those
less general.
On the other hand, there are inferences from propositions which
are equally or more general. The former inferences are inductions, the latter are
deductions. What we now generally understand as logic is the latter, but Mill
argues that this, what he calls “ratiocination,” should be seen as part of a larger
logic, the logic of truth.
2
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND: ARISTOTLE’S LOGIC
The logic that came down to the nineteenth century was largely the invention of
Aristotle.
This logic dealt with propositions of two terms, referred to as the subject and the
predicate terms. Arguments had three terms; there was the subject and predicate
of the conclusion and the third term, called the middle, which was shared by the
two premises. There were arrangements like this:
M −P
S −M
S −P
(1)
The three terms were general terms, and the propositions either general (“all S is
P”) or particular (“some S is P”). An argument like
All M is P
All S is M
All S is P
(2)
was called a syllogism. Syllogisms with the three terms arranged as in (1) were
in the “ﬁrst ﬁgure”. So (2) is in the ﬁrst ﬁgure. Other arrangements of the terms
yielded other ﬁgures (second to fourth). Some syllogisms were valid, in the sense
that if the premises were true then the conclusion must be true; in these syllogisms
the conclusion is contained implicitly in the premises. (2) is a valid syllogism. But
All P is M
Some S is M
No S is P (= All S is not P)
(3)
(which is in the second ﬁgure) is not valid. There were various rules concerning
which syllogisms are valid and which are not ((3) violates both the rule that if one

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
233
premise is particular then the conclusion is particular, and the rule that a negative
conclusion requires a negative premise).
Aristotle also showed that syllogisms of the other ﬁgures could be proven to be
valid by constructing proofs that reduced them to a valid syllogism in the ﬁrst
ﬁgure. Thus,
All S is M
All M is P
All S is P
(4)
which is in the fourth ﬁgure can be reduced to (2) in the ﬁrst ﬁgure by simply
transposing the premises. Similarly, the syllogism
No P is M
All S is M
No S is P
which is in the second ﬁgure can be reduced to the ﬁrst ﬁgure syllogism
No M is P
All S is M
No S is P
by the simple conversion of the ﬁrst premise
No P is M
No M is P
which is a valid immediate (one premise) inference. The second ﬁgure syllogism is
valid because it reduces by a valid inference to a valid ﬁrst ﬁgure syllogism. Other
reductions are more complicated, but the rules for reduction in eﬀect establish that
validity in the other ﬁgures can be reduced to validity in the ﬁrst ﬁgure, which
was therefore known as the “perfect ﬁgure”.
So far, this is how Aristotle developed the formal logic of syllogistic (in his Prior
Analytics). Formal logic of this sort could be used by the debater, the lawyer or
the politician, to make a point in a conclusive way, provided that the premises
were given, perhaps by custom, perhaps by the legal code, perhaps by ordinary
experience of the world. (Aristotle so used it himself in his book on the Topics.)
But Aristotle had a more particular, and deeper, purpose for his syllogistic. He
intended his logic to apply to, and display, the ontological structure of the universe,
conceived in terms of his metaphysics. (These developments can be found in his
Posterior Analytics.)
On this metaphysics, the world consists of substances. Substances have prop-
erties present in them; these properties are given in sense experience and are
predicated of the substance in which they are present: they constitute the being
of the substance, they are what it is. Simple sentences that describe the world,
for example,
That apple is green
(5)

234
Fred Wilson
have a subject term, here ‘that apple’ and a predicate term, here ‘green.’ The
subject term refers to a substance and the predicate term refers to a property.
The ‘is’ of predication represents that the property is present in the substance.
Each substance has a form — its species. (In (5) the form of the substance is
that of an apple.) This species is not given in sense experience, but nonetheless
explains, constitutes the reason for, the substance being and becoming what it is.
The properties presented to us in sense reﬂect in their order the inner form: there
is as it were the outer form given in sense and the inner form, the deeper reality,
that is the cause or reason for that outer form. Now, the properties may come and
go, but the substance and its form remains the same and endures through change.
The substance is active in determining its own being, this activity is in conformity
with its speciﬁc form — the form is an active form. Substances have properties;
these change in certain ways determined by their form; and these changes are
explained by the active form. The form determines the end towards which the
substance is, through its activity, striving to become. The explanation is plainly
teleological and has human activity as its model.
Substances have a speciﬁc form, but this form will have an internal structure.
It shares features with other species, and so is falls under a genus. It is distin-
guished from other members of this genus by its speciﬁc diﬀerence. For Aristotle,
a scientiﬁc syllogism has P as a genus, S as a species and M as the speciﬁc diﬀer-
ence. Sentences like (5) do not appear in scientiﬁc syllogisms; the latter contain
no terms that refer to individual substances, only terms that refer to forms, which
are general and not individual. Thus, as an example of a scientiﬁc syllogism, we
have
All rational is animal
All human is rational
All human is animal
(6)
which is an instance of the form (2) in the ﬁrst ﬁgure. This syllogism displays
the logical and ontological structure of the species human.
This form is given
equivalently in the real deﬁnition of the species human:
human is rational animal
(7)
This real deﬁnition is a necessary truth, a timeless truth about the logical and
ontological structures of the forms of substances. “Human” is the species, “animal”
is the genus, and “rational” is the speciﬁc diﬀerence — the ﬁrst of these is the
subject of the conclusion of the scientiﬁc syllogism, the second is the predicate of
the conclusion, and the third is the middle term — the syllogism thus displays
the connection between species and genus that is in the real deﬁnition of the
species. The premises of the scientiﬁc syllogism are thus necessary in the sense of
constituting the logical structure of the speciﬁc form mentioned in the conclusion.
A scientiﬁc syllogism thus, for Aristotle, shows the necessity of its conclusion by
displaying how that structure is necessarily contained in the structures, themselves
also necessary, mentioned in the premises.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
235
As for the substantial forms, knowledge of these is presupposed by the use of
scientiﬁc syllogism. These forms are not given in our sense experience of the world.
They are, rather, known by a rational intuition. Some held (following Plato) that
such rational intuitions are innate, others (following Aristotle himself) held that
they are products of a process through which the mind abstracts the form of a
substance from the properties it presents to us in sense experience, but in any case
it is an intuition and not an inference and rational because it an intuition of the
forms that constitute the ontological reasons for the being of things (substances),
that is, for their being and becoming what they are, for their having and coming
to have present in them the properties that are predicated of them. In fact, on the
traditional view, again coming from Aristotle, the rational intuition of the form
consists of that form being itself in the mind of the knower (“like knows like”).
In knowing, the knower becomes identical with the known. The form in the mind
is the concept — the abstract idea — of the thing known. In thinking the thing
that thing is there in the mind of the thinker as the concept of the thing being
thought.
3
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND: ARISTOTLE: THE EMPIRICIST
CRITIQUE
According to this tradition coming down from Aristotle, in order to explain the
world we know in sense it is necessary for the mind to go beyond this world to
entities that are outside this world, to the substantial forms of things. This meta-
physics of forms and substances was subject to critique in the ancient world, but
the sceptical tradition largely disappeared during the long period during the mid-
dle ages and beyond when philosophy was subordinated to theology. In the early
modern period, the sceptical critique was revived by Montaigne, and developed
more systematically by a series of British thinkers, Bacon, Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley
and Hume.
The idea that there were things beyond the world of sense was criticized by
Locke, Berkeley and Hume: there are neither substances nor substantial forms.
Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley and Hume attacked the older doctrine of our concepts of
things: all our concepts derive from sense experience, and there are no abstract
ideas in the required sense — not only are there no substances and no substantial
forms but they cannot even be thought — the whole metaphysics is, in other
words, simply non-sense.
It follows that the traditional understanding of the syllogism, or at least of the
scientiﬁc syllogism, is in fact gravely in error. On the tradition, the terms in the
syllogism represent concepts which are the substantial forms of things, and the
syllogism itself displays the ontological structure of these forms. The syllogism
thus expresses and makes explicit our knowledge of this form. But, the critique
argued, there are no forms and therefore none of the relevant concepts and none
of the necessary connections supposedly displayed in the “scientiﬁc syllogism.”
Far from representing knowledge, the “scientiﬁc syllogism” was empty nonsense.

236
Fred Wilson
Syllogisms of course still had their place in debates, but they were certainly inca-
pable of providing the superior sort of knowledge claimed for it by the tradition.
Concerning the knowledge of things, syllogisms were simply trivial: they could
not yield knowledge. And even their utility in debates could be questioned. Or
rather, debate, where they might ﬁnd a use, was itself a trivial exercise, incapable
in itself of yielding knowledge of things: the knowledge of things that yielded un-
derstanding could be got only through the methods, the empirical methods, of the
new science. Such, at least, was the argument developed by Locke in his Essay
concerning Human Understanding.
The concept of what it is to understand events in the world in fact undergoes
a radical change. In understanding, one wants to know what brings things about:
what brings things about are the causes that are the reasons for things, in the
sense of providing the reasons why the world goes this way rather than that. In
the traditional metaphysics, the causes of things are the substantial forms, where
these active forms provide the necessary connections among the events in the world
of ordinary sensible experience that explain why this rather than that follows so
and so.
To understand meant intuiting — rational intuiting — the necessary
connections established by the logical structures of the forms. But now there are
no forms. All that can be said to bring about something is that it was preceded
by another event, where events of the same sort as the ﬁrst are regularly preceded
by events of the second sort. For example, this kettle of water is boiling and being
heated is what brought about this event, since water, when heated, boils.
Mill puts it this way:
An individual fact is said to be explained, by pointing out its cause,
that is, by stating the law or laws of causation, of which its production
is an instance.9
Thus, in general an explanation is of the form
All F are G
This is F
This is G
(8)
the event of this being F explains the event of this being G just in case that the
pair can be subsumed under the generality or regularity that All F are G. The
point is that, given this regularity, then bringing about an F will produce a G, and
the F is the reason for the G. In other words, in the world without substances and
forms, reason, the capacity to know the reasons for things, consists in the grasp
of regularities. This account of explanation and of the human understanding was
developed most thoroughly by the philosopher David Hume. It was adopted and
defended by both the Mills. It is a major theme in John Stuart Mill’s System of
Logic.
(Karl Popper, later in the twentieth century, was to claim that he was the ﬁrst
to propose that scientiﬁc explanation involves subsumption under a general law or
9System of Logic, Bk. III, ch. xii, § 1, CW, vol. 7, p. 465

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
237
regularity. He may have discovered it for himself, but he could have saved himself
the trouble by reading Mill!)
For Mill human understanding consists in the discovery of matter-of-empirical-
fact regularities, and it such regularities that form the major premise in explana-
tory arguments of the form (8).
In causal explanation, it is a regularity that
explains: contrary to the older tradition there is no ontologically necessary tie
that links cause and eﬀect and accounts metaphysically for the observed regular-
ity. Already in his review of Whately’s Logic, Mill had criticized the book for
its taking seriously the traditional doctrine of real deﬁnition and the traditional
doctrine that scientiﬁc syllogisms have necessary truths for their premises, and
this attack continues in the System of Logic. Right from the beginning Mill in var-
ious ways criticizes the doctrine of substances and of substantial forms, and the
doctrine consequent upon these that there is no causal connection rooted in ob-
jectively necessary connections. To the contrary, causal explanations are given by
matter-of-empirical-fact regularities, that is, by contingent generalizations. As for
substances and forms, these concepts are confusions and the thought that there
are such things is a matter of fallacious reasoning. Thus, for example, Mill ar-
gues that those philosophers who, like Descartes, or Mill’s contemporary William
Whewell, think there are objective synthetic necessary connections do so because
it is fallaciously supposed that what is inseparable in thought is logically insepa-
rable in reality. Mill’s understanding of the syllogism is therefore diﬀerent from
that of the older tradition, and even from that of Whately.
But Mill does not take so critical an attitude towards the utility of formal logic
as do other critics of the tradition such as Locke. To be sure, syllogistic is no
longer taken as displaying through intuited necessary connections the objective
ontological structure of the world.
Argumentation is not, however, the trivial
matter Locke supposed it to be: the scholasticism Locke encountered in Oxford
was still in its bareness there in Mill’s time, but that was not all that could be said
for debate — critical thought was much needed everywhere. Even in the search
after truth, however, logic had a role unacknowledged by Locke.
In the discovery of causes, there is ﬁrst observation.
That F is G
That other F is G
Yet another F is G
(9)
Then there is inductive inference from observation: essentially we have the infer-
ence
All observed F are G
so, All F are G
(10)
But then the generalization that is the conclusion of the inductive inference must
be tested: one tests it by using it predictively — if things turn out as it predicts
then the generalization is conﬁrmed, if things do not turn out as predicted then
the generalization is falsiﬁed and rejected — in which case the process of forming
hypotheses to try to understand nature begins over with the new data. The point

238
Fred Wilson
Mill makes is that prediction involves deduction: predictive arguments are, like
explanatory arguments, of the form (8)
All F are G
This is F
This is G
— the explanatory argument applies to an F already known to be G, the predictive
argument applies to an individual which is F but where it is not (yet) known
whether it is G or not. So, according to Mill, deduction plays an important role in
scientiﬁc theorizing — deduction elaborates and makes explicit what is contained
in the hypotheses arrived at through inductive inferences, and then tests those
hypotheses by testing those consequences against observed facts.
The disappearance of substances leads to a new account of basic statements of
individual fact such as (5)
That apple is green
Since there are no substances, there is no reference to them, nor are sensible quali-
ties predicated of them. A sentence like (5) is now understood as saying something
simply about how the world appears, and not about what metaphysically tran-
scends this world, not about substances or active forms. Formerly, on the old view,
and also on the new, the predicate ‘green’ refers to a sensible quality that is in
the thing of which it is predicated. But where the subject term ‘that apple’ was
formerly taken to refer to a substance in which sensible qualities inhere, including
the one that is predicated of it, it is taken, as before, to refer to the thing that
remains the same through change, which now, however, can only be the whole
itself of all the sensible properties predicated of it. Where formerly the relation of
predication represented the tie of inherence, it now represents the relation of a part
to a whole. As for the term ‘apple’, where this formerly was taken to refer to the
active substantial form of the substance, it is now taken to describe the pattern of
appearances characteristic of apples, the pattern that distinguishes those wholes
from other wholes such as sticks and rainbows. But this is not the end of the
story. As science comes further to investigate the regularities that give the causal
structure of the world it locates the sensible appearances of things as rooted in
a common source, a “material object”, which is unlike the sensible appearances
to which it gives rise, unlike them in quality but like them in having a similar
structure. These material objects are not traditional substances: the supposition
that there are such entities is not a matter of metaphysical speculation but rather
is rooted in the inferences from sensible experience of empirical science: the evi-
dence for their existence is empirical, not metaphysical. Mill defends this view in
the System of Logic, and in still greater detail in the Examination of Sir William
Hamilton’s Philosophy. He sums up his view there in this way:
When . . . I say, The sky is blue, my meaning, and my whole meaning,
is that the sky has that particular colour . . . . I am thinking only of

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
239
the sensation of blue, and am judging that the sky produces this sen-
sation in my sensitive faculty; or (to express the meaning in technical
language) that the quality answering to the sensation of blue, or the
power of exciting the sensation of blue, is an attribute of the sky.10
4
RATIOCINATION: MILL’S DEDUCTIVE LOGIC
As the case of Whately makes clear, one can present a good defence of formal logic
without accepting the empiricist critique of the traditional doctrine of substances
and forms and objective necessary connections; and as the case of Locke makes
clear, one can accept the empiricist critique, and its rejection of the traditional
doctrine of the syllogism, without accepting that formal logic has a reasonable
place in the structure of knowledge. Mill accepts the empiricist critique and also
defends formal logic. But as one might expect, the formal logic that he defends is
not quite that of the tradition.
Mill argues that the meaning of terms in a proposition is to be understood as
involving denotation and connotation. Proper names denote individuals. Thus,
‘John Stuart Mill’, the name, denotes the individual person who was so called.
‘This’ and ‘that’ are also pure denoters, but they denote a diﬀerent individuals
on each occasion of their use. Predicates such as ‘red’ also denote, but besides
that they connote: they connote a certain property or quality and denote the
individuals that have that property or quality. A basic sentence such as
This is red
(11)
or
This is F
is true just in case that the denotation of the subject term is among the individuals
denoted by the predicate, which is to say that it is true just in case the properties
or qualities connoted by the predicate are present in the individual denoted by the
subject term.
In taking this view, Mill is situating his account of logic in a tradition other
than that of the great logician Gottlob Frege.
In a proposition like (11), Mill
takes it, if it is true, to be true by virtue of a combination of entities, namely the
property connoted by the predicate ‘red’ and the individual denoted by the subject
term ‘this’. The ‘is’ of predication represents the tie between the property and the
individual which has that property. The complex which makes (11) true, if it is
true, consists of an individual, a property and the tie represented by the relation
of predication. For Frege, there is no such complex. There is the individual, that
is, the individual which the subject term ‘this’ denotes. But there is no tie of
predication. Rather, the predicate as it were carries the tie with it. We should
10Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy, CW, vol. 10, p. 386

240
Fred Wilson
not think of the predicate of (11) as ‘red’ alone but as ‘is red’. This term Frege
takes to be, not a property present in the individual, but a function, or at least
an entity analogous to a function, in the mathematical sense of ‘function’, where,
for example, the function
square of
maps one number onto another, as
the square of 2
maps 2 onto 4. Here the basic sentences are like
the square of 2 = 4
so that ‘is red’ in (11) maps the individual this onto another entity. This entity
is, Frege proposes, the True. Thus, (11) is really of the form
the redded of this = the True
Needless to say, this entity, the True (and its evil twin the False), is hardly one
given in our ordinary sensible experience of the world, and would for that reason
alone be unacceptable to Mill. But Mill is hardly alone on this matter: Bertrand
Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein both rejected the True and the False on these
grounds. To use a phrase of Russell, any philosopher with a robust sense of reality
could not accept such an ontological monster.
For Mill, predicates in sentences like (11) represent classes, not functions. In
defending this view of such propositions (and the consequent class interpretation
of general propositions), Mill is in fact locating himself in what was to become the
central tradition in formal logic, the tradition developed by Boole, de Morgan and
Peirce, and in eﬀect made ﬁnal by Russell, the tradition, ubiquitous in logic texts,
in which predicate logic is understood as a logic of classes.
In giving his account of propositions like (11), Mill has other opponents in
mind besides the defenders of substantial forms. Mill also argues against Hobbes
and other nominalists about the correct account of predication. According to the
nominalists, the meanings of terms is given by their denotation alone. A predicate
is distinguished from a subject term only in this, that it has been decided that it
denotes several objects rather than just one. Just which individuals it denotes is
a matter of decision; there is no objective ground for the choice. The extension of
any predicate is therefore arbitrary, and which propositions are true is a matter of
convention. (One is reminded of more recent views of such philosophers as Quine,
Sellars, and Davidson.) But, Mill argues, truth is not a matter of convention: we
apply a predicate like ‘red’ to things by virtue of their being red, and not simply
because we have decided these rather those other things are red. To account for this
we must allow, what the nominalists miss, that terms like ‘red’ have connotation
as well as denotation. The nominalist account works for verbal propositions such
as

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
241
Cicero is Tully
where truth is a matter of linguistic convention, but not for others like (11), where
the truth is not a matter of convention.
But Mill sides with the nominalists against the Aristotelian tradition that gen-
eral terms refer to substantial forms This leads to a diﬀerent understanding of the
general propositions that appear in syllogisms. For the Aristotelians, the general
proposition
S is P
states a relation about substantial forms, and not about individuals. Given the
non-existence of substantial forms and the new understanding of predication, the S
and P terms denote individual and connote qualities or properties that determine
classes. This means that the form
All S is P
is now taken to assert that all members of the class of individuals denoted by ‘S’
are members of the class of individuals denoted by ‘P’, or, equivalently, that every
individual having the qualities connoted by ‘S’ also has the qualities connoted by
‘P’. Being S is a sign of, or evidence for, being P.
This extensional understanding of the propositions of the syllogism enabled Mill
to include among the forms of logic not only syllogisms like
All M is P
All S is M
All S is P
and
All M is P
Some S is M
Some S is P
but also syllogisms like
All S is P
This is S
This is P
involving singular propositions where the subject term denotes a single individ-
ual. Inclusion of the latter within the scope of logic was in fact a major step in
making legitimate forms of reasoning excluded by the metaphysics of substantial
forms. But none of this required any serious revision of the traditional rules, e.g.,
concerning reduction to the ﬁrst ﬁgure.
Others were beginning to propose more major changes. Sir William Hamilton
had introduced his doctrine of the “quantiﬁcation of the predicate.” This doctrine
refers to traditional propositions like “S is P,” understood as Mill understood
them, as propositions about classes of individuals. When not construed as about

242
Fred Wilson
a substantial form, but about a group or class, then the assertion that “All S
is P” may be meant to apply to every member of the class or only to some of
them; it is, therefore, necessary to indicate this, or to express the quantity of the
subject: “All S is P” in contrast to “some S is P”. In the traditional forms,
the predicate is not similarly quantiﬁed. But a quality always determines a class
— the class of things which possess that quality. This implies that the predicate
can be also be treated as if it were a class and also assigned a quantity. Thus,
Hamilton modiﬁes quantitatively the predicate as well as the subject in “All S
is P” to produce two forms, “All S is all P” (where the classes determined by S
and P have exactly the same members) and “All S is some P” (where the class
determined by S is contained in the class determined by P, but that determined
by P has more members than that determined by S). This would apply to all the
traditional forms, so that we would also have, for example, in place of “Some S is
P” the two forms “Some S is all P” and “Some S is some P”, and similarly for the
other forms. Hamilton thus extended the range of classiﬁcation of propositions.
His “new analytic” depends upon the contention that the quantity thus implied
should be always explicitly stated, and consists in following out the changes in
formal procedure which seem to him to result from this being done. But Hamilton
was not thorough enough in the elaboration of his theory, and was too often less
than careful in elaborating the rules for validity for the now enlarged class of
syllogistic forms. He did not see that the change from the traditional view to
the “class view” of the proposition would lead to a very diﬀerent classiﬁcation of
propositions from his, and, in general, to a much more radical revision of logical
forms than he contemplated. Two mathematicians contemporary with Hamilton
(and with Mill) — Augustus de Morgan and George Boole — went further than
he did. The latter’s treatise on The Laws of Thought (1854), in which he accepted
Mill’s view of logic as dealing with classes determined by qualities connoted by
predicates, working on a careful analogy with algebra, uses the symbolical methods
of the latter to greatly enlarge our knowledge of the laws of logic beyond those of
the traditional syllogistic. Boole here laid the foundations of the modern logic as a
symbolic calculus. Boole’s work represents the commencement of that ﬂourishing
of logic that has taken it far beyond syllogistic which is now but a minor part of
the discipline. Mill notes none of these developments in which formal logic became
modern symbolic logic: his account comes at the end of the older tradition and
not at the beginning of the new.
Hamilton, in contrast, did point the way to these new developments, however
imperfectly he worked out his proposals. Mill did see the soundness from a formal
point of view of Hamilton’s move to quantify the predicate, but like Hamilton did
not see the implications that de Morgan and Boole were to develop. Moreover,
Mill argued that Hamilton’s innovation was of little interest to those who wished
to study the judgments and inferences that people actually make. He argued that,
while we could quantify the predicate in our ordinary judgments, we in fact do
not do this: normally, Mill argued, we do not know whether the class S does or
does not coincide in membership with the class P and so use the form “All S is

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
243
P” in a way that leaves this open. Mill is no doubt correct, and he is no doubt
correct in his allowing that Hamilton’s point is formally sound, given how they
both understood in an extensional or “class” way the propositions with which
syllogistic deals; but his anti-Hamilton polemic, on this point at least, goes on for
rather too long.
Apart from allowing syllogisms including singular propositions, Mill does not al-
ter the formal structure of syllogistic as it had come down to him through Whately.
Rules for such things as the reduction of syllogisms to the ﬁrst ﬁgure are those of
the tradition.
There is one feature that he does reject. Aristotle argued that the ﬁrst ﬁgure
was the perfect ﬁgure, but that the syllogisms which occur in it could be justiﬁed
by what came to be called the dictum de omni et nullo. This is the maxim that
“whatever can be aﬃrmed (or denied) of a class can be aﬃrmed (or denied) of
everything included in the class.” In the traditional metaphysics this did indeed
have a place. According to that tradition, the proposition
(a)
S is P
is about substantial forms. But it is true about individuals that
(b)
All S are P
in the sense that
(b′) All individuals which are S are also P
Since no substantial forms exist, according to Mill, this latter is of course the only
sense that Mill allows. The traditional system has to account for why (a) implies
(b)=(b′). The traditional doctrine has it that the forms as active entities cause the
individuals of which they are the forms to be in a way that guarantees the truth of
(b)=(b′): what is predicable of the universal or form is predicable of the individual
substances subordinate to it. Indeed, the metaphysics guarantees not only that
(b)=(b′) is true if (a) is true, but ensures that it is necessarily true. Thus, on the
traditional view, the dictum do omni et nullo expresses a fundamental principle
or law about the ontological structure of the universe; as Mill put it, the principle
stated that “the entire nature and properties of the substantia secunda formed
part of the nature and properties of each of the individual substances called by
the same name...”11 But in a world without substantial forms, the dictum amounts
to nothing more than the principle that what is true of a class of certain objects, is
true of each of those objects. It is a trivial proposition that does little more than
pleonastically explain the meaning of the word class. It has retained its place in
logic texts only as a consequence of doing what others did who went before, even
though the metaphysics which alone justiﬁed it has disappeared.
There is, however, a fundamental principle on which, Mill argues, any logic
rests:
11System of Logic, II, ii, § 2; CW, vol. 7, p. 174.

244
Fred Wilson
Every proposition which conveys real information asserts a matter of
fact, dependent on laws of nature and not on classiﬁcation. It asserts
that a given object does or does not possess a given attribute; or it as-
serts that two attributes, or sets of attributes, do or do not (constantly
or occasionally) coexist. Since such is the purport of all propositions
which convey any real knowledge, and since ratiocination is a mode of
acquiring real knowledge, any theory of ratiocination which does not
recognise this import of propositions, cannot, we may be sure, be the
true one.
This yields two principles, one for aﬃrmative syllogisms — “things which coexist
with a third thing, coexist with one another” — and one for negative propositions
— “a thing which coexists with another thing, with which other a third thing
does not coexist, is not coexistent with that third thing.” Nor are these trivial
propositions like the dictum:
These axioms manifestly relate to facts, and not to conventions; and
one or the other of them is the ground of legitimacy of every argument
in which facts and not conventions are the matter treated of.12
The point is that every proposition which attributes a property to an individual
is either true or false and not both — properties are, in other words, logically
and ontologically wholly contained within themselves, separable from and not
intrinsically tied to other properties. Contrary to the older tradition which held
that one property can be necessarily tied to another property, so that the being of
the one implicates the being of the other, everything is what it is and not another
thing. This itself is a matter of fact about the world, a fundamental law of nature;
if the world were not this way, ratiocination would not be possible: all other laws
of nature, including the laws of logic, rest on this fundamental fact.
5
TWO SMALLER POINTS
One: Propositional Logic
An argument like
either A is B or C is D
A is not B
C is D
which has been known as “Disjunctive Syllogism,” depends for its validity upon
the words “or” and “not”, connectives which make compound propositions out of
simpler ones. Aristotle studied systematically arguments the validity of which de-
pend upon “all” and “some” and “is”, words which occur within simple sentences.
But he largely ignored arguments the validity of which depends upon connectives,
12System of Logic, II, ii, § 3, CW, vol. 7, pp. 177-8.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
245
what we now call propositional or sentential logic. In the ancient world the va-
lidity of such arguments was studied by the Stoic philosophers. The Stoics and
the Aristotelians each argued that they had the correct logic and that the other’s
logic was incorrect. In one sense they were wrong: we now recognize, since Boole,
that these are two parts of what is now the much broader ﬁeld of symbolic logic.
But they were also correct. Aristotle’s logic was designed to ﬁt his metaphysics
of substantial forms. And the logic of the Stoics was designed to ﬁt their own
metaphysics that was at once pantheistic and materialistic. The two metaphysical
systems were incompatible, and in that respect so were their logics: the logic of
the Stoics did not ﬁt the metaphysics of Aristotle and that of Aristotle did not
ﬁt the metaphysics of the Stoics. The metaphysics of Aristotle survived to ﬁnd
a place in the theological philosophy that came after the revival of learning after
the fall of the Roman Empire, and with it Aristotle’s logic. The Stoic philosophy
did not survive, and we now know only fragments of its logical system. Some
of this fragmentary knowledge came down to the scholastics, to be explored and
even somewhat developed by mediaeval logicians, though the main concern of the
latter remained syllogistic. But large parts of the logic of the scholastics disap-
peared with the eclipse of scholasticism which came when it was replaced by the
new science as a method in the search after truth. All that remained were small
bits. These survived in texts like that of Aldrich, and were given a minor place in
logics like that of Whately.
Their place in Mill’s logic is also minor. In fact, he proposes to assimilate them
to the logic of subjects and predicates characteristic of syllogistic.
Mill ﬁrst deals with conjunctions. A conjunction, he argues, is not a new propo-
sition compounded out of the two conjuncts. The word “and” (and the word “but”)
is but a way of bringing two propositions before the mind at the same time. In
other words, “A and B” is taken to be shorthand for “A, B, and it is desired
that the two propositions be thought of at once,” while “A but B” is taken to be
shorthand for “A, B, and note the contrast between them.”
Disjunctions received a more complicated treatment. The treatment of conjunc-
tions would suggest a moment of doubt or hesitation about which of the disjuncts
is true. But he does allow that disjunctions are genuine propositions. They are
genuine propositions but are reducible to hypothetical judgments. “Either A is
B or C is D” is taken to be logically equivalent to “if A is not B then C is D,
and if C is not D, then A is B.” [Mill is correct in this. In modern symbols,
“(∼p ⊃q)&(∼q ⊃p)” is logically equivalent to “(∼∼p∨q)&(∼∼q ∨p)” which is
logically equivalent to “(p ∨q)&(q ∨p)” which is logically equivalent to “(p ∨q).”]
He then proceeds to assimilate these hypothetical judgments to the simple cat-
egorical judgments of syllogistic logic. He argues that
if A is B then C is D
abbreviates
the proposition C is D is a legitimate inference from the proposition A is B

246
Fred Wilson
which is a subject-predicate sentence, where the subject term is “the proposition
C is D” and the predicate term is “a legitimate inference from A is B”.
Modern logics treat hypotheticals as material conditionals of the form “p ⊃q”
which are false if the antecedent is true and the consequent is false and otherwise
true. The material conditional cannot be used to prove a conclusion true using
(as we often do) modus ponens if we know it to be true solely because we know
the antecedent is false (for then the argument would be unsound); nor can it be so
used solely because we know that consequent to be true (for then the conclusion
would already be known and the argument would not be needed). Similar remarks
hold for material conditionals in their other characteristic use in modus tollens. So
a material conditional cannot be used in demonstrating conclusions with modus
ponens or modus tollens if the sole evidence we have for its truth is a knowledge
of the truth values of its components.
But we do use hypotheticals in modus
ponens and modus tollens so we must aﬃrm the premise on some other basis,
and, more speciﬁcally, on the basis of some known connection between antecedent
and consequent, a connection which establishes that the antecedent is evidence for
the consequent. Mill is drawing our attention to this fact about conditionals. He
is, in other words, not seriously at variance then with what goes on in modern
symbolic logic. Since the implicit connection between antecedent and consequent
will, most often at least, be a law or regularity, he is in eﬀect taking conditionals
to be instances of universal conditionals like
Any individual, if it is A then it is B
which, for practical purposes of explanation and prediction, are not diﬀerent from
Any individual which is A is also B
that is, from the standard categorical form
All A is B
So what Mill says does make sense. Nonetheless, we still have also to say that
Mill misses the basic point of sentential logic. It remained for Boole to discover
its central place in any complete system of formal logic.
Two: Relations
It was traditional that substances are separable ontologically in this sense, if there
are two things a and b, and b ceases to exist, then a will continue to exist un-
changed. Now, if there was a relational fact, a is R to b, then they would not
be in this sense separable. For, if b ceased to exist then a would cease to have
predicated of it the property of being R to b. It was therefore argued that there
are no genuine relational facts, that every fact like a being R to b is really two
non-relational facts, a is r1 and b is r2, where r1 and r2 are two non-relational
properties, said to be the “foundations” of the relation. It may be true that a is

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
247
R to b, but in fact there is no genuine unity. What unity there is is on the side of
the mind judging: what unity there is lies in the mind, in comparing a and b in
an act of judgment.
This account of relations can be found in Locke, for example. It is also the
view of Leibniz. If you have God, then that is a substance that can account for
the unity of all things, even in the absence of genuine relations. But God as a
substance disappeared under the empiricist critique. Certainly, this entity is not
there for Mill.
For many relations, Mill takes Locke’s account for granted. This is so especially
for social relations like master and servant. In the latter the bond between the
two is given by the attitudes of the two persons, where the one has undertaken, or
is compelled, to perform certain services for the other.
The empiricists, Locke anyway, were criticized by later idealists such as F. H.
Bradley and Bernard Bosanquet for their account of relations. It did not, was the
charge, account for genuine unity in the world. If there was an objective being
to the relation, then the account would only allow it to be a third thing — in
eﬀect, a non-relational fact alongside the other two — which gives not a unity of
two things but three separable things, and therefore does not achieve the desired
real unity in things. The idealists argued that there could be a genuine unity
which included a and b only if these were conceived as parts of a unifying single
substance. “a is R to b” would thus in reality have the form “the substantial whole
of which a and b are aspects is R-ish” where the predication is again non-relational
but of a “higher” and more substantial whole. Since everything is related in one
way or another to everything else, there is in the end only one real substance, the
Absolute: everything else is but an aspect of this whole.
Mill did not himself confront his idealist critics; they came later in the century.
But one can see two things. First, it is clear on empiricist grounds that there are
no substances and therefore especially no Absolute. Second, there are, contrary to
Locke and as the idealists were to assert, genuine relational unities. Mill certainly
holds the latter.
He does allow that some relations are susceptible to a Lockean analysis. And
he agrees that a relation cannot be a third thing existing alongside the relata:
Dawn and sunrise announce themselves to our consciousness by two
successive sensations.
Our consciousness of the succession of these
sensations is not a third sensation or feeling added to these...
Mill agrees with the idealists on this point. However, there is a unity to these that
cannot be further analyzed.
To have two feelings at all, implies having them either successively,
or simultaneously. Sensations, or other feelings, being given, succes-
sion and simultaneousness are the two conditions, to the alternative of
which they are subjected by the nature of our faculties, and no one has
been able, or needs expect, to analyse the matter any further.13
13System of Logic, I, iii, § 10, CW, vol. 7, p. 69.

248
Fred Wilson
Resemblance, too, is a basic, unanalyzable feature of things and of properties.
Mill is here arguing, in eﬀect, that there are certain facts in the world that
cannot be represented by propositions consisting of a single subject and a non-
relational predicate. “In the same manner, as a quality is an attribute grounded in
the fact that a certain sensation or sensations are produced in us by an object, as an
attribute grounded on some fact into which the object, jointly with another object,
is a relation between it and that other object.”14 Mill’s point is ontological: there
are relational facts in which the relation is an attribute jointly of two objects. But
he does not trace out, or even really notice, the logical implications, that besides
sentences of the form
This is F
logic must include sentences of the form
This is R to that
The traditional logic does not admit sentences of the latter sort. It was de Morgan
who drew attention to the fact that the traditional logic could not account for the
validity of the inference
A horse is an animal
A head of a horse is a head of an animal
The relational predicate “x is of y” adds something with which logic ought to deal
— after all, it ought to be able to show why this argument is valid (which it is)
— but which has no place in the traditional logic — nor in the formal logic that
Mill allowed. Mill had an insight, an ontological insight, that had implications for
formal logic, but failed to develop those implications it had for logic, and it was
instead de Morgan who was to work out a newer logic that admitted of dyadic as
well as monadic predicates. De Morgan’s work, along with that of Boole, opened
up logic into the broad science that it has become, a science within which the
formal logic of Aristotle and Mill is but a fragment. William James and Bertrand
Russell were to develop the ontological insight.
6
MILL’S DEFENCE OF DEDUCTIVE LOGIC
Mill accepted what was taken to be a devastating criticism of syllogistic:
It must be granted that in every syllogism, considered as an argument
to prove its conclusion there is a petitio principi. When we say,
All men are mortal,
Socrates is a man,
therefore
Socrates is mortal;
14System of Logic, I, iii, § 10, CW, vol. 7, p. 68.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
249
it is unanswerably urged by the adversaries of syllogistic theory, that
the proposition, Socrates is mortal, is presupposed in the more general
assumption, All men are mortal.15
If the conclusion is already contained in the premises, then deductive inference
cannot be a means to proving the conclusion; it cannot be productive of new
knowledge.
To be sure, as Whately emphasized, the conclusion might well be
psychologically new, quite unanticipated, but that does not meet the objection,
since, if it is true that the conclusion is contained in the premises, then in fact
we did know that conclusion, it was just that we did not know that we knew it
The better answer, Mill proposes, can be found if we reﬂect on the principle that
“All inference is from particulars to particulars,” and “General propositions are
merely registers of such inferences already made, and short formulae for making
more.”16 It follows that there is a sense in which syllogistic reasoning cannot really
be inference. And not being inferences they cannot be expected to inferentially
yield new knowledge.
These arguments have often been attacked. But they are in fact straightforward.
First, Mill is making the point that there are no general facts in addition to
individual facts. Those in the Aristotelian tradition held that there were general
facts over and above individual facts.
These were the necessary truths about
substantial forms. Mill of course denies that there are such forms and such facts.
It might be noted that Russell was later to argue, against Wittgenstein, that there
are general facts in addition to individual or atomic facts. Mill is here taking the
side of Wittgenstein. But where Wittgenstein argued that a statement of general
fact was nothing more than a conjunction of atomic facts, Mill argues that there
is something more. If a general fact were a mere conjunction it would be nothing
more than a conjunction of statements of facts already known. Generalization is
an inference from what we do know to what we can anticipate. From the mortality
of Socrates and all other humans hitherto observed we infer the mortality of those
now living and those who will live and who have lived, and this inference to
these other facts we summarize as it were in the statement of general fact. This
statement records not another fact, a general fact, that exists in addition to the
individual facts, but simply that the pattern hitherto observed will continue.
What generalization does is summarize and then anticipate experience. The
rules of syllogistic are rules, not for generating new knowledge, but for interpreting
what is recorded in those generalizations. In a syllogism like
All humans are mortal
George Bush is human
George Bush is mortal
the evidence for inferring the mortality of Bush from his humanity is the set
of individual facts in which we have observed mortality to always accompany
15System of Logic, II, iii, § 2, CW, vol. 7, p. 184.
16System of Logic, II, iii, § 3, CW, vol. 7, p. 186.

250
Fred Wilson
humanity. The major premise does not add to this evidence, nor does the syllogism
record any new data. Rather, their point is to keep one consistent in the inferences
one draws from the evidence we have, that is, our observations of what has already
occurred.
Syllogisms and the rules of formal logic do not produce new truth. Insofar as
logic has truth as its end, formal logic has an auxiliary role, that of keeping our in-
ferences consistent. Formal logic is a, or the, Logic of Consistency; it is not a Logic
of Truth. Inference begins with observations, and if that inference is warranted
then it can be generalized, and is to be presented in that form. Its warrantability
is then tested by drawing out its implications that can be tested against further
experience. The drawing out of these implications within the broader context of
the whole Logic of Truth is the task of formal logic as the Logic of Consistency.
What this logic of consistency presupposes are the premises from which it draws
its inferences and these are supplied not by formal logic, not by the rules for the
syllogism, (nor by rational intuition,) but by inductive inferences. It is inductive
inference that is central to the pursuit of matter-of-fact truth: the Logic of Truth
is the logic of inductive inference.
7
MILL ON NECESSARY TRUTH, ARITHMETIC ESPECIALLY
To treat a generalization as a sort of conjunction of statements of individual fact,
as Mill does, that is, to treat a generalization as a mere contingent truth, is, many
argue, to miss the element of unity that must be there if the generalization is to be
genuinely explanatory. The later idealists were to make this point, which was of
course made earlier in the history of philosophy, by Aristotle against the Megarics,
who argued the thesis of the empiricists and of Moli`ere, that a potentiality is the
same as its exercise, that is, who argued contrary to Aristotle that were no active
powers the exercise of which produces the succeeding event from its predecessor,
tying the former necessarily to the latter. Mill of course sides with the Megarics
and with Hume in denying that there are any active potentialities or substantial
forms and more generally in denying that there are any necessary connections.
There are four cases that we should consider.
First there are the so-called
essential truths, the real deﬁnitions of things.
Second, there are the truths of
geometry. Third, there are the truths of arithmetic. Fourth, there are the axioms
of sciences such as mechanics.
William Whewell, the Master of Trinity College, champion of unreformed uni-
versities, and intuitionist in ethics, also championed the idea that science aims at
a priori truth; he was Mill’s opposition on these points. He was followed by the
British idealists who championed the same points, though from a slightly diﬀerent
perspective. We shall later examine the response to Mill of the British idealists.
The work of Bertrand Russell and G. E. Moore will help us consider what Mill
might have said in response to the idealists.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
251
One: Essential Truths
Traditionally, and this tradition survived through to Whately’s text, besides nom-
inal deﬁnitions there are also deﬁnitions of things, so called “real deﬁnitions”, that
explicated the essences of things. The logical structure of the essence or substan-
tial form is reﬂected it its deﬁnition. This deﬁnition is said to be “real” because
it can be true or false depending on whether it accurately or wrongly reﬂects that
ontological structure. Now, the doctrine of real deﬁnitions makes sense only if sub-
stantial forms exist. But once they are exorcised through the empiricist critique,
there is no longer any reality the logical structure of which is supposedly given by
the real deﬁnition. All deﬁnitions are nominal. The deﬁnition of “human” as a
“rational animal” is not something that is true or false, it is simply a convention
about how to use words: “human” is short for “rational animal.”
But we do choose our words for use. The point about “rational animal” is that
There are rational animals
(12)
and it is convenient to speak more brieﬂy, so we use the concept introduced by
the nominal deﬁnition
‘human’ is short for ‘rational animal’
(13)
and re-phrase (12) as
There are humans
(14)
The general proposition that
Human is rational animal
(15)
is merely verbal, simply a statement of identity made true by the linguistic conven-
tion (13). (15) is not a statement of fact, it is true by convention; that convention
is arbitrary — we may deﬁne words as we please. But not every deﬁnition will
please us — not every deﬁnition will serve the ends for which we use language,
namely, in this context, the statement of facts. (12) is a true statement of fact,
and we ﬁnd it useful to record that facts and facts similar to it using the simple
form established by the deﬁnition (13). Since deﬁnitions are arbitrary, we could
equally well deﬁne the concept
‘Stoogle’ is short for ‘rational stone’
(16)
But there are no rational stones, there are no stoogles, and so the concept deﬁned
by (16) is of little use as we go about the task of describing the world. We may
deﬁne concepts as we please, but the concept “stoogle” deﬁned by (16) does not
please us: the world being the way it as a matter of fact is, the concept of a
“stoogle” is of no use whatsoever in the task of describing the way things stand in
the world as we ﬁnd it.
Mill thus argues that, although there are no real deﬁnitions of things, and that
all deﬁnitions are nominal, there is associated as it were with the deﬁnition a

252
Fred Wilson
statement of fact that establishes the utility of the concept deﬁned in the task of
describing the world, a statement of fact to the eﬀect that there are entities falling
under the concept deﬁned.17
Two: Geometry
Geometry has been a stronghold for the idea that we have a priori knowledge of
necessary truths about the structure of the world. Plato argues in the Phaedo
that the geometrical ﬁgures of which we are aware in the world of sense experience
are imperfect — there are no perfectly straight lines, for example, in our ordinary
experience of things. But to judge something is not perfectly straight it is necessary
to know what it is for something to be perfectly straight: to judge that something
is not-F one must know what it is for something to be F. Since, as we know,
we do not obtain the concept of perfect straightness a posteriori, we must have
that idea through some non-sensory a priori means, generally understood to be
the intuition of the form of a perfectly straight line. The deﬁnitions and axioms
of geometry are taken to be exactly true of these forms, and, since the forms are
non-sensory or ideal, these truths are necessary. As for applied geometry, this is
not exactly true since the world of sense only imperfectly imitates the world of the
forms.
Whewell defended this view of geometrical knowledge — it consisted, he argued,
of demonstrable truths derived from axioms and deﬁnitions as necessary truths.
Mill challenged this point of view. There are two points to his critique.
First he challenged the argument that the concepts that form the deﬁnitions
of geometry, e.g., of a perfectly straight line, could not be derived from sense
experience. The Platonic argument takes it to be (what is so) that one cannot
judge something to be not-F unless one has the concept of F — one cannot judge
a line to be imperfectly straight, that is, not perfectly straight, unless one has
the concept of perfect straightness. Mill argues that the concepts of the perfect
geometrical ﬁgures can, contrary to Whewell and Plato, be derived from things
as we sensibly experience them.
Consider smooth lines.
These come curved,
these resemble others of that kind, but some resemble each other in being more
curved than others, that is, lines as we experience them have diﬀerent degrees of
curvature. The concept of the perfectly straight line is the one that is negative,
it is the concept of a line with no degree of curvature. One can similarly form
from experience other geometrical concepts, e.g, that of a line with no thickness.
And from these one can form the concepts deﬁned in geometry, e.g., the concept
of a triangle as a plane ﬁgure bounded by three straight lines each perfectly thin.
The entities dealt with in pure geometry, the perfect ﬁgures, are thus merely
17As the Kneales put it, Mill expressed the point that so-called real deﬁnitions are “only
nominal deﬁnitions accompanied by assumptions of matters of fact” in a “downright fashion”;
and his inﬂuence on this point has been great: “After Mill’s book little was heard of the doctrine
of real deﬁnition.” (William Kneale and Martha Kneale, The Development of Logic [Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1962], pp. 373-374).

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
253
hypothetical and not real. There is no need to suppose that there is beyond the
world as we ordinarily experience it a world of ideal or perfect geometrical forms.
Mill’s second point is this. Whewell also argued that the truth of geometry had a
necessity that could not be obtained by matter of fact truths: unlike matter of fact
truths, those of geometry are necessary because their contraries are inconceivable,
and our knowledge of them must therefore be a priori.
Mill agreed that the
axioms of geometry is such that their contraries are inconceivable, but denied that
Whewell’s conclusion follows: to the contrary, the inconceivability of the contrary
is compatible with the claim that, insofar as they are true, our knowledge of their
truth is derived from experience. To be sure, our knowledge is not derived from
something like induction by simple enumeration, nor is their certainty like that
of our knowledge that all humans are mortal. It is rather something learned in
our earliest experience of the world, and it is reinforced constantly as we interact
as incarnate entities with other material things in the world. So profound is our
experience of the world as spatial that it is indeed true, as Whewell claims, that the
certainty of the axioms of geometry is such that their contraries are inconceivable.
But that is compatible with their being (“mere”) matter of fact truths.
On the issues concerned with geometry, it is generally now accepted that Mill’s
positions were right and those of Whewell (and Kant) were wrong: geometry is
not a demonstrative a priori science. The existence of non-Euclidean geometries
showed that the contraries of the Euclidean axioms could conceivably be true
and the Euclidean could conceivably be false, and the discovery that the large
scale geometry of the world is, as Einstein argued, non-Euclidean showed that the
geometry of Euclid, far from being necessary, was in fact false of the real world
of ordinary experience: insofar as it is true, it is true only approximately, as Mill
claimed, and only as a matter of fact. There is no need to suppose those truths
to be necessary nor to suppose that there is a realm of perfect forms to guarantee
that necessity.
Three: Arithmetic
Mill argued that the truths of arithmetic were also, like those of geometry, matter
of fact. In this hiss views have not generally been accepted.
We may contrast Mill’s views with those of Russell.
Russell argued that the truths of arithmetic are deducible from those of logic,
and therefore were, like the truths of logic, true necessarily and a priori of the
world. To establish this he had ﬁrst to deﬁne the concepts of arithmetic in terms
of those of logic, and then deduce the axioms of arithmetic from those of logic.
Both of these were quite beyond Mill’s logic. Yet at times Mill seems to be on the
right track.
Thus, Mill argues that numbers are properties of classes. He argues that all
classes that resemble the class of Apostles in number have the property of being
a 12-class — which is close to Russell’s deﬁnition of a number as the class of all
classes equinumerous to some given class, where equinumerosity is deﬁned (in a

254
Fred Wilson
non-question-begging way) in terms of there being a one-relationship between the
members of the two classes. Mill argued that we know by our sensible experience
of the world that two classes resemble each other in being two-ed or in being
twelve-ed. Mill also thought of addition much as Russell did: the number a is the
sum of the numbers b and c just in case that it is the number of a class which is
the union of two disjoint classes, the number of one of which is b and the number
of the other is c. But Mill has no way to deal with the concept of “immediate
successor” which Russell needs, nor any means to state such necessary premises
as “immediate successor is asymmetric”, since the concept is essentially relational
and Mill has no place in his logic for a logic of relations: it was only with the work
of later logicians such as de Morgan and Peirce, and, indeed, Russell himself, that
there was any adequate logic of relations.
It is the status of arithmetical truth, however, that we should look at. Mill
argues that the laws of arithmetic are empirical, and a posteriori, like the laws
of geometry.
Here he is taking issue, as usual, with Whewell and Plato, and
with Russell. The latter argued like the former, that the entities arithmetic talked
about were non-empirical, and that the certainty of mathematics derived from this
fact. Russell accepted a sort of Platonism, with individuals or particulars known
by sense and with general forms or universals known by conception or rational
intuition. Arithmetical and other mathematical truths are truths about structural
relations among universals, and are known a priori. The laws of arithmetic, and
also the laws of logic, from which, Russell argues, the former can be derived, are
highly general facts about the world, necessarily true because they are grounded
in the structures of non-empirical universals.
This Platonism has deep problems. Suppose individual a falls under the concept
F. Then it is a fact that a is F. The problem is this: If particulars are known
by sense perception and universals by conception, then how does one know that
a is F, the fact which involves both the individual and the universal? Moreover,
as we have seen, there is the issue about what guarantees that a relation among
universals is going to be replicated as it were among particular things in the world
of ordinary sensible experience. Those who admitted substantial forms solved this
problem by having the active form cause its structure to present in the individuals
of which it was the form. That is why, as Mill, saw, the dictum de omni et nullo
had for them a logical and ontological signiﬁcance. But disallow the causal activity
of the forms, as Russell does, then there is no answer. Mill is correct, the solution
is to abolish the forms too: exclude non-empirical entities and make the laws
regularities about ordinary matters of fact. Russell generates the problem because
he assumes that individual things are known by sense, and the properties of things
and their properties are known in another way, by conception. But why assume
that? As Mill makes clear, not only individual things, e.g., Jones, are given in our
sensible experience of the world, but so are their properties, e.g., when Jones is
green, then that fact is known by sense, and that fact includes the property green.
Indeed, not only are properties given in sense but so are properties of properties,
e.g., the fact that green is a colour we know from our sensible experience of things

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
255
in the world, and the property of being a colour is a property of the property,
also given in experience, of being green. Or, as Mill might put it, the property
of being green resembles other properties like red in being a colour, and the fact
of resemblance in respect of being a colour is one given to us in our ordinary
sensible experience of the world. The point is to eliminate the gap between the
world of things and the world of properties or concepts. So Russell’s very general
laws about abstract objects become very general laws about classes as classes and
as entities located ontologically in the world given in sense experience. Laws of
number then have a status of very abstract exact generalizations holding of the
world of ordinary experience.
If therefore we make Russell’s ontology more of a piece with that of Mill, then
Mill’s account of arithmetic as an exact science has a certain familiarity and even
plausibility. But still, his logic is far from that of Russell and entirely inadequate
to the task of making clear the logical structure of the laws of arithmetic.
It is worth noting that Mill, like Russell, distinguishes clearly the laws of arith-
metic as purely about numbers from the laws of measurement. He insists, rightly,
that there is a diﬀerence between “1+2 = 3” and “1 litre + 2 litres = 3 litres.” In
contrast to the exactitude of the laws of pure number, those of applied arithmetic
are inexact. But that is as far as Mill goes, or can go. With no logic of relations he
cannot recognize that one must, as one says, operationalize or empirically inter-
pret, relations such as “equal in weight” and “less than in weight”. Nor, therefore
can he see how it is necessary to distinguish the arithmetic “+” of pure arithmetic
from “sum” as applied to weights, or whatever one is measuring (or, indeed, dis-
tinguishing either of these from the vector addition of forces in mechanics, nor,
worse, any of these from mere conjunction, the ‘and’ of the logicians). The closest
Mill can get to a reasonable account of measurement is a relatively vague concep-
tion about operationalizing diﬀerent units of measurement. That is part of what
is involved in developing empirical scales of measurement, but far indeed from the
whole story.
Mill’s account of arithmetic and of applied arithmetic is not as implausible as
it is often made out to be; taking into consideration diﬀerences in ontology, Mill’s
view of arithmetic as a set of very general laws about classes as such is not far
from that of Russell. At the same time, however, it must be emphasized that,
owing to the inadequacies of his formal logic, Mill’s is far from the last word and
far from the best.
Four: Axioms of Scientiﬁc Theories
Whewell developed the view that the axioms of such sciences as mechanics are
ﬁrst known inductively, but then come to be known a priori as necessary truths.
He suggests that for any science, or any genuine science, one that can be arranged
into a system deductively organized into axioms and theorems, the axioms are
necessary truths, the contraries of which are inconceivable.
Our knowledge of
them is in fact innate, though we are not initially conscious of either the concepts

256
Fred Wilson
or the axioms or their necessity. Only after experience is organized by primitive
inductions do we become aware of the ideas within us that provide a conceptual
structure for these facts that reveals that those generalizations are rooted in the
necessity of that conceptual structure.
Mill objects that the conceptual structure is not provided by the mind, but
discovered to be objectively there in the things observed. Whewell’s is in fact the
old doctrine of forms: the forms in our minds as ideas are the forms in God’s mind
and things created have within them the necessary structure which they exemplify
in the ways they sensibly appear to us. The forms in things are the locus of the
power God has put in things to produce appearances in not only a regular but a
necessary order. As we pursue our study of that order we gradually awake within
ourselves that idea which is identically that order in things — and in the mind of
God who created things to have that order. The forms of things that are provided
by the mind are forms in things and ultimately forms in the mind of God. The
mind may contribute the ideas to the things observed, and in so contributing it
contributes something of its own structure to the things of the world. But that
structure which it contributes is also the structure God put there in the things.
So in contributing its own structure it is in a way ﬁnding itself as objectively there
in things.
But in the sense required, there are no objective forms. God may play a role
in Whewell’s account of inductive science and the necessity of the axioms that
ultimately becomes present to us as we explore the observable patterns of things,
but His presence doesn’t really help to render secure Whewell’s account. With
the absence of forms, however, all Whewell’s account of science amounts to is two
claims, one that the structure of things as described by the axioms is put there by
the mind of the observer or, perhaps, by the mind of the scientiﬁc community —
which is false, the structure is not contributed by the mind but is there objectively
in things, to be discovered by the inquiring mind; and second that the contraries
of the axioms are inconceivable — but Whewell here proves no more than can be
accounted for by appeal to the strength of psychological associations.
The axioms are, in short, inductive generalizations, but with the evidence such
that they become certain enough that they can no longer be counted as “mere”
generalizations. As for the concepts we use to express these generalizations, they
are formed by the usual methods of deﬁnition. In fact, far from being innate, they
often ﬁnd their ﬁnal form only after the discovery of the laws they are used to
express. For, we form concepts to express the laws we discover, and so naturally
enough we form accurate concepts of the subject matter of a science only when
we have laid the lawful structure out before ourselves.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
257
8
INDUCTIVE LOGIC
One: The Methods of Eliminative Induction
Inductive inference seems at ﬁrst glance to be radically diﬀerent from deductive
logic: after all, the former is ampliative and fallible where the latter implies only
what is already contained in the premises and is necessary. But in Mill’s inductive
logic, inductive inferences are inter-twined in complex ways with deductive infer-
ences — many of which Mill does not himself see, owing to the limitations of his
deductive logic.
The standard notion of inductive inference is the model
That F is G
That other F is G
Yet another F is G
All observed F are G
so, All F are G
(17)
This is “induction by simple enumeration.” Mill, like Bacon and Hume before him,
rejected this as too fallible to be relied upon as a valid mode of inductive inference
— except, Mill allows, in certain restricted, but important cases. The problem
with inferences like (17) is that they don’t take account of alternative possibilities
— maybe it is but an accident that the observed F’s are G, and that really all
F’s are G’ only we have not taken this into account. Since this and other possible
alternatives have not been ruled out, the inference (17) is hazardous indeed: just
think of the inference of Europeans to all swans are white, which they took to be
as certain as anything, ignoring the possibility of black swans (which were in fact
later observed by Europeans when some Dutch sailors in the seventeenth century
sailing for the East Indies around the Cape of Good Hope were blown oﬀcourse
and landed in what is now Western Australia).
Mill proposed, following Bacon and Hume, that inductive inference, if it was to
be certain, had to run through the possible cases and eliminate all but one, what
remained would then be certain.
Mill laid out several modes of “eliminative” inductive inferences. The “method
of diﬀerence” was designed to discover causes in the sense of what are now called
“suﬃcient conditions” — in (17), the conclusion states that F is a suﬃcient con-
dition for G.18
The method takes for granted that there are several possible suﬃcient conditions
for G — let us say F, F ′ and F ′′. The task is to eliminate all possibilities but one.
We do controlled experiments in the laboratory or rely upon natural experiments
18The “method of agreement” is designed for the discovery of necessary conditions. Mill is
not fully clear on the distinction between necessary conditions and suﬃcient conditions, and as
a consequence he unnecessarily qualiﬁes the use of the method of agreement.
There are three other eliminative methods described by Mill: all of them follow the basic
structure of the method of diﬀerence that we are here displaying.

258
Fred Wilson
found in nature. One experiment might produce, for example, an instance which
was F ′′ but not G. That would show that the hypothesis that
All F ′′ are G
is false, and eliminate F ′′ from the list of possible causes. In eﬀect — though Mill
does not it this way — we have, let us say, three possible cases for the condition
which is suﬃcient for G. These are the hypotheses
(H1)
All F are G
(H2)
All F ′ are G
(H3)
All F ′′ are G
Let us suppose we eliminate (H2) and (H3). Mill concludes that (H1) is the true
generalization. It is inductive, because it goes beyond the observational data, but
it is more secure than any hypothesis arrived at by induction by simple enumer-
ation, since possible competitors have been eliminated. This is Mill’s method of
“eliminative induction.”
Mill’s conclusion follows by the rule for disjunctive syllogism:
(D)
(H1) or (H2) or (H3)
Not (H3)
Not (H2)
so, (H1)
This is an inference in deductive logic. So Mill’s method of eliminative induction
involves not only an inductive but also a deductive step. But Mill does not rec-
ognize this as the logical structure of his inference. This is because he does not
understand disjunctions, nor the pattern of inference of the disjunctive syllogism.
The disjunctive syllogism (D) is valid, but it will not establish its conclusion
as true unless its premises are true. The two minor premises are established by
observational data that are counterexamples to the generalization which constitute
the alternative hypotheses. What about the major premise?
It might be false, in which case the inference to (H1) is unsound and Mill would
be unable to conclude that (H1) is true.
Now, the major premise of (D) might be false because none of the disjuncts
is true. So Mill must assume in any inference of this sort that at least one of
the alternative hypotheses is true. That is, he must assume (for the method of
diﬀerence for the discovery of suﬃcient conditions) that there is a condition the
presence of which is everywhere suﬃcient for the presence of the conditional prop-
erty, which in our example is G. In Mill’s terminology, he must assume that there
is a property the presence of which is the cause for the presence of the conditioned
property.. This has been called a “Principle of Determinism.” It is evident that
this Principle is a matter of fact generalization, and therefore, if true, then only
contingently true. Mill recognizes the need for such a supplementary premise if his

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
259
conclusion is to be sound. (Bacon is less clear on the need for this premise; Hume
is quite clear that it is needed.) And Mill also recognizes that this supplementary
premise, if true, is only contingently true. But he does not really see that it is the
logic of the disjunctive syllogism that requires him to assume this extra premise.
It might also be the case that the major premise of (D) is false because all the
disjuncts are false but that there is an alternative that has not been included: the
list of possible conditioning properties should have included F ′′′ as well as the ones
actually considered. That would mean that the hypothesis
(H4)
All F ′′′ are G
should be among those considered. In that case we would have
(D′)
(H1) or (H2) or (H3) or (H4)
Not (H3)
Not (H2)
so, (H1)
But in that case (D′) is not valid and Mill has not established his conclusion
that (H1) is true – not all the competitors have been eliminated. If Mill is to
conclude that the uneliminated hypothesis (H1) is true because he has eliminated
(H2) and (H3), then he must also assume that he has a complete set of possible
conditioning properties. The assumption that he has such a set has been called a
“Principle of Limited Variety.” It is clear that such a principle is, like the Principle
of Determinism, a matter of fact truth, if it is true, and is only contingently true.
Mill is less than pellucid on the need for this supplementary premise. (Bacon is
quite clear on the need for this premise; Hume, like Mill, is less clear.)
The structure can be more formally put this way. Let the genus F be exhausted
by the species F, F ′, and F ′′. That is, let it be true that
F is F, F ′ is F, F ′′ is F, nothing else is F,
so that
F = F or F ′ or F ′′
Then the required Principles of Determinism and Limited Variety can be stated
as
(L)
There is a species f of genus F such that all f are G
Mill has sometimes been criticized for not recognizing the need for this premise,
and in particular the need for the Principle of Limited Variety. There is a point
to this charge, but a charitable reading will make allowance for his vagueness. It
was not until the Cambridge philosophers W. E. Johnson, J. M. Keynes and C.
D. Broad in the twentieth century and in the light of Russell’s full development
of formal logic that these matters were ﬁnally clariﬁed.
It should be allowed,
then, that Mill was aware of the need for a premise like (L). Now, given Mill’s

260
Fred Wilson
point that there are no necessary connections, that all properties are logically and
ontologically self-contained, then it is clear that this premise, which evidently is a
generalization, is, if true, only true contingently and as a matter of fact. It follows
that the conclusion that Mill draws from the use of the mechanisms of elimination
— in our little example, the conclusion that (H1) is true — is only as certain as
this premise (L). The issue is, what evidence could there be for this law?
Mill suggests that background theory can provide the required evidence. (Ul-
timately, the broadest of these theories is the Law of Universal Causation.) Let
F be part of a broader genus F, and let G be a genus under which the species G
falls. Then we might well have a theory like this
(T)
For any species g of genus G, there is a species f of genus F such that all
f are g
Knowing that
G is G
we can deduce (L) from (T). But this only puts the question back a step, what
evidence do we have that (T) is true? Since (T) is a generalization which is, if
true, only contingently true, (L) can only be as certain as (T), and therefore Mill’s
conclusion from the process of elimination that (H1) is true can only be as certain
as (T). What evidence do we have for theories like (T)?
[As an aside, a remark on Popper is in order. It will likely be recalled that
Popper claimed originality in introducing the idea that science progresses through
falsiﬁcation of hypotheses, where hypotheses to be tested are arrived at through
guesswork. Popper was hardly correct in his suggestion that he was the ﬁrst to
recognize the importance of falsiﬁcation. Mill preceded Popper in emphasizing the
role of falsiﬁcation as part of the logic of induction. And, as Mill acknowledged,
it was Bacon who introduced this notion.
But Popper would have it that the
formation of hypotheses has no logic, it is guesswork.
For him, the teleology
of science is more or less random; at best, it is guided by more or less vague
metaphysics or “point of view.” For Mill (and Bacon), it is otherwise; they argue
that there is a logic to hypothesis formation. Speciﬁcally, they notice that research
is theory-guided, that is, they notice the importance of abstract generic theories
in guiding the formation and selection of hypotheses to be tested.]
Two: Consilience and Colligation
Let us suppose we have discovered several speciﬁc laws
(L1)
All H1 are K1
(L2)
All H2 are K2
(L3)
All H3 are K3

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
261
We might, for example, suppose that these are Galileo’s Law of Falling Bodies,
Galileo’s Law of Projectile Motion, and Huygen’s Law of the Pendulum. Now let
us suppose we notice that they in fact share a generic form. Suppose each
Hiis F
Then we have from (L1)–(L3) that each of the causes K1–K3 have F-ish causes
(L11) There is a species f of genus F such that all f are K1
(L22) There is a species f of genus F such that all f are K2
(L33) There is a species f of genus F such that all f are K3
Each of (L11)–(L33) share a common generic logical form
(f)
There is a species f of genus F such that all f are g
where “g” is (as we would say, though Mill lacks the logical sophistication to put
it this way) a free variable. Then we further notice that each
Ki is G
which enable us to generalize over all species of genus G to obtain our theory (T)
For any species g of genus G,
There is a species f of genus F such that all f are g
Then, we know already that
G is G
and deduce that (L)
There is a species f of genus F such that all f are G
which provides the Principles of Determinism and Limited Variety that delimit
our range of interest to the hypotheses (H1)–(H3) which we are putting to the
experimental test.
We arrive at the generalization (T) by generalizing over all the species of a
genus. The evidence which has previously conﬁrmed (L1)–(L3) conﬁrms (T), that
is, supports the background theory that justiﬁes the Principles of Determinism
and Limited Variety that we need to make the eliminative inferences work.
If (L1)–(L3) are such laws as Galileo’s Law of Falling Bodies, his Law of Pro-
jectile Motion, and Huygen’s Law, then we can think of Newton generalizing from
these speciﬁc laws to the Law of Inertia, the ﬁrst of his axioms. This axiom has
the logical form of a generic theory like (T) — “For any species f of mechanical
system there is a force function g such that g is suﬃcient for accelerations in f.”
Newton, as a matter of historical fact, records in his Principia just this sort of

262
Fred Wilson
inference from speciﬁc laws such as Galileo’s Law of Falling Bodies to the generic-
level Law of Inertia; the speciﬁc-level laws are taken to justify the acceptance of
the generic-level law. Mill discusses this sort of inference in the case of one of
the central discoveries of the nineteenth century, the Law of Conservation of En-
ergy, which he takes to be a generic-level generalization made from speciﬁc-level
generalizations about heat energy, mechanical energy, chemical energy, and so on.
We arrive at (T) from (L1)–(L3) when we recognize that the three speciﬁc laws
share not just the more abstract generic form (f) but in particular the generic
logical form
(f∧)
a species g of genus G is such that there is a species f of genus F such that
all f are g
(Again, “g” is a free variable.) Whewell argued that in order to generalize to a
theoretical law from simple inductions one had as part of the inference process
to “colligate” the facts, that is, discover a concept that is common to the facts
in question, and which permits of generalization.
As Whewell would have it,
this concept is a form that is as it were imposed on the facts. Mill recognizes
the need for such a concept. He denies, however, that we impose it on the data
observed; rather, the fact that the data fall under the concept is objectively there,
discovered by the investigator. Moreover, to locate the concept that applies is
not an inference.
It is, rather, the recognition of a pattern among the things
already known. In terms of our simple example, it is the recognition that the
patterns (L1)–(L3) have in common the generic form (f∧).
The identiﬁcation
of this common form colligates these facts, organizes them so that they can be
generalized into a fruitful theory. Generalizing, we obtain the theory (T).
Having obtained the theory (T),
For any species g of genus G, there is a species f of genus F such that
all f are g
we now apply it to areas as yet unexplored, that is, new speciﬁc sorts of systems
falling under the genus G. We know that
G is G
and deduce that (L)
There is a species f of genus F such that all f are G
which provides the Principles of Determinism and Limited Variety that delimit
our range of interest to the hypotheses (H1)–(H3) which we are putting to the
experimental test. So, for example, Newton takes his axiom, the Law of Inertia,
and extends it to systems not previously explored, e.g,, the planetary system, or
sun-comet systems. He deduces that for each of these systems there is a force
function that describes accelerations, and therefore determines the motions in the
system. The research task is to ﬁnd the force function that we know, from the

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
263
theory, is there to be discovered. The theory tells us that this speciﬁc law will
have a certain generic form, which means we can limit ourselves to searching for a
law of this form. Similarly, the Law of Conservation of Energy, once formulated,
can be applied to new speciﬁc sorts of system, in the search for the speciﬁc laws
that the theory tells us are there to be discovered and which we know to have a
certain generic form.
So, an abstract generic theory like (T) can provide a guide to research in new
speciﬁc areas, as yet unexplored. It predicts the existence of laws. These laws will
have a certain generic form. Experiment will decide among these possible cases,
which one is true. Conﬁrmation of this law by successful prediction will conﬁrm —
or rather, further conﬁrm — the more general theory. This successful prediction
of laws in new areas is the mark of a good theory, Whewell argued. Mill agrees
with him: there is nothing in his empiricist account of theories that would count
against such a position.
Now notice how the patterns of conﬁrmation go. We have the speciﬁc laws
(L1)–(L3).
These are conﬁrmed through successful prediction.
The data that
conﬁrm these laws also conﬁrm the generic theory (T) which generalizes from
them and from which they can be inferred (assuming the appropriate genus-species
relations). This theory is them applied to a new area and yields (H1)–(H3) as
possible hypotheses. Each of these derives partial conﬁrmation from (T) — we
know that one of them must, given (T), be true, and that other possibilities lack
such conﬁrmation and can therefore be excluded. Then, experiment falsiﬁes (H2)
and (H3), leaving (H1) alone as acceptable: it has passed the test of experiment
and has successfully been conﬁrmed. This conﬁrmation in turn conﬁrms the theory
(T) which led to its prediction. (T) is more strongly conﬁrmed, given the successful
conﬁrmation of (H1). But if (T) is more strongly conﬁrmed, then so are the speciﬁc
laws (L1)–(L3) in the diﬀerent speciﬁc areas wherein theory (T) was originally
formulated.
This sort of conﬁrmation, by which conﬁrmations in diﬀerent areas support one
another and support the abstract generic theory which binds them together, was
called by Whewell the “consilience” of inductions:
The Consilience of Inductions takes [lace when an induction, obtained
from one class of facts, coincides with an Induction, obtained from
another diﬀerent class. This consilience is a test of the truth of the
Theory in which it occurs.19
Consilience was argued by Whewell to be a central feature of inductive inference
and support. Mill agrees, but argues, in the way in which we have just outlined,
that there is nothing contrary to empiricist principles in recognizing this as a cen-
tral aspect of inductive support. Whewell explained that “the evidence in favour
of our induction is of a much higher and more forcible character when it enables us
to explain and determine [i.e., predict] cases of a kind diﬀerent from those which
19W. Whewell, Novum Organon Renovatum (London: Parker and Son, 1858), ch. v, Aphorism
xiv.

264
Fred Wilson
were contemplated in the formation of our hypothesis.”20 Consilience is achieved
when one subsumes a speciﬁc kind under a more generic kind, where there are
other diﬀerent speciﬁc kinds under that genus; there are speciﬁc generalizations,
but an induction over these to all species within the genus. Whewell claimed that
“when the theory ... has included a new range of phenomena, we have, in fact, a
new induction of a more general kind, to which the inductions formerly obtained
are subordinate, as particular cases to a general population.”21 As Mill put it,
the theory is a “law about laws”; in the most general case, the Law of Universal
Causation, the theory states that “it is a law, that every event depends on some
law” or “it is a law, that there is a law for everything.”22 Whewell’s way of stating
it is a bit murkier than Mill’s but the point is clear: like Mill, Whewell is arguing
that generic laws about laws play a central role in science. Such a law, generalized
from several speciﬁc laws to all species of a genus, permits the prediction of new
laws for as yet uninvestigated areas. It determines a Principle of Determinism
and a Principle of Limited Variety for some new area, delimiting the range and
form of hypotheses that are reasonable candidates to be tested. Each of these will
have a prior probability that other possible candidates lack. Experiments then
eliminate all of the candidates but one. These data conﬁrm this uneliminated hy-
pothesis. These same data also conﬁrm the theory. This strengthens the support
for the theory. With the theory more strongly supported, then the other speciﬁc
laws subsumed under it, including the speciﬁc laws from which it was generalized,
themselves receive additional support. The theory provides the linkage that al-
lows inductive support for laws in one speciﬁc area to also support speciﬁc laws in
another area, and to allow the inductive support for the laws in the second area
to provide support for the laws in the ﬁrst area. This is the consilience of induc-
tions. Whewell describes this, but Mill, with his account of the role of the casual
principle in conﬁrmation shows why this should be so, why consilience should be
so important in the logic of inductive inference.
The crucial point is the abstract generic nature of the theory that binds several
speciﬁc laws together and so interlocks them that conﬁrmation is transmitted from
one speciﬁc area to another, and the conﬁrmations of laws in the several speciﬁc
areas mutually support and enhance one another. The theory itself permits the
scientist to colligate the facts in a new area, to discover in the laws of the new
area a logical form or concept that is shares with other speciﬁc laws in other
areas and which admits of generalization which in turn permits the speciﬁc laws
to be subsumed under the theory and captured and strengthened by the logical
connections of that theoretical structure.
It is sometimes suggested that Whewell’s account of consilience depends upon
his ontology of “natural kinds”, where a natural kind is a property of things that
determines a “real” set rather than as a group of things arbitrarily lumped together
by a person or group of people: a system of natural kinds is a classiﬁcatory system
20W. Whewell, Novum Organon Renovatum, p. 87.
21W. Whewell, Novum Organon Renovatum, p. 96.
22Mill, System of Logic, III, v, § 1, CW, vol. 7, p. 325.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
265
which as it were “carves nature at its joints” and which thereby places constraints
on what sorts of entities can be the subject-matter of laws of nature. So, if a
generalization involves natural kinds it is a law of nature, otherwise it is a “mere”
generalization. For Whewell there are such kinds. These are the kinds which stand
in necessary connections to one another, and where the properties are necessarily
connected then there we have a lawful generalization, and not a “mere” matter-
of-fact regularity. The necessity of the connection is, according to Whewell, not
immediately apparent to the researcher, but becomes so as science progresses,
until the laws are fully recognized as necessary axioms. For Mill, however, kinds
do not thus resolve themselves into two classes, natural kinds are artiﬁcial kinds:
there are only kinds, and if they are complex then their deﬁnitions are always
nominal. These kinds which “carve nature at its joints” are simply those that
appear in laws, that is, in matter-of-fact regularities. Those regularities that we
count as laws are simply those where we are prepared to infer that the unobserved
instances will continue to be as those that have been observed. This does not
yet distinguish those regularities that are the suﬀof superstition (“black cats are
unlucky”) from those that are scientiﬁc, i.e., those that are asserted on rational
grounds. So we count as reasonable law-assertions those that are the conclusions
of sound inductive inferences. Laws are not determined by “natural kinds”; rather,
which kinds are “natural”, “carving the world at its joints,” are those that appear
in statements of law: it is the concept of law which is primary, not the concept of
kinds which are somehow more “natural” than others.
The point to be emphasized is that the notion of the conﬁrming power of a
“consilience” of inductions does not presuppose any doctrine of “natural kinds”
or of essential ties or of necessary axioms. Mill’s treatment of theories as forming
a generic hierarchy of laws is what is important: it is the abstract generic theories
that tie together laws in speciﬁc areas that allow inductive support in one area to
be transmitted to another area and conversely. Consilience is easily understood
in an empiricist-inductivist context, contrary to what Whewell and his followers
seem to think.
It is, moreover, safe to say that Mill is more perspicuous in his handling of
consilience than is Whewell. Nonetheless, it is also true that Mill does not fully
grasp the issues of logical structure. The logical form of the theory (T) which Mill
is trying to articulate requires a full grasp of the logic of quantiﬁers (which he
does not have), as well as the idea of a second order logic in which one quantiﬁers
not only over individuals but also over kinds or species (which perforce he also
does not have).
The limitations of his deductive logic prevent him from fully
grasping the role of deductive connections in the consilience of inductions . [It
is worth commenting on the frequently made claim that Mill’s logic of science
makes no allowance for inferences to unobserved entities of the sort physics talks
about. This in spite of the fact that Mill makes speciﬁc reference to theories of
heat that account for heat through the motions of molecules, that is, through the
motions of hypothesized unobserved and unobservable entities. Philosophers do
make mistakes in construing the positions of other philosophers, but the rule ought

266
Fred Wilson
to be that of ﬁnding a generous reading of their logic of science which manages
to allow them to talk about entities that they say they want to talk about. The
reading of Mill’s logic given above does allow inferences to unobserved entities.
Here’s how. The theory (T) permits one to deduce the law (L)
There is a species f of genus F such that all f are G
This mentions an unobserved species f of genus F. It could well be that this species
of system consists of minute molecules. For the kinetic theory of heat to which Mill
refers, the concept of a molecule is that of a species of billiard ball — a genus which
we know in experience — but of a billiard ball smaller than others — the relation
of “smaller than” is given in experience — in fact suﬃciently small to be in itself
undetectable by our sense organs and therefore unobservable. The concept of a
molecule is thus one that is acceptable within Mill’s empiricist account of concept
formation. The species f may therefore be that of a congeries of molecules. So
(L) then deals with molecular motion as a cause of heat. But that cause is a set
of unobservable entities. Nor is there any need to observe those entities to have
evidence that (L) is true. For, we have deduced (L) from the background theory
(T), which receives inductive support from elsewhere. Notice, too, the existential
quantiﬁer: this means that failure to observe the relevant entities will not lead
to falsiﬁcation. This is sketchy indeed, but clear enough to make the basic point
about how infer that there are unobservable entities, and clear enough that this
ﬁts with Mill’s account of how theories like (T) permit us to infer to laws which
we might not be able to conﬁrm — that is, conﬁrm directly by observation —
but which are not totally unconﬁrmed, since background theory (T), which is
conﬁrmed elsewhere, provides inductive support.]
Three: The Conﬁrmation of Abstract Generic Theories and the Justi-
ﬁcation of Inductive Inference
Whewell would, of course argue and did argue that theories like (T), e.g., the
axioms of classical mechanics, are true a priori, and that that necessity emerges
and becomes clear to us only gradually as we use these theories to make inductive
inferences. Mill, as we have seen, will have none of that.
What Mill argues is that we do use theories like (T) at the generic level to
predict the existence of more speciﬁc laws, that is, predict the existence of true
generalizations at the speciﬁc level, and also argues that the instances of the
speciﬁc level generalizations that conﬁrm those generalizations also conﬁrm the
generic hypothesis (T): the inference to the theory (T) is a sort of induction by
simple elimination. Enumeration does not play a role, or rather, an increasingly
less important role as one moves down the generic hierarchy of laws.
At the
speciﬁc level one cannot rely on such induction by simple enumeration, one must
take account of, and eliminate speciﬁc alternatives.
But as one moves up the
generic hierarchy, the range of alternatives at the generic level becomes smaller.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
267
To the extent that there are fewer possible alternatives, to that extent induction
by simple enumeration becomes a more reliable process of inference.
At the most general level, there is the Law of Universal Causation, which states
that “it is a law, that there is a law for everything.”
The principle that, for
everything there is a law, is a law about laws, a law at the generic level about laws
at a more speciﬁc level — it is a generalization like in form to our sketch of a theory
(T). This generalization is arrived at by generalizing from more speciﬁc cases: “The
truth is, that this great generalization is itself founded on prior generalizations.”23
The evidence for this lies in the fact that we really have, so far as we can tell,
discovered causes: “The truth that every fact which has a beginning has a cause,
is coextensive with human experience.”24
This means, in eﬀect,, that we are
relying upon induction by simple enumeration to justify this law on which all
other inductions rest. But this is reasonable: at the generic level there are not the
variations in nature which, at the speciﬁc level, render this an unsafe rule.
And hence we are justiﬁed in the seeming inconsistency, of holding
induction by simple enumeration to be good for proving this gener-
alization [that is, the generalization that “everything which begins to
exist has a cause”], the foundation of scientiﬁc induction, and yet re-
fusing to rely on it for any of the narrower inductions.25
There is much more of detail that could, and indeed must be said about Mill’s
inductive logic, it is rich in its ideas. Like Mill’s deductive logic, it has its limi-
tations, and many of those limitations are due to the limitations of the deductive
logic. But certainly, it is not as foolish as many have claimed. Equally certainly, it
is less dated and less narrow than his deductive logic. It deserves a careful reading
by anyone with more than a passing interest in the philosophy of science.
9
THE IDEALIST CRITIQUE OF MILL
One: Inferences in Science
Mill’s logic was criticized by the British ideal philosophers later in the nineteenth
century and the early twentieth century. F. H. Bradley and Bernard Bosanquet
both wrote logic books that attempted to refute Mill.
They were critical of almost all aspects of Mill’s philosophy, and all aspects of
his logic. In their eye, Mill could do little that was correct. Among other things,
they were critical of Mill’s account of disjunction and of disjunctive syllogism, and
therefore of the role that Mill attributed to negative instances in the scientiﬁc
method. More speciﬁcally, they argued that formal logic alone could not account
for the way negative instances functioned in scientiﬁc practice.
23System of Logic, III, iii, § 1, CW, v. 7, p. 307.
24System of Logic, III, v, § 1, CW, v. 7, p. 324.
25System of Logic, III, xxi, § 3, CW, v. 7, p. 571.

268
Fred Wilson
Here is how Bosanquet analyzed one case. The example is from biology. It
concerns a certain plant, the Bee Ophrys; the issue is whether it is self-fertilized
or fertilized through insects. It was Darwin’s hypothesis that the plant is self-
fertilized through the action of wind blowing the pollen masses that develop on
the plant until they strike the stigma.
The alternative hypothesis was insects
were required for fertilization. Note that these are causal hypotheses, and they
therefore, as Mill argues, imply regularities. Bosanquet does not acknowledge this
point. In any case, in his experiment, Darwin, to conﬁrm his hypothesis, isolated a
spike of ﬂowers in water in a room. In this situation there was an absence of insects
(not-i). This ensured that fertilization by insects was impossible. It also ensured
the absence of wind. In this context the pollen masses did not come in contact
with the stigma. Thus, in this situation we have both the absence of wind (not-w)
and the absence of contact (not-c). According to Bosanquet, Darwin concludes
that his hypothesis is true, that the Bee Ophrys self-fertilizes through the action
of wind.
Bosanquet states about this example that
We have here left the ground of formal logic, in which ‘not-w is not
c’ could only rest on knowledge that ‘c is w’.
In the process now
considered ‘c is w’ actually rests on the knowledge that ‘not-w is not c’.
The corroborative power of the negative instance in induction depends
on the fact that it has a positive content within the same ultimate
system as c and w, and, within that system, related by way of deﬁnite
negation to them.26
He is arguing, then, that formal logic cannot account for Darwin’s inference. But
Bosanquet is wrong. There is in fact a way in which formal logic can deal with the
example. Indeed, it is precisely the way in which Mill dealt with such examples.
As Bosanquet understands the statement ‘not-w is not c’, we have
Free caddices without wind give no contact
From this he infers his conclusion that
c is w = contact is by wind
In the ﬁrst place we have to recognize that, for the empiricist, the conclusion is
not so much ‘c is w’, as Bosanquet claims, but rather that
wind produces contact
or
Whenever wind then contact
26B. Bosanquet, Logic, or The Morphology of Knowledge, 2 vols. (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1888; second edition, 1911; reprinted, two volumes in one, New York: Kraus Reprint,
1968), vol. II, p. 126.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
269
That is, the conclusion to be drawn is that wind is a suﬃcient condition for contact:
this is a causal regularity. The way that Bosanquet states the matter implies that
the inference proceeds by contraposition: from ‘not-w is not c’ we infer ‘c is w’.
This is a species of immediate inference. But in fact the inference, at least from
the point of view of formal logic, is more complicated. Indeed, we can see that
it must be more complicated. For, what is observed are particulars things, single
instances, where what we want to conclude is a generalization.
Bosanquet in fact notes only one of Darwin’s observations. The point is that
Darwin also ensured that in the presence of wind (w) in the absence of insects
(i) one has the presence of contact (c). He did this by placing a similar spike of
Bee Ophrys in the open air in the presence of wind but covered by a net which
ensured the absence of insects. Bosanquet’s actual account of the inference, as
going from ‘not-w is not c’ to ‘c is w’, omits this piece of information. But it is
crucial for the empiricist analysis of the example. Upon the empiricist account of
this inference, there are in fact two pieces of evidence: in both insects are absent
while in one both wind and contact are present and in the other both wind and
contact are absent. We can summarize these results in a small table, with “a”
indicating absence and “p” indicating presence:
i
w
c
event one:
a
p
p
event two:
a
a
a
And now by a simple application of the method of diﬀerence, we can infer that
Whenever w then c.
Or at least, we can do so provided that we have grounds for accepting both the
Principle of Determinism, that there is at least one suﬃcient condition, and the
Principle of Limited Variety, that this condition is among a certain determinate
set. That is, we need to know a generic statement to the eﬀect that
(*)
There is a property f such that whenever f then c, and it is in the set
consisting of w and i
This is a law; after all, it asserts a general truth. But it also asserts the existence
of a property of a certain sort. Because this law also makes an existence claim,
it includes the particular quantiﬁer. In fact, it is of mixed quantiﬁcational form.
Mill sees the need for such an additional principle if his eliminative methods are to
work — though his deductive logic is, as we have seen, too primitive to allow him
to articulate fully his insights; but he does see, let us emphasize, that such a “law
about laws” is necessary. Moreover, again as Mill saw, since the law (*) asserts
the existence of a property of a certain sort, it makes an abstract generic claim,
rather than a speciﬁc one: it asserts that there is a property of a certain generic
sort and this property is suﬃcient for the presence of the conditioned property c.
This law (*) guides the researcher. It asserts that there is a speciﬁc law, there
to be discovered, and that this law will have a certain generic form. The task of

270
Fred Wilson
the researcher — Darwin, in this case — is to ﬁnd the law that (*) asserts to be
there.
As for (*) itself, one generally can infer the truth of such an abstract generic
law from some background theory of this sort:
(**)
For all systems g of generic sort G, there is a property f such that it is of
generic sort F and such that whenever f then g.
From a law of this sort, together with the premises
c is of sort G
F = {i, w}
one can deduce the law (*) that guides research. (**) has the same general form
as our theory (T), which we talked about above. What (**) asserts is that for all
systems of a certain generic sort there are for those systems speciﬁc laws of some
other generic sort. The justiﬁcation for accepting (**) is past experience: we have
in fact been successful, so far as we can tell, when we have looked at systems of
the relevant generic sort, at discovering laws of the sort that (**) would lead us
to believe are there. Taken in its most generic form, (**) is of course what Mill
referred to as the Law of Universal Causation.
By virtue of our accepting (**), we can infer a law of the sort (*) for the
systems in which we are interested, in Darwin’s case the Bee Ophrys. The law
(*) tells us not only where to look but that if we do look carefully enough then
we shall be successful in discovering a law of the relevant sort for those systems.
Our prior knowledge of (**) and therefore of (*) thus provides a teleology for the
research process. The aim is to discover a speciﬁc law of a certain generic sort; our
knowledge deriving from the theory tells us that the goal can be achieved. And
our logic tells us that the means towards that goal is the method of diﬀerence.
The goal, then, is to be achieved through the observational data recorded in the
chart of presence and absence.
The empiricist logic that Mill defends draws sharp lines between the statements
of individual fact, positive and negative, that are recorded in the chart of presence
and absence. These facts are ontologically and logically separable and independent
of one another. This means, in particular, that these statements of individual fact
do not by themselves imply the statement of law or regularity that is the conclusion
of the inference. To be sure, they conﬁrm that law, but it is not they that give
it its strongest support. That support comes, rather, from the workings of the
eliminative mechanisms, which serve to show that possible alternatives could not
be true, that is, show that, given these observational data, none other than the
conclusion could possibly be true.
Bosanquet, however, has a rather diﬀerent account of the process. He considers
only the event that we have labelled event two. This event he records as ‘not-w
is not c’ from which he then infers the contrapositive ‘c is w’. The latter he takes
to be the causal conclusion of Darwin’s inference. The sharp distinction that the
empiricist draws between the statements of individual fact in the premises and

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
271
the law that is the conclusion is no part of Bosanquet’s account. Nor does Bosan-
quet interpret the example in terms of the eliminative mechanisms. Where the
statements of absence do not for the empiricist by themselves imply any law, for
Bosanquet in contrast the statement of absence becomes the statement that ‘not-w
is not c’ and from this alone the causal conclusion that ‘c is w’ is inferred. Bosan-
quet as it were discovers the causal claim in the particular events themselves.
Nor, I shall now argue, is this at all accidental: Bosanquet is in fact pursuing a
point that many have thought to be a fatal criticism of the empiricist account of
laws and of scientiﬁc inference.
Let us look at something that Bosanquet had said earlier.
Mill argued that a universal judgment
All A are B
is a statement of individual facts
a is A&a is B, b is A&b is B, ...
As he put it,
... a general truth is but an aggregate of particular truths; a compre-
hensive expression, by which an indeﬁnite number of individual facts
are aﬃrmed or denied at once.27
In fact, however, as we have seen Mill argue, it is not a mere conjunction: it itself
is an inference: the form of language is such that it enables us to record in one
statement
... all that we have observed, together with all that we infer from our
observations....28
On this account, a syllogism such as
All humans are mortal
Socrates is human
Hence, Socrates is mortal
does not provide new knowledge in the conclusion beyond what is contained in
the premises. Or rather, insofar as it does provide new knowledge, it does only by
inferring the facts of the minor premise and the conclusion from the observed facts
that are among those facts recorded in the major premise. What the deductive
connections do is guarantee that our thought is consistent; they prevent us from
once inferring that all humans are mortal and then denying of the human, Socrates,
that he is mortal. As Mill puts it, deductive logic in itself is a logic of consistency,
not a logic of truth. It is inductive inference that constitutes the logic of truth.
27System of Logic, II, iii, § 3, CW, vol. 7, p. 186.
28System of Logic, II, iii, § 3, CW, vol. 7, p. 183.

272
Fred Wilson
Bosanquet takes up this point.29 He considers the inference from particulars to
particulars:
a is B, b is B, c is B, d is B; hence, e is B
For example, a is a good book, b is a good book, c is a good book, d is a good
book, and so e is a good book. This, he rightly points out, is not a good inference.
In contrast, however, the inference
Ivanhoe, Waverley and Rob Roy are good books; hence, Guy Manner-
ing is a good book
is reasonable. It is reasonable because “there is a self-evident passage by means of
the identity of authorship, which is too obvious to be expressed, but which would
form a premise in any explicit statement of the inference.”
Bosanquet notes that
... it is impossible to state an inference [to particulars from particulars]
in a shape that will even appear to be convincing, unless we supply
by a second premise the element of unity between the particulars, al-
ways operative in the mind, which is necessary to bind the particular
diﬀerences into the diﬀerences of a universal.30
Note the point: what one needs is “the element of unity between the particulars,
always operative in the mind, which is necessary to bind the particular diﬀerences
into the diﬀerences of a universal”: there is an element of unity; this binds dif-
ferences, that is, diﬀerent diﬀerences, into diﬀerences within a universal; and this
element of unity is operative in the mind. We shall return to these points.
In any case, accepting this, we see that the inference that is supposed to be to
particulars from particulars really is
All novels written by Scott are good books
Guy Mannering is a novel written by Scott
Hence, Guy Mannering is a good book
where the major premise is justiﬁed by the inference
(@)
Ivanhoe, Waverley, and Rob Roy are novels written by Scott
Ivanhoe, Waverley and Rob Roy are good books
Hence, All novels written by Scott are good books
So far this looks fairly close to Mill’s view. In fact, however, Bosanquet qualiﬁes
the conclusion of the inference (@) in an important way. Here is one of Bosanquet’s
examples31:
a, b, c, d are rational
a, b, c, d are men
Hence, Are all men rational? or, Men may be rational
29Bosanquet, Logic, vol. II, p. 51f.
30Bosanquet, Logic, vol. II, p. 51.
31Bosanquet, Logic, vol. II, p. 51.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
273
The conclusion of the inference (@) is to be taken as a conjecture rather than as
something demonstrated.
Bosanquet notes that there is a teleology here:
Speaking generally, the coincidence of several attributes in one or more
objects ... is the starting-point of conscious conjecture and investiga-
tion. And this starting point is all that the present form of inference
embodies. Conjecture or pure ‘discovery’ diﬀers only in degree from
proof.32
Again, this does not sound very diﬀerent from what Mill might say. But it turns
out that the teleology is in fact very diﬀerent: Mill’s account of this teleology has
it grounded in abstract generic theories, laws about laws, that guide research. For
Bosanquet, in contrast, the teleology is, as it was with Whewell, one that aims
at uncovering as it were a real objective necessity in things which is not at ﬁrst
apparent to us, but which becomes explicit as the process of discovery proceeds.
Bosanquet comments on (@) as follows:
The ground of argument being the characteristic unity of the unanal-
ysed individual object or event, naturally takes the place of the subject
in judgment — of the concrete individual which is taken as real — and
therefore gives rise to that syllogistic form in which the middle term is
the subject of both premises.33
Here he again emphasizes the “unity” that one ﬁnds in the argument. Only now
it is a unity that is in the “unanalysed individual object” rather than, as before,
“operative in the mind.” Or rather, the element of unity is at once in the subject
which the inference is about and operative in the mind of the person making the
inference. This view is of course similar indeed to the view of Whewell. In any
case, this “unity” that Bosanquet claims we discover in the individual facts is the
ground of the argument.
As for the notion of a ground, Bosanquet has earlier explained what this is.
He has distinguished merely collective judgments from those that are genuinely
universal. The former deal with an aggregate that arise from an enumeration34.
From these are distinguished quasi-collective judgments that are truly general and
apply to an indeﬁnite number of individuals, an open class as one would now
say. These cannot arise from a mere enumeration, otherwise they could not be
truly general, rather than a summary of the already observed. These judgments
must therefore “derive [their] meaning from some other source”.35 Among these
judgments are those such as “All men are mortal,” that is, the sort we have just
been considering. These quasi-collective judgments are more than mere summaries
of the already observed, but are nonetheless falsiﬁable by a single counter-example;
32Bosanquet, Logic, vol. II, p. 52.
33Bosanquet, Logic, vol. II, p. 51.
34Bosanquet, Logic, vol. I, p. 211.
35Bosanquet, Logic, vol. I, p. 211.

274
Fred Wilson
as Bosanquet puts it, they are “helpless in the face of the most trivial exception”.36
Beyond these are the genuinely universal judgments such as “Man is mortal.” In
practical terms, they are equivalent to propositions like “All men are mortal.”
However,
It is obvious that the aﬃrmation of universal connection which we feel
in such an instance to be all but warranted is not approached from
the side of the individual units, but from the side of the common or
continuous nature which binds them into a whole.37
Because this sort of universal judgment is warranted by the connection among the
attributes it is abstract and therefore hypothetical.38 The hypothetical judgment
contains a consequent and a ground; the latter warrants the former. It does so by
virtue of being connected to it, connected internally, in its very being.
Ground implies a consequent other than, though fundamentally one
with, itself.39
The two are related as parts in a whole which establishes the connection between
them.
... the content of a hypothetical judgment is composed of ground and
consequent, each referring to something other than itself, and hence
essentially a part....
It is only a question of detail how far the system in and by which the
nexus subsists, is itself made explicit as a content within the hypothet-
ical judgment.40.
These nex¯us are themselves facts within the world.
... every set of relations within which certain nexus of attributes hold
good, is itself ultimately a fact or datum, relative no doubt within
some further totality, but absolute relatively to the inferences drawn
within it.41
Hence, “all hypothetical judgment rests on a categorical basis”.42.
Thus, Bosanquet proposed that the conclusion of the inference
a, b, c, d are rational
a, b, c, d are men
Hence, .......
was not
36Bosanquet, Logic, vol. I, p. 211.
37Bosanquet, Logic, vol. I, p. 211.
38Bosanquet, Logic, vol. I, p. 234.
39Bosanquet, Logic, vol. I, p. 239.
40Bosanquet, Logic, vol. I, p. 238.
41Bosanquet, Logic, vol. I, p. 241.
42Bosanquet, Logic, vol. I, p. 241.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
275
All men are rational
but
Are all men rational? or, Men may be rational
The inference from particulars to particulars in eﬀect forms an hypothesis which
is not ready for warranted aﬃrmation until it is grounded in a categorical basis.
At the level where the empiricist stops, that of “Men may be rational,” we are,
according to Bosanquet, still at a level of ignorance as to the genuine structure
of reality. The empiricist would have us stop at the point where genuine inquiry
would have to continue.
In eﬀect, then, Bosanquet is arguing that Mill goes wrong in his view of general
propositions when he treats them all as quasi-collective judgments. To the con-
trary, the warrant for truly universal propositions, propositions which cannot be
overturned or falsiﬁed by a single instance, lies in a nexus that holds between the
attributes. As Whewell had also argued, a judgment is truly universal only if it is
not falsiﬁable — only if, in other words, it is somehow true a priori.
But Mill had already dealt with this claim. His opponent then was Whewell,
not Bosanquet, but the point was the same.
Mill insisted that each thing is
what it is and not another thing, and in particular, an attribute or property
implies nothing about any other property or attribute.
This fact, that things
and properties are logically self-contained, is a basic feature of the world, given
to us phenomenologically. Mill, in his reply to Whewell, had already replied to
Bosanquet.
Two: The Argument from Ontology
Bosanquet had a further point to make, beyond just re-asserting Whewell’s claim
that generalizations, to be genuinely scientiﬁc, had somehow to be necessary. His
claim, following in his argument here the other main idealist, F. H. Bradley, was
that this account of the necessity of general propositions or judgments derived
from the idealist account of relations.
Bosanquet and Bradley followed Whewell in holding that various generalizations
were necessary. Thus, they argued that the relation of contrariety that a property
had to other properties was a necessary relation. For example, green is contrary
to red and this is part of the being of both, an internal relation that makes the
generalization
Whatever is red is not green
(18)
a necessary truth. Mill of course would argue that it is contingent, an inductive
generalization, though, to be sure, no doubt one for which it is psychologically
impossible to conceive the opposite. The idealists argued that when one judges
that
this is red
(19)

276
Fred Wilson
one is judging, or attempting to judge, that this fact obtains independently of,
and separable from all other facts. This is what it is, one is saying. But (18)
is a necessary truth. So the judgment (19) is not separable from all other facts.
One, when asserting it, is saying that it is wholly distinct from other facts, yet
by the very being of the property judged about, the fact is not wholly separable
from other facts. One is claiming that the judgment (19) is wholly true and is also
committed to its being not wholly true. The judgment taken in isolation leads to a
contradiction, and one achieve the truth about the subject only if one oveercomes
this contradiction. The judgment becomes (more) true only if the connection is
made explicit as in something like
this is red-as-opposite-to-green
(20)
But this, too, is a judgment which aims at being wholly true but is not wholly
true, given the relations things have to one another. Ultimately the only wholly
true judgment involves the whole of reality:
the Absolute is
and even to put it that way is misleading since it implies a distinction between
subject and predicate — between the Absolute and its being — and in the ultimate
judgment, the one that is wholly true, even that apparent separation disappears
into the whole: the ultimate judgment is not really a judgment, not really a jux-
taposition of subject and predicate, but an intuition, an intuition of the Absolute.
This is not the place to deal with the idealist logic and metaphysics in detail.
Suﬃce it to say that Mill does have a reply.
This reply consists in drawing attention to the phenomenological fact that each
thing is what it is and is not another thing.
We saw that Mill defended this
principle as the basic axiom on which all formal logic is grounded.
His reply
to the idealists would consist in re-emphasizing this point. It follows, of course,
that statements like (18), taken by the idealists to be synthetic a priori general
truths, turn out to be contingent inductive generalizations — “merely” contingent
inductive generalizations, but, as Mill would also insist, suﬃciently deep in the
structure of knowledge to be such that their opposites are inconceivable, that is,
psychologically inconceivable.
G. E. Moore and, following Moore, Bertrand Russell, were to re-state this point
upon which Mill insists and which implies the rejection of the idealist critique.
In his well known essay on the “Refutation of Idealism”,43 Moore makes the
point with respect to the idealist claim that in knowing, say, yellow, the know-
ing and the known are related and are therefore not distinct from each other —
implying the idealist point that the object of knowledge is inseparable from the
knowing of it and that idealism is therefore true. The idealist, Moore suggests,
holds that yellow and the sensation of yellow, that is, the sensing of it, are indis-
tinguishable. Hence, as he puts it, “to assert that yellow is necessarily an object
43G. E. Moore, “The Refutation of Idealism,” in his Philosophical Studies (London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1922), pp. 1-30.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
277
of experience is to assert that yellow is necessarily yellow — a purely identical
proposition, and therefore proved by the law of contradiction alone”.44 But unlike
“A is A”, the proposition that yellow is a sensation, that is, yellow is being sensed,
is, when true, a substantive truth, and worth defending. Hence, “the proposition
also implies that experience is, after all, something distinct from yellow — else
there would be no reason for insisting that yellow is a sensation... ”.45 Thus, the
very assertion of the idealist, that yellow is inseparable from the experiencing of
it, is one that would not be made unless in fact yellow and the experience of it
are in fact distinct and therefore separable. The doctrine of relations proposed by
the idealists maintains that, since yellow and the experience are indeed related,
and therefore also maintains that yellow and the experience are inseparable and
therefore not distinct. But to state the doctrine presupposes that yellow and the
experience are distinct. The very attempt to state the doctrine of relations thus
refutes that doctrine. The doctrine of relations thus does not so much establish
that there is no distinction as obscure the fact that such a distinction exists.
When, therefore, we are told that green and the sensation of green are certainly
distinct but yet are not separable, or that it is an illegitimate abstraction to
consider the one apart from the other, what these provisos are used to assert is,
that though the two things are distinct yet you not only can but must treat them
as if they were not. Many philosophers, therefore, when they admit a distinction,
yet (following the lead of Hegel) boldly assert their right, in a slightly more obscure
form of words, also to deny it.46
Moore’s argument is clear. What he does do is insist that things, properties,
and relations are distinct, that, while they are related one to another, they are
also separable.
Moore urges, in other words, that by itself relatedness does
not imply that distinct relata are logically inseparable. Moore in eﬀect
appeals to the same phenomenological fact to which Mill appeals. We do in fact
know yellow; it is presented to us. We also know experience, that is, what an
experiencing is; this too is presented to us. These entities that are presented to us
are presented as distinct. They are presented as self-complete, and to know the
one does not require us to know the other. The entity yellow as we know it, as it is
presented to us, is presented as an entity such that there is nothing about it that
requires it to be connected inseparably with experience. To identify it as yellow
does not require us to identify it as somehow connected to any other property,
which would after all be required if it were, as the idealists assert, inseparably
connected to some other entity, e.g., experience.
This argument from acquaintance, that we are not presented with the necessary
connections claimed by the idealists, and, earlier, by Whewell, is Mill’s axiom
which he rightly sees as central to the defence of his inductive logic and also to his
defence of formal logic. Russell was to build his logic on this same assumption.
Moore and Russell provide the response to the idealist critique of the formal logic
44G. E. Moore, “The Refutation of Idealism,” p. 14.
45G. E. Moore, “The Refutation of Idealism,” p. 14.
46G. E. Moore, “The Refutation of Idealism,” p. 15.

278
Fred Wilson
of the empiricist; they provide the defence of the logic that Mill was defending.
It was in fact a defence that can be found already in Mill’s own work. Russell’s
version of the logic is incredibly more developed than that of Mill. But it rests on
the foundations that Mill had already established.
10
THE PHILOSOPHY OF ERROR
Given Mill’s aims in writing the System of Logic, it should not be surprising that
Mill devoted a whole of one book to the fallacies. It was, however, contentious.
Like formal or deductive logic, the analysis of fallacies before Whately had hardly
progressed beyond Aristotle. Aristotle had given a list of thirteen fallacies and
these were repeated in texts down to that of Aldrich. It was no doubt a dreary
exercise to study the formal logic of Aldrich, and the fallacies were likely thought
a rather frivolous exercise that nonetheless provided a welcome relief from the
drudgery of the rules of syllogistic. Things are little improved today: one still
ﬁnds most texts in introductory deductive logic devoting a chapter or so to the
fallacies, and most of these discussions hardly go beyond Aristotle — though,
like Whately, they often spice things up with more recent examples. In such a
context, then and now, Mill’s phrase, “the philosophy of error,”47 no doubt seems
a bit strange. But when one realizes that for Mill, much of human misery and
unhappiness is due to error, this description in not at all odd. Would that more
take Mill’s aim as seriously.
Mill did include among his list of fallacies, Aristotle’s thirteen kinds; and his
discussion is clearly dependent upon Bacon’s treatment of the “Idols of the The-
atre” in the Novum Organon. But his classiﬁcation is original and deserves to be
better known. The classiﬁcation consists of ﬁve categories derived from a series of
distinctions among various kinds of evidence, good and bad, and argument.
The ﬁrst category, the “fallacies of simple inspection,” were forms of thought
which disposed a person to believe a proposition without evidence by creating a
favourable presumption of truth which permitted one to avoid any appeal to the
rules of inductive inference. This sort of fallacy consists of various ways in which
a person mistakes a feature of one’s subjective way of thinking for an objective
feature of things. This is the source of various popular superstitions — one of Mill’s
examples was the belief that “talk of the devil and he will appear”, where an idea
is, by itself, supposed to generate a reality — but also is the root of various forms
of philosophical “intuitionism” — which included both Whewell’s philosophy of
science and inductive logic and his principles of ethics. The fallacy is the notion
that what is true of “our ideas of things must be true of the things themselves”.48
It is the root of the notion, so common amongst those, like Descartes and Whewell
and “modern German philosophy”, who would aggrandize the place of pure reason
in our claims to knowledge, that if the contrary of a proposition is inconceivable
47System of Logic, V, i, § 3, CW, vol. 8, p. 737.
48System of Logic, V, iii, § 3, CW, vol. 8, p. 751.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
279
then it must be true. This is the source of much bad philosophy.
I am indeed disposed to think that the fallacy ... has been the cause of
two-thirds of the bad philosophy, and especially of the bad metaphysics,
which the human mind has never ceased to produce.49
It is the root ﬂaw in those systems of thought that are not thoroughgoing empiri-
cist. It might be necessary to devote a whole volume, such as Mill was to write
in his Examination of Hamilton, to refuting a particular metaphysical system, but
here was the root fallacy that lay behind it.
Mill discusses other forms of the fallacy of simple inspection, e.g., the sort of
thought that gives rise to mysticism in religion and in philosophy, e.g., Hegelianism
(which he no doubt would have applied also to the later British idealists). Then
there are other forms of fallacy, e.g., fallacies of confusion (such as arguments
involving ambiguous terms — the traditional fallacies of ambiguity) in which the
strength of evidence is imperfectly grasped. The traditional petitio principii also
falls into this category. Then there are various forms of deductive and inductive
fallacies. Among the latter are two kinds, fallacies of observation and fallacies
of generalization. Fallacies of observation include those of non-observation, e.g.,
where negative instances of a generalization are ignored, as when one takes an
almanac or a psychic to be a good predictor of whatever.
Inductive fallacies
include such traditional cases as hasty generalization and post hoc, ergo propter
hoc.
Mill covers all the traditional fallacies and much more besides. There were those,
like Whately, who argued that a logic book should present the rules of logic rather
than present various ways of breaking them. But Mill’s discussion, while partially
derivative from the work of Bacon and Bentham, shows how clarity and order can
be brought to this subject, which is usually dealt with as a catalogue of tricks
to deceive. There is, among those who have followed Boole in developing formal
logic, a studied indiﬀerence to the fallacies. Mill shows that such indiﬀerence is
undeserved.
∗
Mill’s treatment of formal or deductive logic is now clearly dated. This is much
less true of his inductive logic and more generally his philosophy of science, though
it can be said to be nowadays unfashionable. But he also places his discussion in an
empiricist metaphysical context. This discussion remains impressive: the criticism
of intuitionism in its various forms still commands respect — whether it be in the
foundations of logic, or of geometry or of arithmetic — or, for that matter, of
the social sciences or of ethics. Mill argued, no doubt correctly, that intuitionist
philosophy had, as a “false philosophy,” disastrous eﬀects in “morals, politics and
religion”,50 and his discussion of logic and the rules for the search after truth
49System of Logic, V, iii, § 3, CW, vol. 8, p. 752.
50Autobiography, ch. 7, CW, vol. 1, p. 233.

280
Fred Wilson
should be seen as part of an on-going political battle. Mill is not now included
among the list of distinguished logicians — the list that runs from Aristotle (and
perhaps Carneades) through Leibniz to Boole and Peirce and on to Frege and
Russell does not contain Mill’s name.51 This is a list, however, of those who made
logic ﬂourish as a formal science but also of those who made of logic a narrow and
therefore a rather impoverished ﬁeld of study. But in a list of those concerned to
defend the search after truth, his name cannot be omitted: his work deserves our
attention.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Boole, 1998] G. Boole. The Mathematical Analysis of Logic, introduction John Slater (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1998 [originally published 1848]).
[Bosanquet, 1968] B. Bosanquet. Logic, or The Morphology of Knowledge, 2 vols. (Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 1888; second edition, 1911; reprinted, two volumes in one, New York:
Kraus Reprint, 1968).
[Buchdahl, 1991] G. Buchdahl. Deductivist vs. Inductivist Approaches in the Philosophy of
Science. In Menachem Fisch and Simon Schaﬀer, William Whewell: A Composite Portrait,
pp. 311–344. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.
[De Morgan, 1850] A. De Morgan. Review of Whewell’s Novum Organum [sic] Renovatum, The
Athenaeum, no. 1628, 42–44, 1850.
[Jackson, 1941] R. Jackson. The Deductive Logic of John Stuart Mill, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1941.
51George Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of Logic, appeared originally in 1848, just four years
after the ﬁrst edition of Mill’s System of Logic. Mill was aware of the work of Boole, de Morgan
and Jevons that was the beginning of the vast expansion of logic as it became mathematized and
symbolic. In one of his letters he wrote that “[Jevons’] speculations on Logic, like those of Boole
and De Morgan, and some of those of Hamilton, are infected with this vice” — that is, Mill has
said earlier, “a mania for encumbering questions with useless complication, and with a notation
implying the existence of greater precision in the data than the question admit of”. He furtherr
comments that this vice “is one preeminently at variance with the wants of the time, which
demand that scientiﬁc deductions should be made as simple and as easily intelligible as they can
be made without being scientiﬁc.” [Mill, Later Letters, vol. 3, in CW, vol. 17, pp. 1862-63].
Mill’s objection to the developing symbolic logic reminds one of similar objections from those
who have to teach critical thinking to undergraduates: the formalism of formal logic sometimes
obscures the tools needed to critically analyze real life arguments rather than contrived examples.
Perhaps. But that misses the point about that new logic created by Boole and the others Mill
mentions, that it has developed into a formal science in its own right, one of great power and
elegance, and one which is studied for its own sake and not for, or not simply for, its applications
to the critical assessment of reasoning in ordinary discourse or in science. The editor of a recent
edition of Boole’s ground-breaking Mathematical Analysis of Logic, John Slater, has noted that
Boole’s work freed logicians, once and for all, from the endless repetition of a
few principles, mostly derived from Aristotle, and, by example, challenged them
to develop their subject in new directions.
Many gifted thinkers, among them
John Venn, William Stanley Jevons, Charles Sanders Peirce, Ernst Schr¨oder, Alfred
North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell rose to the challenge, and the vast and
autonomous subject of modern logic emerged from their combined eﬀorts. It is a
glorious success story. (J. Slater, in G. Boole, The Mathematical Analysis of Logic,
[Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1998], p. xi)
Mill does not appear in this list. But he did, as we have argued, provide the philosophical and
metaphysical context, free of both continental and idealist fuzziness and nominalistic denigration,
in which the new formal logic could take oﬀand ﬂourish.

The Logic of John Stuart Mill
281
[Kitcher, 1983] P. Kitcher. The Nature of Mathematical Knowledge, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1983.
[Kitcher, 1998] P. Kithcer. Mill, Mathematics, and the Naturalist Tradition. In J. Skorupski,
ed., The Cambridge Companion to John Stuart Mill, pp. 57–111. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998,
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic, Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 1962. Ch. 5, § 5, “Bolzano and Mill”; pp. 371–379 are devoted to
Mill.
[Kubitz, 1932] O. A. Kubitz. The Development of John Stuart Mill’s System of Logic, Urbana,
Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1932.
[Lehman, 1979] H. Lehman. Introduction to the Philosophy of Mathematics, Totowa, NJ: Rowan
and Littleﬁeld, 1979.
[Mackie, 1967] J. L. Mackie. Mill’s Methods of Induction. In P. Edwards, ed., The Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, 8 vols., vol 5, pp. 324–332. New York: Macmillan, 1967.
[Mill, 1963–] J. S. Mill. Collected Works, ed. J. Robson. Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1963-. Cited as “CW ”.
[Mill, CWa] J. S. Mill. Autobiography, CW, vol. 1.
[Mill, CWb] J. S. Mill. An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy, CW, vol. 9.
[Mill, CWc] J. S. Mill. Inaugural Address Delivered to the University of St. Andrews (1867),
CW, vol. 21, pp. 215–258.
[Mill, CWd] J. S. Mill. System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, CW, vols. 7–8.
[Mill, CWe] J. S. Mill. Whately’s Elements of Logic, CW, vol. 21, pp.3–35.
[Moore, 1922] G. E. Moore. The Refutation of Idealism. In his Philosophical Studies, pp. 1–30.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1922.
[Nicod, 1970] J. Nicod. Geometry and Induction, containing Geometry in the sensible world
and The Logical Problem of Induction, with prefaces by Roy Harrod, Bertrand Russell, and
Andr´e Lalande, translated by John Bell & Michael Woods. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1970.
[Scarre, 1989] G. Scarre. Logic and Reality in the Philosophy of John Stuart Mill. Dordrecht,
The Netherlands: Kluwer, 1989.
[Skorupski, 1989] J. Skorupski. John Stuart Mill, London: Routledge, 1989.
[Skorupski, 1994] J. Skorupski. J. S. Mill: Logic and Metaphysics. In C. L. Ten, ed., The Nine-
teenth Century: Routledge History of Philosophy, vol. vii, pp. 98–121. London: Routledge,
1994.
[Skorupski, 1998] J. Skorupski. Mill on Language and Logic. In J. Skorupski, ed., The Cambridge
Companion to John Stuart Mill, pp. 35–56. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[Snyder, 1997] L. Snyder. Discoverers’ Induction, Philosophy of Science, vol. 64, 580–604, 1997.
[Snyder, 1997] L. Snyder. The Mill–Whewell Debate: Much Ado about Induction. Perspectives
on Science, vol. 5, 159–198, 1997.
[Whately, 1826] R. Whately. Elements of Logic. London: Mawman, 1826.
[Whewell, 1837] W. Whewell. History of the Inductive Sciences, 3 vols. London: Parker, 1837.
[Whewell, 1858] W. Whewell. Novum Organon Renovatum. London: Parker and Son, 1858.
[Whewell, 1840] W. Whewell. The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, 2 vols. London: Parker,
1840.
[Wilson, 1999] F. Wilson. The Logic and Methodology of Science in Early Modern Thought.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1999.
[Wright, 1966] G. H. von Wright. The Logical Problem of Induction, second revised edition.
New York: Barnes & Noble, 1966.

This page intentionally left blank 

DE MORGAN'S LOGIC 
llichael E. Hobart arid Joan L. Riellards 
1 INTRODUCTION: THE SYhIBOLIC TURN IN LOGIC 
Looking back on a nlore than a decade of work in logic, Augustus De illorgan 
(1806-1871) remembered that from the beginning "in my own mind I was facing 
Mant'i asiertiori that logic neither has improveti since the tirile of Aristotle, nor of 
its on n nature can improve. except in peispicuitx, accuracy of expressions and the 
like".' For Ininianuel Kant. niiting at tlle verj end of tlle eigliteeiltll centurj, the 
longe\ itj of Alistotle's logic slloned that the Greek had essentidllj gotten lt right: 
for De illorgan it was evidence of stagnation. From his position in the progressive 
nineteenth centur?. De Morgan set out in the 1830s to move the study of logic 
forward by building on the folmdation Aristotle had laid. In so doing. De Morgan 
brought a very specific view of progress to his logical enterprise. "Every science 
that has tlrr7ven lias thriven upon its o~vn sylribols: logic. tlie only science which is 
admitted to have made no inipiovelnents i11 centuiy aftei centmy, is the onl) one 
nhich has grown no new symbols."L De Alolgan's logical program. then. entailed 
creating a set of symbols that would slionr hirn the way to move logic beyond its 
Aristotelian base into an ever-expanding future. 
Foi niany, De Alorgan's determination to cieate an operational set of logical 
s~mbols has niarked him as a pioneer of tlie s~ri~lbolic 
logic of tlie late nineteenth 
and early tneiltietll centulies, and he is routinely credited nitli the laws that beal 
his riame and with tlie logic of relations. Beyond this appreciation, the lest of 
his more than tn-entv years of logical effort is generally seen to have little ini- 
portance in the development of logic: ~riost rilodern readers shing it off as odd. 
clunisj, or old fashioned. Thus disniissing the bulk of De hloigan's logic because 
of its unfamiliarity is myopic at best. homevei. for it er dses tlie coniplex dynamic 
of change that supported the developnient of lnodern symbolic logic. And un- 
derstanding the roots of twenty-first century symbolic logic requires entering the 
riineteeiltll-ceritllry ~voi 
lei iri which they tleveloped. 
l h u g ~ ~ s t u s  
De LIorgan. .'On the Syllogism. No. 111, and 011 Logic in general". Transactio7~s 
of the Cnm,hridge Ph,-ilosophzcai Society, p. 173, 1858 [OS; p. 711. (H~reaft~er. 
[S3]: see fn. 
#21 for a complete listing of De hIorgan's major logical works and the abbreviations we use in 
citations.) De Morgan's reference is to Kant's statement: .,Logic. by the way, has not gained 
much in content since Aristotle's times and indeed it cannot, due to its nature. But it may xn-ell 
gain in ezactness. definiteness and disti7~ctness." Inlinanuel ICant. Logic. Translated. with an 
Introduction by Robert S. Hartman and IVolfgang Schxvarz; New York: Dover Publications. Inc.. 
p. 23. 1974. 
2[S3, p. 1811 [OS. p. 881 (ital. De Morgan's). 
Handbook of the History of Logic. I~olnme 1: British Logic in t,he Ninet,eenth Century. 
Dov LI. Gabhay and John IToods (Editors) 
@ 2008 Elsexrier BV. A11 rights reserved. 

284 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
De 1101 gan was an erudite scholar and prolific wr iter. with wide-ranging and 
catholic concerns; liis particular combination of intellectual and moral gravity with 
high-bron and omilipresent wit runs through not 0111) his inany published books, 
but also the nlore than 700 articles he wrote for the popular Penny Cyclopedza. 
and the well over a thousand reviews he published in the Athenaeum. He ad- 
dressed subjects ranging from algebra to gymnastics. from chelnical change in the 
Eucharist to astro-theology, but n~atlien~atics. 
logic. and their histories remained 
his donlinant interests throughout his career. 
Tlle logic of Angustus De Alorgan was primarily rootetl in his identity as a 
Canibridge-educated Englishmaii of the mid-nineteenth century. Initially. that 
identit) was nlucll Inore tied up with matllematics than xvith logic. De Alolgan 
began the seiious study of mathematics as 
student at Cambridge. .ivheie math- 
ematics was the center of a liberal education designed to educate the Anglicali 
clergy 
The piling of mathenlatics and tlleologl that supported De Llolgan's 
Cambridge educatioli stemmed from a position developed in Jolln Locke's Essay 
Concernzng Human CTnderstandzng. In this magisterial work. Locke had exempted 
mathenlatici ant1 theology from the mlcertainties of enlpiiical kno~vletlge by plac- 
ing them in a separate category of demonstrative knonledge. The niatliematical 
focus of De Llolgan's Canlbriclge education is a testament to the enduling powel of 
Locke's coupling of mathematics and theology as exemplars of certain knowledge. 
In Locke's construction. the certainty of i~latheinatical knoxvledge was at,tested 
to by the extra-ordinarily t,igllt fit bet,\veen synlbols and t,heir positive, spat,ial 
meanings. The pon7er of t,llis connection is nlanifest in geometry, nrhere diagranls 
play a crucial role in illustrating and clarifying proofs. Yet: by t,he end of the 
sevent,eent,ll century, a great deal of nlatllernatics did not fit t,he geonletrical nlotlel 
of certainty. In the one hundred and fifty years before Locke published his work, 
algebra had nlovecl from virtual non-existence to the center of nlatllenlatical de- 
velopment,. At the heart of t,his transformation lay the creat,ioli of nuillerous and 
recognizably nlodern coi~~entions 
of ilot,at,ion - e.g. such fuilct,ioilal symbols as 
+. -. x .  t. 
=. <. >. J: m. 2, 
plus the use of superscripts (2~3..."....x."z... ) for p o ~ ~ e r s  
and of letters for knowns (a. b. c.. . .) and unkno\vns (x. y, 2,. . .)."Algebra's 
power 
lay precisely in the way its symbolical exuberances broke through the constraints 
of lneaning that held geometry fast. 
Throughout the English eighteenth century the problem of algebraic certainty 
was usually glossed over. but late in the century some of England's political and 
"or 
the nineteenth-century development of the Cambridge mathematical education, see: Xn- 
drew War~vick. Masters of Theory: Cambridge and the Rzse of A~lathrmntical Physics. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 2003. There has been considerable interest in the interaction of 
matllematics and theology n-itllin that education, much of it focused on Willianl 1i:he~vell. The 
articles gathered in hIenachern Fisch and Sirnor1 Schaffer. Wzllzam Whewell: A Composite Por- 
truit. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1991. are useful as an initial entr6 into that material. 
 or the history of nlathenlatical notation, the nlagisterial work of Florian Cajori ( A  History 
of Mathrmntical Notntion,~. TILW 1101s. Vol. I:  notation,^ in Elemen,tary Mathrmo,tics: vol. II: 
Notatzor~s Mainly i n  Hzgher Mathema,tzcs, Kelv York: Dover Publications Inc.. 1993 [c. 1928- 
19291) rernains unsurpassed. 

De h1organ.s Logic 
285 
religious radicals were deteriniiied to bring it to the fore."~i 
1797, the radical 
Unitarian JYilliain Frend. published A Treatzse on Algebra in TX-liicli he insisted 
that all nlatlle~natical truth - includiilg algebraic tiutli - lay in tlie close tie 
between symbol and subject matter. Algebra mas just gerieialized aiithmetic. and 
the subject matter of arith~netic had bee11 known since antiquity to be the numbers 
~vitli ~vhich we count the objects around us. There is no such thing as a negative 
object. Frend insisted. and with that he eliminated negative numbers from algebra. 
Freiid's was an extreme positiori - 
to follow his lead 
esseritiall) to destrov all 
algebraic developillents since the sixteenth century - 
but iii the Lockean world of 
Cambridge mathematics his stubborii iiisisteiice that the validity of inathematical 
symbols depended on their interpretations was difficult to refute. 
JJ5.itliin five years of Frmd's negative-tlei~.ing treatise. the Calnbridge tutor 
Robert 'il'bodholme tried to ansm-er its extremism with a re-examination of the 
connectiori between rrlatheinatics and nleaiiiilg. Wootlhouse's writing was too "dif- 
ficult ant1 
for his hook have a broad impact. but by tlie 1810s others 
nioved to free English mathematics from the collstraints of the meanings-based 
Lockean approacli. 111 the 1810s tlie more effective conlillunicators of the slio~t- 
lived, but highly iilflueritial Canibridge Analytical Society (ca. 1812-181'7). set 
out to introduce the syilibology of French analysis illto England. I11 1816 John 
Herschel. Cliarlei Babbage. and George Peacock translated Sylvestra Fraiiqois 
Lacroix's Elementary treatzse on the dzfjerentzal and zntegral calculus for the ben- 
efit of tlieir comitrj men: by the end of tlie decade. Cainbridge studelits were 
abalidoiiiiig Isaac Ne\vtoii's conceptually ricli fluxiorial ilotatioil in favor of the 
operational power of Gottfried Leibniz's 2 
notation. This change in syilibology 
carried IX-it11 it a challenge to Engliili meaning-based matheiiiatici that was deep 
enough to focus the thinking of a generation of Englishineii.' 
"For a fuller t,reatment of these developments see Helena LI. Pycior, Sym,bols. Imposszble 
N7~mbers, arid Geoiraetric Er~tn~aglements: Brltish Algebra through the Com7r~enta~rzes 
07, New- 
ton's '.Lr~w~ve~rsal 
A~ithrr~etic", 
Canibridge: Cambridge Uriiversitl- Press. 1997. 
G ~ e 7 ~ n y  
Cyclopaedza (1833-13). s.v. [Augustus De illorgan]. .'Robert Iloodhouse". 
7For t,he work of the Analytical Society see Philip C. Enros, -Cambridge University and the 
adoption of analytics in early Nineteenth-Century England". in H. hlehrtens, et 01. (eds.). Socznl 
history of Nineteenth-Cen>tury mathrmo~tics. Bost,on: Birkhauser, pages 135-18. 1981: "The Ana- 
lytical Society 1812-1813." Hzstorza ~IIathematica. 10: 24-37. 1983: Harvey 117. Becher. '.ItTilliam 
Il'hewell and Cambridge n~athen~atics", 
Hzstor~cal Studies i n  the Physzcal Scieraces. 11: 1-48, 
1981: Llenacllein Fisch. "'The emergency which has arrived': Tlle probleinatic history of 19th- 
century British algebra - 
a programmatic outline". Brztish J o ~ ~ r n a l  
for th,e History of Scirn,cr, 
27: 247-276; 1994. For the influence of French developnlents in particular on De Llorgan's early 
career. see LIaria Panteki. -French 'logique' and British .logic3: on the origns of Augustus De 
hlorgan's early logical inquiries. 1805-1835". Historia Mnthemntica. 30: 278-340. 2003. Classic 
studies in which nineteenth-century English algebraists are evaluated for tlieir formal coilteilt 
include: Eric Temple Bell. The Dezlelopmerat of A/lathematics, New York: hIcGraw Hill. 1951: 
L. Nov4. Orzgins of hloder~z. Algebra. Jaroslave Tauer, trans.. Leyden: Noordhoff. 1973: Elaine 
Koppelman. "The Calculus of operations and the rise of abstract algebra". Archi7:es for Hzstory 
of the Eznct Sciences. 8: 15.5-242. 1971-72: D. A. Clock. ..A New British Concept of Algebra". 
PhD dissertation, Universit,y of TVisconsin. 1964. More recent studies which focus on the corn- 
plexities of De llorgan's views of algebra include: Joan L. Richards. "Augustus De hlorgan. the 
History of hIatlierriatics arid the Fouridatioris of Algebra", Isis. 78: 7-30. 1987: Joan L. Ricliards, 

286 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L Richards 
De RIorgan was a stutlent during the 1820s. when Cambridge mathematics 
was delicately balanced betneeii the geometrical and analytical points of view. 
He counted a iluilibei of Analytics. illeluding Peacock. IYilliam Whenell. and 
George Biddel ,4iry. as his teacheis. and finished his educatioii fully equipped to 
pursue analytical iliathematics at its verv highest levels. De Morgan's teachers 
were markedly less successf~~l 
in the religious goals of their educational efforts. 
however. Despite the fact that all of thein were life-long members of the Anglican 
Church. De SIorgan fini~hed his education facing serious religious doubts. De 
SIorgan nlust have subsciibed to tlle Thirty-Nine Articles of tlle -Anglican Church 
in ordei to ieceive his Bachelor of Arts degree. but this was the last time that he 
publicly acknowledged a religious affilintio~~. 
Soon after he demurred in signing 
the Test Act. ~t-llich was required for taking the higher degree of Master of Arts 
and becoming a Fellow at Cambridge. Instead, he departed for London. where he 
folmd another inentor. one ~t-lio supported llini in his doubts about the legitinlacy 
of the Aiiglicaii Church. 
IT-illiam Frend was a Cambridge-educated scholar who. in the 1780s. had left the 
Anglican Church to become a Unitarian: he was also the mail who in the 1790s. had 
tried to rid algebra of negative numbers. For Frend. the religious and inathelllatical 
positions v r e  inextricably bound together. He was led awav froin the Anglican 
Church by a close reading of the Bible - 
that the LvorcJ. 'Trinity' was a Latin rord 
not to be fouiid ill the Greek or Hebrexv scriptures was an esseiitial argument for 
his rejection of tlle cloctrii~e.~ 
A decade latei. his arguinents against the validity of 
negative iiuilibeis flowed from the same literalist impulse. The religious positions 
F r e d  shared with a questioili~lg De SIorga11 were esseiltinlly intertwined with the 
Lockran inatheiiiatical prograrn he had so passionately espouietl. 
Even as -Augustus was deepening his personal relations with England's n~ost de- 
terniinedly restrictive algebraist, his niatlieniatical prowess was being recognized: 
the young man was just twenty-two years old when. in 1828, he became the first 
Professor of Alathematics at the nem-ly created London University (later Univer- 
sity College London or UCL). The appoiiitnient pleased De SIorgan's Cambridge 
teachers who llad helped shape one of England's rising mathematicians: it pleased 
William F l e d  because the defining feature of the new institutioi~ was its reli- 
gious inclusivity. For most of the next forty years.g De hlorgali devoted himself 
to teaching rnatheiilatics to classes that indiscriminately mixed Jews. Anglicans. 
and dissenting Christians. lo 
.'The art and the science of British algebra: A study in the perception of mathematical truth". 
Historia Mnthemntzca. 7: 343-6.5. 1980: and Helena Pycior. "Early criticisills of the symbolical 
approach to algebra". Historia i2fathematica. 9: 413-440. 1982: Helena Pycior. ..The three stages 
of Augustus De IIorgan's algebraic work". Isis. 74: 211-26. 1983. 
"f;illiarn 
Frend. An Address to the Mernbe~s of the CI~urch of England and to P7,otestnnt 
Trinitarians In General. Exhorting Them to Turn from the False Worship of Three Persons. to 
the Worshap of the One True God. London: J. Johnson, p. 7. 1788. 
 or reasons of academic politics. De hlorgan resigned his position at the London University 
in 18:31. 111 1838 he accepted a position as Professor of hlathematics at the newly renamed 
University College London, which he held until 1867. 
1°For De hlorgan's appoirlt~ne~lt 
and teaching career. see Adrian Rice. ..Inspiration or desper- 

De hIorgan's Logic 
287 
De AIorgaii was first and forelnost a superb and absol~itely tlevoted teacher: 
..All I do arises directly out of teaching" he remarked after almost tn-entj years on 
the job. ..and has in sonie na) 01 another reference to n hat can be brought before 
a class and especially with a view to mathematics as a discipline of tlie mind." l1 
He was well-beloved and respected by his students. many of whom. including J. 
J .  Sylvester, Stanley Jevons. Isaac Todhunter. and 11-alter Eagehot, went on to 
distinguished careers of their own. The diversity of this small sample points to 
De SIorgari's success in the primary goal of his teaching, which was to bring the 
study of niatlieniatics to tlie lieait of a liberal education that ~vould create effective 
thinkers as broadly interested as he. 
I11 his focus on niatliematics as the center of a liberal education. De AIorgan 
nas norking ~vithiii the venerable tiadition that liad shaped English ~llatlieinatics 
and education for n ell over a century. 
aiisposing that education fi on1 Anglican 
Cambridge to the religiously diverse environ~nent of the Londo~i University was a 
significant challenge. but De hlorgan gamely rose to meet it. In ..An Introduc- 
tory Lecture delivered at the opening of the hlathematical Classes in the London 
Uriiversitj [on] Noveinher 5. 1828". lie argl~ed p o ~ v e r f ~ ~ l l ~  
for the iniportance of 
nlathematics for all students. hlatlieinatical study. he insisted. was the best nay 
to teach young people to think. It was ..instrumental in furnishing the mind with 
new ideas. and calling into exercise some of the powers. which most peculiarly 
distinguish inan from the brute creation";12 it was a *.compendious language" 
that "contains in its very formation. the germ of the most valuable impro~ements 
. . . and has been frorii its peculiar structure. a riever failing guide to Iiew dis- 
coreries" . I 3  De Morgan's description of inatheinatics as language n hose peculiar 
strength was its poner to mole kiionledge fornaid can be seen as tlie position 
from which lie would develop logical symbology some thirty years later. ,4t the 
time that he first stated it. horn-ever. De hlorgan's Frendian outlook meant that it 
n-as rather difficult for liiiii to inairitaiii such a progressive point of rien-. 
From De hlorgan's very first days as a mathematics professor. his desire to use 
matheinatics as a way to teach his students to think properly meant that founda- 
tional questions lav at the verj heart of his educational riii~siori: it nieaiit that in 
all of his classes he had to be absolutel> clear about the ways that inatlienlatical 
svmbols related to theii meanings. Tliis brouglit liim immediately to the problenl 
of the -inipossible" quantities as they nere called at the time, tlie negati~ e aiid 
imaginary numbers that Fiend had insisted be re~noved from algebra. The young 
ation? Augustus De hIorgan's appointment to the chair of inatheinatics at London University 
in 1828". British ,Joz~rnal o,f the History o,f Science. 30: 257-74. 1997. and ..W-hat makes a 
great ~nathe~natics 
teacher? The case of Augustus De LIorgan". The Airaeracaii Mathema,t~cal 
Quarterly. 106(6): 534-553. Jun/Jul 1999. 
llAugust~~s 
De LIorgan to IVilliam Rowan Hamilton, April 29, 1854. Quoted in Robert Graves. 
L-fe of Sir Wzlliam Rowan Ha'milton. London: Longmans. Green &L Co.. 1889. 3: 479. 
"Augustus De Llorgan. -An Introductory Lecture delivered at the opening of the hIathemat- 
ical Classes in the London University No\rember 5. 1828". UCL Archives. LIS ADD 3. p. 3 
(hereafter. "Introductory Lecture"). 
l3 ..Introductor~- Lecture", p. 3. 

288 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
De Alorgan ~vanteti to recognize that these nu~nbers col~ld he used to generate cor- 
rect results, e\ en as he honored Freiid's position that they n-ere epistemologically 
illegitiniate. In his filst publication. a tra~lslatioli of L. P. AI. Bourdon's Algebra. 
he essayed tortuously, and in ways that leave lnoderli readers somewhat bleathless 
and bewildered. to explain how these iluilibers could be at once ilieaningless and 
yet useful. l4 
Mithin the year after De Morgan had thus tried to satisfy the delllands Rend 
represented. one of his Cambridge teachers offered a radically different solution. In 
A Trrat~se of Aly~bra, Peacock sugge5ted a novel ~ a v  
to legitirrlize all of algebra's 
miinterpretable quantities. Peacock's solution began with a distinction betreen 
'.arithmetical algebra" and .'symbolical algebra" . I 5  Arithinetical algebra employed 
signs (+, -. J , etc.) in the same sense as colnnloii arithmetic. and opelations, such 
as s~lbtraction. were iestricted in order to pleclude negative and iinpossible quan- 
tities. Synibolical algebra. by contrast. coniprised a new and bbstrictly formal" 
science. of .'syilibols and their combinations, constructed upon their o-cvn rules. 
which may be applied to arithmetic and to all other sciences by interpretation." l6 
Having clearly distinguishetl betxveen these two kinds of algebra, Peacock forrriu- 
lated a .'principle of the pernianence of ecluivalent foi 111s" that connected them." 
Peacock's principle stated that an equation such as nL - b2 = ( a  + b)(a - b) was 
legitimate. even in cases where n was smaller than b. because the truth of such 
equations did not depend on symbolic rneanings of the letters per se, but rather 
on the "form" of the aritlilnetic expressioris from which they yere tler ived. So. for 
14Consider. for example. the problem: ..To find a nurrlber which, added to a nurnber, gives for 
their sun1 the nurrlber a," This perfectly unexceptional problem could be transfornled tl~rough 
the forrnula b + .r = u to give u - b = s. Given this forrnulatioa. what happens if a = 21 and 
b = 31? In that case z = -7. which is inconivrehensible. ..But." the text continues. ..if we 
consider the solution independently of its sign, that is. .r = 7. we may say that it is the solution 
of the following problem. 'to find a number ~vhich. subtracted from 31. gives 24.' in this. that the 
words ,added to' are supplied by the words 'subtracted from'." Somehow, with this last. head- 
hurting clause. the problenl was solved. Louis Pierre hIarie Bourdon. The Elerraents of Algebra: 
Translated from the Three Fzrst Cl~apters of the Algebra of M. Bourdon, and Designed for the 
Use of Students z7a arad Preparing for the Urazcersity of London. trans. Augustus De Llorgan. 
London: J .  Taylor, p. 7'7. 1829. 
15George Peacock. A Treatise o n  Algebra. Vol. I: Arithmetical Algebra: vol. II: O n  Symbolical 
Algebra arad its Applications to the Geometry of Position. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 1842, 1845 [lSt 
ed., 18301. I: iii-x, 11: iii-~7, and passirn. In vol. 11. p. 39, Peacock gave the 
following '.formal statement" of his principle: "\\'hatever algebraic forms are equivalent. when 
the syrnbols are general in forrn but specific in value; n-ill be equivalent likewise when the syn~bols 
are general in value as well as in form." From which it follo13-s "that all the results of Arithmetical 
Algebra will be results likewise of Symbolical -4lgebra: and the discovery of equivalent forms in 
the former science . . . will be not only their discovery in the latter. but the only authority for 
their existence: for there are no definitions of the operations in Symbolical Algebra, by which 
such equivalent forms can be deterrnined.'' 
16George Peacock. -Report on the Recent Progress and Present State of Certain Branches 
of Analysis". Report of the Th'lrd Meetiny of the Brztisiz Associataon ,for the Ad~uance~ment of 
Science. London: John hIurray, pages 194-95. 1831. cited in Daniel D. hlerrill. Augustus De 
Morgan and the Logic of Relations. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publications. p. 187. 1991 
(hereafter [ADhl]). 
17Peacock. Treatise or1 Algebra; loc. cit. 

De hIorgan's Logic 
289 
exanlple. Peacock mlderstootl a' - b2 = (a + b)(a - b) as an expression gmeralizetl 
fiom arithmetic equations like 4' - 32 = (4 - 3)(4 + 3); the sxmbolical gener- 
alization obtained bl substituting lettels for nu~llhers n as the -equivalent foinl" 
of the arithmetic equation. Peacock's principle of the pernlanence of equi~alent 
forms guaranteed that as long as the generating arithnletic equation were valid. 
the equivalent form -cvould be valid as ~vell. elen though i11 other arithmetical in- 
stantiations - 
if a = 3 and b = 6 for example - 
the equi~alent form might yield 
negative or irilaginary nl~lnbeis. The presence of such aiithrnetically illegitimate 
expressions in symbolical algebi a sinlply indicated that tlieir interpi etations n er e 
to be found elsewhere: negative nunlbers could be interpreted through a geomet- 
rical nu~nber-line. and the imaginary. square roots of negative numbers could be 
meaningfull\ interpreted as lying in a two-dimensional plane. 
De Morgan was initially shocked by Peacock's vision: "it seenled to us something 
like synlbols beviitched, ant1 r~mning about the n-orltl in search of meaning." l8 
Over time. hom-ever. he came to see its liberating power. De AIorgan was never 
able to persuade Frend of the legitinlacy of Peacock'\ approach - "I an1 verv inl~cl1 
inclined to believe that your fignlent \/--1 will keep its liold anlong Alathe~llaticians 
not niuch longei than the Trinity does anlong  theologian^."'^ - 
but the youngel 
man was not to be deterred. and late in the 1830s he exploded into algebra. This 
is the De Slorgan to ~11on1 we owe explicit recognition of the basic laws that 
structure field algebras (he onlittetl only associativitj ). 
De Ilorgan's effort to articulate tlie basic axioms of field theoil has earned tlie 
respect of many 1~110 have seen hi111 as a pioneer of lnodern algebra. Formal and 
therefore nlodern though his work ma? appear. honever, he was always focused 
on the meanings of tlie symbols. He colnpared doing algebra to putting together 
an upside down jigsaw puzzle: in such a configuration the pieces could be put 
together following just their forms, but it was the pronlise of the picture or1 tlie 
other side that justified the effort. Peacock's principle of equirale~it forms prolnisecl 
De Slolgan that the picture existed: it strengtllened his conviction. cited fronl one 
of his French predecessors. Jean Le Rond d'Alembert, to "push on and faith will 
follow". By the 1830s. De Morgan felt this faith justified and the puzzle largely 
solved: '.There ii 1101~ riot a cloud in the heaven of algebra. except in the corner 
appropriated to divergent series". he wrote to John Herschel in 1844. '+I mean 
that ever) sylrlbol . . . is not merely capable of interpretation. hut intelligible on 
the definitions of the sylnbols themselves" .20 
His belief that algebra was essentiallj completed propelled De AIorgan to extend 
Peacock's insigllt into logic, and in 1847. he publislled Formal Logzc. Tlle hook 
does not represent tlie cullni~lation of De Slorgan's logical thought, however: on 
the contrary, he was already pushing his ideas f~lrther when it was still in press. 
18[Xugustus De hIorgan]. .,Review of George Peacock. A Treafi~se on Algebra", Quurterlq 
J o ~ ~ r n a l  
of Education, 9: 311. 1833. 
l9\Villiam Frend to Xugustus De hlorgan. 22 .Tune 1836. Cambridge UL. -4dd 788729. 
20Augustus De llorgan to John Herschel; May 18d4. #205. 
Herschel Archave of the Royal 
Astronorrlicnl Society, l\Iicrofilrri. 

290 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L Richards 
His niost iriiportarit logical work appeared suhseyneiitly as a series of five iiiajor 
essa?s in the Transuctzons o j  the Cambrzdge Phzlosophzcal Soczety from 1849 to 
1863. De Morgan recogiiized the coherence of the series bj- including '.On the 
Syllogism" (or sonle variation thereof) in the title of each article: throughout the 
follou~ing we shall use the coninloll bibliographical practice of referring to these 
essays by number as [Sl]. [S2]. [S3]. etc.'l 
De AIorgan was certainly not the first to try to bring the svmbolical power of 
mathematics to hear on logic. Already hj- the late severiteenth century a limnher 
of leading i~ltellectuals - iilcludirig Seth TVard. John TT'ilkins. AIarin IIersenne, 
Francis Lodo~vyck. Johann Amos Conienius. and Re& Descartes - 
had devoted 
considerable efforts to devising a new. abstract and synibolic "universal language". 
Their goal was to create a logic of symbols that they believed would be as powerful 
as the new n~athematics, and by means of which long-st anding philosophical and 
practical tlisputes could be resolved. Yet by the early eighteenth century the "mii- 
versa1 language" mol-enient had failed ancl liad beconie a historical cul de sac.22 It 
failed not only because there were as many candidates for a uiiiversal language as 
tliere were proponents of the idea (rendering nugatory tlie idea of such a language 
cornillon to all), but even inore significantly because the synibols employed in these 
efforts were not f~~iictioiial. 
Rather. they reriiairietl ideograms tliat siiiiply itood 
for words and. like words. were arranged in classificatory systems. 
Tliis ineans tliat while in tlie eigliteeiitli century abstract niatlieniatics forged 
ahead - 
providing analytical tools of discovery with an ever niore precise array of 
functional symbols and ever expanding topics and branches - 
logic anlbled along 
in its 01~11 natural language. This helps explain why Denis Diderot and d'Alembert. 
editors of the Encyclop?dze. did not even think it worthwhile to include an article 
or1 "Logic" in their great coniperidiurii of Enlightelirrieiit knowledge: sustairied by 
the new> iliatlielliatical scieilces and a critical cast of mind. the "esprzt syst?7nut~c" 
of reason could do quite well without it. 
21De hlorgarl's principle works on logic irlclude: (-4) his one book on the topic. Fo~mal Log~c, 
Londoa. 1837. Facsimile reproduction, London: The Open Court Company. 1926 (hereafter 
[FL]): (B) the above-mentioned series of five major articles carrying the title of ..On the Syllo- 
gism", or some variant (commonly referred to as [Sl]. . . . . [S5]: the full citations for each are: 
[SI]. "On the structure of the syllogism. and on the applicatioil of the theory of probabilities 
to questions of argument and authority". Transactions of the Cambrzdge Philosophzcal Society 
[TCPS]. pages 379-108. 1839: [S2]. "On the symbols of logic. the theory of the syllogism, and in 
particular of the copula. and the application of the theory of probabilities to some questions of ev- 
idence" [TCPS. 79-12;, 
18.511; [S3]. "On the Syllogisln. No. 111, and on Logic in general" [TCPS. 
173-2301: [SA], "On the Syllogism. No. ITr. and on the Logic of Relations" [TCPS. 331-358. 
18601: [S5]. "011 the Syllogism. No. T'. and on \.arious points of the Onymatic System" [TCPS. 
128-187, 18631: [SI-Sri] are all reproduced in On the Syllogism an,d Othler Logicnl Writings. Peter 
Heath (ed.). New Have11 CT: Yale University Press. 1966: in citing. we shall provide the original 
first. folloured by the Heath edition. listed in brackets as ['OS']); (C) two pieces appearing in 
1860, which surmrlarized rrluch of his achievement. "Logic" (written for the Englzsh Cyclopedza. 
V. 1860) and ..Syllabus of a Proposed Systern of Logic" (both are reproduced in [OS], and will 
be referred to in that edition as ..Logic" and "Syllabus" respectively): (D) scores of lesser articles 
ancl reviews dealing with logic and related topics. ~vhich we shall cite as needed. 
'"ee 
hlary h1. Slaughter; linz~:ersal Langl~ages and Scaentzfic Taxo~aomy i7i the Se1:enteenth 
Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1982, passirn. 

De h1organ.s Logic 
291 
Logic lay dornlant in eighteenth-cmtllry England as yell. Here the prohlern was 
its perceived emptiness: logic. Locke asserted. '.has beell made use of and fitted 
to perplex the signification of ~vords, mole than to discover the kno~vleclge and 
truth of things."23 The early nineteenth century brought change in logic as in 
mathematics. however. In 1826 Richard 11-hately published his Elements of Logzc. 
1Yhately intended his presentation of Aristotelian syllogistic logic as a textbook for 
Oxford students. but it was also the first contribution to what in the next several 
decades developed into a corisiderahle discussion of logic in Victorian England. 
At the center of this discussion. De LIorgan sought to use Peacock's insight to 
free logic from its static past. In this he was joined by the \-omlg I r i 4  math- 
ematician. Geoige Boole. Boole arid De lIorgan were friends ~vllo coirespollded 
frequently and steadily from the 1810s until Boole's death in 1864: theii first books 
on logic were publislled ~vithin a neek of each other. Nonetheless. sharp differ- 
ences separated their approaches. The lnost fundamental of these differences lay 
in their respective readings of Peacock's principle. For De LIorgan. who always 
remained in some sense Frend's disciple and kvns by this time also his son-in-law." 
the principle of the permanence of equivalent forms provided a guarantee that 
valid interpretations conltl be found for all legitilnatel\- generated sj nlbols. Bv 
contrast. Boole saw tlie principle as one "of iildepeildence from interpretation ill 
an .algebra of symbols'."L5 The distiilction can be made more succinctly: whereas 
Peacock's principle freed De LIorgan to find myriad interpretntions for algebraic 
symbols. it freed Boole from the need to interpret those symbols at all. 
Illoreover. for Boole. bringing t,he insights of algebra t,o logic entailed not only 
inlporting algebra's focus on symbols. but also t,he functional operat,ions of nlany 
symbols t~hemsel~~es. 
His use of 1 and 0 as class designators. universal and null 
respectively, arid his two-1-aluetl algebra based on manipulations of 1 and 0 pro- 
vided him an extreniely robust and functional system. In it he ret,ained many of 
nlatllenlatical functions and sj-nlhols (+, -: and the like). even ~vhile carefully 
departing from solne conveilt~ional algebraic definitiolls of rules. as witli the not,ion 
of idempotency, the idea t,hat in logic r t,imes n: = r. not x2 (a class times itself 
cannot create Inore iilenlbers that already exist within it,). In effect, t,his allon-etl 
him to express and manip~lat~e 
propositioiis as equations. Later logicians mould 
build on Boolean 1s and Os, considering thein as "operators" for assigning truth- 
values in logical conjunction. disjunction, and ilegation (complementation), ~vhich 
gave birtli t,o an eilt,ire propositional calculus and. as is well kno~vn after the work 
of Claude Shannon, digital computing circuitry.26 
2 3 ~ o h n  
Locke; An Essay COTLC~TTLZTL~ 
Hzirnan Understandzng. Twenty-ninth edition. London: 
Thomas Tegg; p. 349, 1841. 
'%ugustus 
De Morgan married Sophia Elizabeth Frencl on -4ugust 3. 18:37. 
2"\'olker Peckhaus. '.The hIatllenlatica1 Origins of 19'" Century Algebra of Logic". (paper 
delivered January 18. 2003. and made available at: http://www.uni-Paderborn.de/fileadmin/ 
kw/Institute/Philosophie/Personal/Peckhaus/TextezumDownload/l.pdf 
2 " ~  his 1938 hIIT masters t,hnsis. Shannon. often called the founder of information theory. 
recognized the linkage betn-een binary systems, pairs of logical (true or false) states, and a '.relay- 
based" system of electrical circuits. which lle could exploit fornlally using Boolean algebra. See 

292 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
11-hen De Morgan first encolmtered Boole's notational syitem he describecj. it as 
+.elegant". but he never sho~vecl any desire to follo~v a coniparable path.'7 Rather 
than ilnpoltiilg algebraic syinhols into logic, 11e developed a conlpletelj nen set 
of symbols for logical ideas. "1\1y working processes are not so like those to com- 
mon algebra as to symbols. but inore resemble the operations of our heads". he 
e~~lctined.~"tlier.vl-ise stated. algebra inspired in him the idea of a logical ma- 
chinery, but few details of its actual operations. 
Although it was thoroughly functional. De hlorgan's system of logical symbols 
ilevel captul ed the attention of subsequeilt generations 
At least pal t of this 
iesistance may be attributed to the essential conservatism of De Alorgan's project. 
Throughout all his svinbolic novelties and the innovations in his logic of classes. De 
Morgan viewet1 logic as ultinlately tied to the m-orld of tr atlitional syllogisms. From 
the outset his goal was to find a notation that would articulate old as well as new 
inferences within that n-oild. He rnq have found Boole's sx stern **elegant". but 
he was also distuibed that Boole nas unable to expless kej aspects of sj llogistic 
reasoning that his oliT1l notation captured." 
De Illorgan's work mas nonetheless highly creative He saw himself to be ex- 
terlding, as oppoietl to supplanting Aristotle's syllogisnm. hut his interpretations 
of propositions, inferences. and sj llogislns led him far beyond the Stagirite. B) 
the end of his life De hlolgan had come to see Aristotelian syllogisms as onlj one 
subset (onymatic relations) of a more general - 
and therefore for De hloigan inore 
f~lndamental - 
logic of relations. Even inore f~lndamental. De Illorgan shared with 
Aristotle the haiic assmnption that tllonght alm-a)-s points to soirle ieality outiide 
of itself In logic as i11 algebia. De hlo~gan was alnays deeph iiite~ested in the 
Xrno Penzias. Ideas a7zd I7;fomutzon: Alanagi7zg i n  a H~gh-Tech I.thrld. Nen- l'ork: Simon &z 
Schuster. Inc.. p.100. 1989. 
'7Augustus De LIorgan to George Boole. 28 November 1847. letter sent. Booie.De 
Morgaia 
Correspondence. p. 26. Also, in [S2. p. 791 [OS. p. 221. De hlorgan stated that his "n~ethods'" 
had "rlotlling in cornrnon" with Boole's, urllose "rnode of treating the forrrls of logic is most 
worthy the attention of all who can study that science mathematically, and is sure to occupy a 
proniinent place in its ultirrlate system". In [S3. p. 1831 [OS. p. 871. De llorgan put the point 
even more bluntly: "The truth is that I have not made much use of symbols actually employed 
in algebra: . . . " 
' % ~ e  
hlorgan to Boole. 28 November 1837. draft of a letter not sent. G. C. Smith (ed.). The 
Boole.De Morgan Correspondence. 1842-1864. Oxford: Clarendon Press; p. 23. 1982. See also 
the apposite remarks of C. I. Lewis, A Suruey of Syirabolzc Logzc. Ken. York: Dover Publications. 
p. 43. 1960 (repr. of 1918 ed.): "hlathernatical symbols are introduced but without any corre- 
sponding mathematical operations. The sign of equality is used both for the symmetrical relation 
of equivalent propositions and for the unsyil~metrical relation of premises to their conclusion." 
'"e 
hlorgan to Boole. 28 November 1847. draft of a letter not sent. Boole-De ATorgan Corre- 
spondence. pages 26-27: ..IVith regard to the syllogistic process. there are unexplained difficulties 
about L. and about division by y." In a recent article. Daniel hlerrill shows that De hlorgan's 
"logic of con~plex terms". which he had sketched in [FL] and which provides the context for this 
comment, \?-as as far-reaching and robust as the system Boole had published (at virtually the same 
time) in The lZlathernatzcal Analysis of Logzc (1847). and indeed comprised a "lattice-theoretical 
formulation of Boolean algebra". See Daniel D. hlerrill. '.Augustus De llorgan's Boolean Alge- 
bra"; Hzstory and Phzlosophy of Logzc. 26: 75-91, h1ayl; 2005. hlerrill's argument helps explain 
why De hIorgan's reaction to Boole was lligllly respectful but not overly enthusiastic. 

DP h1organ.s Logic 
293 
picture behint1 tlie puzzle: although his methods were synlbolic. the ultiniate jus- 
tification for all of De AIorgan's n-ork lay alnays in the lneaiiings that undern-rote 
his synlbolic nianipulations. 
I11 this brief iiitroduction to De Slorgan's logic, we shall consider three of De 
Alorgan's chief contributions in successive sections. 111 the first vie shall explore 
the ways he created a purely synlbolic and instrumental notation, taking his cues 
from developments in symbolic algebra. but inventing a completely independent 
svmbolic \\-stern. In tlie secorld n.e shall consitler the ways lie usetl his notation 
to iewoik aiid extend the world of Aristoteliaii syllogis~ns. ~\-llich led to new in- 
terpretations of contraries aiid contradictories and to collsiderillg as valid a set 
of "streilgthened" syllogislils that lay beyond the pale of tradition. Finally. we 
shall explore the way. in one of his last papers. he expanded his work to einbed 
Aristotle's work into a more expansive logic of relations. Led by the logic of his 
progressive teaching ant1 research concerns, especially as they revolvetl aromitl the 
cultivation of reason. De AIorgan's historical accolnplislilnent was to have nudged 
steadily the concerns of logic from those of natural language to a synlbolic. sys- 
tenlatic reckoning of common thought. 
2 
THE .+ACTION OF THE MACHINERY" 
IVlleii in the secoiid of his major logic papers [S2] De hIorgail spoke of developing 
an .'algebra of the laws of thought". lie signaled his illtention of approacliing the 
subject with the same inspiration that had propelled algebra be!-ond its arith- 
rlietic roots." 
He habitually described that process by iiivoking the metaphor of 
a machine. In his hands. *.tliought" would be characterized bv the "parts of its 
niaclliiier>" and logic ~vould conie to niean the inecllaiiical opeiations of these ~ a r -  
ious parts. The nlachine nietaphor worked as well to break logic into its forni and 
matter, \~hich specified two intilllately intertwined hut analyticallv distillguishable 
parts of thought. In logic, the "action of the rliachinery" governs the "form" of 
thought - its niechanical or '+instruineiital" operations - as distinct from the 
niattei of thought. And because the lnacliinery can be separated froin the matter. 
we can even "watch the nlachille in operation without attending to the matter 
operated on" .31 
Ever as plaj ful as he mas serious. De SIoigan portra~ed the machinery of logic 
as a -nut-cracker". Take '.two levers on a conlnion hinge". he mote. aiid '.put a 
bit of viood between the levers to represent . . . any . . . kind of [edible] nut." The 
logician calls this the "form of nut-crcxck/ng" aiitl we niight eve11 imagine it to be 
the "pure form of nutcracking". until n-e think about other nutcracking variations 
- .'the scien . the llamnier, the teeth. &c." On11 then can we detect the really 
pure form. which applies to all the various forms of nutcrackiilg - 
that is "strong 
pressure applied to opposite sides of the 
In this may. logical form folloured 
.30[S2, p. 791 [OS. p. 221 (ital. De hlorgan's). 
"[SS~, pp. 174-1791 [OS, pp. 73-78]. 
32[S3, p. 1741 [OS. p. 751 (ital. De LIorgan's). 

294 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
tlie sanie iort of progression De AIorgali had earlier collie to appreciate in algebra. 
wliich he characterised as the ..abstraction of the illstrument from the n~aterial."~' 
De AIorgarl took pains to explain llinlself here because in his mind the develop- 
ments in symbol use and interpretation in algebla suggested comparable advances 
might be possible in logic. Eegilllling with his 1830 Study of AIathematzcs. the ma- 
chine imagery and its conceptual ties to "form" infused and illformed De Alorgan's 
matheiliatical work. There he used the term "form" to mean the n~anipulation of 
mnner ical or algebraic equations accor tlirig to ..mechanical processes" .31 Fur tlier. 
lie distinguished between correct and incorrect -formsw in both arithmetic and 
algebra in older to tackle tlle prohlenl of negative nunlbers. To take one of his 
examples, in arithmetic 3 - 8 = -5 can be simply transformed into 8 - 3 = 5 using 
a nlechanical manipulation of symbols: likewise. algebraically. '.a - h = -c can be 
written in its true form. or h-n = c".35 For De AIorgan. -cvlio had yet to assi~nilate 
Peacock's principle. these examples illustrated the way that the form of an equa- 
tion could be rexvorked and mider5tood in such a wav as to retain the *yohiti\-e" 
coiltent of mat1~ematic;s. In both cases the b~impossible", 
negative iesult of the first 
equation could be simply eliminated thlough the action of formal, mechanical pro- 
cesses. 11-hen De AIorgali embraced Peacock's principle, some five years later, it 
ineant for him the freedom to press on with more sophisticated exploratioils of the 
forms. or ~nachinery. of algebra and higher mathematics n-itliont fi15sing excessivel) 
o ~ e r  
meanings. Peacock's principle proinised the receptive. young nlatllenlaticiail 
that true forms could always be made to yield positive results and that equations 
could always be translated into their true form. 
As he wielded Peacock's principle over the course of the 1830s. De AIorgali be- 
gan to perceive tlie di5tirictiori between riiatter arid forln as perlneating riially arid 
varied levels in the llierarchies of mathematics. He found this distiilctioil even 
in the .'first element of matlieniatical process" itself. ivliicli nTas "the separation 
of space from matter filling it. and qualltity from the material qlsanfum: nrhence 
spring geometry and arithmetic, the studies of the laws of space and number."36 
Space was the forin of matter and quantitv the machinery whereby one counted 
tliings (atltled. multiplied. calculatetl in varioui ways). In arithmetic, cliariging tlie 
form of an equation to produce a desirable. positive result required lnechallistic 
reductions, elinlinations. and tlle like on both sides of tlie equation. even while 
the material coiltent or inearling or -quantum" of the equation stayed the same. 
'"S3. 
p. 1761 [OS. p. 771. 
"Augustus De Llorgan. O n  the S t ~ ~ d y  
and Dzfic~alties of Alathematzc.s. Londoa. 1831: reprint 
ed. Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Company. p. 175, 1902 [usually abbreviated as Th,e 
S t ~ ~ r l y  
of !Wuthenantics. and hereafter 'SDhl']. It bears rernernbering that we get 'algebra' fro111 the 
title of .41-K11~variznli> treatise Hisub nl-jnb'r w'a1-'muyubula, which translates as the "calculation 
of reduction and confi-ontation". Jabr designates the practice of transferring negatix~e terms 
fro111 one side to the other of an equation and muqubalu refers to canceling siniilar terms on 
both sides. In these and other. comparable instrumental n~anipulations, algebra carried with it 
a purely 'mechanical' component from its inception. 
""SD~I. pp. 102-1091. 
3G[S3. p. 1761 [OS. pp. 77-78]. 

De h1organ.s Logic 
295 
Indeed. it r a i  the basic fact that the matter of ari equation renlained the same 
regardless its forni that allowed one to discern the initial separation of the two. 
Addition and subt~action tendered the mechanisms of variouslj conlbining any 
nuinber of objects independently of any properties belonging to the objects. Thus 
equations that included the number seven could be manipulated regardless of 
~vhether the objects being considered were seas. sins, or wonders of the world. 
With matter and form partitioned in this way it became possible. as Peacock 
had demonstiated. to adopt the aiithinetic form for algebiaic equations and con- 
centrate on manipulating them without worrying about their arithlnetic (or geo- 
rnetr ic) rneanings or instantiations, tlllls making .#dist inct ions ~vhicli are of foi rn 
in arithinetic become inaterial in algebra" .37 Late1 . n riting fol the popular En- 
glzsll Cyclopedza in 1860. De hlorgan illustrated his point. "Pass into algeb~a. 
and the diffe~ences whicli are foiinal ill arithinetic beconle 01111 material: thus 
8 + 4 = 4 + 8 is but one nlaterial inrtance of the for111 u + b = b+a." 38 The hieiar- 
chg. of fo~nl and matter continued as the ..lo-cver fornls in algeb~a become nlate~ial 
in the algebia of the functional symbol". Aloreorei. De Slorgan explained. "the 
f~lnctional form becomes material in the differential calculus, lnost visibly when 
this last is merged in the calcuhm of operatioris."39 
De Llorgan's conceptio~l here may be illustrated wit11 a simple differential equa- 
tion or derivative. A derivative takes a f~~nction 
of x. f (x) - 
to take the particular 
c a v  of a parabola. y = .r2 - and subjects it to other procedural r~lles. i.e. cal- 
culating the clianges in tlie depeiident variable y nit11 iespect to tlie iildependeilt 
variable x. So, iff (x) = xL. then, after a series of ~llechanical opeiations. it can be 
shohvn that the changes with respect to y are twice those of x or 2 = 2;c. During 
this process the entire f~mction. r2, becomes the subject matter for the formal. 
nlechanical procedures of the derivati\-e itself. In various pa5sages De hlorgan 
spoke frequently of abstracting tlie ~~instru~iient 
from the mateiial" in ~iiatlieinat- 
ics. From +'particular arithnletic" to "universal arithmetic" to "single algebra" 
to the algeb~a of ..functional sj nlbols" to calculus and be>oncl. De Llorgan saw 
mathematicians to be constantly. thougll often mlrvittingly. separating forin and 
~natter.~' 
For De Morgan each separation of forni and matter revealed an increasing level 
of nlathenlatical abstraction. The term 'abstraction' itself derives from the Latin 
verb abstmhere, (..to pull". "drag", or -draw away from") and cairies the twofold 
mental activity of (a) "drawing an-ay from" experience or some portion of it. and 
(b) b*pulling" or -dragging" solrietlling - a pattern. a procedure, a class - 
out 
"7[S:3, p. 1761 [OS. 77-78]. 
38 ..LogicU . p. 238 . De hlorgan's entire treatment of form and matter in ~nathe~natics 
resonated 
closely with the account of rrlatherrlatical abstraction earlier developed by d'i2lernbert and other 
French mathematicians. See [Panteki, op. cit.] for a thorough treatnlent of the French influ- 
ences on De hlorgan's early career. For d'Alembert3s depiction of rrlathematical abstraction, see 
hlichael E. Hobart. ,'The Analytical Vision and Organisation of Knowledge in the En,cyclopr'die", 
Studies on Voltalre and the Eighteenth Century. no. 327: 117-175. 1995. 
"[SS~, p. 1761 [OS. p. 781. 
"[S3, p. 1761 [OS, pp. 77-78]: see also llerrill ([ADhI. p. 1001). 

296 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L Richards 
of experience. De Alorgan sav the nlatheiilatical hierarchy as one of a growing 
abstraction of identifiable ineclzanical or instrumental procedures and processes. 
At each new l e ~  
el. these ~nechanis~ns 
of calculation became tlle abstractioil - 
both 
the drawing away and pulling out - 
from the matter that stayed behind. Recalling 
the nutcracker. its form entails the nlechanism of two levers on a common hinge. 
while two sticks (of nrhatever material) comprise its matter. Placing the sticks 
so as to produce levers turns them from siinple materials into a siinple machine: 
it gives thern a nlecllanical forrn and fimction. This mechanism beconles nlore 
coinplex n lien the both levels are situated on a coinriloil fulcruin or hinge. thus 
making a nutcrackel. But then the "form" of the hinged levels comes to be seen as 
only one anlong several variations of nutcrackillg mechanisms - 
screw. hammer. 
teeth, and the like - 
which allows one to elicit an even more general and abstract 
mechanism. the "pure form" of .'strong pressure applied to opposite sides of the 
llllt" .'I 
111 matheinatics. the crucial distinction between forin and matter ineant not 
only that the lnind could separate tlle tno, hut that it could criticall? exainiile 
each of them distinctly from one another. This is how the .'action of [thought's] 
machinerv" becanle *.more visible in algebra than in other thought" .12 Mith the 
machinery out in the open. De AIorgan could investigate more closely its prop- 
erties. the iizterineshing of its parts and levers and gears. Thus. as a function of 
thought itself. abstraction - 
the drawing awaj from and pulling sonlet hing out 
of experience - 
made it possible to understand how thought worked by bringing 
it from nocturnal obscurity. as it were. into the daylight of examination. 
De Alorgan's understanding of form a i d  nlatter continued to be fundamental 
throughout his life's work; it both provided the rationale for his teaching and was 
the rnotimting force behind his logical efforts. He taught his stlldents how to think 
by piesenting thein n ith thought's niachiriery in its inost exposed. available. and 
visible manifestations. First in arithmetic, then through algebra to calculus and 
beyond. he focused their attenti011 on the nlechanical or instrumental forms of 
thouglrt. Likewise. De Morgan carried the forin/matter distinction with him into 
logic. where his guiding insight ~vollld be that logic is to language as algebra is to 
arithnletic. 
Pervading all of De AIorgan's tlliilkiilg about mechanical, inathelllatical forms is 
a workable, symbolic system. IVllenever he. or his students. changed an equation 
like a - b = -c into b - a = c they did so by inanipulating us and bs, ecluals 
signs, plusses and minuses. according to a fixed sets of rules. And as he turned 
his attention increasingly to logic. one of his ceritr a1 concerns lay n-it11 tiel-eloping 
a izotation that would f~ulction comparably. In his 1837 book, Formal Logzc. 
he introduced soine s>inbols - the parenthesis, the dot. and the colon - as 
'bahbreviations" for logical processes.43 These efforts represent De hlorgan's first 
"In 
[S3. p. 1761 [OS, pp. 77-78], De hlorgan distinguished between the ..abstraction of 
colleague qualities" and abstraction of the "instrument from the material". The former descrihes 
how we delrise terms: the latter how we relate them through logical form or machinery. 
"[SS~; p. 1791 [OS; p. 821. 
43 [FL, p. 1261: ..Let the f o l l o ~ ~ - i ~ ~ g  
abbreviations he employed: 

DP h1organ.s Logic 
297 
attempt to use various, essentially diacritical syrnbols both to express propositions 
used in tmraditional. syllogistic reasoning and to introduce clistinctioiis hitherto left 
blurred." He used t,hese syinhols only sporadically. t,l~ougll, 
and only as shorthand. 
memory devices. never as instrunleiits of manipulat,ion. 
Even before his book was published, De hlorgan n7as pushing ahead ivit,h fur- 
t,her logical invest~igat~ions. A major part of t,he expanded logical program De 
hlorgan developed iri his papers focusetl on experinients mit,ll synlbol construct,ion 
and i~laiiipulation. In April of 1849, lie was deeply engaged in devising a more 
conlprellensive syinholic syst,em: .'all inference consists in four parentheses a i d  
t,.ivo dots, at most". lie wrot,e excit,edly to his forrner Cambridge t,eacher, 15-illiam 
15;liewell. By that fall the abbreviations of Formal Logic were evolving int,o a care- 
f~llly defined set of symbols that enabled De hlorgan t,o capture and nla~lipulat,e 
inst~ruiilentally the propositions used in syllogi~~ns.~" 
And by Deceniber he n7as 
boasting: I have "got a notation" for "illy own [logic] so easy that I find get,t,ing 
out the more difficult cases of syllogisin easier by beginning [with] the symbol in 
my head - and detecting the symbol of inference - than by thought"." 
The 
next year (1850), in several passages of [S2], De hIorgan int,roduced publicly his 
new iiotatioii aiid explained how to read and use it. 
The shape of De Alorgan's new program can be seen in his de~nonstration of the 
advantages it offered over the traditional designations of propositions as A, E. I. 0. 
These vowels refer to the traditional foursorile of propositions uietl in framing 
svllogisms. A proposition is a statenlent with two ternis - a subject (either 
universal or particular. all or some). geneiallj denoted by X. and a predicate. 
generally indicated by the letter Y. Thus .All humans are animals' connects the 
subject 'humans' with the predicate 'animals'. It is written 'All X is Y ' .  with 
' X '  arid .Y' serving a i  placeholders for tlifferent ternis, in this case 'hurilans' ant1 
.aninials'. aiid is interpreted as claii~liiig that any being belonging to the categor? 
.lmmans'. also beloilgs to the class of 'animals'. I11 traditional logic, A and E 
are universal propositions. denoting. 'All X is Y' aiid 'No X is Y '  respectively. 
while 1 and 0 denote the particular propositions 'Some X is Y '  and .Some X 
is riot Y' respectively. The letters A ant1 I come from the vowels in the Latin 
affirm0 ('I affirm'). niakiiig A aiid I the affirmative propositions. nhile the E aiid 
0 sten1 from rlego ('I den) ') iilclicating the negative propositions.J7 For centuries 
the A. E. I. 0 piopositioris had beer1 thought to be tlie building blocks of logical 
reasoning. but in 1850 De AIorgan rejected them as foundational because they 
n ere "rathe1 inneinonical t hail instruineiltal" . 
A-)Y means ,Every X is Y' X.Y means .No A- is Y' 
X : Y - 
.Some X s  are not Ys' I XY - 
'Some X s  are Ys' " 
44[S2. p. 851 [OS. 
pp. 29-30]. 
'%ugustus 
De hlorgan to I&Tilliam Il'he~vell, April 1; 1849. Trinity College, Cambridge Univer- 
sity. iI'The~-ell 
Archive. Add hls. a 202"~. Unless other\\-ise noted. all of tlie De hlorgan-iVhexvel1 
letters cited in this paper are from this archive. 
"Augustus De hIorgail to IVilliam IVhewell. December 31. 1849. Add hIs. a 202"~ (ital. De 
hlorgan's). 
 syllabus". p. 1571 

298 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
Alore to their detrinient. the -4. E. I, 0 y.mboli harbored *.compomltl" nieari- 
ings. B? this, De Alorgan lneaiit the? coiifounded quantity with affirmation or 
negation. The A statenlent, for exaniple. is both affirmative and universal. These 
characteristics needed separation. "If A arid E had stood simply fol affirmative 
and negative. and two consonants. as B and A-. for universal and particular. the 
distillctioll of figure might have been symbolized." In this case .AB' would have 
symbolized a universal. affirmative proposition. 'AAV' a particular affirmative, .BE' 
a universal. negative proposition. and so forth . But such developriiellt historicall) 
had not occured. with tlie consequence tliat each proposition. represented by a 
single letter. continued to possess - 
confusingly - 
both quantity and quality (i.e. 
the qualitative judgement of affirinatioll or  legation).'^ To make logic truly for- 
mal, which for De AIorgali meant instrumental, required capturing two essential. 
analytic steps. First, the subject and predicate of a proposition had to be invested 
with quantity - 'some' or 'all' (particular or luliversal) - 
in such a r a y  as to be 
independent of one another and of the proposition i11 n hich they resided. Then, 
each quantified tern1 had to be logically linked to the other quantified tern1 b) 
meails of inclusioil or exclusion. that is affirnlatiol~ or negation. 
The instruinental trick lay with capturing these analytical lequireinents syni- 
bolically. For quantification. De Morgan used parentheses: ')' or '('. He had first 
introduced these svmbols in Formal Logzc. but in [S2] he set about correcting what 
he saw as a *~svrnbolic 
want" of his earlier m-ork by developing arid explainilig them 
as part of a functional ~~stenl.~"C>rie~~tiilg 
the parenthesis so as to "inclose" a 
terni. as in 'X)' or '(X'. denoted tliat the b.nanie-symbol X" enters the proposi- 
tion universally, nrhich ma>- be read as 'all X'. Logicians now con~inonly refer to 
this as a "distributed" term. To imagine inclosing or inclusion. De Morgan added. 
picture the parenthesis as part of ail oval drawn around the term, and contain- 
ing all the deiignatetl iterns within it, riluch like a Venn diagrani." 
Corn-ersely. 
wlien the parellthesis excluded a teri-11. as nit11 ')X' or 'X('. it indicated that the 
'.nanle-s) nlbol X" enters the plopositioil particularly. nliich may be lead as .some 
X'. This is an .'undistributed" term in moderri parlance. Take for instance the 
propositioli "All men are aninlals". Letting X stand for .men'. then 'All men' is 
captured by #X)'. The proposition affirnii that all rile11 are included in tlie clais of 
animals. but because there inay be niore animals than men. 'men' is included only 
in tlie class of some alnirnals. which the notation expresses with ')Y' (Y standing 
foi banimals'). The entire proposition is thus syinbolized as . X ) ) Y ' .  To make 
clear the second step of affirinatioli and negation. De AIorgali introduced dots. An 
even number of dots or no dots at all denotes affirmation or agreement of the two 
terms: all odd number of dots, usually one, signifies negation or nor-agreement. 
For example. ,X))Y' rneans .All X s  are [sonle] Ys'. ~vhereas 'X(.(Y' nlearis tliat 
48 [S2; p. 861 [OS. p. 301. Along with IYilliam Hamilton, anlong others. De hlorgan believed the 
absence of quantification in the predicate of these traditional propositions rendered the building 
blocks inadequate for developing syllogistic argument. 
' 9 s ~ .  p. 911 [OS. p. 361. 
 he similarity is striking, but De llorgan is here n-riting long before \.'en11 (1834-1923) was 
either an adult, or had developed his diagrams. 

De hIorgan's Logic 
299 
'Some X s  are not [all] Ys'. 
With this sylnbolic system. De Illorgall was at last able to bring to logic the 
separation of formal from illaterial that had been so powerful in algebra. He did 
this bv dividing the matter. or "name-symbols" (X, Y, 2. 
etc.) from the fuilctional 
symbols (parentheses anti dots) of their quantification and of their affirmation or 
negation. He even started using tlie syinbols by theniselves, without the X s  aiid 
Ys. leaving tlie reader flee to fill in the name-symbols: -Thus +X))Y' means that 
all X s  are Ys; .X(.(Y' nieails that some X s  ale not Ys: but '))' and '(.(' specify the 
characters of the propositions: as do also .((' and ').)'." Illoreover. his functional 
symbols began to show a bit of their flexibility and eventually some robustness. for 
they could be read **either way: thus 'X))Y' and *Y((X' both denote that every 
X is Y .''51 
Thoroughly versed in the history of logic. and especially of earlier attempts at 
using sy~nbolic notation." De Llorgail begail inimediatelj to pursue tlie niechani- 
cal advantages of his symbolic system. He was especially coilcerned to denlonstrate 
its superiority over that of his rival. the Scottish logician 11-illiam Hamilton. who 
had also been viorkiiig or1 quantifying pretlicatei in a proposition. Harniltoii had 
devised a iiotatioii that. in De Illorgan's vien. assulned the forms of predication. 
n hereas his pioducecl tlieni froni Inore primitive, notational bases. This alloned De 
Illorgan greater flexibility and accuracy. and created what he ternled the "numeri- 
callv definite syllogism" (discussed below). In his words. "complete quailtification 
of both ternis [subject anti predicate] was derived from tlie algebraical fonii of 
nunlerical quantification." j3 
IT-it11 tliese innorations. De Aloigan had devised for hilnself the iudiillents of a 
~lotatioil that allowed for the same sort of '*rnechailical" operations that algebra 
had provitied in riiatlieniatics. In years to coine. lie was to iiarile liis new synibology 
"spicular" . *.a name first given in derision [bj Hamilton]. but not the worse for that: 
it is bettei than par.enthetzc. which has a derived nieaning." '' The word .spicular' 
lneans .bracket': it derives from the Latin 'spzca' which denotes ail ear of giain. 
The curved shape of the ear presumablv yields the conilection. De Illorgall's care 
in picking the terni that viould describe liis notation reflects its importance: with it 
he had found tlie mealis of resolving probleins in traditional. svllogistic reasoning 
"'[S2, p. 871 [OS. p. 311. 
"In 
[S2. p. 871 [OS, p. 321. De hIorgarl rrlade references to the earlier systerlls of ..Lanlbert 
and Euler". which he had also nlentioned in Formal Logic. Among his other accon~plishn~ents. 
Joharln Heinrich Lanlbert (1728-1777) had devised a pictorial representation of propositions. 
using lines in a similar fashion as those adopted by De llorgan. Thus 'All X is I" is represented 
as two lines Y-y. 
and X-.r: 
Visually, one can see t,he inclusion of X in Y. 
Similarly. the mathematician 
- 
Leonhard Enler 
(1707-1783) had used circles to capture the same visual representation @. Here the outer circle 
represents Y. the inner circle X ;  
heilce ..411 X' is illeluded in Y. 
'"S2, 
p. 901 [OS. p. 351. 
5"S3, p. 1981 [OS. p. 1061. See also [..Syllabus". pp. 157. 163. 203 11.11. 
Y 
y
X 
x
Y 
y
X 
x
Affirmative

300 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L Richards 
using ..niedianical motles of iriaking tr ansitioni." 5 j  
The first significant results that fell out of the iilstruinental inanipulatioiis of De 
Slorgan's spicular iiotatioil were the *.erasure rule" and the bbtraiisfoimation rule". 
These rules call perhaps best be ~mderstood by examilii~lg a table he presented 
in his retrospective "Syllahlm of a Proposed Syiteiri of Logic". published in 1860. 
There. looking back on a decade of logical thought. De Morgan sun~marized in 
tabular forrii the a r r q  of valid syllogisnls lie had generated from his notation in 
[S2]. ST7ith this table. De illorgan piesented in coinplete forin n hat he cdrile to call 
the "universe of the syllogism" einbraced by his functional. spicular notation.i6 
fi have reproduced the table here as Table 1 (adding labels for reference) as a 
com~eiiient and useful introductioil to his logical s ~ s t e n ~ . ~ ~  
To see the *.eiasure rule" in action. note first that in the Tahle each set of 
symbols - a through f f - depicts an arguinent in svllogistic form. That is. 
each arguinent is aiticulated through two propositions. the syllogisin's niajor and 
ininor premises. For example. tlie arguinelit labeled s is presented as ')) ).)' (we 
have added some spacing for clarity)." To read the argument. insert the ..name 
syinbols" of X ,  Y, and 2. arolmd anti hetween the functional y'mhols. This 
produces: 'X))Y).)Z' and ma) be read as a traditional 
Major premise: All X is Y 
Minor premise: Some Zs are not Ys 
Now. the reader supplies the conclusioi1. the inference derived from the premises: 
Conclusion: Therefore. Soine Zs are not X s  
Tlie "canon" of inference. lie rrote. "in the Aristotelian system and in niy 
extension" is to eliiniiiate the middle tern1 from the argument, generally denoted 
by Y. Using the spicular notation iliacle the elilniilatioil inechanical: "Erase tll e 
symbols of the mzddle term. the remaznzng symbols sheu the znference." Thus. he 
contiilued. ..)) ).) gives ).)". or in the expanded version. X))Y).)Z gives X).)Z.60 
" ~ e  
LIorgan to Boole. 28 Nove~riber 1847. Bou1e.De 11lorgun Co~respondence, p. 25. 
" 
[S2. p. 871 [OS. pp. 31-32], 
" I$S-llabus" . p. 1621. 
"See also [S2. p. 871 [OS, p. 311. 
5g~11 traditional syllogistic reasoning, this is tlie forrn of argument knolvri as ..Baroko3'. in ref- 
erence to the riallies used ..for many centuries" by logicians. Forms of argument were designated 
by their illood and figure. The illood referred to the order of names in propositions. while the 
figure specified the position of the middle term. For example. the argument. 'A11 Y is 2'. 
'All 
X is Y ' .  therefore 'All X is Z '  is con~posed of three A (universal, affirmative) statements. which 
give it the mood -4AA. The rrliddle tern1 is the subject of the major prerrlise arld the predicate 
of the minor, making it a first figure syllogism. It is designated AAA-1. and called "Barbara". 
The valid forins all carried their own names, rlanies De hIorgan took "to be more full of rneaaing 
than any that ever were made." Thus did he reaffirrrl his ties with tradition. [FL. p. 1501. 
"[S2. p. 871 [OS. p. 311 (ital. De Llorgan's). De hIorgan's example here might seem confusing 
at first for it reverses the order of the Zs and 1's in the minor premise. But. as he noted. the 
syn~bols could be read either way. See Table 2 below for a list of propositions in both his spicular 
notation and comrnon language. 

De h1organ.s Logic 
Table 1. Syllogisms 
Premises 
St,rengthened 
LIinor/Alajor 
Cniversal 
Alajor/hlinor 
Strengt,hened 
particular 
particular 
particular 
particular. 
Negative 
1 
Affirmative 
AIinor 
Affirmative 
Major 
- C- 
I) )( 
-h- 
)( (( 
-k- 
I.( (.( 
- P- 
I.) I,( 
-S- 
I) 1.1 
-.r- 
I( (.I 
-aa- 
I.( 0 
-f f- 
I,) )I 
- e- 
)I (( 
-nz- 
I.( I.( 
-1L- 
I) (.I 
-CC- 
I.( I) 
Affirmative
-d-
(())
-l-
-t-
-66-
-a-
-n-
-q-
())•(
-V-
-y-
-dd-
-6-
-9-
-3-
-0-
-r-
-w-
z
-ee-
301

302 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
In this way one may interpret all thirty-two syllogisnis of Table 1 as tlepictiiig a 
wlid argument .61 
De hlorgan's ..tiansforniation rule" enierged in the context of coiisideling con- 
traries (or complements as these nould later be called) For the latter De hIolga11 
used lower case letters (zs and ys. etc.). Tlie contiary of X was thus expressed as 
1.. and interpreted to mean that within the universe of the term and its contrary if 
all elements fell within the teriii. X .  it woultl be a contradiction to clairn that ionle 
fell nithout. i.e. in z Coiiverselr, the existelice of ally oi some xs (non-Xs). lneaiit 
that not all elements in the uilivelse undei consideration were X (all Xs). The 
"rule of transformation", fioiil positive to negative and fioili universal to particu- 
lar m-as the follou~ing: '.To use the contrary of a term without altering the import 
of the proposition, alter the cmvatme of its parenthesis. arid annex oi withdraw 
a negative point "62 For example. *All X s  are some 17s' equals logicall~ 'All X s  
are not all ys', or with the notation: X))Y = X )  . (y In the latter expression the 
parenthesis attached to Y has been reveised. the Y converted to the lower case. 
coiitrair y of negation. and the dot of liegation added (thus produciiig the logical 
double negative, nhicli equals a positi~e) Rhetoricall>, this leads '.All X s  are not 
[all] non-Ys" . 
In [S2]. De hlorgaii deinoiistrated ill detail how his traiisfornlation rule gener- 
ated equivalencie5 in both llniversal and particular propositions. Tlie mliver5al 
propositions begin with X ) ) Y  ('-411 X s  ale some Ys' or. an altelilative reading. 
,Ever\ X is Y'). This r ields X ) .  (y in the inanner described abox e. Kon take the 
next step: reverse the parenthesis on X .  change the X to lower case a i d  reinole 
tlie dot, giving ailother equivalency: .r((y. hiid, once more, change the y to Y. 
reverse the spica. and now "annex the negative point" for z(.)Y. This produces 
the following airay of equivalmcies: X ) ) Y  = X ) .  (y = .r((y = 1 (.)Y. Usirig the 
traiisforlnatioii ~ u l e  one can nianipulate particular plopositioiis in a like fashion 
to genelate coillparable equivalencies a~nong them Begin with 'Some X s  are not 
all Ys' - 
i.e. X(.(Y - and pioceed step by step as a b o ~ e  to net the following: 
X(.(Y = X()y = a.).)y = T ) ( Y . ~ ~  
The erasure and transformation rules were the functional building blocks of the 
b*mliverse of the syllogism": they weie the logical machineiy riom- exposed to view. 
De hlo~gan's rules permitted hini to express an? proposition using uiiiversal oi 
particular teinls and/oi their contraries in either the subject or the predicate arid 
to delive a host of infeiences in the plocess. Indeed. he viewed these tno ~ules 
as the logical equivaleiits of reduction aiid caiicellatioii in ordinary algebia. and 
frequently compared "inference" in logic with "elimination" in algebra: "speaking 
instrumentally. what is called elimiiiation in algebra is what is called inference in 
logic." 
Bl~ildiiig 011 the rnechariisriis of the erasure and tranformatiori rules by filling 
"De SIorgan provided a comparable t,able of these arguments in [S2, p. 951 [OS. p. 411 
"[S2. p. 921 [OS. p. 371. 
'" 
[S2; p. 921 [OS. pp. 37-38]. 
64[S2. p. 831 [OS. p. 271. 

DP h1organ.s Logic 
303 
in the name terms as X ,  Y .  .I*. or y for both the subjects ant1 predicates. and 
b? designating X.Y. z, 
and y either universal or particular with the parentheses. 
De LIorgan was able to generate an entire table of propositions. wliicli we have 
reporduced as Table 2. that utilized liis new i ~ o t a t i o n . ~ ~  
Note heie that ivith the 
utilization of contraries. all the universals become variations of a single expression. 
)). while all the particulars derive from (). De AIorgan situated these t~vo strings 
of equivalences prorninentlv on Table 1. with the arguinents comprised of universal 
propo5itions listed in the central colnnin. while those with particular proposition5 
made up the coluiiiw iinnlediately to eitliei side. 
Table 2. Propositions 
Spicular notation 
X ) ) Y  
x))y or X((Y 
X)) y or X )  . (Y 
n.))I7 or X(.)Y 
Proposition expressed in 
colnnion language 
Every X is Y 
Every Y is X 
No X is Y 
Everything is X or Y or both 
Particulars 
Sorrie X s  are Ys 
Sonie things are neither X s  nor Ys 
Some X s  are not Ys 
Some Ys are not X s  
IT-hat is more. De Morgan elicited further ilnplications from the mechanisms of 
these propositions, I$-hich were renliniscent of his earlier m-ork on the true form of 
algebraic equations. For example. lie rioted, tlie foregoing abandoned tlie distinc- 
tion of affirniative and negative "in the usual sense" because for an? affirinative 
proposition. oiie could produce its negative equivalent. To wit. the affirmative 
proposition X()Y ('Sonic X s  are [some] Ys') could also be expressed in its nega- 
tive ecluivalent. X(.(y ('Some X s  ale riot [all] non-Ys'). Similarly. one could alter 
one of the quantities in a universal proposition. either from universal to particu- 
lar or from particular to uriiversal. arid the results remained a "true tleductiori. 
though not an equivalent". For example. reversing one of the parentheses in X ) ) Y  
produces both X()Y and X)(Y. 
Slanipulating the spicular iiotation mechanically not only led to the above list 
of eight propositions and an entire table of valid arguilients. it enabled De AIorgan 
to discover a "carion of validity" that pertairietl to the entire set of arglmienti. 
although he never drew clearly the distinction between a calloii of lalidit) and 
Universals
X()Y
x()y or X)(Y
X()y or X(-(Y
x()Y or X)-)Y
65 [S2, p. 91] [OS, pp. 35-36].
X
X
Y
yz
z
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

304 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
a canon of inference.6"In 
fact, De Illorgan's Peacockian approach meant that 
lie selcloin constructed proofs for his logical inferences and priiiciples - 
even the 
theoreills that cany his name.) To see ho\v this ~xorks. let us recall that a syllogism 
has three name-terms (X. Y, 2) 
along ivith their coiitraries (x. y. z). These may 
be expressed as an arrav: X or T .  Y or y. Z or z. because. in De Illorgan's view. 
tlie alternate forms of the terms (e.g. changing from X to r )  have no effect on the 
"character of the proposition" .67 From this set. there are eight possible variations. 
llsing one tern1 out of each pair and combining it with others. JYe nlay illustrate 
this in the follo~ving table of our on 11 composition: 
Table 3. Ternis arid Contraries 
X
 X
 X 
X 
X
X
X
X
 
X
 X
 
X
 X
 
X
 X
 
X
 X
 
X
 
X 
X 
X
 
X
 
X 
X 
X
 
Here each coluniii represents a syllogism created by employing one of the terins 
from each of the pairs. X - T .  Y - y. Z - z. Frosn this grid, and assuming the 
first two terms are distributed (enclosed by the parenthesis), one can derive eight 
mliversal syllogislns, those with tn-o universal prenlises and a universal conclnsion. 
all variations of the universal forni: )) )) = )). Further. one car1 produce sixteen 
particular syllogisms. each with one universal preiilise and one particular premise 
and a particular conclusion. The number sixteen derives from the eight syllogislns 
whose major preniise is a universal proposition and is then followed by a particular. 
plus eight nlore that begin with a particular and are follon-ed by a universal. The 
fornls follo~t-ed by the particular argunlents are: (( () = () (beginning wit11 the 
uiiiversal preniise) and () )) = ( ) (beginning with the particular premise). Finally, 
tlie grid also spa.vcrns eight further syllogisms, starting with universal prenlises but 
yielding particular conclusions. Their spicular form is: (( )) = (). These De 
Morgan called "strengthened argunients" 
For all thirtj -t\vo arguments. the bbcanon of xraliclit> " was the same. Reineillher 
an inference in a syllogism nleans eliininating the middle, Y term (the erasure 
G"ee 
[S2. p. 941 [OS. p. 401. Here De 1\Iorgan depicted both the -canon of validity" and the 
"canon of inference" with perhaps their sharpest contrast. The forrrler he designated as a rrlearls 
of identifying a valid syllogism; the latter comprised the rules for manipulating the symbols in 
the prelriises in order to produce one. The .'canon" terminology is murky, for. as we note below. 
the canon of validity entails the erasure and transformation rules that make up inference. Later. 
in the ["Syllabus". p. 1611. De hIorgail abandoned .'canoas" and referred simply to the ..test" of 
x-alidity and the ..rule" of inference. a modest linguistic improvement. 
6 7 [ ~ 2 .  
p. 941 [OS. p. 391. 
X
X
Y
yz
z
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

De h1organ.s Logic 
305 
rule). Changing Y into y occurs when one flips both of the parentheses. ant1 
therefore does not "affect" the '+relative character" of the terms. So. one call 
use a combination of the erasure and t~ailsforinatio~l 
rules to eliininate either the 
Y or the y tern1 fro111 tlie argument. If the middle paie~ltheses surrounding the 
Y tern1 turn the same way - i.e. )Y) or (y( . 
any tn-o propositions that fit 
the arrangelneilt yield a valid argument. when at least one of the propositio~ls is 
universal. And when the middle parentheses turn contrary ways - 
i.e. )y( or (Y) 
- 
orie must ha\-e two miiversals for a valid argmnent. The canon of inference that 
produces the validitj in all these cases is sinlply "strike the middle parentheses" 
(the erasuie rule) and bbtulo negative dots, if tliere be two" (the traiisfornlatioii 
rule). The remaining syilibol exhibits the valid iilference. 
Taking another look at Table 1. we can see horn- De AIorgan arranged the rela- 
tions between these groups of argumeiits. The central colunln utilizes the universal 
propositions - 1). ( (  ) ( ( )  - 
and the eight universal s>-llogisilis they generate 
(arguments b, g. 1. o. r. w, z, and ee). The colun~ns to the right and left of 
center display both the particular propositions - (). )(. (.(. ).) - 
and tlie sixteen 
paiticulai arguments utilizing orie particular prerilise (along nith orie u~liveisal 
premise). The four argulnents to the extreiile right and left of the central colulnns 
(arguilients d. 1. t. bb. e, m. 71, and cc) are his "strengthened" arguments. 
If the spicular notatio~l provided the symbolic counterpart to algebra. De Nor- 
gan often eiliployed as well a variety of solid and broken lines. thick and thin. 
to provide. as he put it, an equally iniportant *.graphical representation which 
is as suggestive as a diagram of g e o ~ n e t r y " . ~ ~  
Using an array of lines and bars 
De l\lo~gan experi~nented with these -pictorial" representations of argunlents, one 
of which we have provided as Figure 1. To see how the graphics woik, we have 
expanded the argument s and added the name symbols.69 
All the lines (X. Y. Z) conihine to represent I$-liat De Illorgan called the "mi- 
verse of the syllogism". with each line representing a nanie or term. and each pair 
of lines depicting the *xniverse of the proposition". Here tlie lines are divided 
into a dark or shaded portion: else~vliere he used a straight line divided into a 
continuous and dotted portion (e.g.. XI 
. . . . . . .). The division of lines 
distributes the -universe of the term" into a "name and its contrary". the name 
being the darker (or solid) portion of the line and the contrary all the rest (or the 
dotted portion). (From Formal Logzc on. De Alorgan used "contrary" and ..con- 
tr adictor y" as synonynm. on rliidi more helo~v.) To assert a proposition. one need 
merely inspect isually the shaded and uiishaded portions of t~vo lines. Thus i11 the 
exaniple. the sliaded portion of line X falls eiiti~ely within all the sliaded portion 
of Y. capturing tlie first premise: )). or X))Y, or 'All X s  ale Ys'. Likewise. tlie 
second prenlise may be seen in the overlap of shaded portions between Y and 2. 
"[S2, p. 871 [OS. p. 321. 
 h his square is actually taken directly from one of the several sheets of logical diagrams De 
hlorgan had drawn by hand and past,ed into his own copy of [FL]. this one on page 92. His 
personal copy of [FL] may be foulld in the De hlorgan collection of the University of Lo11do11 
Library. 

hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L Richards 
X II II II II 
Y
y
 
z z  
II II II II II 
) O ) Y ) * ) Z  
(Argument 's' 
from Table 1, "Name-Symbols" added) 
Figure 1. 
which nets Y).)Z (or .Some Zs are not Ys'). The conclusion of the nrguilient may 
be discerned by examiniilg the short. vertical lines above X and below Z. These 
represent individuals eirdmiced within the term as captured by the propositions. 
In X))Y. all the nlerilbers of X are illeluded in Y and ale shoxv~~ 
b> the vertical 
lilies above all .All X '  (when extended donn to the shaded portion of the Y line). 
I11 the inillor premise. Y).)Z, n e  see vertical lines beneath that poltion of shaded 
Z which does not orellap the shaded portion of Y. thus depicting those Zs that 
are not also Ys (again. extending the vertical lines up to Y). The conclusion, then. 
may be observetl by noting that of the vertical linei. some of the Zs (belon. the 
Z term line) do not o~erlap with all the Xs. The erasure rule is thus achieved 
'bpictorially" by merely looking at the 7 eltical lines above X and belon Z in each 
of the syllogism boxes. 
As the above accouilt of De Alorgan's symbology suggests, it is far more cuin- 
bersoirle to tle5cribe logical operatioils in ordinary language tllail to ohserl-e di- 
rectlj the machinerj in action. This. of course, was precisely De AIoigan's point. 
ilYith his algebra-inspired spicular llotatioii and his geoinetrv-inspired diagrams. 
De Alorgan's thinking here forecasts the approach to yuestiolls of classes and class 
extension found later in the work of John Venn. Stanley Jevons, Cllarles L. Dodg- 
son (Lewis Carloll) and others. In his own lifetime, De Alorgan's nenr symbology 
led him to reinterpret key points of traditional syllogistic. to which we now turn. 
3 THE -UKIVERSE UNDER CONSIDERATIOK" 
De Alorgan's new, synlbolic and fimctional spicular notation suffices to secure him 
an iinportailt position in the symbolic turn in the history of nineteenth-cel?tur?:lth-century 
306

De h1organ.s Logic 
307 
logic. Yet beyond experiineiitirlg with new notation. he was keenly am-are of nem- 
logical ineanings his symbols had prompted. Indeed, although TX-e 
have beeii look- 
ing at his logical niachinery as separated from the question of its interpretation. 
this does not reproduce how De hlorgan hiinself approached the subject. Rather. 
in his mind the forilia1 and inaterial, synlbolic and interpretive dinlensioils of logic 
were al~vays intertwined. though. as he always insisted, separable for analytical 
and pedagogical purposes. 
One of the most exemplary manifestations of this interpretive effort may be 
found in De hlorgan's idea of .'universe" and its iinplications for recasting the 
tiaditional distinction between 'coiltraly' a i d  .contradictory'. For ovel a century. 
historians and logicians have beeii attributing the phrase "universe of discourse" 
to De 1\1organ.~~ 
Theirs is u~ldoubtedlv a respectful error, but in fact De hlorgan 
never used this phrase. Instead, he spoke of a -universe under consideration". 
by 1~-11ich he ineant those objects that are expressed by the name terins (X, Y. 2. 
etc.) and manipulated in his forinal logic.71 It was Boole. not De hlorgan. who 
first emploj ed the phrase 'buniverse of discourse" in describing how to irlterpiet 
his svstein. Boole's universe of discourse derives from a process of abstraction and 
geileralizatioil tliat begins nitli nainiilg terms "representative of an intellectual 
operation. tliat operation being also prior in the order of nature". One begins. 
so to speak. with the operations of thougllt. and then proceeds to apply then1 to 
the ~vorld beyond. Here, the rlanle terms represent either the entire universe of 
discourse (X) or nothing (0). and '.Notliing and Universe are the two limits of class 
extension" .7L De hlorgan's uilrvillingness to adopt Boole's phrase reveals again his 
Aristotelian iilsisteilce that thouglit always points to some reality outside itself. 
7 0 ~ l ~ ~ s .  
C. I. Lewis; in his classic [op cit.. p. 431, IX-rites that among De llorgan's contri- 
butions of "permanent value" is the idea of the ..uni\-erse of discourse". Len-is then cites a 
long passage from Form,al Logic to buttress his claim. but nowhere in the passage does Dr 
hIorgan use the phrase, nor as n-e shall see in our analysis belo~xr does he ernbrace the idea in 
the same sense as Boole and subsequent logicians. Even Peter Heath, irl his other\\-ise excel- 
lent introduction, cites De hlorgan as proposing a "universe of discourse"; giving page two of 
his own collection (citing De hlorgan's [Sl]) as a reference. n-liere the expressiorl is nowhere 
to he found. See "Introduction". in Augustus De Morgan. On, the Syllogzsm and Other Logz- 
cal Writings. Peter Heath (ed.). New Haven CT: Yale University Press. pp. xxv and 2. 1966. 
Likewise. the Kneales (IVillian~ Kneale and hlartha Kneale. The Dezlelopment of Logic. Oxford: 
Clarendoil Press. p. 408. 1962) cite De llorga~l's Formal Logic (p. 55) as expressing the "ulli- 
verse of discourse"; whereas De hlorgan's phrase there is "universe of a proposition". Nore 
recently Volker Peckhaus refers to "De P\lorgan3s universe of discourse" in "[op. cit.. p. 41. while 
the author of the Encyclopaedia Brztann,zca article on the "History of Logic" claims that De 
LIorgan "introduced" the notion "universe of discourse" that then was used by later Booleans 
(logic. history of. Encyclopaedia Brzto,nnzco from Encyclopaedia Britannica Premium Service. 
http//www.britannica. com/ed/article?tocid=65944. .An exception may be found in John Cor- 
coran's recent "I~~troductioll" 
to Boole's La'ws of Tho'ught. Nen- York: Prometheus Books. p. xx, 
2003. where he recognizes that Boole authored the expression "universe of discourse" for "the 
first time in the history of the English language . . . " 
"[FL, p. 1261. 
72George Boole. A n  Iravestigntion of tlze Lazus of Th,ou,gh,t. o n  ~uh,iclz o,re founxied The Allathe- 
matical Theoraes of Logic and Proba,bilities. New khrk: Dover Publications; pp. 43-14. 37, repr. 
of 1854 ed. 

308 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
De AIorgan developetl liis idea of a .Quriiverse under consideration" in tande~n 
with his ieno~king of the distinction between contrary and contradictory. In -41is- 
totelian logic a contrary was an apple to a coiitradictory's olange the? wele tno 
essentially different categories of relations between propositions. The contiast 
between them is most frequentlv described as part of the Aristotelian "square of 
opposition". This square -cvliich we haxe reproduced as Table 1, 
graphically depicts 
the relations between the four major propositions - -4. E. I. 0 ' 3  In this tradi- 
tional synale. contlaries, like A and E. connote tn.o propositions both of which 
cannot be sinlultaneouslj hue. but both of nhich can be false. FOI example. con- 
sider .mammal' as a sub-class of banimal'. Taken together. the A proposition. 
.All mailin~als are vivipara', and the E proposition. 'No ~na~nnlals 
ale xivipara'. 
cannot both be simultaneously true. but both can be false. The duckbill platypus 
renders the first false as does any live-bearing mainma1 the second. By contrast. 
contradictoriei are pairs of propositions that can neither be simultaneously true 
nor false. As the square indicates. A and 0 stateinelits contradict one another. as 
do E and I. Collocluially. this says that if *All X is Y', it cannot be t ~ u e  
that thele 
are sonie X s  (elen one) that ale not Y. If it is true that .all niaiilnials are animals'. 
then there cannot be a single being in the class of 'mainmal' that does not also fall 
in the class of banimal'. Untlelrriting these tlistirictioris was the capacious notion 
of a universe as a *.suminurn genus". filled nith beings of all different types. to 
wllicll nanies cor~esponded. and xv11icl.i could be arrayed in a classificatory fashion. 
a universe ivliose plenitude was so abundant that contraries ivere possible. 
Table 4. Aristotelian Square of Opposition 
A 
E 
(All X is Y) 
Contraries 
(KO X is Y) 
Subalternation 
Contradictories 
Subalternation 
I 
4 
Sub-contraries 
w 
0 
(Some X is Y) 
(Some X is not Y) 
In his earliest writings De AIorgan appears to have been tliorollglllv wedded to 
7"See, for example, the standard treatment by Irving hl. Copi. An Iratroductaor~ to Logic; 2nd 
Ed.. New York: The hlacmillall Compally, p. 114; 1961. 

De hIorgan's Logic 
309 
the stantlard segregation of contrary and contratlictory. For instance. he devoted 
Chapter XIV of his 1830 Study of hluthematzcs. to "Geometrical Reasoning" where 
he giappled ~vith deinonstratiilg how the stateinents of geometrj nlaj be expressed 
in one of the four tladitional propositional foims. A. E. I, and 0. and how geo- 
metrical reasoning in general might be expressed in standard svllogistic form. Of 
these "species of assertions" (as he labeled propositions in these passages). the A 
and E assertions ,*are called contraries". while the A and 0, as well as the E and 
I are .~contradictorv" ." 
However. even in this early work, De hIorgan was inclling toward a later posi- 
tion in which he would collapse the distinction in his notion of "universe under 
consitleration". Again. the mathenlatical context provitled tlle suggestion. Ear- 
lier. \ve discussed his account of "real" and ..incorrectw forins i11 algebra. in \vhich 
De AIorgan had 5ho1vn that expressions (like 3 - 8) that seenled to prodnce "inl- 
possible" cluailtities (like -5) could be mechanically rearianged ( 8  - 3) so as to 
produce a possible (positive) r e ~ u l t . ~ '  
He also took another approach. In one of 
his examples he suggested that the expression 3 - 8. which produces a negative 
sol~~tion, 
may be written in a different manner by simply connecting the expression 
to another nmnher. say 56. xvhich ~vould then yield tlle mlexceptional sl~btraction 
56 + 3 - 8 = 56 - 5. Here. De Alorgan fourici that changing tlle matl~eniatical 
context for framing the original problein led to an acceptable solution. In this 
example lies the germ of his later idea that enlarging 01 restricting the "universe" 
of a putatively intractable expression inight render it intelligible.7G 
This gerrri flon-ered in Fornlol Logic. n-hele De AIorgan announced that "in 
logic it is desirable to consider ilaines of irlclusioil with the correspoilding names 
of exclusion". He proposed acllieving this end through "inventing the names of 
exclusion by the prefix not. as in tree and not-tree. man and not-man. Let these 
be called contrary or contradzctory names." In a footnote he added simply. -1 
intend to dra~v no distinction hetxveeri these m - o r d ~ . " ~ ~  
Collapsiilg the long-standing distinction between contraries and coiltradictories 
grew out of a problein that De LIorgan had folmd with traditional accounts. Up 
to llis o~vn age. lle claiinetl. logicians llad uietl *.such contraries as man ant1 not- 
mail . . . [to] mean by the alternative. man and everything else." This practice. 
however, llad "little effective rneanirig. and no use. in a classification which. because 
they are not nleri. includes in one wortl, not-rnnn, a planet and a pin, a rock 
and a featherbed, bodies and idea. wishes and things wished for." In short. the 
tiaditional use of contrary was t~ivial. Llost p~opositions nere illucll less extensive 
than the entire universe, and inore typically one considered a -range of ideas" 
as containing "the whole matter under consideration". F~lrther. he remarked, in 
"such ~miverses. contrariei are very coinnlon: that is. ternli each of ~vhicli excludes 
7"SDLI 
pp 203-2051 \I~11111 ([ADLI pp 26-35]) 
75See above, p 291 
7 6 [ s ~ h ~  1051 
-- 
' ' [FL, pp 11-12] (ital De hlolgarl's) 

310 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L Richards 
every case of the otlier. while both together contain the \vhole."'" 
Contraries. then. did not embrace the -\t-hole universe". but only one general 
idea within it. For example. Briton arid alien are contraries hecanse everv Inan 
lnust be one oi the other of tlie t\vo, and no nlan can be both. This nleant that 
not-Briton and alien are identical names. The same may be said of othei paiiings: 
of "integer and fraction among numbers". peer and commoner anlong subjects. 
male and female among animals. and so on. As thus defined. contraries acquire 
their contradictory stat115 xvithin the universe of the general idea or class terrii 
being contenlplated (e.g. Briton and alieri n ithin tlie class of men). Tlle 
hole 
idea under considelation zs the unzverse (lneaning nierely the whole of which itre 
are considering parts)." And \t-it11 "respect to that unz~lerse", contraries are the 
nanies that have nothing in common, but betwee11 them they contain the whole 
idea under consicleratiol~ (i.e. Britons and aliens have nothing in colnl~lon with 
one another, but together comprise all men). To make all this more manageable. 
De hlorgan designated term nalnes by capital letters, their contraries by lower 
case letters (as with X and .r). In this n-ay he fornlulated what ~vould later be 
knon 11 as logical con~plenlentatiori. n ith teinls and their con~plemei~ts 
coniprising 
tlie entire menibership of a bbuniverse under consideration" .7Y 
Resti icting the "mi\ er se undei consideration" mas therefore conceptuallj tied 
to eliniinating tlie distinction between contrary and contradictoiy. which De Nor- 
gan saw as an important innovation in logic 111 passing. it might seen1 that such a 
move coulci tlnn out to he equally as arhitraiy as the Image De Alorgan sought to 
o ~ e r t m n .  STThile ceitainl) true that Briton and alien exhaust the class of inen. so 
too mould any pairing of opposing characteristics oi featuies: clad oi naked: local 
or mute. rneii wlio cap their tootlipaste tubes or inen who do not (this would entail 
a f~lrther sub-class of men as toothpaste-users or not), and so forth. De hlorgan 
agieed: **ST'(. 
can make a class of any individuals we please. JfTe can imagine a qual- 
ity by \vhich to desci ibe the class. Any individuals. ho~vevei cap1 iciousl~ joined, 
ale logzcally a class. . . " His point here was that tlie uni~erse under consideia- 
tiori depended on the user's designs on the ternis (a haberdashei rniglit divide all 
men into those who wore hats and those who did not). not on whether the terms 
matched some **I eal" structure of objects in the outside \t-or ld. Still. regal dless 
of whether the designs nere f1i1 olous or serious. piofouiid or trivial. the teims 
hrollght tlieir real 'exi5tenc.e' into logic: as De Ilorgan declaied at the end of his 
sentence: ... . . let then1 be ontologicallj a11 ~~nassiinilating 
medley" 
Even more telling. this 'existence' extended to contraries. as well as the ternis 
thenlsehes. In fact. \vhether tern~s mere positive oi negative. De hIorgan argued. 
was but "an accident of language". I11 English one might say "every A is B" while 
in French the same meaning might be expressed as  lo A is b". 111 short. a term's 
being contrary hai no affect on its existential scope. Coniitler , he exemplified. the 
"universe of propert) ". In it "personal and real are contraries. and a definition of 
78[FL. pp. 45-16] (ital. De LIorgan's) 
7 9 ~ ~ ,  
p. 421 (ital. De h1organ.s). 
[..Syllabus". p. 1671. 

De h1organ.s Logic 
311 
either is a tlefiriitiori of tlie other." At the sanie tinie 'personal' ant1 'real' are not 
merely the iiegation of one another: both are "objects from whicli positive ideas are 
obtained . . . r\loney is not land but it as something. And even nhen tlie contiary 
tern1 is originally invented merely as negation. it may and does acquire positive 
properties." From the foregoing. De AIorgail made the point even stronger as he 
generalized: ... . . of two contraries, neither lnust be considered as only the nega- 
tion of the other: except ~vhen the universe in question is so wide [i.e. completely 
urirestricted]. and the positive teriri so limited, that the thing5 contained under 
the contiai? name have nothing hut the negative quality in common," a negative 
quality that in effect beconies trivial, outside of the more restrictive, -universe 
under consideration" .81 
Terms and their contraries, then. are elicited from a larger universe. and are 
restricted to lying within the smaller pale being considered. As such. they have 
positive. 'existeritial inlport'. lJ5.itli tliis perception. De Alorgari doggedly stuck to 
the priniacy of being that underlies thought. In liis logic. all terms. even negative 
ones - 
the contraries, n., y. 2. etc. - 
nere charged n it11 existence: 
On looking into any writer on logic. we shall see that ezzstence is 
claimed for the significations of all the names. Never. in the staterrlent 
of a pioposition. do we find an> rooin left foi the alternative. suppose 
there should be n o  such fhzngs. Existence as objects. or existence as 
ideas. is tacitly claimed for the ternls of every ~ y l l o ~ i s i n . ~ ~  
For De AIorgan, thought - 
even. and especially i11 its iilost visible appearances. 
in the lnachineries of algebra and logic - always pointed to something positive. 
something beyond. even if it were nothing. 
It is riot 5urprisirig that De AIorgan ~vould ha\-e stuck to liis logical last xvitli 
Aristotle. He had never envisioned liis or11 systeiii as doing alq-thing other tlian 
"extending" the Philosopher's logic in tlie technical and symbolic sense. He called 
his system '.an ezferlsaon of Alistotle" because lie had propounded "no new laws" 
beyond Aristotle's and because all of his own syllogisms could be *.ieduced to 
an Aristotelian forin without any addition except that of contraries [and hence 
quantification] to the rilatters of predi~ation."'~ 
This last. exception clause brings us to one of the most intriguing illiiovations 
in De Alorgan's reworking of syllogi5ms, tlie "strengthelled argl~riieilts" . In oln 
discussion of Table 1 we noted tlie eight b.strengthe~led arguments" that lie in 
the coluiilns on the left and right (aigunients cl, I .  t. bb. e, m, I L .  and cc). The 
-strengthening" in these argulnents occurs when a particular premise is trans- 
formed into a universal. 17-e can see this by comparing arguinent 5 (our earlier 
81[FL. p. 361 (ital. De hlorgan's). 
8 2 [ ~ ~ ,  
p. 1271 (ital. De LIorgan's). See also. [..Syllabus". p. 1,541: '.Remember that in 
producing a narne. the es~stence of things to which it applies is p~edzcated. i.e. asserted . . . "  and 
"Logic". p. 251: ". . . el-ery logical tern1 is postulated as ha\-ing existence in thought or existence 
in external reality. according to the universe in question. It is only as representing existence that 
a term is used in logic." 
83[S2, p. 971 [OS; p. 421. 

312 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
example) with the strengthened arglniierit u. which lies inirnediatrly to the right 
and slightly lower on the Table. The s argui~leiit is X))Y).)Z. n hich gives X).)Z: 
tlie u argument is X))Y(.)Z. which produces X).)Z. the same coiiclusion as s. 
The middle preiliise of s is the particular proposition Y).)Z. which reads .Some 
Zs are not Ys'. while the middle premise in u is the universal expression Y(.)Z. 
('Everything is Y or Z or both'). The move from s to u "strengthened" the par- 
ticular. minor premise. by transfornling it into a universal. Another example of 
strengthening car1 he seen bj comparing argmrient x on the table to argnnient u. 
In this instance arguinent z has a particulai. niajor premise. X)(Y. arid a uni- 
versal, illinor premise. Y(.)Z. which leads to tlie paiticular conclusion X).)Z. the 
same as wit11 argument I L .  Only nom- in moving to I L .  the major. rather tlla~l the 
ininor premise is strengthened. 
De Llorgan's symbolic system sho~ved that this kind of "strengthening" - 
whether of the minor or the major premise - had no effect on the conclusion. 
The canon of validity remained the same. Applying the erasure rule to s - 
that is 
to X))Y),)Z - 
yields X).)Z; applying the eraslne rule to u - 
that is to X ) ) Y  (.)Z 
- 
also yields X).)Z. Fio111 the standpoint of traditional sj llogistic. the inferences 
in tlie strengthened arguilleiits were problematic, iiideed invalid. They are all 
syllogisms with two universal premises and a particular conclusion. which means 
they all commit what is commonly called the "existential fallacy". which says a 
valid svllogi5rn with a particular conclusion cannot have txvo ~~niversal 
prenlises. 
De Illorgan ackno~vledged that such sj llogisins ale invalid nheil subject to tradi- 
tional. Aiistotelian analysis: "tlius A E I  in tlie first figuie can be nothing but the 
invalid mode .Every Y is Z. no X is Y ,  therefore some X s  are Zs", he wrote in 
[S2].8' However, they were valid in his own system. They were to logic what the 
negative and i~nagiriarj riurribers were to algebra. Tliej were the results of the 
legitinlate inanipulatiorl of the functional rules of his spicular sjstem, and nTele, 
therefore. theinselves legitiii~ate.~~ 
De Illorgan's challenge was to find a way to 
~mderstand them. 
De Illorgan's defense of tlie validity of his strengthened syllogisms enibraced 
what we may identify as three separate segnlents of interpretation that either 
grew out of hii spicular notation or were reinforced by it: (a) the "calcuhm of 
opposite relatioils"; (b) the tn-o 1101el expressions. X(.)Y (.E\erytliing is X or Y 
or both') and X )  (Y (.Sonle thing5 are neither X s  nor Ys'): and (c) tlie sl~balterri 
'existence' possessed by contrary tenns. Together these itenis of interpretation 
sliow the ways tliat De Llorgan's Peacockian approach moved him considelably 
beyond Aristotle. eve11 as it kept him based in the Greek's syllogistic. 
De Illorgan's "calculus of opposite relations" i11 symbolic logic was inspired by 
algebra. where ..all oppositions are instrumentally reducible to addition and sub- 
''[s2. 
p. 851 [OS. p. 291: [Copi. p. 1931. 
' w e  hIorgan had actually introduced ..strengthened" premises for arguments in Formal Logic 
(pp. 70, 104-103) as a consequence derived fro111 his eight basic propositions and his formulation 
of the '.numerically definite syllogism". Tying these strengthened premises to the mechanisms 
of his new notation. however, gave hirn a more explicit rneans of explaining their ~ralidity. 

De h1organ.s Logic 
313 
t~actiori."~"liii 
was the core of the *.munerically tlefinite syllogisni", which lie 
devised to address problems attellding the vagueness of traditiollal quaiitification. 
As a niathematician. De hIorgail mas acutely aware of the way a niiddle-term's 
cluantity could deternliiie tlie validity of a syllogism. In criticizing Hamilton's s p -  
tern, which he believed incapable of treating quantity effectively. he introduced 
a distinction in the quantity terms that nlarked for hinl a considerable step for- 
ward. Logicians up to his day. he observed. had interpreted the universal .all' in 
a "curiinlar" sense. That is. 'all' referred to tlie entire, accuriil~lated collectiori of 
individuals that fell under a tern1 so quantified, a -completed induction". But 
this did not exhaust the possibilities in for~ning terins and deriving inferences. 
especially as regards the "general propositions of any science [including logic]. us 
actually proved". Euclid. for example, intended to shorn- that **all isosceles tri- 
angles have equal angles at the bases". but this could not extend iilductivelv to 
the entire collection of isoscelei triangles. which was infinite in nmiiher. Rather. 
Euclid ineant +all' ill the sense of .ally one' or .every'. This usage coniprised an 
"exemplar" interpretation of 'all'. Like~vise with the particular 'some': its exeni- 
plar iiiterpretatioii was "some oile", which of course could be expanded to "some 
two". "some three" and so on indefinitely. with each number specifying the exact 
aniomlt of cluantity. Tlle exemplar reading of cluantity terrils. in short, gave tlieril 
a precisioii previously lackiiig. This provided their core nieaniiig in logic where 
often ..what is pro\-ed is the exeniplar proposition" .X7 The consequences of these 
new definitions were far-reaching, for the exeinplar readings of .all' and .some' 
opened the door for considering probabilities in the numerically definite syllogism. 
and probabilities. in turn, made possible the strengthened syllogis~ns.~~ 
8 6 [ ~ 2 .  
p. 831 [OS. p. 261. 
"[S2, pp. 100-1011 [OS, p. 461 (ital. De h1organ's): see also [.Syllabus", pp. 168-1691. 
"De 
illorgan first introduced the numerically definite syllogism (NDS) in [FL]. where he 
counted it among the nlajor accon~plishn~ents 
of the book (p. x). and. indeed, he devoted 
an entire chapter to it (Chapter VIII). IVithout straying too far afield here. we can use his ex- 
anlple to illustrate a simple NDS. Let X .  1'; and Z be the terms of a syllogism, with .'E the 
number of Xs in existence. r/ the rlunlber of Ys. and i the rlurnber of Zs. and 7% the number of 
instances in the universe [of the syllogism]." Furt,her. let mXY represent that 7nXs are t,o be 
found anlong the Ys or that mYs are to be found anlong the Xs. Likewise n-ith nXZ. From 
the premises mXY and n X Z  and assuming only rj (the number of Ys) is known, it follows 
that m X Y  + n X Z  = (m + n - r1)XZ [FL. pp. 166-1681, See Adrian Rice. "'Everybody llakes 
Errors': The Intersection of De Morgan's Logic and Probability. 1837- 1817". History and Phi- 
losopl~y of Logzc. 24: 289-305. 2003. \Vith this formulation it also becornes possible in sorne 
cases to create a valid inference from t13-o particular propositions, an anathema for Aristotelian 
traditionalists. Consider 'Some Ys are Xs'. Y( ) X  . and 'Some Ys are Zs'. Y (  )Z. I11 traditional 
syllogistic. nothing follox<-s necessarily about the relat,ion of t,he Xs and 2s. and. indeed. the 
inference ( ) ( ) = ( ) is not to be found on De hIorgan's table of valid arguments (see Table 
1). But, by specifying the rlunlbers of Xs and 1's. then a valid inference can follo~v. Suppose 
the number of the Ys is q, the number of the Ys that are Xs is a, and the number of 1's that 
are Zs is b. Then there are at least ( a  + b - rj) X s  that are Zs. If the nunlber of ticketholders 
in an auditorium were 1000, of whom 500 (a) were assigned seats, with the remainder sitting 
in general admission. and 700 (b) bought itenls at the concession stand. it would follow that at 
least 500 + 700 - 1000. that is. 200, of the assigned-seat attendees bought concession items. See 
the remarks of Alexander IIcFarlane. Lectures on Ten British Mathematzcinras of the Nzliir~eteenth 
Century. np, 1916. ("Project Gutenberg" eBook #9942, released. 2003). pp. 15-16. 

314 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
Beyond interpreting the quantity terms with "n~mlerical" tlefiriiteness, De AIor- 
gan paid careful attention to the franiework in m-liicli they operated. The univer- 
sality oi particularit? of propositions. foi instance. refeired to all or some things 
within the universe of the proposition, whereas applied to terlils they refei red to all 
or some things. in the exemplar sense. contained within the terms. or a "portion" 
of the universe of proposition. But. we recollect. all terllls were acconlpanied by 
their contraries (complements) so that every term is only a part of the universe 
llnder consitleration and has an exi5tirig coritrar) within it. These considerations 
nlearlt it nTas possible to liave a universal piopositiorl in ~\-llich one of the teinls 
might be particular. e.g. X ) ) Y  ('All X s  are some Ys') or a paiticular propositio~l 
in which both the ter~ns might be universals: X)(Y (.Some things are neither X s  
nor Ys'). I\lore importantly. they led to the collapse of the distiiictioii between 
number and kind. between quantity (all or some) and quality (affirmation or nega- 
tion). In its stead De AIorgan profferetl a *.quantitative" definition of contraries: 
"the qualititative contrary of 'ever) X '  is .some 2s.' and of 'sonie Xs.' 'ever) x ' . " ~ ~  
ST7ith affirmation arid negation "in the usual 5erise" abandoned and subject to 
a11 exeniplar, quantitative reading, De hloigan observed tliat n~ithin theii uiii- 
verses. nialiy expressions, such as X (  )Y (bSonie X s  are Ys'), could be interpreted 
as possessillg degrees of increasing or decreasing probability. To see this. change 
both the quantities of X (  )Y: this yields X )  (Y. or x( )y (.Some things are neither 
X s  nor Ys'). If the second expression is true. lie asserted. then it stands as a 'pre- 
sumption" for tlie truth of X (  )Y. For, imagiiie. the inore tllings '*there ale n hich 
are neither X nor Y, the snialler the number of instances in the universe within 
which all the X s  and Ys are contai~led." Therefore the greater the probability of 
X (  )Y, that is. of 'some [n~lmber of] Xs' agreeing with or matching *some [number 
of] Ys'. 
Using De Illorgan's diagranls we cari more readily vien- this probability at work. 
Let the following depict the ulliverse of the propositioli X (  )Y: 
The X line represents the term X and its colliplelilelit x. with X denoted 
by the solid portion and its contrary or comple~lient ;c by the dotted portion. 
Likewise with the Y line. The overlap of the solid X and Y lines shows that 
some X s  rriatcli some of the Ys: one cari easil) see here that the tliagranl stands 
as nell foi .r( )y (.Some non-Xs are noii-Ys'). Now picture the riurnber of dots 
growing on both tlie X and Y lines (from either end). increasilig the nulliber of 
i~lstances of x( )I/. and dilliinisliing the scope of the ternis X and Y. The eler 
slilaller universe of X s  and Ys increases tlie piobability of the terrns matcliing. 
Accordinglv. by logically linking quantity and quality in the calculus of opposite 
relations. tlie payoff lay m-it11 the calcuh~s' ability to captlne probabilities. arid 
"[S2. p. 921 [OS. p. 371 
x\
y

De h1organ.s Logic 
3 1 5 
therefore to perrnit comprehending quantification inore richly anti specifically as 
niatters of degree.g0 
De illorgan took this interpretation of quantification as a specific inatter of 
degree yet further when compiling his -Syllabus" antl in so doing presentetl an 
additional argument for considering probabilities in particular propositions. There 
he distinguished -definiteM quantity from quaiitit) that is "mole ol less vague". 
Definite quantity could be either absolute or relative: -50Xs and no more'' n7as 
absolute: a fraction. say '.2-sevenths (and no more) of all the X s  are Ys" m-as 
relative. A1oreo1-er, a c~uantity nlay he definite at one m d  of a spectrmn. ant1 
vague at the other. The only perfectly definite quantities are 'all' aiid 'none': 
these are tlle signs of total quantity that niake plopositions universal. The contrary 
propositioiis of tlie universals (.Some X s  are not Ys' aiid 'Some X s  are Ys') are 
entirely vague in one direction. They start with "not-none" and proceed to add 
a bit of quantitj, so to speak, beginiling with "one at least". then contiiiuing to 
..more". and finally even to "all". the total, definite quantity at the otlier end 
of the spectrum. This conception differed from ordinary parlance. he discerned. 
n-here *.some" often ineans "not-non~" or b*not-all." In logic it can only nlean the 
former. never the latter. Logically in fact. "some may be all." STThen the logician 
sa)s 'Eveiy X is Y'. he nieans all tlle X s  are sonie of the Ys. and that sonie of 
tlie Ys are all the Xs. but he makes no clainl about just how many of tlie Ys are 
anlong the Xs. Indeed, mq-be all of them are." 
From tlie above understanding of yuantificat,ion enriched bj- probabilities. De 
illorgan concluded t,hat in tliose cases where we may move degree by degree through 
t,he vagueness. from 'not-none' to 'some' to 'niost' to 'all'. we do so without affect- 
ing the validity of a syllogism. SJTe only niake one of the premises in it st,ronger 
by increasing the pr~babilit~j- 
of correlating nienibers of the subject and predicate 
classes: even all t,he way from .some' to .all'. To the ext,eilt Tve increase the prob- 
ability in the premise, we also strerigtlien the probability in the conclusion. As 
a consequence, it becomes possible to have a valid syllogism with two ~miversal 
premises (one strengtlienetl) antl a particular conclusion. 
De AIorgan was aided in his interpretation of strengtliened argurneiits by two 
novel statement forms. which he had invented, and which are not found in tra- 
ditional Aristotelian syllogistic. These were the propositions X(.)Y ('Everything 
is X or Y or both') and X )  (Y (.Some things are neither X s  nor Ys'). He first 
introtluced the expressions in Formu1 Log~c in the chapter "On Propositions" as 
"[S2, pp 91-93] [OS, pp 35-39]. De LIorgan had also clone considerable work in the theory of 
probability itself and was as current with the field as any mathematician in the mid-nineteenth 
century; he devoted Chapter IX of [FL] to probability. and produced several papers on the 
subject; his views are treated more fully ill Joan L. Ricl~ards, "The Probable and the Possihle in 
Early Victorian England" in Bernard Lightmaa. ed. fictorzan Scie~ace in Co~atezt. University 
of Chicago Press: Chicago. pp. 51-71, 1997. These developments lie beyond the scope of our. 
more restricted concerns with De hlorgaa's uaiverse of the syllogism: here we wish to note only 
how his recasting of the canon of syllogistic validity opened a door to probability. which in turn 
influenced his account of strengthening syllogisms. 
g1 [..Syllabus". pp. 151-1561. 

316 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L Richards 
part of his discussion of the complement and noii-conlplemeiit relations bet~veen 
X aiid Y classes. That ' X  is a compleineiit of Y' equals 'No iioii-X is non-Y' and 
tliat ' X  is a lion-coinplenient of Y' equals .Some non-Xs are ~ i o n - Y s . ' ~ ~  
These 
ielatiosis becaine ri~uch easier to see with tlie spicular notation and the accompa- 
nying graphical expressions. The propositioil X(.)Y reads literallv 'Some X s  are 
not some Ys'. The universe of this proposition call be expressed with the following 
diagram: 
Again, the X and Y lines represent the terms X and Y and their complenlents x 
a i d  y. I11 the universe of this propositioii we call see that theie ale sosne X s  tliat 
are not some Ys. Me can also see the equivalent expression x))Y. 'All xs are some 
Ys'. Anti we can see the overlapping solitl lines. ~vhereiri X s  are also Ys. 11-lien 
we take tlie expressiosl as a n hole. then. ever? t hiiig that is in the proposition (all 
inenihers of X and Y) entails X 01 Y or both X a i d  Y. Siinilarlj, the expression 
X)(Y (literally 'All X s  are all Ys') may be graphically depicted to show that 
'Some non-xs are some non-Ys'. or alternatively stated, 'Some things are neither 
X s  nor Ys.' 
The spicular notation tied both of these novel propositions specifically to De 
SIorgan's coriception of quantification. for X(.)Y (,Ever\-thing is X or Y or both') 
was the only universal expressioil coinposed of two paiticulai tenns, ~vliile X) (Y 
was tlie only particular expression coinposed of tnro universal teims. Tlie expres- 
sions were not needed in all cases of strengthening arguments. But they combined 
with the other six propositions to give De lllorgan the means of coinpleting the 
full array of strerigtheiietl syllogisnls. Attending once again to Table 1. convert- 
ing a particular syllogism to a strengthened one iileant cllangiilg the quantity of 
one term in one of the premises in ordei to resider both preinises universal. In 
arguments s and n this was accomplished by simpl>- altering ).) to (.). a universal 
premise composed of two particular terms. In a similar fashioii it became possible 
in argurrieiits P aiid rn to derive froin two universal preinises. composed with mi- 
versa1 terms, the conclusion, )(. ~vhich althougll conlposed of two universal teiills 
remains nonetheless a particular proposition. 
Tlie above describes ho~v strengthened argl~nlerits were created within De AIor- 
gall's system. Still. the question of their validitj remains. and leads us to the 
tliird point of liis interpretive endeavors. De LIorgan's central assusnptioii was 
that changing the form of all expression will not alter its positive content, even 
though it appears to produce an impossible result. The first figure argument. AEI. 
we saw. had protluced an invalid syllogism in the traditional forrii. But De SIorgari 
insisted that *.ever) one" of his "sj llogisins call be reduced to an Aristotelian form. 
without any addition except that of contraiies to tlie matters of predication." How 
could this be? He provided the answer with all example, argument e from Table 1. 
X
Y

De IIorgan's Logic 
317 
The argmnent is )) (( = ) (, or X))Y ( ( 2  = X )  ( 2 .  which in traditional fonii is: 'All 
X s  are Ys': +All Zs are Ys': 'Therefore sonie things are neither X s  iior 2s'. Iii ad- 
dition to conlinitting the existential fallacj. this argunient colnniits tlle fallacy of 
the undistributed iniddle terni, Y. aiid is doubly iiivalid. so to speak.93 But using 
contraries. as vie11 as the erasure and transforiliatioil rules De Llorgan generated 
the following, equivalent expression. X).(y))z = X).)z. And this expression nets a 
traditional. valid syllogism, *'Fesapo" in the time-honored terminology. From this. 
De hlorgari conclntled. *.the s)llogisiri )) (( = )( can thus be lnade Aristotelian."" 
Although De AIorgan did riot provide it. we can reproduce a proof of a strength- 
ened syllogism's validity. ivliicli will reveal a critical linchpin in all these strength- 
ened 
To do so we shall need to shorn- that. from the premises, it 
follo~vs that X)(Z. *Some things are neither X s  iior 2s'. or, its eqldvalent, 'Some 
zs are some zs . 
Proof: 
1. X))Y - 
Every X is Y (premise) 
2. Y((Z - 
Every Z is Y (premise) 
3. y ) ) ~  
- 
Every y ii .r (I, contraposition, i.e. restatement ~ming contraries) 
3. y))z - 
Ever)- y is z (2. contraposition) 
5. y()z - 
Some ys are .IS (3. subalternation. see below) 
6. .c()y - 
Soine xs are ys (5. conversion) 
7. z()z - Sonie zs are zs (3, 6. First Figure, AII. "Daripti") 
The critical step in this proof is #5, the inference of subalternation. IYith the 
traditional. Aristotelian square (seen earlier) this inference allowed one to iilove 
logically from the A statement to the I, as well as froin the E to the 0 statement. 
For Aristotle. universal statelrients n-ere not eiiipty. Tlllls *all nien' (understood in 
the -cun~ular" sense of 'all') included ever? being who was a niaii, and ever) mall 
gave the -existence" to the term 'all men'. Each inan was an existing instantiation 
of .all men' or 'inan'. Because uni~ersal teriils nere iiot empty. it follo~ved that 
particular terms, such as 'some men' were also not eniptv. and the .existential 
 lie ..fallacy of the undistributed middle" occurs when the middle terrri in a syllogism. E'. 
is particular in both premises. For instance, in the syllogism. 'A11 dogs are animals'. ,All cats 
are animals', therefore 'All dogs are cats'. .animals' is the 1'; middle term. but represents only 
part of the class of .animals' in both premises (e.g. .All dogs are [sorne] animals'). By being 
undistributed. different parts of the class may be involved in each use and therefore the Y term 
cannot corinect the X arid Z ternis of the major arid nlirior premises. Traditionally, a valid 
syllogism requires that the Y term be universal (or 'distributed') in at least one premise. It can 
then serve as tlle term through which or by means of which the other two terrns of the syllogism 
can be connected, eliminating I' in the process. 
94[s~, 
p. 971 10s. ,,. 
431. 
" 1 ~ e  wish specifically to thank Professor IIerrill for his help in clarify-ing both this proof and 
a variety of points pertaining to strengthened arguments. 

318 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
inlport' of the general tern1 carried through to the particular terni. De Alorgarl's 
ploy was to do this with contrary terms as well: the critical inference in step #3 
above is fioin tlie uili~ersal coiitrar) 'eveiy y' to the palticulai contrarj 'sonie ys'. 
Once the existential inlport of .some ys' is granted. tlie rest of the proof follows. 
The same holds with the other strengthened arguilients. includilig even that 
original bugaboo. the putatively invalid A E I  ~vitli which we begall this excursion. 
**I11 rny system". he recorded. 
a plain illail mlio sees cleailj that soine things are proTed to be neither 
inen nor mice. were it only because they do not eat cheese. may rest 
coiltelit that his knowledge. even in the form of the light of nature. 
can he rnatle science. without the necessity of llaving recourse to the 
following ver) venerable, but very uiisatisfactory form: 
No nian is a noii-eater of cheese. 
[proposition E] 
All iioii-eaters of cheese are other things than niice. 
[proposition A] 
Therefore sorne other tliings tlian inice are also not men. 
[propositioi~ IIg6 
Througliout his renorking of traditional syllogisn1s. De Morgan leinailled con- 
vinced that liis own systeni only extended Aristotle's and that any argument in 
his system could be "made Aristotelian." This required 'existence', which accord- 
ingly was not for De Morgan an extrinsic addition to liis logic. but an intrinsic 
component of it, a critical one that made kev inferences possible. 
3 THE -PRIXCIPLE . . . OF THE HINGED LEVERS" 
De Morgan produced his nut-cracker analogy for logic in the third of his inajor 
logic papers. n-liicli he wrote in 1858. He dm-oted much of that paper. [S3]. to 
a revien and general treatment of logic as he had understood and developed it 
to that point. Shortly after, in [S4], published with seemingly little preparation 
in 1860, he introduced perhaps liis most profound ailcl eilcluriilg contributioil to 
logic. tlie logic of relations." 111 tlie saine year he summarized the central point of 
tlie niore technical [S-l] in a popular article simply titled bbLogic" for the Englzsh 
Cyclopaedzu: the .'p?sre form of the proposition. divested of all iliatter. is the 
assertion or denial of tlie following: X stands in relation L to Y."g8 
Here was the nutcracker analogv brollgllt to life in his om-ii work and inaturitv. 
Befoie 1860 De hloigaii had thougllt hinlself in possession of the '.pure form" 
of logic with his spicularly sylnbolic rewo~king of Aristotle. Witli his table of 
argumeilts, he had portrayed the complete "universe of the syllogism" using his 
"[S2; p. 971 [OS. p. 331. 
g7hlerrill ([.4DhI, p. 1151). 
98 . . L ~  
gic". 
' 
p. 252 (ital. added). The Eraglzsh Cyclopa,ed~a was the sequel to the P e n n y  Cyclo- 
pedan, to which De Morgan colltributed over 700 articles. 

De IIorgan's Logic 
319 
functional. spicular notation. a miiverie he saw as a -y'mbolic language [that] 
gives the expression of the lans of thought in their purest forms." But non he 
realized he had grasped only tlie ..levers on a coninion hinge". as it mere. and 
not the pure form of the nutcracker. nor, to exploit the analogy, the pure form of 
logic. The latter would require yet ailother step in the process of abstracting and 
generalizing ..the ~nachiilery in action" to which he had so far coinnlitted himself. 
Thus, for De Morgan. the logic of relations he presented in [SJ]. was a major. 
further move t o ~ a r d  
tlie "pnre forin" of logic - 
tlie **principle . . . of tlie liinged 
levers". 
Tlle pathnaj that led De IIorgail to the logic of relations lay through tlie thicket 
of interpreting the copula, a problem that engaged liini throughout his career. 
Traditionally. the copula was considered as one of four components of formal logic. 
along with ternis, propositions. and ~ ~ l l o g i s m s . ~ ~ 4 s  
the etymology of the term 
indicates (from the Latin copulare. "to link"). the copula served to connect the 
trrms of subject anti predicate in a propoiition; tllus in tlir proposition 'All X is 
some Y ' ,  'is' stands as the copula. Tlie copula's core clefinitioii was "identit]c" and 
'is' and 'is not' pro1 ided the molds cair) iilg this nleaning into piopositions. By 
itself. 'is' also designated affirination of tlie identity betiveen subject and predicate. 
whereas 'is not' signified its denial. De Morgan would later chide logicians for being 
vague arid inconsistent in tlieir restrictive arid substantive use of .is' and .is not'. 
which took "many meanings in their inodes . . . and examples."100 And from the 
-Preface" to Formal Logzc on, lie believed iriaking the copula "abstract" to be one 
of his nlajor contiibutions to logic: *.In tlie for111 of the proposition, the copula is 
inacle as abstract as the terms: or is consideled as obeying only those conditions 
~vhich are ilecessarv to inference." lol 
As wit11 so many of De Illorgan's innovations in logic. the iilspiration for ab- 
stracting the copula "followed the hint given by algebra".lo2 Even before De 
hlorgan's rnore sj stenlatic turn to logic. his earliest foravs into tlie subject liad 
dealt nit11 the copula in the context of mathenlatics. His earliest rulninations 
arose from an attempt to cast Euclid in syllogistic 
I11 soine early coin- 
ineilts in The Study of A/lathrmntzcs. De Morgan experimented with broadening 
99 [..Syllabus". pp. 153-1541, 
looDe IIorgan cited the Port Royal Logic for his understanding of the traditional. substantive 
use of the copula [S2. p. 1051 [OS. p. ,521. There Arnauld and Nicole had identified three 
cornpolle~lts in a proposition: the subject. the predicate, and a11 "action of the mind" - 
affir- 
rnatiori or denial - 
indicated by 'is' or .is not'. Tlie .is' was considered '.substantive" because 
it indicated ,%lie corl~lection . . . bet\\-een the two [substantive] terms of a proposition." See. 
Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole. Logic or the Art of Thinkzng: Contnining. besides common 
rules, see~eral new observations appropriate for ,forn~ing 
judgment. Trans. Jill 17ance Buroker. 
Cambridge: Cambridge Uni~rersity Press. pp. 79-83. 1996. 
lol[FL, p. ix]. 
lo2[s2, p. 1041 [OS. p. 501. 
10"[SDT\I. p. 203 ff]. The central problem lay with translating a fortiori reasoning into syllogist,ic 
form. An example of the former w o ~ ~ l d  
be '4 is greater than B'. .B is greater than C'. therefore 
'A is greater t,han C'. This reasoning was critical to Euclid's proofs, but utterly recalcitrant to 
translation into some meaningful and non-circular or non-question-begging syllogism. See IIerrill 
([ADhl. Chap. 21). 

320 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L Richards 
its definition enough to include 'is equal to' as a second. equally legitimate copula 
that linked A to B ('A is equal to B'). De IlIorgaii saw hiniself to be thereby 
recognizing that tlieie were '.two". sepaiate copulas involving 'is'. behind nhich 
lay tlie assunlption tliat both coniprised a niore abstract and general **relation" 
between the subject and predicate. This was the assumption De Illorgan \~ould 
later unearth and refine in his logic of relations. Implied as well in these develop- 
inents was the supposition that both senses of the copula could be expressed in the 
sairle notation. m-liicli in tlnn required further effort directed toward interpreting 
the ielatioiis between subjects arid predicates n-ithili his lien syiiibology. 
In Formal Logzc. De Llorgan used his analytical scalpel to detach what he later 
called the *.essential from the accidental characteristics of the copula."104 To do 
tliis he devisetl a "double singular proposition." the rriost elerrieiital of expres5ions. 
which entailed only one instance eacli of the subject and pretlicate: "tliis one A is 
this oiie B". De Illorgan then identified three features pertaining to the copula of 
tliis core proposition. The first was its indifference to "conversion." that is 'A is B' 
and *B 
is A' nlust have tlie saiile meaning: they iilust "be both true or both false." 
Second. '*the coiinexion 2s. existing between oiie terni and eacli of tnTo others, must 
therefore exist between those two others." such that ' A  is B' and .A is C' nlust 
imply 'B 
is C'. Third. -2s and 2s not are contradzctory alternatzves. one must. 
both cannot. he tn~e." These tliree characteristics - corivertibilitv. transitivity. 
arid contrariety - aiose from the bbahsolute identity" of *is' and piovided the 
coliclitions that niacle "all the rules of logic true". Tlie analogy with algebia drove 
honie the point. for the abstracting from .is' nlirrored just ho-cv 
arithnietic \$-as tlie irietlimii in which the fornis ant1 and lam-s of algebra 
were suggested. But as now we znvent algebras by abstracting tlie 
forlns and lan s of operation, aiid fitting lien lneaiiings to tlieni. so n e  
have powel to invent nen lneanings for all the forins of inference, in 
every way in ~vhich we have the ponTer to make iileanings of zs aiid as 
not ~vhich satisfy the above  condition^.^"^ 
Immediately. De SIorgaii illustrated how other copnlai niight also inert the ei- 
sential conditions. Iniagine, lie proposed, X, Y. and Z as symbols attached to 
"rnatrr~al objects". then let 'is' be placed between two of tlierri (as in 'X is Y'). 
arid let 'is' meail tliat the "tno [objects] are tied together. say bj a cord." Non 
the cord. ..tied to". fills all the above conditions: 'X is tied to Y' means 'Y is tied 
to X': ' X  is tied to Y '  and 'Y is tied to 2' imply ' X  is tied to 2'; 
and of . X  is 
tied to Y '  and . X  is not tied to Y' only one can be true. 
Not only was 'is' abstracted into the 1iiol.e general conditions of copulas. but De 
Morgan also noted tliat tliis raised the possibility that other copulas might exist, 
which fulfilled only sonie of the a b o ~  
e conditions. For exaniple "gives" (in the 
causal sense) is transitive. but not convertible: .X gives Y' and .Y gives 2' yielcls 
lo4[S2; 
p. 1041 [OS; p. 501: [FL. 
pp. 56-61] 
10"[FL, pp. 57-59] (ital. De hIorgall's). 

De h1organ.s Logic 
32 1 
' X  gives Z': yet ' X  gives Y' does not produce 'Y gives X'. The sanie lleltl wit11 
other links between subject and predicate. sucli as the "verbs to bring. to make. 
to lift. etc."lo6 Other connectives inigllt be convertible. hut not transitive. Foi 
instance. 'converses with'. as in 'X converses with Y ' .  converts to 'Y com.eises with 
X'. but it is not transitive. for X's conversing with Y and Y's with Z do not iinply 
X's conversing with 2. 
Of course. sonie links between subject and predicate fail all 
the conditions. That .John loves Mary' entails neither that 'Mary loves John' nor, 
if .Mary loves Kevin', that bJolln lovs Kevin'. (To be sure. no one ever seriouslv 
proposed that love arid logic enlbodied any sort of nlutual. necessary inference. 
~vhatever the conditions.) On tlie basis of these and other examples. De illorgan 
then defined the "abstract copula" as .'a formal mode of joining two terms which 
carries no meaning. and obeys no law except such as is barely necessary to make 
the forills of inference follow." lo7 
Generalizing and abstracting tlie copula rneant incorporating it into the "action 
of the machinery". 
This led to two further. successive innovations before De 
Morgan ~voultl arrive at the logic of relations. Tlie first was his so-called **bicopular 
svllogism" and its conipanion. tlie -coinposition of relatiolis". Tlie second niay be 
found in his "material" interpretation of the copula 'is'. The former emerged in 
[S2] as he brought the ..abstract copula" to bear on his reworking of traditional 
svllogistic in tandem with his new svinbology. The latter surfaced in De Alorgan's 
response to several of his critics, especially the Reverent1 Henry L. A I a n ~ e l . ~ ~ ~  
These developments in the 1850s paved the n-ay for liis next step in abstractioil 
in two ways. If tlie copula wele palt of tlie logical machinery then the various 
relations that comprised it niight be conibilied nritliout fussing excessively over 
their "illaterial" meaning. Lloreover. instantiations of these colnbined relations 
(inchtding, eventually. syllogiinls) viould he then understood as b*inaterial" in the 
same xva) that arithmetic provided an instantiation, but 0111~ one. of algebra. Just 
as tlie "forms boiii and educated in aritlimetic have left tlieir palent and set up 
for themselves." so too would those "born and educated" in language - 
especially 
the traditional copula 'is' - *'set up for themselves" in the logic of relations.lo9 
Heretofore. De Illorgall clainled in [S2]. logicians had restricted theniselves to 
a single copula. 'is'. when describing inferences. even though it mas eniployed in 
a variety of ways. In fact, De Illorgan had held in Form01 Logzc that syllogisms 
themselves did not exhaust inferences. even though they typified the instrumell- 
talit) of reason. .'For example. 'man i5 anirrial, therefore the head of a Inan i5 
the head of an animal' is inferelice. but not ~ y l l o ~ i s n l . " ~ ~ ~  
But now with the 'is' 
abstracted according to tlie conditions laid doivn, tlie conditions themselves be- 
canie effectively the markers of tlie copular connection and hence inference. Tliis 
lo6[S2. pp. 106-1071 [OS. pp. 53-55]; [FL. p. 3121. 
'O7[s2. p. 1041 [OS. p. 511. 
ln8A follower of Harriilton. illa~isel had charged De hlorgan with abaridonirig traditiorlal logic's 
reading of the copula 'is' as a "formal" component of t,he discipline. De Morgan agreed with 
hlansel's point and defended himself by claiming the .is' to be ..materialM not "formal". 
1°"S2. 6. 1031 [OS. p. 501 (ital. De l\lorgan's): 
~ ~ o [ F L ,  
p. 1311. 

322 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
ineant one did not have to rely on any one or rilnilber of tliern, sudi as transitivity. 
which up to then had been insisted on -in ever) kind of logic". Oiie could use 
an) copula nliatsoever. because '+the perception of relations by nieans of relations 
does not require us to use only one relation." Otherwise stated. one did not need 
a syllogisin and its copular 'is' to evaluate a syllogism: indeed. froin the perspec- 
tive of the abstracted conditions. copular relations were themselves abstracted and 
ainenable to other mechanisms. They could be compounded. for example. and it 
was even possible to iritrodnce different relation5 in different prenlises. De hlorgan 
illustrated: 
Every X has a relation to sonle Y 
and Every Y has a relatioii to seine 2. 
From which it folloned that ..every X has a coinpound relation to soine Z."lll 
As a case in point. De Morgan explained what might happen (logically) in an 
act of persuasion. "If John call persuade Thomas. and Tlionias call corniliarid 
IT-illiam" we canilot, initially. infer that John call either persuade or co~nmand 
1J5.illiam because of the ~~intransitiveriess 
of the individual copulae" (i.e. neither 
'persuade' nor 'command' is transiti~e). But let a single word. say 'control'. ex- 
press the ..process of gaining an end by peisuading one xvho can comniand." I11 this 
instance we have a legitinlate inference: "then John call contiol TYilliam." The 
inference is valid because the ~.compolmd copula" ('coiltrol') supplies the transi- 
tivity that the individual copulas lacketl. .#Thisw, 
De AIorgan liiglilightetl. "is the 
step by n hich we ascend to the general theor) of the copula." And it produces 
what he called a -bicopular sj llogism" .' l2 
The bicopular syllogism. then. conlhiiied two copulas into a "coniposite copula". 
which in turn yielded the "instrumental part of inference". De LIorgan further de- 
scribed this as "the eltmznat~on of a [mzcldle] term by composzt~on of relatzons." 'I3 
Accordingly. this n.as a major step toward viewing all copular connective5 as but 
an instantiation of a let inole abstract and general relation. It is fair to say that 
in [S2] De Slorgan had neither worked out all the iinplications of this direction in 
his own thinking nor clarified precisely the links bet-cveen the 'is' of identity and 
the now ,*abstract copula".ll' 
Konetheless, his insight that copular connectives 
- 
which provide inference in logic - 
call be considered as iilstruinental, as part 
of the action of the machinery. carried fom-ard his program of abstracting fonn 
from inatter in logic. just as lie had earlier done ill mathematics. 
The further separation of logical forin and inatter inariifest in the bicopular 
syllogisni hecaine ever Inore pronounced as De Slorgan respoiided to hlansel. In 
'11[S2. p. 1081 [OS. p. 551. 
11"S2; p. 1081 [OS; p. 561. 
11"S2. p. 1091 [OS. p. 561 (ital. De LIorgan's). 
' I 4 ~ o r  instance. De hlorgan tried to explain how a ,.bicopular syllogism [could] be reduced to 
a compound process of a unicopular syllogism" ([S2. p. 1081 [OS. 1'. 
361). hut the results. at 
best. '.remain problematic". hlerrill ([ADhI. pp. 69-78]). provides an incisive discussion of the 
bicopular syllogisnl and its place in the developrrlerlt of De LIorgan's logic of relations. 

De h1organ.s Logic 
323 
an 1851 review of De Alogan's Formal Log7c Alansel chargeci that in his attenipt 
to niake the "abstract copula" intelligible. De AIorgan had iiitroducecl material 
beyoild the ..science of tlie lams of formal thinking" itself (Alansel's traditional 
defiiiitioli of logic). Take "transitivity" for example. For De Illorgall this was a 
condition that could be satisfied by .is' and by manv other collllectives as well: an 
exailiple of the latter might be .gives' in the causal sense, as we saw above. hlansel 
responded with counter examples that were of the same form. but obviously invalid 
inferences: l5 
De hlorgan: 
X gives Y 
hlansel: 
Achilles killed Hector. 
Y gives Z 
Pari5 killed Achilles. 
Therefore, X gives Z 
Therefore. Paris killed Hector. 
IVith this aiid many similar examples. hlansel advanced the arguinent that De 
hlorgan's clailns to doing formal logic - 
viz. the title of his book - 
collapsed in 
a plethora of material instrusions into his arguments. The 'is' of identity. was the 
orilv legitimate forni of the copula in logic. \rid xvhatever De Alorgan was doing. 
hIanse1 concluded. it was no longer the science of formal thinking; his sj llogisiils 
thelnselves weie no longer formal. but material. 
De Morgan met this charge head on. First. he agreed ~vitli hlansel that transitive 
relations. such as "is equal to". cannot be converted into formal syllogisms using 
the copula of identitj as traditioriall~ understood. Earlier. hi5 rival, Hamilton. 
had tiied. by trarislatiilg 'A is equal to B' and 'B 
is equal to C'. therefore 'A is 
equal to C' into tlie following aigunieiit: 
TIVhat are equal to the same. are equal to each other: 
A and C are equal to the same (B): 
Therrfore. ,4 and C are equal to eoch othrr. 
But De hlorgan confessed he was *bql~ite 
at a loss" to see how this could be an 
"expanded for111 of the first" expression. Buried in Hamilton's sj llogisiil he still 
saw. rathei, the  coinpo position of relation. .equal of equal is equal'. expressing the 
transitiveness of the copula rq7suls." This plus convertibility made the original ar- 
gument valid, but did so only 011 the basis of De Alorgan's own copular conditions. 
Then Alansel tried a different tack. claiming that the putatively formal reasoilillg 
involved in .A is equal to B' and *B 
is eclual to C', therefore '-4 is equal to C' was 
"elliptical" and. therefore. +'as a t  stands. material . . . aiid extra-logical." To this 
De Alolgan replied by turning the tables on the traditioilal distinction betneeli 
inaterial and formal: 
Matter is opposed by writers [like Slansel] not to forni. but to what is 
recognized as form in the school of Aristotle: the assulnptioll of course 
being that that ichool exhausts the fornis of thought. Historically 
speaking. the copula has been material to this dav.l16 
115h~ansel's comments are cited in hlerrill [ADhI. pp. 93-95] 
[S2, pp. 126-1271 [OS, pp. 67-68] (ital. De hIorgall's). 

324 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
lJ5.itli this De Alorgari stuck to liis o1v1.n version of form. **Traiiiitiveness is the 
coinmoil form: the difference between equalzty and adentaty is the difference of 
mattel." Aid in case one failed to see the point. lie continued: "But the logician 
who liugs identity for its transitiveness. cannot liug transitiveness: let hi111 learn 
abstracti~n.""~ If LIalisel and others wanted to make material those argui~ieilts 
that rely 011 transitivity for their inference, so be it. Mbat's good for the goose 
is good for the gander, to invoke folk ~visdom; the same argunlents applied to 
idelitit) as well. Onlv by ..dram-ing axyay from" the *is' of identit) and -pulling" 
transitivity out of it - 
that is. by abstracting from it - 
could one trulj percei~e 
tlie for111 of logical relations. 
Mith these observations. De Morgan not only furthered his ow11 abstractio11 
toward the logic of relations. but he iecast traditional syllogisms as materially. 
but iiot formally valid. If the syllogism weie to language as. say. algebra is to 
arithmetic, then the logic of relations would be to the syllogism as the calculus 
to algebra: a further abstraction of form from matter in the process of reasoning. 
lJ7hat was previously forriial (in algebra and syllogistic) has now hecolne riiate- 
rial (in calculus and tlie logic of relations). And logic. then, nould expose the 
meclianisms of thought in geneial. not just those of language. 
,4 further iiidication that De hIorgan n as moving well beyond language conies 
froin the opening of [S4] itself. There he introduced the .'study of relation in 
general" by noting that even Aristotle had paid it little heed, being "too nluch the 
expoiitor of common language, too little the expositor of coiriinoii thought." 'Is 
Logicians since had fared no better, placing relation "aniong those heterogeneous 
cafegor~es which turn the porch of [their] teinple into a niagaziile of ranT inaterial 
inixed witli refuse." De hlorgan's attack on tradition was by now recognizable. 
Logicians had affirmed all logical relation as a three-fold reduction ..to zdentzty. 
A is A, to r~o71-contrnd7ct7on. Kothing both A and not-A. ant1 to P Z C ~ I L ~ P ~  
rnlddle. 
Ever) thing either A or not-A,'' Yet in so doing the? had omitted transitivit) 
and coilvertibilitj. neither of n hich could he derived from the triad of tradition 
without *.begging tlie cluestion" and both of wliicli. therefore, stood "independeiitly 
of the three". Even more troubliilg. their ilisistelice on the centrality of copular 
identity liarhoretl a corifi~sion betn-een relatiori anti jutlgiiient. for 'is' possessed 
two meanings. Alone. it ineant '+zdentaty afirmed" and in the phrase 'is not'. it 
iriearlt .'onl) ~ d e n t ~ t y "  
(n.ith the .not' sl~pplying the judgirieiit of de~lial)."~ 
Tlie distinction betreen relatiori and judgnierit gave De Morgan entry into the 
"analysis of the necessar? lam-s of thought connected ~ i t h  
the notion of relation." 
As with his syllogistic. X and Y mould he terms. but L would designate any sort 
of **relation in which X may or may not stand to Y." To capture judgment, he 
again invoked his dots. with two being positive and one negative. Thus "let X..LY 
signify the assertion of the relation. and X.LY its denial." Jlmt after introducing 
these con~ponents, De illorgan asserted that separating relation and judglneiit 
117Footnote to [S3, p. 1771 [fn to OS, p. 791: [S4, pp. 338-3391 [OS. pp. 217-2181 
118[Si; p. 3311 [OS; p. 2081. 
11"S3. pp. 335-3361 [OS. pp. 213-2151 (ital. De hlorgan's). 

De hIorgan's Logic 
325 
teiidered an -importarit step" towards treating "syllogistic inference as an act of 
coi~lbiiiatioii of relation."120 I11 this lie once inore shoxved his conservative colors. 
Despite its next level of fornlal abstraction. the logic of relations nas concei~ed 
essentially as a nleaiis of enriching the theory of syllogis~n. It would be Charles 
S. Peirce's insight to recognize that it had a life of its own. separate from the 
retrograde intentions of its creator. 
De Morgan then set about proposing formal nlechanisms of relations. using the 
-relation\ betyeen liulnari beings. . . . corisariguinitj arid affinity" as appropriate 
exemplals. Amplifj ing the above. tlie expression X..LY niearls that X is b.soi~~e 
one of the objects of thouglit which stand to Y in the relation L" or otherwise 
stated that ' X  is one of the Ls of Y'. (Likewise. X.LY means that X is "some 
one of the objects of thought ~$-liich [do not] stand to Y in the relation L.") The 
X and Y are. respectively. the subject and predicate of the relation and they are 
so deterniiried by the relation itself. not by tlie order of ~nentiori. i.e. "Y is the 
predicate in LY.X, as well as in X.LY." Compositioii of relations enters nheii 
the predicate tern1 itself is tied to a relation. as with JIY. Thus X..L(IZIY) reads 
as ' X  is one of the Ls of one of the 111s of Y'. or, in shorter form. * X  is an L 
of any AII of Y'(noted, too. without the parentheses, as X..La1IY). Like contrary 
terms. contrary relations are expressecj. with the lover case letters: X..lY ('X is not 
one of the Ls of Y'. also recorded as X.LY). And De AIorgan captured coilverse 
statenlents with a superscript: X..LP'Y, interpreted as .Y is one of the Ls of X'. 
The following Table 5 depicts botli De Alorgaii's "dot notation". as his expanded 
symbology is sometinies called, and the basic propositions of liis system.lZ1 
Table 5. De Alorgaii's System of Relations 
X is one of the Ls of Y 
X is not one of the Ls of Y 
Y is one of the Ls of X (converse of 1) 
X is not one of the Ls of Y (contrary) 
X is one of the Ls of one of the llIs of Y (composition) 
X is an L of every 11 of Y (inherent quantity) 
X is an L of nolie but AIs of Y (inherent quantity) 
Every L of a Z is an ill of that Z (relational inclusion) 
L))AI and 1 I ) ) L  (relational equivalence) 
Particulary riotem-orthy here are statenients 5. 6. anti 7. Together they provide 
"three sj nihols of compound relation", and n ill become an effective and poxverful 
tool foi generating a pletlloia of nenT relations. nell beyond De Illorgan's immedi- 
ate concerns. In explaining "composition". or conlpound relation. De AIorgaii was 
careful to distinguish between the '~composzt~on 
and aggregation" of relations. a 
12'[Sd. p. 3361 [OS. p. 2151. 
121[S4, pp. 341-3431 [OS, pp. 220-241: hIerrill ([ADhI, pp. 118-1191. 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
X..LY
X.LY
X..L-XY
X..IY
X..LMY
X..LWY
X..L,MY
L))M
L M

326 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L Richards 
tlistirictiori he hat1 earlier invoketl in discussing terins. With aggregation of terins. 
a coniplex term stands for +.ever? thing to which any one or more of the siniple 
terms applies." Thus, 'aninlal' is the aggregate of *man' and .brute'. ~vhich are its 
aggregants. IVith composition. the coinplex term stands fol .'evelythiiig to which 
all the simple terms applv": hence. 'man' is compounded of .aniinal' and .rational'. 
which are its components. Symbolically. aggregate terms are noted as .X. Y. 2'. 
with coinmas separating the terms. while coinpounds are indicated by 'XYZ'. 
with no coinnla~."~ Now De Illorgan extended the distinction to relation\. A 
relation is coinpounded in the saine sense tliat niatlieinatically X and Y are said 
to be colnpounded i11 XY. (This is lloliT generally referred to as relative product.) 
In the phrase .brother of a parent'. 'brother' and 'parent' are compounded "in the 
same manner as uihzte and ball in the term whzte ball." The notation. X..L?IIY 
captures compounded relation. An aggregate of two relations. he remarked. would 
be expreised by the syrnbols X.. (L. JI)Y, (comnla atlded), but "at present" he had 
no need for them. The -coinpound relation 'L of ,\I' classes with the compound 
tern1 *both X and I."."'" 
In'e should note in passing that ..aggregation" and ..coin- 
position" (compounding) would later be labeled, respectively, logical disjunction 
and conjunction. 
Statenieilts 6 and 7 are also novel in De Illorgan's scheme. for they introduce 
"inherent quantity" as an integral part of the relation itself ("unirersal quantity 
. . . [as] part of the tlescriptiori of the relation"). riot just quantity attached to 
individual terms. He indicated how this worked in discussing the lllechanislll 
converting a compound relation. The dictmn is straiglitforxvard, hut require5 a 
fair nieasuie of parsing: "The cornersion of a co~npouild ielatiorl converts both 
components. and inverts their order." Let X be an L of an 111 of Y for the 
compound relation (X..LdIY). Then. in conversion. an JI of Y is the converse of 
X - 
i . .  X . . L 1 ( Y )  - 
and Y is the converse of an 
(JIP1) of the converse 
of an L (L-l) of X .  Tlle compounded con\-erse is denoted by (LdI)-l. n-llicll 
is identical to L-lJ1-l 
and the whole expression theri leads as X..L-'dI-lY. 
I11 this convelsion. he noted, the -mark of inlierent quantity is also changed in 
place." So, if X..LA\IY. "then Y is an 31-I of none but the L-Is of X". which 
inay be expressed as X..L.-I JIP1Y. De IlIorgan did recognize the linguistically 
mm-ieldv nature of these and other of llis theorems. Of the above example. he 
remarked rryly -a gootl instance of the difficulty of abstract propositions" and 
then proceeded to supply a concrete instance: "If X be the superior of every 
ancestoi of Y. then Y is the descendent of none but the inferiors of X."'24 
As nas his wont. having described how the expanded symbolog) functioned. De 
l\loigan then supplied a table nit11 his main theorelns (Table B).'" 
Soine of these 
expiessions can find tlieir xva> into English. For instance '31-'L-l 
is the coilverse 
of L J I '  niay be stated as '.the coniposition of the converse of a relation with 
1'~'SS3.11abns". 
pp. 180-1811. 
1"[S4. pp. 341-3421 [OS. pp. 220-2221 
1'4[S1; p. 3131 [OS; p. 2231. 
12"S4. p. 3431 [OS. p. 2241. 

tlie coriveise of anotliel relation is tlie converse of the composition of the second 
relation m-itli the first." l'"tlleis 
canriot he so expiessed. for English lacks teriris 
that can capture *.inherent quantit]c". As with the spicular notation. De AIorgan 
belieled that the action of this machinelj was niucll easiel to lead diiectlj in 
the nlanipulations of its symbols, although in his rush to leturn to syllogisms. he 
hi~nself did not expand then? very f a .  Still, these theorenis harbor soiile of the 
basic principles that sltbsecluent gellei ations of logicia~ls ha1 e i~lcorpoi 
ated into 
the logic of relatio11s.l'~ 
As a prelutle to reconiitlering syllogiinli in light of the logic of relations, De 
AIorgan focused on the propelties of relations that pertained to the maill conditions 
of his abstract copula. convertibilitj and transitivitj. A coiilertible relation is one 
that provides its o\i711 coiivel se. "when X.. LY gives Y.. LX" , and takes the general 
form LL-I. A transitive relation occurs when .'a relative of a relative is a relative 
of the same kind". and is -syriibolised in LL))L. whence LLL))LL))L: and so 
011." Further, a transitive relation has a transitive convelse. but not necessarih 
a tlansitive contrary Thus, L-' L-' is the coiilelse of LL. so that LL))L g i ~ e s  
L-'L-'))LP1. 
These conditions genelated yet another table of results fol De 
Alorgan. which we call illustrate with an example 
Assume .'L is contained in 
LLP1 ; 1.1-I: 11-I : L. LP1 ." Non- let L iigiiify ancestor ant1 L-I tlescmdarit. 
and the following obtain: "An ancestor is always an ancestoi of all desceiidants 
[LL-' 1, a lion-ancestor of none but 11011-descendents [ I .  I-'], a non-descendant of 
all non-ancesto~s [ll-' 1, and a descendant of none but ancesto~s [L, L-1]."12" 
With these fornis (and their cilcmnlocutolj instantiations of lineage), De hlor- 
De hIorgan's Logic 
Table 6. Sonie Principles of the Logic of Relations 
12"Ierrill 
([ADhl, p. 1201). 
1'7A case in point is his "theorem K 
(so-called after the 'K' ill the syllogisills Baroko and 
Co~llbination 
LAI 
LJI' or I. nz 
L. A I  or lm' 
Bokardo), a t,heorenl on which formation of "opponent syllogisms is founded". That theorem 
reads ..if a coinpourld relation be colitailied in another relation. . . . the same may be said 
when either comporierit is converted. and the contrary of the other conlporlent and that of the 
conipound change places" ([S4, p. 3341 [OS. p. 2241). In his notation this reads 'If LaZI))i\TT. 
then 
r ~ A I - l ) ) l .  See hlerrill ([XDhI. p. 1211). for proof of this tlieore~ri. For an account of ho~v theorem 
h
'
 
"constitutes a complete characterizatioil of residuation" in the calculus of binary relations. 
see L'aughan Pratt. .,Origins of the Calculus of Binary Relations". h t t p :  //boole . stanf ord. edu/ 
pub/ocbr . pdf. 
12'[S4, pp. 345-3461 [OS, p. 2771. 
Converse 
Lll-lL-l 
llI.-' L-' or n 2 -'1-' 
I I I - ~ L - ~  or m.-I 1-I 
Contrary 
LJI' or L.m 
IAI 
Lm 
Converse of contrary 
Contrary of converse 
AI,-'l-' 
or n I -'L-'. 
111-'1-' 
rn-I Lpl 

328 
hIichael E. Hobart and Joan L. Richards 
gan liad presented tlie abstract iiiachinery involved in the relations needed for 
syllogisms. At this juncture he saw no need to go further. The "supreine law 
of syllogisin of three terins" could ilon he expressed in tlie most abstract fashion 
inlaginable (to him). "Any relation of X to Y coiilpounded with any lelation of 
Y to Z gives a relation of X to 2." 
Mith his revised notation. this read as: 
Additionally. the coiiclusion could be altered by ineaiis of the above inferences. 
and expiessed in negative forni (X.l.lIIZ or X.L. m Z )  or as an statenient of the 
coiiipositioii of L aiid 1l I :  L J I  1 S (with S representing their composition). 
Froin this prototlcpe "unit" svllogism, now cast as a coinpositioii of relations. De 
l\Ioigan proceeded to tabulate the lest of the syllogisms according to tlieir tradi- 
tional figures. now alteled to take into account co~nposition of relations. This was 
for him the pavoff in generating the logic of relations. an abstract account of the 
b'principle . . . of tlie liingetl leveri." Traditional syllogisnis were now consitleretl a 
inaterial instantiation of the general. formal theory of relations. And, indeed. De 
l\Ioigan came to the conclusion that the ordinary syllogisni. though lalid. 'does 
not very frequently contain the act of reasoning." Nore coninlon arid iniportant 
in logical inference were its other traditional features. "M7hen we examine any 
hook of ordinary reasonirig. we fintl that the onyrilatic iyllogisin is not very fre- 
quent. the combiliation of relations ~nuch inore frequent. and the introduction of 
composition of terriis arid transforrnatioii of propositions hj far the most freynerit 
of all." Terms, aggregates, compounds. and the transforniation of propositions - 
featules that have long since entered the lexicon of logical relations as conjunction. 
disjunction. sinlple and complex propositions. coinplenlentarity. and the like would 
increasingly corninand the logician's attention.129 But not De Llorgan's. He saw 
llinlself as having achieved a inajor hreaktlllough n.itli tlie logic of relations: -Arid 
lleie tlie general idea of relatiori emerges. arid for the first time in the history of 
knowledge. tlie notioiis of relation and relatzon of relufzon are syn~bolised."'~~ 
But 
he never returned to it. [S3] represents De Llorgan's last significant logical effort. 
5 
COKCLLSION: THE .,KATURAL SYLLOGISLI" 
From this brief journey into De Llorgan's logic. we see that existelice beyond 
tliought mas the assulnptioii that held together liis entire. logical "nlacliine in op- 
eration". the '*universe under consideration". aiid tlie logic of relations. It ascribed 
to the entirety of his logical thinking the underpinnings of that sanle positive re- 
ality he llatl grappled r i t h  in the inatheiiiatics of liis early career. In liis logic. tlie 
"existential charge", so to speak, stood equall) as the conceptual pointer from the 
12"[Si; 
pp. 354-3561 [OS. pp. 237-2391, 
130[S4. p. 3581 [OS. p. 2461 (ital. De hlorgan's). 
X..LY
Y..MZ
X..LMZ

De hIorgan's Logic 
329 
laws of thought to a parallel, real miiverse beyond. This charge carried De AIorgan 
through his reworking of the universe of the syllogisni and, as nell. into his logic 
of lelations: '*The adnlission of relation in general. a i d  of the coniposition of rela- 
tions. tends to throw light up011 the difference between the invented syllogism of 
tlie logicians and the natural svllogisni of the external world." 13' The conceptual 
core of De hlorgan's deep conservatism harbored the belief that everything we 
conceive. think. or imagine in the universe of our logic. sensations. or psychology 
takes us outside ourselves. into another. parallel miiver se, that "natural s) llogism" 
of the outside ~voild. 
One of De Illorgan's star pupils. Stanley Jevons. wrote of his mentor. ..there was 
in fact ctn ~mfortunctte want of power of generalisation in De Illorgan; his mind 
could dissect logical questions into their very atoms. but he could not put the 
atolns of tliouglit together into a real system.""' 
A fair nieasure of truth resides 
in Jevons' assessment, but it masks De Alorgan's accoliiplisllliie~lts in the context 
of a major turning point in tlie liistorv of logic. Throughout the head) and rich 
Sears of De Illorgan's career. logic would anaken fioin its -clogniatic slunibers" in 
no sniall pait because of his keen analytical skills. I11 the course of devising ever 
more abstract ways of trying to understand the outside world. De Illorgan applied 
theie skills to mlearthing and exposing problelns that had lain buried in centuries 
of traditional logical thought. Aiid in so doing he made numerous. often tangential 
disco~eries. including the theorenis that bear his name, which inelit recolding in 
his 01i711 words: ..The contraiy of an aggregate is the compound of the contraries 
of the aggregants: the contrary of a colnpound is the aggregate of the contraries 
of the components. Tlil~s (A. B )  and A B  have nb and (a. b) for ~ o n t r a r i e s . " ' ~ ~  
Originallv devised for De Illorgan's logic of classes. these theore~ns have made 
their xvq to the propositional calcnlus. and in nlodern notation are written a5 
- (p . q )  -- (- p v  - q )  and - ( p  v q )  - (- p) . (- q). They bear enduiing 
testimony to both De Alorgan's analytical brilliance and historical contributions 
to modern logic. 
IYe would like to acknowledge wit11 gratitude the incisive. critical co~nnlentary of 
earlier drafts of this article provided by Professors Daniel D. hlerrill of Oherlin 
College ant1 George Alariz of l15.estern '1Yasliington University. 
l"l[s2. p. 1111 [os. p. 591. 
1.3'\V. Stanley Je~ons. Studies in Deductive Loglc, a Alanz~al for Students. London and Kew 
Y-oik: hIacnlillan and Co.. pp. xii-xiii. 1880. 
133[S3, p. 2081 [OS, p. 1191. De ILIorgarl first irltroduced these tl~eorems in [FL, p. 1361. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This page intentionally left blank 

BOOLE’S LOGIC
Dale Jacquette
1
ALGEBRAIC ANALYSIS OF LOGIC
The development of modern symbolic logic has involved steady progress from a
few extraordinary episodes. Among the handful of outstanding insights and inno-
vations that have contributed most dramatically to the progress of contemporary
logic must be included George Boole’s algebraic analysis of traditional Aristotelian
syllogistic logic. Although Boole’s logic was at most a forerunner and not yet a
prototype of ﬁrst-order propositional and predicate-quantiﬁcational logic or the
so-called functional calculus, Boole, independently of but partially in agreement
with parallel advances by Augustus De Morgan, introduced several conceptual
breakthroughs that paved the way for the formalizations of mathematical logic as
they came to fruition in the work of C.S. Peirce, Gottlob Frege, and, especially,
A.N. Whitehead and Bertrand Russell’s Principia Mathematica.
Boole was trained as a mathematician and in particular as an algebraist. In The
Mathematical Analysis of Logic: Being an Essay Towards a Calculus of Deductive
Reasoning [1847], The Calculus of Logic [1848], and An Investigation of the Laws
of Thought on Which are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Prob-
abilities [1854], Boole revolutionized the logic of his day, which was an enhanced
four-term syllogistic logic that with minor improvements had remained essentially
unchanged since its formulation in Aristotle’s Prior Analytics and popularized in
Antoine Arnauld’s The Port Royal Logic [1662]. Thus, Immanuel Kant, in his
Critique of Pure Reason [1787], was able to report a mere sixty years before the
publication of Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of Logic, that: ‘It is remarkable...that
to the present day this [Aristotelian] logic has not been able to advance a single
step, and is thus to all appearance a closed and completed body of doctrine’.1
Kant’s pronouncement remained appropriate until Boole discovered how to sym-
bolize logic as a specialized interpretation of a more general algebra of variables
and values. Boole afterward echoes Kant’s words when in the Laws of Thought
he relates that: ‘In its ancient and scholastic form, indeed, the subject of Logic
stands almost exclusively associated with the great name of Aristotle. As it was
presented to ancient Greece in the partly technical, partly metaphysical disquisi-
tions of the Organon, such, with scarcely any essential change, it has continued to
the present day.’2
1Kant, Preface, Critique of Pure Reason, Bviii.
2Boole, Laws of Thought, p. 1.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝200
Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.
8

332
Dale Jacquette
The Aristotelian precedent makes it easier to appreciate the extent to which
Boole revolutionized logic. What Boole contributed was a new conception of the
basic units of reasoning by which a logical inference is made deductively valid
or deductively invalid.
When in his ﬁrst booklength treatment of the subject,
Boole speaks of the mathematical analysis of logic, his description is meant to be
taken literally. Boole breaks logic down into more elementary components than
had previously been considered in the Aristotelian tradition in logic, which he
argued can be conﬁgured algebraically in all possible combinations as representing
all predications of qualities and relations to objects and all logical operations on
predications. Boole describes his project in precisely these terms, as operations
of thought, in the Introduction to his Mathematical Analysis of Logic. There he
explains:
It appeared to me that, although Logic might be viewed with reference
to the idea of quantity, it had also another and a deeper system of
relations.
If it was lawful to regard it from without, as connecting
itself through the medium of Number with the intuitions of Space and
Time, it was lawful also to regard it from within, as based upon facts of
another order which have their abode in the constitution of the Mind.3
Boole emphasizes the greater generality of his algebraic interpretation of logic
by comparison with syllogistic reasoning. He promotes its advantages as encom-
passing not only classical syllogistic logic, but the logic of propositions generally
in a more universal algebra of symbols.4
Consider the structure of a standard
Aristotelian syllogism. We begin with a simple illustration such as the familiar
example from the taxonomy of whales as cetaceans and cetaceans as mammals.
The syllogism is:
1.
All cetaceans are mammals.
2.
All whales are cetaceans.
3.
All whales are mammals.
The inference is deductively valid according to syllogistic logic by virtue of the
fact that it contains categorical propositions of a certain sort, belonging to a certain
category and arranged in a form that is known to be such that if the assumptions of
the inference are true then the conclusion must also be true. The syllogism is valid
more particularly because any argument with the AAA-1 form consisting of the
proper distribution of major and minor terms is deductively valid, where the ‘A’
form is the form of a particular type of categorical proposition. We do not need to
look more deeply into the internal logical structure of a proposition in Aristotelian
3Ibid., p. 1.
4Ibid., p. 6. In reﬂecting on his formalization of logic in the Postscript, Boole qualiﬁes his
previous endorsement of his algebraic system over its syllogistic precursor only by strengthening
his conclusion, p. 82: ‘I have seen reason to change the opinion expressed in pp. 42, 43. The
system of equations given there for the expression of Propositions in Syllogism is always preferable
to the one before employed — ﬁrst, in generality — secondly, in facility of interpretation.’

Boole’s Logic
333
syllogistic logic than to determine whether a proposition is superﬁcially of the
right form, and we use information about the logical structures of propositions
only at this relatively high level of abstraction in deciding which syllogisms are
deductively valid and which are deductively invalid. The limited depth of analysis
of the logical structures of categorical propositions by virtue of which they make
possible deductively valid or invalid categorical syllogisms in Aristotelian syllogistic
logic unfortunately implies that as logicians we never gain any further insight into
what it is about the internal logical structures of propositions that contribute to
the deductively validity or invalidity of the inferences in which they occur.
In some cases, we may be able to translate a proposition like ‘I will go wherever
you go’ into the canonical form of a categorical proposition, if necessary, by intro-
ducing concepts that the original speaker of the proposition may not have intended.
Here it is not stretching things too much to interpret the original proposition as
‘All places to which you go are places to which I will go’. The original speaker does
not mention the concept of place, so that in advancing this reformulation we foist
onto the proposition an idea that is strictly speaking external to the exact word-
ing of the thought in order to bring the proposition into the domain of canonical
propositional forms recognized by syllogistic logic. Some such reinterpretations
are no doubt inevitable in any application of logic to colloquial discourse. Logic
abstracts from and idealizes reasoning as it occurs in everyday contexts, so there
is bound to be some slippage and mismatch in any formalization of ordinary rea-
soning. We should nevertheless be aware of the fact that we thereby undertake
to ﬁt ordinary language into a more rigid mold in which some of its original con-
tent may be lost, and other, potentially undesirable content of our own, might be
illegitimately added or superimposed. To the extent that classical Aristotelian syl-
logistic logic requires us to undertake greater liberties and logician’s license with
the propositions and inferences it considers, to that extent it is less advantageous
and less to be preferred, other things being equal, than another more ﬂexible logic
that involves fewer or less radical distortions of the natural preanalytical logical
structures it is called upon to analyze. Boole understood the advantages of re-
fashioning logic as an algebraic construction of terms, operations, and values, and
proceeded to work toward an algebra that would avoid the Procrustean bed of
limited regimented structures in syllogistic logic.
Boole proposed abstracting from the underlying grammatical form of subject-
predicate sentences by means of which he could algebraically symbolize the combi-
nation of any subject term with any predicate term in any categorical proposition.
This method permitted him to expose the internal logical structure of propositions
and inferences generally, not limiting himself to the particular forms recognized
in Aristotelian logic as categorical or hypothetical, primary or secondary, but in-
cluding any proposition or inference capable of being constructed by means of any
combination of terms. Ironically, Boole’s algebraic analysis of logic is in this regard
more faithful to the Aristotelian concept of a term logic. The propositions and in-
ferences Boole suddenly made accessible to logic in a generalized algebraic theory
of logical forms include those involving predications of any number of properties to

334
Dale Jacquette
any number of objects, and any connection of propositions by means of conjunc-
tion, disjunction, and if-then conditionals. Where traditional logic distinguishes
between categorical and hypothetical propositions and inferences, oﬀering special
rules for working with hypothetical syllogisms, Boole recognizes the same distinc-
tion, which incorporates both as the distinction between primary and secondary
propositions and inferences.5
By contrast with traditional Aristotelian syllogistic logic, Boole’s algebra for-
malizes both primary and secondary propositions, and is capable of evaluating the
deductive validity or invalidity of categorical and hypothetical inferences. These
are based in turn on a proposition’s internal logical relations, according to a gen-
eral theory of the logical terms by which propositions are constituted and their
deductively valid assembly into inferences according to their assigned values as the
class of all objects (1), or the null class, consisting of no objects (0). He attaches
almost mystical Pythagorean signiﬁcance to the concepts of unity and nullity in
algebraic logic. A bivalent logic of the sort he describes in both Mathematical Anal-
ysis of Logic and Laws of Thought is easily mapped onto two propositional truth
values, whereby the generality of Boole’s logic and its insight into the essential
fundamentals of logical relations are again evident.
The ﬁrst giant step toward modern symbolic logic was thereby taken by Boole.
The indispensable idea, without which the further course of symbolic logic would
not have been possible, was Boole’s concept of a logical operator, which has since
come to be known as a Boolean operator.
The operators make it possible to
understand logical relations combinatorially without restriction to a prescribed
number of limited forms, but in any of an indeﬁnitely large number of mathe-
matical combinations involving any choice of predicates. This is the same basic
concept that has liberated modern symbolic logic, working instead with unlimit-
edly many well-formed combinations of truth functions and propositional symbols,
constants, predicates, quantiﬁers and quantiﬁer-bound variables. Boole’s method,
unlike Aristotelian syllogistic, is not satisﬁed with an identiﬁcation of logical form
in terms of ﬁgure and mood, but provides a much deeper and more versatile math-
ematical analysis of the internal logical structures of all propositions that can be
constructed out of the algebraic combinations of terms by which properties can
be predicated of objects and propositions can be combined to form more com-
plex conjunctions, exclusive disjunctions, and conditional statements. In this way,
Boole oﬀers greater insight into the ﬁne-grained logical structures of propositions
and inferences than could possibly be attained in the syllogistic logic of his prede-
cessors.
5Ibid., pp.
48–59.
Boole, Laws of Thought, pp.
159–184.
See Prior, ‘Categoricals and
Hypotheticals in George Boole and his Successors’.

Boole’s Logic
335
2
BOOLEAN OPERATORS: NOT, AND, OR
Boole’s most important suggestion is that all categorical subject-predicate con-
structions involve classes of objects that are logically related by a limited number
of functions. Boole identiﬁes three logical operators, which have the modiﬁed ef-
fect of the ordinary language terms, ‘not’, ‘and’, and ‘or’. Also known respectively
as complementation, conjunction, and disjunction, these three logical connectives
are the Boolean operators, which can be represented more technically but not yet
symbolically as NOT, AND, and OR.
The role of Boolean operators can be understood in Boole’s mathematical anal-
ysis of propositions and valid inferences in Aristotelian syllogistic logic. The A-E-
I-O categorical propositions of syllogistic logic are illustrated again by taxonomic
applications: (A) ‘All ﬁsh are vertebrates’; (E) ‘No ﬁsh are vertebrates’; (I) ‘Some
ﬁsh are vertebrates’; and (O) ‘Some ﬁsh are not vertebrates’. These predications
express relations holding between designated classes of objects, in this case, of
ﬁsh and vertebrates. Boole interprets such relaions by means of the three opera-
tors, as involving the complementation, conjunction, or (exclusive) disjunction of
these classes of objects, and shows how to symbolize the operators as algebraic
functions like, respectively, the subtraction or minus sign, multiplication, and ad-
dition. Indeed, Boole sometimes refers to conjunction as logical multiplication,
and to disjunction as logical addition.
The three Boolean operators can now be characterized more formally.
The
Boolean operator of complementation is not like negation in the sense of propo-
sitional logic. It does not produce Not-P, to be interpreted semantically as the
negation of P, meaning that if P is true, then Not-P is false, and if P is false,
then Not-P is true. The symbol ‘P’ in Boole’s algebra is not a propositional sym-
bol representing a true or false predication, but is rather a predicate symbol that
represents at most only part of a predication standing in need of an object term
with which it must be combined in order to produce a true or false proposition.
By contrast with contemporary logic, the Boolean operator of complementation
does not have the eﬀect of reversing the truth value of a proposition, whatever it
is, to which the operator is applied. Boole says clearly in Mathematical Analysis of
Logic: ‘The expression of a truth cannot be negatived by a legitimate operation,
but it may be limited.’6 Instead, the Boolean NOT operator for complementation
attaches only to predicate symbols, where it distinguishes a complement class of
properties. For example, to write the Boolean ‘NOT-Red’, in saying that ‘Some
frogs are NOT-Red’, distinguishes the class of all objects that do not have the
property of being red, that are, as the terminology directly implies, nonred, or
6Boole, Mathematical Analysis of Logic, pp. 18–19. See Boole, Laws of Thought, pp. 241–
242: ‘To what ﬁnal conclusions are we then led respecting the nature and extent of the scholastic
logic?
I think to the following: that it is not a science, but a collection of scientiﬁc truths,
too incomplete to form a system of themselves, and not suﬃciently fundamental to serve as the
foundation upon which a perfect system may rest. It does not, however, follow, that because the
logic of the schools has been invested with attributes to which it has no just claim, it is therefore
undeserving of regard.’

336
Dale Jacquette
that belong to the complement class of objects with any properties other than
being red.
The diﬀerence between negation in modern propositional logic and Boole’s class
complementation operator is sometimes described as a matter, respectively, of ex-
ternal versus internal negation. The signiﬁcance of the terminology is that external
negation in the sense of propositional logic attaches to entire propositions and has
entire propositions in its scope, whose truth value it reverses from true to false or
false to true, whereas internal negation never takes an entire proposition as falling
within its scope, but attaches only to predicate terms within a proposition in or-
der to designate the complement class of properties represented by the predicate.
For this reason, it may be more appropriate to speak of Boole’s complementa-
tion operator as NON rather than NOT, and to reserve the term NOT for the
truth functional deﬁnition of external or propositional negation as it is deﬁned in
contemporary propositional logic. Such a stipulation would nevertheless probably
cause more confusion than clarity, so that, keeping in mind the distinction between
Boole’s NOT as predicate complementation as opposed to propositional negation,
we shall follow established practice by referring to this Boolean operator as NOT.
There are further implications of the fact that there is no provision for exter-
nal propositional negation in Boole’s logical algebra, especially for his reduction
of Aristotelian syllogistic logic to his algebra of classes, to be addressed further
below.
Conjunction or logical multiplication and (exclusive) disjunction or logical ad-
dition are similarly interpreted in Boolean algebraic logic.
We obtain a more
complex term by applying the Boolean operator conjunction or AND to two pred-
icates x, y, of the form, AND(x,y), or, x AND y, which Boole simply writes as
xy. In set theoretical terms, this compound term designates the class consisting
of all objects that have both the property represented by predicate x and the
property represented by predicate y. If x = red things and y = round things,
then in Boole’s logic, xy represents the class of all objects that are both red and
round. Disjunction or Boolean logical addition is a somewhat more complicated
case, because Boole originally deﬁned this particular operation diﬀerently than it
has since come to be understood. To speak of Boolean logical addition today is
to interpret a Boolean operator that has the eﬀect of disjoining two predicates in
such a way that the resulting compound disjunctive predicate OR(x,y), or, x OR
y, which Boole writes as x + y, represents the class of all objects that have either
the property represented by predicate x or the property represented by predicate
y, inclusively; that is to say including rather than excluding objects that have
both the property represented by predicate x and the property represented by
predicate y. The inclusive interpretation of the disjunction or Boolean logical ad-
dition operator is considered to be an improvement over Boole’s original deﬁnition
of the operator, which Boole deﬁned exclusively as representing the class of all
objects that have either the property represented by one predicate logically added
to another or the property represented by the other predicate logically added to
the ﬁrst, but not both. The original exclusive interpretation of Boolean logical

Boole’s Logic
337
addition in x + y, where x = red and y = round, as before, designates the class
of all objects that are either red or round, but not both, including ﬁretrucks and
baseballs, but excluding apples and cherries and crimson beach balls. The more
standard inclusive interpretation of Boolean logical addition by comparison, again
more closely in keeping with contemporary deﬁnitions of the inclusive disjunctive
truth function in propositional logic, designates the class of all objects that are
either red or round, including those that are both red and round.
The idea of a Boolean operator is that of a function on classes that syntactically
combines predicate terms designating classes of objects with particular properties
represented by the predicates as input, and produces as output a more complex
predicate term that has been constructed out of the simpler component terms,
involving negation or NOT, conjunction, logical multiplication, or AND, and dis-
junction, logical addition, or OR. Despite the algebraic context, we should resist
the temptation of conﬂating the informal use of ‘and’ in verbalizations of elemen-
tary arithemtical operations, as when we say, for example, that ‘1 and 2 is (or
equals) 3’.
The AND operation for Boole is logical multiplication rather than
addition, as we have just seen, and it is the OR operation by contrast that is
logical addition. Logical and arithmetical addition, in other words, are not the
same, even though Boole uses the same symbol ‘+’ for both, and the two do not
univocally map onto the same colloquial uses of similarly suggestive connectives
and operations in ordinary language.7
In explaining the logic of hypothetical propositions and inferences in Mathe-
matical Analysis of Logic, and of secondary propositions such as conditionals and
secondary inferences such as hypothetical syllogism more generally in Laws of
Thought, Boole extends the concepts of logical multiplication and logical addition
to provide the rudiments of a truth functional propositional logic. Here again Boole
can be seen inching toward but not yet attaining the concept of a truth-functional
calculus. Boole allows logical multiplication to hold between complete propositions
rather than mere predicate terms, deﬁned as true just in case the propositions are
true, and otherwise having the value false. This is precisely the truth functional
deﬁnition of conjunction in contemporary propositional logic, where p AND q is
true just in case p is true and q is true and is otherwise false. Similarly, Boole
extends the concept of logical addition to propositions, again deﬁned exclusively,
in such a way that p OR q is true just in case either p is true or q is true, but
not both, much in the same way that modern propositional logic deﬁnes inclusive
(rather than exclusive) disjunction by cases in a truth table as true just in case
either p is true or q is true, or both are true. Boole, however, nowhere deﬁnes a
parallel truth functional operator for propositional negation, but resorts instead
to complicated equations involving 1 as truth and subtraction from 1, representing
the universal class, as falsehood, including in some cases equality with 0. In this
respect, Boole’s algebra, although it gestures toward, fails to provide adequate
coverage of the truth functional foundations of contemporary propositional logic,
7See Rosser, ‘Boole and the Concept of a Function’.

338
Dale Jacquette
and in particular does not attain to the concept of propositional negation.8
The remarkable thing is that Boole correctly perceives what has since been
formally demonstrated that these three operators are suﬃcient for analyzing the
logical structures of all Aristotelian syllogistic logic, and much though not all of
what has come to be known as propositional logic. Boole is in this sense deservedly
regarded as the founder of modern propositional logic, which can be deﬁned as
the logic of Boolean operators as propositional connectives modiﬁed for inclusive
rather than exclusive disjunction or logical addition, and supplemented by a truth
functional operator for propositional negation. The standard theory of proposi-
tional logic is not simply the logic of Boole’s three operators, diﬀerences in the
exact interpretation of Boolean logical addition notwithstanding. Modern propo-
sitional logic also contains special operators, notably the conditional or ‘If-then’
and biconditional or ‘If-and-only-if’ connectives, such as, ‘If today is Tuesday,
then tomorrow is Wednesday’, which, as we have seen, Boole follows the classical
Aristotelian tradition in referring to as hypothetical rather than categorical. In
Laws of Thought, he generalizes his categories even more to distinguish what he
terms primary and secondary propositions. Primary propositions include but are
not limited to the categorical propositions of syllogistic logic, and are deﬁned as
any propositions that express a relation among things, that can be built up by
means of the Boolean operators NOT (for predicate complementation only), AND
(logical multiplication for predicates and entire propositions) and OR (exclusive
logical addition for predicates and entire propositions).
In Laws of Thought, by means of his distinction between primary and secondary
propositions, Boole approximates the contemporary distinction, respectively, be-
tween predicate and propositional logic. Although propositional logic since Boole’s
day has come to be seen as more fundamental than predicate logic, reversing the
order of what Boole for historical reasons considers as primary and secondary, it is
important to see that in his later Laws of Thought and to a limited extent even in
Mathematical Analysis of Logic, Boole makes at least two of his operators, AND
and OR, do double duty as internal class designators and external propositional
connectives. Conditional or hypothetical propositions and syllogisms, such as If
p then q, p, therefore, q, can nevertheless be fully analyzed in terms of Boole’s
three original operators, so that it is appropriate to say that Boole’s logical alge-
bra anticipates the later development of symbolic propositional logic for which it
provides most of the essential foundations.9
No one supposes that Boole invented the concepts or logical-grammatical terms
8The discrepancies between Boole’s original formulation of his logic and its several reﬁnements
in what has since come to be known as Boolean algebra are reviewed in Hailperin, ‘Boole’s Algebra
Isn’t Boolean’. See Goodstein, ‘Boolean Algebra Since George Boole’.
9In Mathematical Analysis of Logic, Boole prominently features the reduction of Aristotelian
syllogistic logic to his algebra, while in Laws of Thought, he emphasizes the development of the
system in its greatest generality, and only after numerous illustrations, almost as an afterthought
before turning to the theory of probabilities, oﬀers a brief reduction of Aristotelian logic, in
Chapter XV, ‘The Aristotelian Logic and its Modern Extensions, Examined by the Method of
this Treatise’, in 226–242.

Boole’s Logic
339
NOT, AND, and OR. These were already part of thought and language, which
could hardly function in their absence. Nor could Boole have possibly made ex-
tensive use of these operators if they were not already well established. What,
then, can Boole be said to have discovered in deﬁning the three Boolean class
operators?
What is the nature of his contribution to symbolic logic achieved
by the formalization of these connectives that have since come to be known as
Boolean operators? Perhaps the major accomplishment of Boole’s logical algebra
is his identiﬁcation of the importance of these three operators, his symbolization
of them as algebraic operators, and his recognition of their power and usefulness
in representing logical relations and designing methods of calculation involving the
mathematical properties of a logic of terms after the operators have been rigor-
ously deﬁned. We have yet to see how Boole applies the three Boolean operators,
nor are we yet in a position to understand their role in the mathematical analysis
of logic. We should nevertheless have already gained an appreciation for the ver-
satility of Boolean operators in describing logical relations more ﬂexibly and with
greater generality than the Procrustean forms of classical Aristotelian syllogisms.
Boolean operators have in later years established their usefulness in articulating
logical commands for computer languages. If we have at least an intuitive grasp of
how class complementation, conjunction or logical multiplication and disjunction
or logical addition function in ordinary thought and language, then we may be
ready to consider Boole’s algebra of logic as among the most important chapters
in the history of mathematics.10
3
BOOLE’S ALGEBRA OF CLASSES AND ELECTIVE OPERATORS
The use of Boolean operators in the mathematical interpretation of classical cat-
egorical propositions in Aristotelian syllogistic logic should now be more fully
explained. We consider Boole’s analysis conceptually and pre-symbolically, while
introducing and commenting on some philosophical aspects of his algebraic sym-
bolism.
Then we can work systematically through Boole’s logical reduction of
syllogisms. Boole begins his Introduction to Mathematical Analysis of Logic by
reminding his readers that:
They who are acquainted with the present state of the theory of Sym-
bolical Algebra, are aware, that the validity of the processes of analysis
does not depend upon the interpretation of the symbols which are em-
ployed, but solely upon the laws of their combination. Every system
of interpretation which does not aﬀect the truth of the relations sup-
posed, is equally admissible, and it is thus that the same process may,
10See the following secondary sources on Boole’s algebra; some are formally technical. Bell,
Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs in Set Theory. Goldstein, Boolean Algebra.
Hailperin, Boole’s Logic and Probability. Rudeanu, Boolean Functions and Equations. Sikorski,
Boolean Algebras.

340
Dale Jacquette
under one scheme of interpretation, represent the solution of a ques-
tion on the properties of numbers, under another, that of a geometrical
problem, and under a third, that of a problem of dynamics or optics.
This principle is indeed of fundamental importance; and it may with
safety be aﬃrmed, that the recent advances of pure analysis have been
much assisted by the inﬂuence which it has exerted in directing the
current of investigation.11
According to Boole, we can interpret the same abstract formal laws of algebra
alternatively as applying to arithmetic, to geometry, or to problems in physics.
Nor is there any reason why those should be the only permissible applications.
Boole proposes yet another interpretation of algebra that had not previously been
developed, applying the principles of algebra to logic and logical inference rather
than to number, ﬁgure, or to the material properties and causal interrelations of
physical substances.
‘That which renders Logic possible’, Boole continues, ‘is the existence in our
minds of general notions, — our ability to conceive of a class, and to designate its
individual members by a common name. The theory of Logic is thus intimately
connected with that of Language. A successful attempt to express logical proposi-
tions by symbols, the laws of whose combination should be founded upon the laws
of the mental processes which they represent, would, so far, be a step toward a
philosophical language.’12 The fundamental idea of Boole’s analysis is that when
we say, for an A-style categorical proposition, that ‘All whales are mammals’,
we are saying in eﬀect that the class of all whales is included in the class of all
mammals. Boole’s logic interprets a general algebra abstracted from its usual ap-
plication in the analysis of numerical quantity, in which all such class relationships
are formalized according to the same basic laws. The advantage of such a method
is not only the ﬂexibility, generality, and versatility of expression that an algebraic
logic aﬀords, but the fact that a logical algebra can avail itself of all the algebraic
techniques that are well-established as previously useful in mathematics.
For those already familiar with contemporary symbolic logic, Boole’s notation
seems in many ways unorthodox. To understand it fully we need to appreciate
its relations to popular techniquess of representing syllogistic relations in his day,
and to the state of algebra in the mid-nineteenth century. Algebra has changed
considerably since Boole’s time, due in no small part to the inﬂuence of Boole’s
11Boole, Mathematical Analysis of Logic, 3.
12Ibid., 4–5.
In his essay, ‘The Calculus of Logic’, published one year after Mathematical
Analysis of Logic, in 1848, Boole writes, 196–197: ‘These appear to me to be the ultimate laws
of syllogistic inference. They apply to every case, and they completely abolish the distinction
of ﬁgure, the necessity of conversion, the arbitrary and partial rules of distribution, &c. If all
logic were reducible to the syllogism these might claim to be regarded as the rules of logic. But
logic, considered as the science of the relations of classes has been shewn to be of far greater
extent. Syllogistic inference, in the elective system, corresponds to elimination. But this is not
the highest in the order of its processes. All questions of elimination may in that system be
regarded as subsidiary to the more general problems of the solution of elective equations. To
this problem all questions of logic and of reasoning, without exception, may be referred.’

Boole’s Logic
341
investigations. Many similarities nevertheless persist, and the symbolism Boole
uses is clear enough once its unfamiliarity is overcome. As we have seen, Boole
does not use as explicit operators the symbols we have conventionally represented
as NOT, AND, and OR. The operators he requires in his logical algebra are sym-
bolized as in standard arithmetical applications, as ‘–’ or minus or subtraction
(in eﬀect, as Boole applies it in logical subtraction to designate the complement
class of a class, NOT); simple juxtaposition of class-designating terms to indicate
in Boole’s case the logical product or multiplication (the set theoretical intersec-
tion if any of the designated classes, AND) represented by the terms; and ‘+’ for
logical addition or (exclusive) disjunction or exclusive set theoretical union (OR).
Using only these simple and exactly deﬁned operations, Boole builds an impressive
logical interpretation of a general algebra of symbols.
As a holdover of the syllogistic logic which Boole hopes to replace, he writes,
in Mathematical Analysis of Logic, X, Y , Z (and seldom needs more than three
terms for his purposes) to abbreviate the entire class of objects with a certain
property. These would be more commonly spoken of today as the extensions of a
predicate representing the property. Boole’s ﬁrst innovation is to consider a class
of symbols, x, y, z, as operators applied to any symbol representing individuals or
classes that selects, respectively, all of the objects contained in X, Y , Z. Thus, x
is a selection of all the members that comprise X, and similarly y selects from Y ,
and z from Z. In Laws of Thought, Boole dispenses with the capital letters used in
the earlier presentation of his logic and begins immediately with elective symbols in
lower case italics to represent classes of objects. It is not until midway through the
book, in Chapter XV, that he turns as a ﬁnal topic to ‘The Aristotelian Logic and
its Modern Extensions, Examined by the Method of This Treatise’.13 By contrast
with standard arithmetical algebra, Boole uses only two numerical values in his
logical algebra, 0 and 1. He stipulates that 0 is to represent the null or empty
class, consisting of no individuals; while 1, perhaps more surprisingly, represents
the entire universe of discourse consisting of all individuals.
By juxtaposing elective symbols, for example, in xy, Boole represents the product
or logical multiplication of x and y, by which he means the application to x and y
of the operator we have previously denoted as AND. The Boolean operation xy is
therefore, as he says in Mathematical Analysis of Logic, ‘the selection of the class
Y , and the selection from the class Y of such individuals of the class X as are
contained in it, the result being the class whose members are both Xs and Y s’.14
If, to pursue the example we have previously discussed from the logic of syllogisms,
we were to abbreviate as W the class of all whales, C the class of all cetaceans,
and M the class of all mammals, then by an obvious choice of symbols for elective
operators, w, c and m, we could write wc to indicate the class of all whales that
13Boole, Laws of Thought, 226–242. A minor typographic diﬀerence is that in Laws of Thought
the capital letters X, Y , Z, are always italicized, whereas in Mathematical Analysis of Logic they
are not italicized. I have risked the appearance of inconsistent notation by following the same
convention in discussing this aspect of Boole’s algebra as he presents it in these two sources.
14Boole, Mathematical Analysis of Logic, 16.

342
Dale Jacquette
are also cetaceans. The compound term wc is thus the class of all objects that
are both whales AND cetaceans. The class represented by wc happens to include
all whales and only some cetaceans, since all whales are cetaceans but not all
cetaceans are whales; dolphins providing a counterexample as cetaceans that are
not whales. Similarly for wm and cm, and for (exclusive) logical OR addition in
w + c, w + m, and c + m. The power of combining symbols to represent ever
more complex relations involving classes and complement classes of individuals
included in or excluded from other classes and complement classes gives a sense
of the greater generality and versatility of Boole’s logic.
Class complementation or NOT is handled using minus or logical subtraction
from the universal class of all objects, designated as unity by 1. If x is the selection
of all objects in class X, then the class of all objects that are not in X is designated
by 1 −x., as the complement class of all objects other than those selected by x.
Combining Boole’s algebraic logical symbols in obvious ways, we can represent the
selection of all objects that are in class X AND NOT in class Y , for example, as
the logical product of x and the complement of y, in x(1 −y) (equivalently, in
(1 −y)x). The selection of all objects that are in class X OR NOT in class X
as the logical addition of x + (1 −x). This, as we should expect, is the universal
class or entire semantic domain of Boole’s logic, as conﬁrmed by agreement with
the ordinary arithmetical interpretation of the algebra, where it is easy to see that
x+(1−x) = 1. The selection of all objects that are NOT in class X OR in class Y
(belonging neither to class X nor to class Y ) can likewise be symbolized in Boole’s
algebra as the logical addition of the complement of x and the complement of y,
in (1 −x)(1 −y).
Boole does not propose to present an entirely new algebra, but only to articu-
late a previously undeveloped interpretation of established algebraic relations. To
this end, he advances a set of principles for applying algebra to the mathematical
analysis of syllogistic logic. The principles with only minor modiﬁcations have
remained the essential core of what continues to be known as a Boolean alge-
bra. Boole’s logical algebra can be deﬁned as any formal theory that satisﬁes the
following three laws:
Axioms of Boole’s Logic
1. x(u + v) = xu + xv
2. xy = yx
3. xn = x
The ﬁrst two of Boole’s three laws are intuitively correct and related to the usual
arithmetical interpretation of algebra. They are respectively laws of distribution
and commutation. The third principle is not generally true in numerical algebra
and uniquely distinguishes Boole’s logical interpretation of algebra.
Principle (1) states that the conjunction of x AND the disjunction of u OR v is
identical to the disjunction of the conjunction of (x AND u) OR the conjunction

Boole’s Logic
343
of (x AND v). As an example, consider the fact that the class consisting of all
whales AND (all mammals OR all cetaceans) is identical to or the very same
class as the class consisting of (all whales AND all mammals) OR (all whales
AND all cetaceans). We obtain the same class no matter which way we put them
together, and which in either case constitutes the class of all mammals, including
all whales and all cetaceans. Principle (2) is equally obvious, implying that the
class of all whales that are mammals is identical to the class of all mammals
that are whales. As Boole illustrates the principle with a similar application in
Mathematical Analysis of Logic: ‘Whether from the class of animals we select
sheep, and from the sheep those which are horned, or whether from the class
of animals we select the horned, and from these such as are sheep, the result is
unaﬀected. In either case we arrive at the class horned sheep’.15
Boole’s principle (3), sometimes known as the Index Law, is less intuitive until it
is interpreted speciﬁcally for the two values of logic, 0 and 1. To say that xn = x is
not true in arithmetical algebra for all values of x and n. It is certainly not the case,
for example, that 22 = 2 or that 53 = 5. The principle is nevertheless true even
numerically in Boole’s logical interpretation of algebra, where the only numerical
values that can enter into formulas are 0 and 1. In Boole’s logic, moreover, a limited
principle of idempotence can be derived, which in the case of logical multiplication
in xn = xx, xxx, xxxx, etc., for x = 2, 3, 4, etc. This is just the class of all objects
selected from class X AND the class of all objects selected from class X, which
is identical to the class of all objects selected from class X, or simply to x itself;
similarly for any logical product of n iterations of x. Boole cannot include the
counterpart form of idempotence, expressed as x + x = x, because he interprets
logical addtion as exclusive, and since no class excludes itself, any class logically
added to itself must be equal to 0 rather than to itself.
Boole’s three laws of algebraic logic are minimal but collectively very power-
ful. They testify to his ability to abstract and axiomatize the essential principles
of a theory, relying on parallelisms already known to obtain in more standard
arithmetical interpretations of algebra. Among the reﬁnements of Boole’s original
system that have been deemed expedient over the years are those recommended al-
ready in Boole’s time by William Stanley Jevons, Charles Sanders Peirce, and John
Venn, among others.16 The improvements notably include reinterpreting Boole’s
logical addition (OR) as inclusive rather than exclusive disjunction, and expanding
the explicit principles of Boolean algebra to include the following now standard
axioms, especially the rule of association, which is conspicuously but inexplicably
15Ibid., 17.
16Jevons, Pure Logic, or The Logic of Quality Apart from Quantity; Peirce, ‘On an Improve-
ment in Boole’s Calculus of Logic’; ‘Description of a Notation for the Logic of Relatives, Resulting
From an Ampliﬁcation of the Conceptions of Boole’s Calculus of Logic’; and ‘On the Algebra
of Logic’; and Venn, Symbolic Logic. See also Halsted, ‘Professor Jevons’s Criticism of Boole’s
Logical System’; and Huntington, ‘Boolean Algebras: A Correction’. More recently Hailperin in
Boole’s Logic and Probability has argued that Boolean logic is sound only if Boole’s ‘classes’ are
interpreted as multisets rather than sets in the present day conception, where a multiset is so
deﬁned that, unlike an ordinary set, it can contain multiple instances of the same objects.

344
Dale Jacquette
missing from Boole’s exposition. Where logical addition is understood inclusively
rather than exclusively, the following principles obtain in modern Boolean algebra,
and are also derivable from or at least logically consistent with Boole’s original
system:
Principles of Revisionary Boolean Algebra
Identity:
1(x) = x
0 + x = x
Boundary:
0(x) = 0
1 + x = 1
Idempotence:
xx = x
x + x = x
Commutation:
xy = yx
x + y = y + x
Distribution:
x(y + z) = xy + xz
x + yz = (x + y)(x + z)
Association:
(xy)z = x(yz)
(x + y) + z = x + (y + z)
Complementarity:
x(1 −x) = 0
x + (1 −x) = 1
Absorption:
x(x + y) = x + xy = x
The complement of set A is sometimes denoted by Boole and later Boolean
algebraists as A′ or by A with a short horizontal bar directly over it, and logical
multiplication represented by the Boolean operator AND as the set theoretical
intersection, and logical addition represented by the Boolean operator OR as the
set theoretical union, of sets A and B, is conventionally denoted in contemporary
Boolean algebra, respectively, as A∨B and A v B. All of the axioms and theorems
of Boole’s algebra interpreted for logic on a domain of objects containing at least
the two binary elements 0 and 1, and closed under the three Boolean operations,
which is to say the logic is such that all and only Boolean classes can be generated
by their application to any choice of class terms, translate in this way directly into
modern set theoretical notation.17
Interpreted for arithmetic, logic or set theory, Boolean algebra comprises an
elegant set of logical-mathematical relations. The principles of Boole’s logic have
proved to be intuitively satisfying as axioms for the analysis of logical reasoning,
and of enormous utility in theory and practical applications. To understand the
full impact of Boole’s discoveries on the future course of mathematical logic, we
should now consider Boole’s comparison of his logical algebra with traditional
Aristotelian logic.
4
ANALYSIS OF CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
In reducing traditional logic to logical algebra, Boole’s task has three main parts.
He must show that his system: (1) makes it possible to express categorical or pri-
mary and hypothetical or secondary propositions and categorical and hypothetical
syllogisms, including but not limited only to those of traditional Aristotelian logic;
17See Bell, Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs in Set Theory; Comtet, ‘Boolean
Algebra Generated by a System of Subsets’; and Stone, ‘Subsumption of the Theory of Boolean
Algebras Under the Theory of Rings’.

Boole’s Logic
345
(2) aﬀords general rigorous methods of calculation by which the traditional tech-
niques of syllogistic logic, notably conversion and evaluation of categorical and
hypothetical syllogisms as deductively valid or invalid can be accomplished; (3)
goes beyond the limitations of traditional logic by oﬀering deeper insights into the
logical structures of propositions and inferences. In the ﬁnal, third, task, Boole
must try to explain how it is that syllogistic logic captures only part and not the
whole, and in that sense, not the most fundamental logical relations that properly
belong to a science of logic as opposed to an incomplete and inadequately sys-
tematic collection of scientiic truths about logic, and that his algebraic analysis of
logical inference surpasses classical syllogistic logic.
Boole’s notation makes it possible ﬁrst of all to symbolize all four of the classical
A-E-I-O categorical propositions for categorical syllogisms. The translations are
these:
A:
‘All X’s are Y ’s’
—
xy = x
E:
‘No X’s are Y ’s’
—
xy = 0
I:
‘Some X’s are Y ’s’
—
v = xy
O:
‘Some X’s are not Y ’s’
—
v = x(1 −y)
To say, as in an A-type categorical proposition, that all X’s are Y ’s, as Boole
formalizes it, is to say that the logical product of all objects that belong to class X
AND that belong to class Y is identical to the selection of all objects that belong
to class X itself; or, in other words, that there are no objects in class X that
are not also in class Y . For this reason, Boole oﬀers as an alternative logically
equivalent translation of A-type propositions the formula x(1−y) = 0. To express
an E-type categorical proposition that no X’s are Y ’s is to say that the logical
product of the selection of all objects from class X and from class Y is empty or
null, here identical to 0.
The interpretation of I-type categorical propositions involves the introduction
of a special elective operator v for the class V consisting of the objects (Boole says
‘terms’) common to classes X and Y . The otherwise unauthorized appearance of
this new elective operator is not entirely satisfactory, and has been the subject of
complaint by many even of Boole’s most sympathetic commentators. The objec-
tion is that V and v in Boole’s translation merely conjure up a name to stand for
what would better be represented as the speciﬁc operations by virtue of which a
set of objects common to classes X and Y are logically related to the membership
of X and Y . There is an easy way to do this that involves a substantial revision
of Boole’s original notation, and indeed of his conception of logical algebra, if we
are permitted to interpret I-type categorical propositions as the negations of E-
type categorical propositions, as in x(1 −y) ̸= 0. This states that the selection
of objects from class X AND from class NOT-Y is not empty or null, and hence
implies that the logical product of these classes contains at least some objects. We
should similarly be able to symbolize O-type categorical propositions which say
that some X’s are not Y ’s more satisfactorily in Boole’s algebra as the negations of
corresponding A-type categorical propositions in the unauthorized extra-Boolean

346
Dale Jacquette
expression: xy ̸= 0.18
It is somewhat of a mystery why Boole does not simply avail himself of propo-
sitional negation or nonidentity in his algebra, but relies instead on a nominal
subterfuge, burying away the logic of ‘some’ in the unsymbolized deﬁnition of
class V and its elective operator v for I-type and O-type categorical propositions.
It is signiﬁcant that Boole never uses the nonidentity sign, ‘̸=’, anywhere in his
system, even though it is commonly found in arithmetical algebra. Boole, as pre-
viously mentioned, moreover, explicitly denies that any proposition in his logic
can be negated or ‘negatived by a legitimate operation’.19 It would be interesting
to know why Boole, who evidently considered and deliberately rejected the pos-
sibility, decided to exclude propositional negation from his logic. What speciﬁc
reasons did he have? The question is philosophically important because the ab-
sence of negation is the chief obstacle to regarding Boole’s analysis especially of
hypothetical or secondary propositions and hypothetical and other related infer-
ences as providing all the essentials of a proto-propositional (and more generally,
proto-ﬁrst-order propositional and predicate-quantiﬁcational symbolic) logic. It
is possible to deﬁne propositional negation or nonidentity only by going beyond
Boole’s symbolism in ways he would not have allowed. What is needed is a device
for denying the truth of an arbitrary proposition, for which we might write ‘Not’
to distinguish propositional negation from Boole’s class complementation opera-
tor NOT. Then, moving beyond the limitations of Boole’s logic, we could write
I-type and O-type categorical propositions, respectively, as Not(x(1 −y) = 0) and
Not(xy = 0). In this way, we could represent the fact, which Boole’s logic can be
faulted for not as explicitly and straightforwardly symbolizing, that A and I (and
E and O) propositions are contradictories, which is to say negations of one an-
other, in the traditional Aristotelian square of opposition which graphically maps
the logical relations among A-E-I-O categorical propositions as contradictories,
contraries, subcontraries, and subalterns.
It might appear to follow from x(1 −y) ̸= 0, for example, in Boole’s strictly
bivalent semantics, that in that case x(1 −y) = 1, which would disastrous as a
formalization or entailment of a formalization of an I-type categorical proposition.
18MacHale, 71: ‘Boole later acknowledged that The Mathematical Analysis of Logic was writ-
ten too hastily and with twentieth-century hindsight, it is easy to see that it contains a number
of ﬂaws. For example, if he had been prepared to write “some X are not Y ” as x(1 −y) ̸= 0,
rather than using the nonelective v in the equation x(1 −y) = v, he could have saved himself
a great deal of trouble.
His use of “or” in the exclusive sense of either, but not both, was
unnecessarily restrictive and, in addition, his use of the “indeterminate” symbol 0/0 caused a
great deal of diﬃculty.’ Grattan-Guinness, ‘Logic in Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of Logic’,
xxx: ‘However, [Boole] oﬀered no laws which “v” should satisfy, and could not always distinguish
between traditional forms of proposition and those involved in the quantiﬁcation of the predicate
(which he did not analyse explicitly); for example, “vx = vy” could cover both “Some Xs are
Y s” and “Some Xs are some Y s” (pp. 21–22). / Further, contrary to Boole’s apparent belief,
the solutions found by his methods were not always complete...For example, for the universal
aﬃrmative proposition “All Y s are Xs”, symbolised as (1 −x)y = 0, he put forward y = xv as
“the most general solution”...but he should have noticed that x = 0 was missing from it, and
that it did not hold if x = 0 and v was a class such that vy ̸= 0.’
19Boole, Mathematical Analysis of Logic, 18–19.

Boole’s Logic
347
Of course, 0 and 1 are not the only values of the identity relation in Boole’s logic;
nor does it follow from the fact that a logical addition or multiplication is not
identical to 0 that it is therefore identical to 1, or conversely. In explaining the
logic of conditional hypothetical propositions and syllogisms, in both Mathematical
Analysis of Logic and in more detail in Laws of Thought, Boole introduces the
following convention for the negation of a proposition X, writing for it, 1 −x.
Utilizing the same method here, it should be possible in the same way to indicate
nonidentity as suggested above for I-type categorical propositions by the sentence,
1 −(x(1 −y) = 0), and, similarly for O-type categorical propositions by the
sentence, 1 −(xy = 0). If Boole had propositional negation, therefore, as from
a certain standpoint, without knowing his precise reasons for excluding it, he
surely should, then he ought to be able to symbolize E- and O-type categorical
propositions as negations of one another.20
By the time Boole came to write Laws of Thought, he expanded his translations
of categorical propositions to include an additional four that are not recognized
in traditional Aristotelian syllogistic logic, but that reﬂect improvements in sym-
bolizing quantiﬁcations, and in this case the complementation of major predicate
terms that were proposed at about the same time by Hamilton and De Morgan.21
Boole later writes:
The course which I design to pursue is to show how these [traditional
Aristotelian] processes of Syllogism and Conversion may be conducted
in the most general manner upon the principles of the present treatise,
and, viewing them thus in relation to a system of Logic, the foundations
of which, it is conceived, have been laid in the ultimate laws of thought,
to seek to determine their true place and essential character.
The expressions of the eight fundamental types of proposition in the
language of symbols are as follows:
1. All Y ’s are X’s,
y = vx.
2. No Y ’s are X’s,
y = v(1 −x)
3. Some Y ’s are X’s,
vy = vx.
4. Some Y ’s are not-X’s,
vy = v(1 −x).
5. All not-Y ’s are X’s,
1 −y = vx.
6. No not-Y ’s are X’s,
1 −y = v(1 −x).
7. Some not-Y ’s are X’s,
v(1 −y) = vx.
8. Some not-Y ’s are not-X’s,
v(1 −y) = v(1 −x).22
By oﬀering this expansion of syllogistic categorical propositions in his algebra,
Boole transcends the limits of syllogistic logic as conceived by Aristotle and the
20The relation of propositional negation to Boole’s predicate class complementation is consid-
ered by La Palma Reyes, Macnamara, Reyes, and Zolfaghari, ‘The Non-Boolean Logic of Natural
Language Negation’.
21Laita, ‘Inﬂuences on Boole’s Logic: The Controversy Between William Hamilton and Au-
gustus De Morgan’.
22Boole, Laws of Thought, 228.

348
Dale Jacquette
Scholastic tradition. Boole nevertheless believes that he has correctly identiﬁed
what is vital to the Aristotelian idea of logic, and that in a way his algebraic
approach to logic is more faithful to its intent. As he explains prior to advancing
these translations:
That which may be regarded as essential in the spirit and procedure of
the Aristotelian, and of all cognate systems of Logic, is the attempted
classiﬁcation of the allowable forms of inference, and the distinct refer-
ence of those forms, collectively or individually, to some general prin-
ciple of an axiomatic nature, such as the “dictum of Aristotle”: What-
soever is aﬃrmed or denied of the genus may in the same sense be
aﬃrmed or denied of any species included under that genus...The idea
of classiﬁcation is thus a pervading element in those systems.
Fur-
thermore, they exhibit Logic as resolvable into two great branches, the
one of which is occupied with the treatment of categorical, the other
with that of hypothetical or conditional propositions. The distinction
is nearly identical with that of primary and secondary propositions in
the present work.23
Far from repenting his choice of the elective symbol v in expressing I and O cat-
egorical propositions in Mathematical Analysis of Logic, Boole in Laws of Thought
later expands its use to include formalization of all eight fundamental propositions
of syllogistic logic, encompassing the four original Aristotelian A-E-I-O types and
the four ‘modern extensions’ with complemented minor terms proposed by Hamil-
ton and De Morgan. This is the most important diﬀerence in Boole’s reductions
of syllogistic logic in Mathematical Analysis of Logic and Laws of Thought. Boole
explains this general use of elective symbol v near the beginning of his later book,
when he is presenting the basic principles of his logical algebra, from which the
other applications are easily generalized. He states:
Let us consider next the case in which the predicate of the proposition
is particular, e.g. “All men are mortal.” In this case it is clear that
our meaning is, “All men are some mortal beings,” and we must seek
the expression of the predicate “some mortal beings.” Represent then
by v, a class indeﬁnite in every respect but this, viz., that some of its
members are mortal beings, and let x stand for “mortal beings,” then
will vx represent “some mortal beings.” Hence, if y represent men, the
equation sought will be y = vx.24
Boole argues that in this case at least, and in most similar applications involving
A-type categorical propositions in traditional syllogistic logic, the assertion that
‘All Y ’s are X’s’ as in ‘All men are mortal’, is not meant to express that all Y ’s
are all X’s or that in this instance that men are the only mortals, since of course
23Ibid., 226–227.
24Ibid., 61.

Boole’s Logic
349
many things other than human beings have a limited lifespan and eventually die.
To maintain that ‘All men are mortal’, as Boole understands the assertion, is
rather to claim that all men are some among the potentially unlimited number of
other things that are also mortal. Such an admission permits Boole to introduce
his ‘some objects’ elective symbol v into all eight translations of the classical
categorical propositions and their modern extensions in his logical algebra.
This new insight, which Boole arrives at only later in writing Laws of Thought,
enables him to symbolize all quantiﬁed expressions of enhanced syllogistic logic in
a more uniﬁed fashion than was possible in Mathematical Analysis of Logic. In
particular, the revised translations in his later reduction of syllogistic logic embody
a more direct way of representing A and O and E and I categorical propositions
as explicit contradictories, as the square of opposition requires. If with Boole we
interpret 1 −x as the logical complement of x, then at least the mystery of the
unprecedented elective symbol v in I and O propositions is dissolved, and we can
see A and O propositions as contradictories in the sense of involving explicitly
complementary classes of objects. Where A propositions are symbolized as y = vx
and O propositions as vy = v(1 −x), it is clear that an O proposition involves
the complement class 1 −x of the class x designated in an A proposition. Here,
in lieu of propositional negation, Boole at least oﬀers inklings of a uniﬁed analysis
of categorical propositions that was not fully achieved until the advent of truth
functional calculus. In his later work, Boole arranges things in such a way that
a good argument can be made to suggest that the symbolization of (A) ‘All Y ’s
are X’s’ contradicts the symbolization of (O) ‘Some Y ’s are not-X’s’, in the sense
that each translation now makes reference to the complement class of the other
translation’s major term. Similarly for the class complement contradiction of (E)
‘No Y ’s are X’s’ and (I) ‘Some Y ’s are X’s’, involving class x and its complement
1 −x, which Boole translates, respectively, as y = v(1 −x) and vy = vx.
Although Boole does not make the further contention, it is certainly in keeping
with his belief that he has at once generalized and oﬀered deeper insight into
the logical structures superﬁcially considered in traditional logic, to say that he
has thereby accounted very precisely for the sense in which A-type and O-type
and E-type and I-type categorical propositions are supposed to contradict one
another in the Aristotelian square of opposition.
While Boole again does not
explain his motivations for rethinking the analysis of categorical propositions from
Mathematical Analysis of Logic to Laws of Thought, it is tempting to suppose that
part of his reason may have been to be able to express the logical contradictions
that classically obtain between A and O and between E and I type categorical
propositions.
Boole’s use of elective symbol v nevertheless raises philosophical diﬃculties,
both in Mathematical Analysis of Logic, and in its expanded application in Laws of
Thought. Symbol v functions properly only by virtue of its special interpretation,
and in other ways does not have the same symbolic role as other class terms.
This is seen among other ways in the fact that from x = y and y = z, it follows
logically in Boole’s system that x = z.
From the fact that x = v and y =

350
Dale Jacquette
v, meaning that class x and class y are not empty, but contain some indeﬁnite
number of objects, however, it does not at all follow logically that therefore x = y,
as William Kneale has shown.25 If Boole tries to block the unwanted inference
either by restricting identities to class terms, so that x = v and y = v cannot be
written in the algebra, the restriction would only serve to further underscore the
peculiar nature of v. Moreover, the parallel problem would still remain for the
canonical Boolean identities, x = vy and z = vy, to symbolize the facts that all
x’s are (some) y’s and that all z’s are (some) y’s — say, that all whales are (some)
mammals and all elephants are (some) mammals — from which it certainly does
not follow that all and only whales are elephants, nor that the class of all whales is
identical to the class of all elephants. To the extent that v looks like but does not
function symbolically as a class term according to general algebraic conversion and
transformation rules, Boole fails to satisfy his own requirement that all of logic be
interpreted by means of purely algebraic syntactical operations.
Boole’s idea that a universal quantiﬁcation (all) conceals a hidden existential
quantiﬁcation (some) is interesting in formally explaining the standard conclusion
of later extensionally interpreted predicate logic that universal quantiﬁcations log-
ically imply existential quantiﬁcations, but not conversely. While Boole’s alge-
bra symbolizes many useful quantiﬁed expressions, and in particular recovers for
mathematical analysis many quantiﬁed expressions that fall completely outside the
scope of traditional Aristotelian syllogistic logic, it is not as fully general as Boole
declares. It is incapable of adequately symbolizing all mixed multiple polyadic
quantiﬁcations with overlapping quantiﬁer scopes, including such propositions as
‘All whales that swim in some northern oceans live with all sea creatures’. The best
that Boole can oﬀer is a formula in which the complex relation of living with all
sea creatures is collapsed into a single class term that does not reﬂect its complex
internal structure, contrary to his general rationale for undertaking the mathe-
matical analysis of logic. In general terms, it is the same kind of limitation for
which Boole criticizes traditional Aristotelian logic. For quantiﬁcations over n-ary
relations, we need quantiﬁers, such as Frege in his Begriﬀsschrift and Whitehead
and Russell in Principia Mathematica later developed, for which an exact and
syntactically unambiguous delimitation of scope can be precisely speciﬁed. Only
in this way can we refer to a chosen class of all or some objects interrelated in
many diﬀerent ways to classes of all or some particular objects. Boole’s algebra ap-
proximates the most sophisticated necessary quantiﬁcational symbolizations, and
does much better than any of his predecessors, but does not deliver a completely
satisfactory logic for all quantiﬁcations.
5
BOOLEAN REDUCTION OF SYLLOGISTIC INFERENCES
We are ﬁnally in a position to see how Boole’s logical algebra analyzes syllogistic
inferences. Boole, in both Mathematical Analysis of Logic and Laws of Thought,
25Kneale, ‘Boole and the Revival of Logic’, 163.

Boole’s Logic
351
demonstrates the method for a number of classically valid syllogisms. For present
purposes, it should suﬃce to continue with the single example we have elaborated
concerning the deductively valid cetaceans-whales-mammals syllogism, known, be-
cause of its arrangement of three categorical A-type propositions, as a syllogism
in Barbara. We can formalize the inference in Boole’s original algebra in Mathe-
matical Analysis of Logic as follows:
1.
All cetaceans are mammals.
2.
All whales are cetaceans.
3.
All whales are mammals.
1. cm = c
2. wc = w
3. wm = w
As an essential preliminary, Boole makes use of an indispensable technique for
eliminating certain terms from alternative expressions of categorical propositions.
The procedure is essentially the same in both Mathematical Analysis of Logic and
Laws of Thought. Boole abbreviates the class complement 1 −x as x′, and shows
how to eliminate term y from the following expressions, set equal to 0 as the empty
or null set:
ay + b = 0; a′y + b′ = 0
The equation for both expressions through which the y term is eliminated states:
ab′ −a′b = 0.
The proof involves only simple arithmetical algebra, which Boole does not
bother to spell out. The equivalence can be demonstrated in this way:
ab′ −a′b = unknown
a(1 −b) −(1 −a)b = unknown
(a −ab) −(b −ab) = unknown
a −ab = b −ab = 0.
The elimination of y is accomplished by ab′ −a′b = 0, because subtracting
the logical product of the complement class NOT-a AND class b from the logical
product of class a AND the complement class NOT-b′ leaves nothing left over; the
complement classes cancel each other out. The resulting formula is algebraically
equivalent to the formulas from which the elective symbol y is thereby eliminated
when both formulas are revealed as equal to 0. Subtracting ab from a leaves 0 in
Boole’s logic, as we see when we consider subtracting the class of all whales that
are mammals from the class of all whales. Ordinarily, by contrast, subtracting ab
from b would not necessarily be equal to 0, as the same instance shows; but the
assumption here is that ay +b = 0. In that case, ay OR b = 0, which is to say that
ay = 0 AND b = 0, from which on the present assumption it follows also that a =
0. If there are 0 mammals, then subtracting from the class of mammals the class
of all whales that are mammals is equal again to 0. Where these conditions are
met, reference to the elective symbol y drops out as logically irrelevant, as Boole
argues. Similarly for the assumption that a′y + b′ = 0.

352
Dale Jacquette
Boole uses the principle to good eﬀect in both his early and later algebraic
treatment of classical syllogisms. We consider its application in each form in turn.
If we recall that in Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of Logic, xy = x (All X’s are
Y ’s) is logically equivalent to x(1−y) = 0 (There are no X’s that are not Y ’s), then
we can equivalently rewrite the symbolization of the cetaceans-mammals-whales
syllogism for purposes of calculation:
1.
c(1 −m) = 0
2.
w(1 −c) = 0
3.
w(1 −m) = 0
The equivalence eliminates what in traditional syllogistic logic is technically
called the middle term c from the premises of the syllogism, resulting in the ex-
pression w(1 −m) = 0. This is just the conclusion of the syllogism, that there
are no whales that are not also mammals. The algebraic manipulations required
to justify the inference of this standard syllogism are somewhat more subtle, and
Boole is less help than usual in guiding readers who are not already accomplished
algebraists but are trying to follow each move. Boole next oﬀers the following
shortcut, when he recommends:
A convenient mode of eﬀecting the elimination, is to write the equation
of the premises, so that y shall appear only as a factor of one member
in the ﬁrst equation, and only as a factor of the opposite member in
the second equation, and then to multiply the equations, omitting the
y. This method we shall adopt.26
In the present example, the term to be eliminated is c rather than y, but the
very same principle applies. By ‘multiplying’ two logical formulas, Boole naturally
means to use logical multiplication; where (a = b)(c = d) = (ac = bd), and
where generally in arithmetical as well as logical algebra, a(0) = 0. We begin by
converting the above statement of the syllogism into the following form, so that
the term c to be eliminated appears as a factor of diﬀerent members of the two
premises:
1. (1 −m)c = 0
2. wc −w = 0
Then we eliminate the middle term altogether, striking it out, according to
Boole’s shortcut method, leaving us with:
1′.
(1 −m) = 0
2′.
w −w = 0
2a.
w = w
(from 2 by algebra)
3.
w(1 −m) = 0
(multiplying 1′ and 2a)
26Boole, Mathematical Analysis of Logic, 34.

Boole’s Logic
353
The method appears to work properly. It justiﬁes the conclusion of the syllogism
in proposition (3) that all whales are mammals, wm = m, or that there are no
whales in the complement class of nonmammals. As another example, consider
the valid AEE-2 syllogism:
1.
All X’s are Y ’s
2.
No Z’s are Y ’s
3.
No Z’s are X’s
We symbolize and then convert the premises of the syllogism into the following
form with the appropriate distribution of y terms, according to Boole’s method:
1. x = xy
2. zy = 0
Next, we eliminate the y terms and multiply the premises together, to produce a
symbolization in Boole’s algebra of the validly derived conclusion in this syllogism,
that No Z’s are X’s:
1′.
x = x
2′.
z = 0
3.
zx = 0
Unfortunately, Boole oﬀers no further explanation of why the convenient pro-
cedure of eliminating certain terms of a syllogism, reformated ﬁrst to appear as
factors of diﬀerent members in the premises of a syllogism, and then logically
multiplying the resulting premises together, is supposed to result in a valid and
never an invalid syllogism’s conclusion. Eliminating the middle term in a classical
syllogism is a standard method of informally verifying its validity or invalidity in
Aristotelian logic. Where traditional logic fails to explain the eﬀectiveness of the
procedure, however, it might have been hoped that Boole, in agreement with his
promise that his algebraic logic sheds light on what is logically obscure in syllogis-
tic logic, would have lifted the veil and exposed the underlying logical machinery.
Boole’s method, moreover, is less systematic than the elimination of terms in
arithmetical algebra. There, as we know, we can eliminate terms, as appropriate,
without limit, for example, by subtracting them from both sides of an equation.
In Laws of Thought, Boole explains this as one of the most important diﬀerences
between arithmetical and logical algebra, and maintains that in logical algebra
there is no general rule governing the elimination of elective class symbols.27
For the sake of comparison, Boole also oﬀers a paradigm for the evaluation of a
deductively invalid syllogism, AAA-2, showing that invalid inferences can also be
detected by his procedure.
1.
All X’s are Y ’s
2.
All Z’s are Y ’s
3.
All Z’s are X’s
27Boole, Laws of Thought, 99–100.

354
Dale Jacquette
We follow the same method as before. The translation into the logic’s notation
with y terms occurring as factors of diﬀerent members of the two equations reads:
1. x = xy
2. zy = z
Then the elimination of the major term and multiplication of the resulting
restatement of premises produces:
1′.
x = x
2′.
z = z
3′.
xz = xz
Boole without further explanation reduces the proposition in (3) above to 0
= 0; yet it would appear that he could have done as well to write 1 = 1. The
conclusion of the syllogism transformed in the required way in any event is patently
not a translation of the AAA-2 conclusion, ‘All Z’s are X’s’, indicating that the
syllogism fails to deduce a valid consequence.
For the sake of comparing Boole’s early and later reductions of syllogistic logic
in Mathematical Analysis of Logic and Laws of Thought, we conclude this section
by brieﬂy reconsidering the cetaceans-whales-mammals syllogism in the alterna-
tive translation style of Boole’s Laws of Thought. In the amended symbolization
method of Laws of Thought, Boole can render the same syllogism in the following
way, using the complement class of v in 1 −v to indicate that the ‘some’ class of
mammals to which the class of cetaceans belong is not necessarily the same indeﬁ-
nite ‘some’ class of cetaceans to which the class of whales belong. The translation
in Boole’s later formalization accordingly states:
1.
c = vm
2.
w = (1 −v)c
3.
w = vm
Adapting Boole’s method of eliminating terms unchanged from Mathematical
Analysis of Logic, we arrive at a logically equivalent evaluation of the syllogism’s
deductive validity. Boole in Laws of Thought conﬁdently asserts: ‘Nothing is easier
than in particular instances to resolve the Syllogism by the method of this treatise.
Its resolution is, indeed, a particular application of the process for the reduction of
systems of propositions.’28 Using Boole’s formal method, as in the Mathematical
Analysis of Logic version, we accordingly eliminate term c, and logically multiply
the result to obtain w = (1 −v)vm, which, alternatively, we can also obtain
algebraically by substituting equivalent terms in the two assumptions. Ordinarily,
of course, in Boole’s logic, (1 −v)v = 0, which would make the above proposition
equivalent again to w = m, meaning that the class of whales is identical to the
class of mammals. Here, given the special interpretation of v as designating an
indeﬁnite class of some objects that have the property of being mammals, and
28Ibid., 231.

Boole’s Logic
355
of 1 −v as a potentially diﬀerent indeﬁnite class of some objects that have the
property of being cetaceans, (1−v)v must correspondingly designate an indeﬁnite
class consisting of some objects that have the product of these indeﬁnite classes,
which is to say an indeﬁnite class consisting of some objects that are both mammals
AND cetaceans. Since assumption (1) declares that all cetaceans are mammals,
(1 −v)v = v, the indeﬁnite class consisting of at least some mammals. Thus, we
obtain the required conclusion in the Laws of Thought translation style for ‘All
whales are (some among other) mammals’, w = vm, as logically equivalent to the
preceding expression, w = (1 −v)vm.
In Laws of Thought, Boole oﬀers many ingenious examples of the method of
evaluating the validity and invalidity of traditional syllogisms and other infer-
ences generally. The applications are fascinating in their own regard, especially
those taken from the history of philosophy and scientiﬁc argumentation, vividly
demonstrating the generality and ﬂexibility of Boole’s algebra as a tool for log-
ical analysis. Boole has often been faulted for failing to explain both his choice
of symbolizations and formal derivations in suﬃcient detail, and it must be said
that in more complex logically and philosophically interesting cases, Boole’s use
of his own method, no doubt transparent to him, ranges from the diﬃcult to the
extremely diﬃcult for a beginner to follow in a step-by-step way. The examples
we have considered here by comparison, while they give an indication of Boole’s
principles of logical analysis, only hint at and are not fully representative of the
most rigorous demonstrations of Boolean logic.
Boole further applies his algebra to the formalization of conversion techniques
for categorical propositions and syllogisms.
Conversion is a traditional logical
method whereby the terms in a proposition are transposed, sometimes in logically
valid and sometime in invalid ways. For example, beginning with the sentence ‘All
whales are mammals’, we might consider the sentence obtained by converseion
which states that ‘All mammals are whales’. Terms that are fully convertible in
any appropriate context can therefore be regarded as representing logically equiv-
alent concepts. Boole in these applications arrives at formally interesting results,
but his conclusions are of concern primarily for the sake of proving that his logic
is adequate to and goes beyond the relatively limited combinatorial possibilities
of classical syllogistic logic.
In the same spirit, Boole reduces conditionals as
hypothetical or secondary propositions to the truth functional form of the mod-
ern propositional connective, dispensing with the categorical propositions as an-
tecedent and consequent of a conditional as accidental to its correct logical form.
In Mathematical Analysis of Logic, he argues:
A hypothetical Proposition is deﬁned to be two or more categoricals
united by a copula (or conjunction), and the diﬀerent kinds of hypo-
thetical Propositions are named from their respective conjunctions, viz.
conditional (if), disjunctive (either, or), &c.
In conditionals, that categorical Proposition from which the other re-
sults is called the antecedent, that which results from it the consequent.

356
Dale Jacquette
Of the conditional syllogism there are two, and only two formulae.
1st. The constructive,
If A is B, then C is D,
But A is B, therefore C is D.
2nd. The Destructive,
If A is B, then C is D,
But C is not D, therefore A is not B.
A dilemma is a complex conditional syllogism, with several antecedents
in the major, and a disjunctive minor.
If we examine either of the forms of conditional syllogism above given,
we shall see that the validity of the argument does not depend upon
any considerations which have reference to the terms A, B, C, D,
considered as the representatives of individuals or of classes. We may,
in fact, represent the Proposition A is B, C is D, by the arbitrary
symbols X and Y respectively, and express our syllogisms in such forms
as the following:
If X is true, then Y is true,
But X is true, therefore Y is true.29
The analysis of these propositions takes Boole well beyond the limited capabil-
ities of traditional logic, and demonstrates the greater ﬂexibility and generality of
his algebraic logic over the logic of syllogisms. By deﬁning the truth conditions
for conditional propositions, Boole sets the stage for the development of modern
symbolic propositional logic as a logic of truth functional connectives. His use of
1 −x to represent the falsehood of proposition X nevertheless raises questions in
the philosophy of logic to which Boole seems blithely insensitive. The symboliza-
tion appears to mark the proposition as detracting from the unity or universe of
the logic’s semantic domain of objects. It is unclear, moreover, what precise sense
such a suggestion might be given, and the analysis at this stage in Boole’s theory,
although it points roughly in the right direction for the future of symbolic logic,
must be seen as philosophically inadequate.
In the ﬁnal chapter of Mathematical Analysis of Logic, on ‘Properties of Elec-
tive Functions’, where he approximates some of problems investigated by logical
metatheory that were to enter the ﬁeld only more than a century later, Boole
writes:
29Boole, Mathematical Analysis of Logic, 48.

Boole’s Logic
357
Suppose it is required to determine for what forms of the function f(x),
the following equation is satisﬁed, viz.
{f(x)}n = f(x).
Here we at once obtain for the expression of the conditions in question,
{f(0)}n = f(0), {f(1)}n = f(1)...
For, as diﬀerent elective symbols combine with each other according
to the same laws as symbols of quantity, we can ﬁrst expand a given
function with reference to any particular symbol which it contains, and
then expand the result with reference to any other symbol, and so on
in succession, the order of the expansions being quite indiﬀerent.30
Boole even contemplates the possibility of a ‘contradictory universe’ for certain
applications of his algebra, for which he says:
It may happen that the simultaneous satisfaction of equations thus
deduced, may require that one or more of the elective symbols should
vanish. This would only imply the nonexistence of a class: it may even
happen that it may lead to a ﬁnal result of the form
1 = 0,
which would indicate the nonexistence of the logical Universe. Such
cases will only arise when we attempt to unite contradictory Proposi-
tions in a single equation.31
The adoption of 0 and 1 as values for truth and falsehood in Boole’s system from
their original designation as the null and universal classes in the logic’s semantic
domain is made explicit in the ﬁnal paragraph of Mathematical Analysis of Logic,
when he writes:
In virtue of the principle, that a Proposition is either true or false, ev-
ery elective symbol employed in the expression of hypotheticals admits
only of the values 0 and 1, which are the only quantitative forms of
an elective symbol. It is in fact possible, setting out from the theory
of Probabilities (which is purely quantitative), to arrive at a system
of methods and processes for the treatment of hypotheticals exactly
similar to those which have been given. The two systems of elective
symbols and of quantity osculate, if I may use the expression, in the
30Ibid., 61–62.
31Ibid., 65.

358
Dale Jacquette
points 0 and 1.
It seems to me to be implied by this, that uncon-
ditional truth (categoricals) and probable truth meet together in the
constitution of contingent truth; (hypotheticals).
The general doc-
trine of elective symbols and all the more characteristic applications
are quite independent of any quantitative origin.32
Boolean algebra has been important for logic, set theory, and computer science
largely because of its binary interpretation on the numbers 0, 1. To equate truth
with 1, however, and falsehood with logical subtraction from 1, nevertheless seems
peculiar. Even if we consider the universe of discourse to consist of all actually
existent facts, it would appear at most to be justiﬁed to equate truth with some
proper part of the universe, that part consisting only of truth-making states of
aﬀairs to which all and only the true propositions in a language correspond. What
sense does it make to stipulate that truth is identical to all such facts and to all
other classes of objects, chairs, houses, trees, galaxies, DNA molecules, quarks,
and the like, that can be represented in the logic?
Boole addresses these questions in Laws of Thought. There he oﬀers a more
elaborate exploration of the use of 0 and 1 in expressing the truth and falsehood
of entire propositions for the same purpose of extending his logical algebra to hy-
pothetical, or what he later refers to as secondary propositions, in particular those
involving propositional conjunction, (exclusive) disjunction, and the if-then condi-
tional. Boole admits that in Mathematical Analysis of Logic he crudely interpreted
1 as consisting of all states of aﬀairs, so that to logically subtract a proposition
from this unity or universal class could be interpreted as considering the class of
all states of aﬀairs minus the one represented by the proposition whose falsehood
is being aﬃrmed.33 In Laws of Thought, by contrast, he proposes for heuristic
reasons only, supplanted later by a more literal interpretation, to treat 1 as the
unity of all moments of time, so that logical subtraction from 1 can be understood
as indicating that there is no moment of time at which the proposition is true.34
Boole suggests as an explanatory expedient a temporal analogy, by which the
universe of discourse or semantic domain of secondary propositions, the objects or
things with which it is concerned, in the special interpretation of the values 0 and
1 that the logic of secondary propositions requires, consists of moments of time at
which propositions are true. He continues:
Now, in considering any such relations as the above, we are not called
upon to inquire ito the whole extent of their possible meaning (for
32Ibid., 82.
33Boole, Laws of Thought, 176: ‘In a former treatise on this subject (Mathematical Analysis
of Logic, p. 49), following the theory of [John] Wallis respecting the Reduction of Hypothetical
Propositions, I was led to interpret the symbol 1 in secondary propositions as the universe of
“cases” or “conjunctures of circumstances”; but this view involves the necessity of a deﬁnition of
what is meant by a “case”, or “conjuncture of circumstances”; and it is certain, that whatever
is involved in the term beyond the notion of time is alien to the objects, and restrictive of the
processes of formal Logic.’
34Ibid., 162–163.

Boole’s Logic
359
this might involve us in metaphysical questions of causation, which
are beyond the proper limits of science); but it suﬃces to ascertain
some meaning which they undoubtedly possess, and which is adequate
for the purposes of logical deduction. Let us take, as an instance for
examination, the conditional proposition, “If the proposition X is true,
the proposition Y is true.” An undoubted meaning of this proposition
is, that the time in which the proposition X is true, is time in which
the proposition Y is true. This indeed is only a relation of coexistence,
and may or may not exhaust the meaning of the proposition, but it
is a relation really involved in the statement of the proposition, and
further, it suﬃces for all the purposes of logical inference.35
Boole distances himself from philosophical commitment to a literal interpreta-
tion of the truth of propositions in terms of moments or intervals of time during
which they are true. Thus, he states:
I shall avail myself of the notion of time in order to determine the
laws of the expression of secondary propositions, as well as the laws of
combination of the symbols by which they are expressed. But when
those laws and those forms are once determined, this notion of time
(essential, as I believe it to be, to the above end) may practically be
dispensed with. We may then pass from the forms of common language
to the closely analogous forms of the symbolical instrument of thought
here developed, and use its processes, and interpret its results, without
any conscious recognition of the idea of time whatever.36
Surprisingly, Boole never returns to the interesting philosophical issue of how
truth and falsehood are to be interpreted if not by reference to the concept of
time. Perhaps he thinks it is suﬃcient to have identiﬁed formal relations capa-
ble of various interpretations that threaten in their implications to infringe on
deeper problems of ‘causation’, and as such are avoidable in mathematical logic
as intractable problems of metaphysics. Perhaps it is enough, as a contemporary
logician or formal semanticist might say, to show that the two truth values can
be ‘mapped onto’ 0 and 1.
Instead of further exploring these issues, he oﬀers
the following series of deﬁnitions of truth and falsehood for entire propositions,
in terms of which he then proceeds to deﬁne the propostional connectives con-
junction, (exclusive) disjunction, and the if-then conditional, for the algebra of
secondary propositions and logical inferences containing secondary propositions.
He writes:
As 1 denotes the whole duration of time, and x that portion of it for
which the proposition X is true, 1 −x will denote that portion of time
for which the proposition X is false.
35Ibid., 163.
36Ibid., 164.

360
Dale Jacquette
Again, as xy denotes that portion of time for which the propositions
X and Y are both true, we shall, by combining this and the previous
observation, be led to the following interpretations, viz.:
The expression x(1 −y) will represent the time during which the
proposition X is true, and the proposition Y false. The expression
(1 −x)(1 −y) will represent the time during which the propositions X
and Y are simultaneously false.
The expression x(1 −y) + y(1 −x) will express the time during which
either X is true or Y true, but not both; for that time is the sum of
the times in which they are singly and exclusively true. The expression
xy + (1 −x)(1 −y) will express the time during which X and Y are
either both true or both false.
If another symbol z presents itself, the same principles remain applica-
ble. Thus xyz denotes the time in which the propositions X, Y , and Z
are simultaneously true; (1−x)(1−y)(1−z) the time in which they are
simultaneously false; and the sum of these expressions would denote
the time in which they are either true or false together.37
The binary algebraic semantics of truth and falsehood are explained by Boole in
terms of 0 and 1. We must bear in mind that throughout this discussion Boole for
undisclosed reasons requires an account of truth and falsehood of propositions that
altogether shuns any recognizable form of truth functional propositional negation.
Boole maintains:
1st. To express the Proposition, “The proposition X is true.”
We are here required to express that within those limits of time to
which the matter of our discourse is conﬁned the proposition X is
true. Now the time for which the proposition X is true is denoted by
x, and the extent of time to which our discourse refers is represented
by 1. Hence we have
x = 1
as the expression required.
2nd. To express the Proposition, “The proposition X is false.”
We are here to express that within the limits of time to which our
discourse relates, the proposition X is false; or that within those limits
there is no portion of time for which it is true. Now the portion of time
for which it is true is x. Hence the required equation will be
x = 0.
37Ibid., 168.

Boole’s Logic
361
This result might also be obtained by equating to the whole duration
of time 1, the expression for the time during which the proposition X
is false, viz., 1 −x. This gives
1 −x = 1,
whence
x = 0.38
Having deﬁned truth and falsehood of propositions in terms of the durations of
time at which a proposition is true, Boole proceeds in his 3rd through 5th ‘consid-
erations’ to deﬁne (exclusive) propositional disjunction, propositional conjunction,
and the propositional if-then conditional as they have typically been truth func-
tionally deﬁned in standard propositional logic. Exclusive disjunction is deﬁned as
a proposition that is true just in case either but not both of its disjuncts are true;
conjunction is deﬁned as a proposition that is true just case both of its conjuncts
are true; and the conditional is deﬁned as a proposition that is true just in case
where its antecedent or ‘if’ part is true its consequent or ‘then’ part is also true,
and is otherwise false. He accordingly adds:
In the laws of expression above stated those of interpretation are im-
plicitly involved. The equation
x = 1
must be understood to express that the proposition X is true; the
equation
x = 0,
that the proposition X is false. The equation
xy = 1
will express that the propositions X and Y are both true together; and
the equation
xy = 0
that they are not both together true.
In like manner the equations
38Ibid., 169.

362
Dale Jacquette
x(1 −y) + y(1 −x) = 1,
x(1 −y) + y(1 −x) = 0,
will respectively assert the truth and the falsehood of the disjunctive
Proposition, “Either X is true or Y is true.” The equations
y = vx
y = v(1 −x)
will respectively express the Propositions, “If the proposition Y is true,
the proposition X is true.” “If the proposition Y is true, the proposi-
tion X is false.”39
It must be acknowledged that, despite Boole’s eﬀorts to forestall philosophical
or metaphysical controversy in his interpretation of truth and falsehood for his
rudimentary propositional logic of secondary propositions, there are many concep-
tual diﬃculties ostensibly entailed by his proposal.
There is in the ﬁrst place the apparent blatant circularity in Boole’s attempt to
characterize the truth (or falsehood) of a proposition as the duration of time during
which the proposition is true (false). If we knew what it meant for a proposition
to be true (or false) at a certain time, then obviously we would not stand in need
of a explanation or deﬁnition of what it means for a proposition to be true (false).
Boole nowhere tries to mitigate or evince any recognition of the problem, but it
is hard to see how his algebraic deﬁnitions of truth and falsehood escape this sort
of conceptual trivialization.
It is also questionable whether Boole’s deﬁnitions of truth and falsehood can
be adequate for propositions that are ostensibly eternal or atemporal, such as
propositions about mathematical entities.
Boole might want to say that these
propositions are true or false at all times, but since abstract entities are themselves
atemporal it seems odd to limit their truth conditions in this way. If time is a
result of the big bang, and the big bang happened not to occur, then there would
be no moments of time at which it is true that 2 + 3 = 5; yet the proposition,
many philosophers would argue, is nonetheless atemporally true.
Finally, logicians sometimes claim that sentences in ordinary language are often
imperfect, incomplete expressions of entire propositions.
To say, simply, ‘It is
raining’, is then shorthand for ‘It is raining at time t and place P’. If this is true,
then to say that it is true that ‘It is raining’ on Boole’s heuristic temporal analysis
of truth conditions is to say that it is true at time t that it is raining. If ‘It is
raining’ is just shorthand for saying ‘It is raining at time t and place P’, however,
then, contrary to Boole’s account of propositional truth, it should always be true
that ‘It is raining’, because it is always true that ‘It is raining at time t and place
P’.
39Ibid., 172–173.

Boole’s Logic
363
It may be possible for Boole to avoid or soften the impact of such criticisms.
But Boole does not even seem to recognize the potential diﬃculties which his
concepts of truth and falsity at speciﬁc durations of time seem to involve. As a
result, it must be said that his attempt to extend his algebra to the truth and
falsehood of propositions in his logic of secondary propositions remains problem-
atic. The sticking points in his analysis are reﬂected in the manifest ambiguity,
about which Boole seems altogether unconcerned, by which an expression like xy
or x + y can alternatively represent a class of objects in a compound term lacking
all truth value, or a propositionally complex proposition that is either true or false,
depending on the values of x and y, and in particular on whether or not x and y
are class terms or propositions. Since Boole’s notation itself does not discriminate
between these possibilities, what are we to say if x represents a class of objects
(all red things) and y represents the proposition ‘All men are mortal’? Are xy
and x + y in that case compound class terms or propositions or neither or both?
It is a defect of Boole’s algebra that it does not anticipate such questions with
satisfactorily unambiguous purely formal distinctions.40
Even so, it would appear that by deﬁning the truth and falsehood of proposi-
tions in terms of his binary values 0 and 1, Boole despite himself equips his algebra
with the equivalent of propositional negation. For then it should be possible to
deﬁne a negation or ‘negativing’ quasi-Boolean operator Not by stipulating that
x = 1 just in case or if and only if Not-x = 0. If he were to avail himself of this
device, Boole would unequivocally have provided all the necessary foundations for
classical propositional logic. This he could further streamline at the expense of
parallelism with his algebra of classes by deﬁning logical multiplication for propo-
sitions in terms of negation and logical addition, or by deﬁning logical addition for
propositions in terms of negation and logical multiplication. Such simpliﬁcations,
and even more radical reductions to a single combined negation and disjunction
or negation and conjunction operator are standard in contemporary propositional
logic, following what has come to be known as the De Morgan duality equivalences.
It would also then be possible for Boole to symbolize categorical propositions more
explicitly to indicate that A and O and E and I propositions are logical contradic-
tories in the sense of propositional negation, and not merely in the sense of class
complementation. This is a step that for reasons unknown Boole himself was un-
willing to take, and that, building on Boole’s work, had to await further advances
in the evolution of mathematical logic.41
40See Feys, ‘Boole’s Methods of Interpretation and Development’; Halsted, ‘Boole’s Logical
Method’; Hooley, ‘Boole’s Method for Solving Boolean Equations’; Van Evra, ‘A Reassessment
of George Boole’s Theory of Logic’. Lukasiewicz, Aristotle’s Syllogistic from the Standpoint of
Modern Formal Logic, oﬀers an insightful perspective on the role of Boolean algebra in supplant-
ing traditional Aristotelian syllogistic logic.
41Inter alia, see sources on the subsequent history of symbolic logic, especially Dudman, ‘From
Boole to Frege’; Feys, ‘Boole as a Logician’; and Hailperin, ‘Boole’s Abandoned Propositional
Logic’.

364
Dale Jacquette
6
BOOLEAN LOGIC OF PROBABILITY AND INDUCTION
In extending his algebraic logic to construct a theory of probability, Boole is chieﬂy
concerned to establish recognized conclusions of statistical analysis within the
framework of his algebra. He observes that there are two diﬀerent approaches
to the study of probability, through ‘number’ and ‘logic’, and a central point of
philosophical interest in his contributions to the topic is his eﬀorts to show that
the two apparently distinct ways of understanding probability can be made to
coincide.
Although in Mathematical Analysis of Logic Boole only hints at the possibility
of developing a similar treatment of probability, by the time he came to write
Laws of Thought, he had devoted much of his thought to its problems, stirred to
reﬂection, as some commentators have conjectured, by De Morgan’s work in the
ﬁeld. Thus, in his ﬁrst book on logic, Boole writes: ‘It is in fact possible, setting
out from the theory of Probabilities (which is purely quantitative), to arrive at a
system of methods and processes for the treatment of hypotheticals exactly similar
to those which have been given’.42
Boole begins Chapter XVI of Laws of Thought, ‘Of the Theory of Probabilities’,
with a convenient statement of fundamental principles, which he attributes to the
French mathematician, Sim´eon Denis Poisson, in his Recherches sur la Probabilit`e
des Jugemens. Boole agrees with the following deﬁnitions:
“The probability of an event is the reason we have to believe that it
has taken place, or that it will take place.”
“The measure of the probability of an event is the ratio of the number of
cases favourable to that event, to the total number of cases favourable
or contrary, and all equally possible” (equally likely to happen).43
From this starting point, Boole draws the indicated inference that probability
so deﬁned must concern the subjective states of knowledge and ignorance of those
performing the calculations. He continues: ‘From these deﬁnitions it follows that
the word probability, in its mathematical acceptation, has reference to the state of
our knowledge of the circumstances under which an event may happen or fail’.44
Yet Boole thinks that such a conclusion would be incorrect, and that probability
is in fact an objective standard of the likely or unlikely conditional occurrence of
an event.45
With a view toward articulating an objective theory of probabilities, Boole
explains his purpose: ‘Let us endeavour from the above statements and deﬁnitions
42Boole, Mathematical Analysis of Logic, Postscript, 82. A defender of Boole on this minor
point might argue that in this passage Boole is referring to the theory of probability as it has
been arithmetically formalized by other acknowledged theorists, rather than as it might ideally
be presented.
43Boole, Laws of Thought, 244.
44Ibid.
45Ibid., 244–245.

Boole’s Logic
365
to form a conception of the legitimate object of the theory of Probabilities’.46
This he proceeds to do by considering a series of seven principles, which he extracts
primarily from the writings of Pierre-Simon Laplace. Together, they oﬀer the most
concise conceptual overview of the laws shared by Boole’s theory of probability:
PRINCIPLE
1st.
If p be the probability of the occurrence of any event, 1 −p will
be the probability of its non-occurrence.
2nd.
The probability of the concurrence of two independent events is
the product of the probabililties of those events.
3rd.
The probability of the concurrence of two dependent events is
equal to the product of the probability of one of them by the
probability that if that event occur, the other will happen also.
4th.
The probability that if an event, E, take place, an event, F, will
also take place, is equal to the probability of the concurrence of
the events E and F, divided by the probability of the occurrence
of E.
5th.
The probability of the occurrence of one or the other of two
events which cannot concur is equal to the sum of their separate
probabilities.
6th.
If an observed event can only result from some one of n diﬀerent
causes which are `a priori equally probable, the probability of any
one of the causes is a fraction whose numerator is the probability
of the event, on the hypothesis of the existence of that cause,
and whose denominator is the sum of the similar probabilities
relative to all the causes.
7th.
The probability of a future event is the sum of the products
formed by multiplying the probability of each cause by the prob-
ability that if that cause exist, the said future event will take
place.47
Although the algebraic operations Boole mentions in connection with these
standard principles of probability are evidently meant to be arithmetical rather
than logical, involving numerical addition and multiplication rather than logical
addition and multiplication. Already in the ﬁrst chapter of Laws of Thought, on the
‘Nature and Design of this Work’, Boole previews the convergence of numerical and
logical methods in his formal theory of probabilities, distinguishing his approach
as unique from previous accounts. He argues:
46Ibid., 245.
47Ibid., 249.

366
Dale Jacquette
Speaking technically, we must be able to express the event whose prob-
ability is sought, as a function of the events whose probabilities are
given. Now this explicit determination belongs in all instances to the
department of Logic. Probability, however, in its mathematical accep-
tation, admits of numerical measurement. Hence the subject of Prob-
abilities belongs equally to the science of Number and to that of Logic.
In recognising the co-ordinate existence of both these elements, the
present treatise diﬀers from all previous ones; and...this diﬀerence not
only aﬀects the question of the possibility of the solution of problems
in a large number of instances, but also introduces new and important
elements into the solutions obtained...48
Later, Boole claims that it makes no diﬀerence whether probability theory is
derived as standardly from applied arithmetic, or from the general formal algebraic
relations variously interpreted by Boole as logical or arithmetical. He maintains
that:
The Theory of Probabilities stands, as it has already been remarked...,
in equally close relation to Logic and to Arithmetic; and it is indiﬀerent,
so far as results are concerned, whether we regard it as springing out
of the latter of these sciences, or as founded in the mutual relations
which connect the two together.49
Boole’s statement of the seven Laplacian probability principles is now expressed
in his algebraic logic.
An example is Boole’s reference to the complementary
probability of the nonoccurrence of an event whose probability of occurrence is
p, expressed in the ﬁrst principle as 1 −p. This algebraic formula bears a clear
and direct analogy to Boole’s symbolization of predicate complementarity and the
deﬁnition of truth and falsehood conditions for secondary propositions in logic.
The use of 1 as a term to represent truth in algebraic logic, is further extended
in Boole’s probability theory as a symbol for the certainty of the occurrence of an
event. Boole elaborates the concept in this way:
When it is certain that an event will occur, the probability of that
event, in the above mathematical sense, is 1. For the cases which are
favourable to the event, and the cases which are possible, are in this
instance the same.
Hence, also, if p be the probability that an event x will happen, 1 −p
will be the probability that the said event will not happen. To deduce
this result directly from the deﬁnition, let m be the number of cases
favourable to the event x, n the number of cases possible, then n−m is
the number of cases unfavourable to the event x. Hence, by deﬁnition,
48Ibid., 13.
49Ibid., 17.

Boole’s Logic
367
m/n = probability that x will happen.
n −m/n = probability that x will not happen.
But n −m/n = 1 −m/n = 1 −p.50
Boole then sets the stage to establish the convergence of numerical and logical
methods in probability theory. He begins with the following explanation of basic
terms, making the projected connection between logic and arithmetic explicit:
As the investigations upon which we are about to enter are based upon
the employment of the Calculus of Logic, it is necessary to explain
certain terms and modes of expression which are derived from this
application.
By the event x, I mean that event of which the proposition which
aﬃrms the occurrence is symbolically expressed by the equation
x = 1.
By the event f(x, y, z, . . .), I mean that event of which the occurrence
is expressed by the equation
f(x, y, z, . . .) = 1.
Such an event may be termed a compound event, in relation to the
simple events x, y, z, which its conception involves. Thus, if x represent
the event “It rains,” y the event “It thunders,” the separate occurrences
of those events being expressed by the logical equations
x = 1, y = 1,
then will x(1 −y) + y(1 −x) represent the event or state of things
denoted by the Proposition, “It either rains or thunders, but not both;”
the expression of that state of things being
x(1 −y) + y(1 −x) = 1.
If for brevity we represent the function f(x, y, z, . . .), used in the above
acceptation by V , it is evident...that the law of duality
V (1 −V ) = 0,
will be identically satisﬁed.51
50Ibid., 253.
51Ibid., 257–258.

368
Dale Jacquette
Boole relies as elsewhere generally in his logic on the exclusive interpretation
of logical addition.
The law of duality for probability theory is invoked in a
form precisely isomorphic to that in Boole’s logic.
Boole asserts that for any
predicate term x, x(1 −x) = 0.
This is to say that the logical product of x
and the complement of x, in other words, the set theoretical intersection of the
extension of a predicate and the complement extension of the predicate, what
they have in common, is nothing, null, and hence equal to 0. Boole extends the
very same logical duality principle with comparable intuitive justiﬁcation to the
multiplication of probabilities of the occurrence and nonoccurrence of the same
event. Boole provides the following table of correspondences for the probabilities
of events in the framework of his logical algebra:
EVENTS.
PROBABILITIES.
xy, Concurrence of x and y,
pq.
x(1 −y), Occurrence of x without y,
p(1 −q).
(1 −x)y, Occurrence of y without x,
(1 −p)q.
(1 −x)(1 −y), Conjoint failure of x and y,
(1 −p)(1 −q).
We see that in these cases the probability of the compound event rep-
resented by a constituent is the same function of p and q as the logical
expression of that event is of x and y; and it is obvious that this re-
mark applies, whatever may be the number of the simple events whose
probabilities are given, and whose joint existence or failure is involved
in the compound event of which we seek the probability.52
Boole further extends the method of eliminating terms from algebraic equations
in logic to the determination of probabilities for two broad categories of uncondi-
tioned events, and in more complicated applications for conditioned events. The
analysis of probabilities for conditionally related events is interpreted, as Boole
explains, ‘according to the rules of the Calculus of Logic’.53 The overarching for-
mal structure for calculating probability values is thus Boole’s logical algebra, in
particular with respect to events related by secondary propositional connectives,
such as conjunction (and), disjunction (exclusive or), and the conditional (if-then).
Having explicated the arithmetical evaluation of probabilities in a logical context,
Boole proceeds to bring together logical and numerical approaches to probability
theory. He writes:
It has been stated...that there exist two distinct deﬁnitions, or modes
of conception, upon which the theory of probabilities may be made to
depend, one of them being connected more immediately with Number,
the other more directly with Logic. We have now considered the conse-
quences which ﬂow from the numerical deﬁnition, and have shown how
it conducts us to a point in which the necessity of a connexion with
52Ibid., 259.
53Ibid., 271.

Boole’s Logic
369
Logic obviously suggests itself. We have seen to some extent what is
the nature of that connexion; and further, in what manner the peculiar
processes of Logic, and the more familiar ones of quantitative Algebra,
are involved in the same general method of solution, each of these so
accomplishing its own object that the two processes may be regarded
as supplementary to each other. It remains to institute the reverse or-
der of investigation, and, setting out from a deﬁnition of probability in
which the logical relation is more immediately involved, to show how
the numerical deﬁnition would thence arise, and how the same general
method, equally dependent upon both elements, would ﬁnally, but by
a diﬀerent order of procedure, be established.54
The exact nature of the relation between the numerical and logical aspects
of probability theory have yet to be explained. Boole indicates that there is an
analogy between the two approaches, and an overlap of common principles that
are identical at least in their more generalized mathematical forms, by which one
supplements the other. However, he also holds that there are diﬀerences of sub-
stance as well as diﬀerences of interpretation that are of philosophical importance
in understanding the formal laws of probability. He continues:
That between the symbolical expressions of the logical calculus and
those of Algebra there exists a close analogy, is a fact to which atten-
tion has frequently been directed in the course of the present treatise.
It might even be said that they possess a community of forms, and, to
a very considerable degree, a community of laws. With a single excep-
tion in the latter respect, their diﬀerence is only one of interpretation.
Thus the same expression admits of a logical or of a quantitative in-
terpretation, according to the particular meaning which we attach to
the symbols it involves. The expression xy represents, under the for-
mer condition, a concurrence of the events denoted by x and y; under
the latter, the product of the numbers or quantities denoted by x and
y. And thus every expression denoting an event, simple or compound,
admits, under another system of interpretation, of a meaning purely
quantitative. Here then arises the question, whether there exists any
principle of transition, in accordance with which the logical and the
numerical interpretations of the same symbolical expression shall have
an intelligible connexion.55
Just as 0 is the term indicating for Boole’s probability theory the non-concurrence
or the occurrence and nonoccurrence of the same event, so 1 represents the cer-
tainty of an event occurring. A prime example of an event occurring with certainty
is the compound event denoted algebraically as the logical addition of the exclusive
54Ibid.
55Ibid., 271–272.

370
Dale Jacquette
occurrence or nonoccurrence of the same event. Boole presents the deﬁnition in
this way:
Furthermore, if we set out from the above hypothetical deﬁnition of
the measure of probability, we shall be conducted, either by necessary
inference or by successive steps of suggestion, which might perhaps be
termed necessary, to the received numerical deﬁnition. We are at once
led to recognize unity (1) as the proper numerical measure of certainty.
For it is certain that any event x or its contrary 1 −x will occur. The
expression of this proposition is
x + (1 −x) = 1,
whence, by hypothesis, x + (1 −x), the measure of the probability
of the above proposition, becomes the measure of certainty. But the
value of that expression is 1, whatever the particular value of x may
be. Unity, or 1, is therefore, on the hypothesis in question, the measure
of certainty.56
Boole now prepares to formulate the numerical probability of any of a series of
mutually exclusive equally possible events occurring. He appeals again to algebraic
symbolisms to express logical relations between the events in question, relative to
which their respective probability values are assigned. He writes:
The proposition which aﬃrms that some one of these [events] must
occur will be expressed by the equation
t1 + t2 . . . + tn = 1;
and, as when we pass in accordance with the reasoning of the last
section to numerical probabilities, the same equation remains true in
form, and as the probabilities t1, t2 . . . tn are equal, we have
nt1 = 1,
whence t1 = 1/n, and similarly t2 = 1/n, tn = 1/n. Suppose it then
required to determine the probability that some one event of the partial
series t1, t2 . . . tm will occur, we have for the expression required
t1 + t2 . . . + tm = 1/n + 1/n . . . to m terms = m/n.
56Ibid., 273.

Boole’s Logic
371
Hence, therefore, if there are m cases favourable to the occurrence of
a particular alternation of events out of n possible and equally proba-
ble cases, the probability of the occurrence of that alternation will be
expressed by the fraction m/n.57
Boole takes advantage of an assumption about the logical relations between
alternative mutually exclusive events, which he characterizes by means of logical
addition or exclusive disjunction. The logical addition of the events as exclusive
alternatives then has an immediate numerical parallel in the quantitative addition
of the distinct probabilities of each of the events in the series under consideration,
while the probability of any such mutually exclusive event in the series occurring
is calculated as the ratio of the number of alternative events divided by the total
number of possible events. Boole’s result, expressed here by means of his logical al-
gebra, integrated with the standard numerical interpretation of probabilities, fully
agrees with the sixth principle of probability derived from Laplace’s arithmetical
theory, to which Boole is committed. Boole compares the logical and numerical
interpretations of probability, and their complicated synthesis in his theory, when
he writes:
Now the occurrence of any event which may happen in diﬀerent equally
possible ways is really equivalent to the occurrence of an alternation,
i.e., of some one out of a set of alternatives. Hence the probability
of the occurrence of any event may be expressed by a fraction whose
numerator represents the number of cases favourable to its occurrence,
and denominator the total number of equally possible cases. But this
is the rigorous numerical deﬁnition of the measure of probability. That
deﬁnition is therefore involved in the more peculiarly logical deﬁnition,
the consequences of which we have endeavoured to trace.58
Boole’s demonstration of the convergence of logical and numerical methods in
probability theory illustrated here concerns only a limited fragment of the calcu-
lations required in standard probabililty evaluations. It is nevertheless suggestive
of the general parallel that Boole claims to hold between these alternative inte-
grated interpretations of probability. It is typical of Boole’s philosophy of logic
and mathematics that he should seek a higher overarching unity of logical and
quantitative approaches in probability theory, just as he proposes alternative log-
ical and numerical interpretations of algebra in the mathematical analyis of logic.
Boole, in any case, regards the evidence for the convergence of logic and arithmetic
in probability calculations in the cases he considers as proving the general thesis.
Thus, he concludes:
From the above investigations it clearly appears, 1st, that whether we
set out from the ordinary numerical deﬁnition of the measure of prob-
ability, or from the deﬁnition which assigns to the numerical measure
57Ibid., 274.
58Ibid.

372
Dale Jacquette
of probability such a law of value as shall establish a formal identity
between the logical expressions of events and the algebraic expressions
of their values, we shall be led to the same system of practical results.
2ndly, that either of these deﬁnitions pursued to its consequences, and
considered in connexion with the relations which it inseparably in-
volves, conducts us, by inference or suggestion, to the other deﬁnition.
To a scientiﬁc view of the theory of probabilities it is essential that
both principles should be viewed together, in their mutual bearing and
dependence.59
Boole’s main purpose in developing a formal theory of probabilities is not merely
or primarily to argue for the higher generalization of logical and numerical rela-
tions in probability calculations as in universal algebra. His concern is rather to
articulate and illustrate a reﬁned and in some ways more systematic treatment
of probability than in the work of his predecessors. It is typical of all his work
in mathematics, however, that it strives for this kind of simplicity, unity, and
generality.
Boole oﬀers a range of elementary applications to advertise the advantages of
his formalization of probability theory, which he extends to the analysis of statis-
tics and statistical conditions at increasing levels of complexity. From this vantage
point, he then turns to the study of causal connections and the relation of cause
and eﬀect in science, and concludes his discussion of probability with a detailed
mathematical modeling of social statistics for the probability of collective judg-
ments in practical decision-making. While acknowledging the limitations of using
mathematical methods in matters of human choice, Boole with due caution applies
his general methods for solving probability equations to judicial deliberations in
deciding criminal innocence or guilt by the participation of individual jurors in a
jury trial.
Although Boole does not produce any altogether unanticipated mathematical
results in probability theory, his generalization of its previously established but
less systematically presented central principles, his extremely careful and precise
applications of its methods to a wide range of diﬃcult problems, and his eﬀorts
to prove the convergence of logical and arithmetical approaches to probability,
distinguish his formalization of the theory of probability, inductive reasoning and
statistics even from the most sophisticated contemporary expositions of the sub-
ject in his day. By choosing to include a highly articulated mathematical theory of
probabilities in sequence together with the generalized algebraic logic in Laws of
Thought, Boole oﬀers a manifest image of the unity and continuity of mathemat-
ical methods. The principal modes of reasoning in logic and probability theory
are thereby represented by Boole as two sides of the same algebraic coin, for the
same inferential law-governed machinery of thought. Symbolic logic and probabil-
ity theory are adapted to diﬀerent, but, as Boole believes he has rigorously shown,
intimately interrelated cognitive tasks that are united by Boole’s multiple interpre-
59Ibid., 274–275.

Boole’s Logic
373
tations of a single underlying universal symbolic algebra of Boolean operators.60
7
CONCLUSION
The principles of Boole’s algebraic logic have unlimitedly many uses. Boole in
his philosophical moments seems to have thought that the extension of his logic
to probability theory and its use in what he referred to as the use of logic in
the further investigation of the mind were its most important applications. The
judgment of history is rather diﬀerent, and not entirely in agreement with Boole’s
own assessment.
Probability theory has since been established as an independent mathematical
theory with only incidental connections to logic as Boole conceived of it. The use
of logic as a tool for the systematic study of thought has equally failed to attract
much of a following in the years since Boole’s death. The idea that logic describes
laws of thought and can be used in turn as a method of psychology has come to
be regarded as an objectionable kind of psychologism, which Boolean algebra has
managed to survive in spite of itself in the opinion of many contemporary logicians
and mathematicians.61
That the verdict of history agrees with Boole’s expectations that he had dis-
covered a more general and extraordinarily useful analysis of logic, for purposes
of expressing thoughts, with rigorous methods of calculation that would carry
reason beyond its previously recognized limitations, is largely due to the impres-
sive applications of later generations of Boolean logic in the design, manufacture,
programming, and implementation of binary digital computing machines. Devel-
opments of Boole’s algebra in these areas, which Boole would not have foreseen,
and which are in some ways inimical to his concept of logic, are important as evi-
dence for the legitimacy and truth of Boole’s systematization of the logical laws of
thought.62 This, after all, is the practical criterion by which Boole himself believed
his logical algebra must ultimately be judged, on which grounds he was prepared
to see the project succeed or fail.
60A more complete exposition of Boole’s probability theory is found in the latter part of
Hailperin, Boole’s Logic and Probability. See also Wilbraham, ‘On the Theory of Chances De-
veloped in Professor Boole’s “Laws of Thought”’, and Hammer and Rudeanu, Boolean Methods
in Operations Research and Related Areas.
61I discuss Boole’s psychologism in detail in Jacquette, On Boole, Chapter 5, pp. 77-91, and the
relevant sections on Boole’s use of logic as a method for investigating psychology in Chapter 4, pp.
61-70. See also, Jacquette, ‘Psychologism Revisited in Logic, Metaphysics, and Epistemology’,
and Jacquette, ed., Philosophy, Psychology, and Psychologism: Critical and Historical Readings
on the Psychological Turn in Philosophy, especially pp. 1-19 and 245-262.
62See Grattan-Guinness, ‘Logic in Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of Logic’, xliv: ‘On Boole’s
side, as we have seen, in both logic and for educational practice he thought that the mind was
capable of original action, such as grasping general laws from particular cases..., and so he would
not have welcomed the association of his logic with the repetitive actions of computing; whether
Babbagean mechanical or modern electrical.’

374
Dale Jacquette
We can speak of any area of application to which Boole’s logic applies as a
Boolean phenomenon. The overwhelming success of Boole’s algebra in computer
applications and the large array of Boolean phenomena in logic, mathematics, and
computing theory, far outweighs the qualiﬁed achievements Boole gained in prob-
ability theory and psychology, which are not particularly highly regarded today,
nor seen as having led to any important new discoveries. All such applications
are invaluable in attaining a comprehensive view of all aspects of Boole’s logic.
Boole’s algebra is indispensable to the design and use of modern computing ma-
chines, tasks that Boole’s logic accomplishes by virtue of several essential insights
implicit in Boole’s mathematical analysis of logic. They include at least the fol-
lowing enduring and enormously useful aspects of any Boolean logic of Boolean
phenomena:
First, Boole pioneered the idea that a binary system of 0’s and 1’s can
be used to represent any values of a logic, which is absolutely vital to
modern computer technology.
Second, Boole recognized that all such logical operations as needed
in order to transform input strings of binary coded information into
output strings of binary coded information can be accomplished by
mechanical rule-governed methods of substitution and replacement of
symbols in an algorithm or step-by-step mechanical procedure, such
as he uses in performing the algebraic transformations in his general
method of logical inference.
Third, as we have emphasized, the three Boolean operators NOT, AND,
and OR, and their logic switching gates mechanical implementations,
as modiﬁed in neo-Boolean algebras, are necessary and suﬃcient for the
logical operations by which the algorithms in computer programming
for transforming input information to output, coded by the electrical
signals moving through a computer’s switching circuits, can be per-
formed.
Fourth, Boole’s work in logic and probability theory reﬂects a math-
ematical insight that is crucial to computer electronic circuit design,
programming, and applications.
Any information input to or output from a machine, as is widely recognized,
can be minimally coded in a binary system of 0’s and 1’s. Consider a sentence
like the ﬁrst sentence of this book, and convert its use of a speciﬁc sequence of
letters of the alphabet, spacing, and punctuation, to a binary string of 0’s and
1’s, according to an explicit and unambiguous glossary, where, say, a = 0, b = 1,
c = 11, d = 10, etc. A computer circuit can encode such a message by sustaining
a corresponding sequence of electrical signals moving at blinding speed, in which
the current is now below .5 volts at a speciﬁc instant of time representing each 0
exactly where it is located in the string, and again above .5 volts at a diﬀerent

Boole’s Logic
375
speciﬁc instant of time representing each 1 exactly where it is located at another
place in the string.
This is Boole’s ruling idea, that logic and arithmetic are alternative interpre-
tations of a common underlying or overarching algebra of symbolic operators, an
expectation that ﬁnds expression in the programming of computers to perform
both number crunching and logical information processing by appropriate adap-
tations of the same formal symbolic operations. Algorithms of the required sort
are mechanically implemented by the logic switching gates of an appropriately
designed electronic computer circuit, under the control of an appropriately de-
signed computer program that controls the input to the circuits and determines
its mechanical algorithmic transformation into output.
If the project to design a thinking machine that functions entirely in terms of
logic switching circuits in its hardware and software programming instructions ever
succeeds, as many of its adherents believe it eventually may, then Boole’s algebra
will have achieved a more remarkable implication for the philosophy of mind than
he ever anticipated.
In that case, it will have been proven that a mechanical
device, a computer with Boolean circuitry and Boolean programming, is capable
of thinking, which will represent a most profound breakthrough in mentalistic
artiﬁcial intelligence. Philosophers for a variety of reasons have been skeptical
about the prospects of building such a thinking machine, and Boole himself, as
we have seen, would at least initially rebel against the idea that the mind could
be understood in purely mechanical terms.
For it is one of the conclusions of
his application of symbolic logic to psychology that the mind does not always
obey the logical laws of thought in the same way that physical phenomena obey
the causal laws of nature. To the extent that the simulation of mental activities
can be implemented on a Boolean machine, from the function of neural networks
analogous to computer switching circuits, to robotic simulacra of the mind’s use
of memory, perception, logical inference, and other cognitive modalities, to that
extent Boole will have inadvertently made his greatest indirect contributions to
scientiﬁc psychology, laying the mathematical groundwork for meaningful advances
in our understanding of the hidden workings of cognitive psychological processes
through logic design and computer modeling.63
BIBLIOGRAPHY
WORKS BY BOOLE
A more complete list of Boole’s publications is found in MacHale, 1985, 277–297. Items listed
here are limited to Boole’s principal works or those especially related to his contributions to
mathematical logic.
[Boole, 1847] G. Boole. The Mathematical Analysis of Logic: Being an Essay Towards a Calcu-
lus of Deductive Reasoning. Cambridge: Macmillan, Barclay & Macmillan; London: George
Bell, 1847. Reprinted with an introduction by John Slater. Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1998.
63See, among many other more recent sources, Craven, ‘An Engineering Application of Boolean
Algebra’; and O’Canainn, ‘The Application of Boolean Algebra to Switching Circuits’.

376
Dale Jacquette
[Boole, 1848] G. Boole. The Calculus of Logic. Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal,
3:183–198, 1848.
[Boole, 1854] G. Boole. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on Which are Founded the
Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities. London: Walton and Maberley, 1854; New
York: Dover Publications, 1958.
[Boole, 1859] G. Boole. A Treatise on Diﬀerential Equations, 1859. 4th edition, 1877. New York:
G.E. Stechert & Co., 1931.
[Boole, 1860] G. Boole. A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Diﬀerences, 1860. 4th edition. J.F.
Moulton (ed.), New York: Chelsea Publishing Company, 1872.
[Boole, 1952] Collected Logical Works. 2 Volumes. Edited by A.E. Heath. New York: Dover
Publications, 1952.
[Boole, 1997] Selected Manuscripts on Logic and its Philosophy. Edited by I. Grattan–Guinness
and G. Bornet. Basel, Boston, Berlin: Birkh¨auser Verlag, 1997.
[Boole, 1982] The Boole–De Morgan Correspondence 1842- 1864. Edited by G.C. Smith. Ox-
ford: The Clarendon Press, 1982.

Boole’s Logic
377
SELECTED SECONDARY LITERATURE
[Barry, 1969] P.D. Barry (ed.). George Boole: A Miscellany. Cork: Cork University Press, 1969.
[Bell, 1985] J.L. Bell. Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs in Set Theory, 2nd edi-
tion. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1985.
[Boole, 1878] M.E. Boole. Home Side of a Scientiﬁc Mind. University Magazine, Vol. 1 (in
four parts), 1878; reprinted in Mary Everest Boole: Collected Works. E.M. Cobham (ed.), 4
volumes. Essex: C.W. Daniel, 1931.
[Bornet, 1995] G. Bornet. George Boole’s Linguistic Turn and the Origins of Analytic Philos-
ophy. In J. Hintikka and K. Puhl (eds.), The British Tradition in 20th Century Philosophy.
Vienna: H¨older–Pichler–Tempsky, 236–248, 1995.
[Bornet, 1997] G. Bornet. Boole’s Psychologism as a Reception Problem. In Boole, Selected
Manuscripts on Logic and its Philosophy. I. Grattan-Guinness and G Bornet (eds.), xlvii–
lvii.
[Broad, 1917] C.D. Broad. Review of Boole’s Collected Logical Works. Mind, 26: 81-99, 1917.
[Comtet, 1974] L. Comtet. Boolean Algebra Generated by a System of Subsets. In Advanced
Combinatorics: The Art of Finite and Inﬁnite Expansions, rev. enl. ed.; 185–189. Dordrecht:
D. Reidel, 1974.
[Cooney, 1917] S. Cooney. Current Applications of Boolean Logic to Advanced Systems for the
Storage and Retrieval, and for the Selective Dissemination, of Technical Information. In P.D.
Barry (ed.), George Boole: A Miscellany, 43–52.
[Corcoran and Wood, 1980] J. Corcoran and S.B. Wood. Boole’s Criteria of Validity and Inva-
lidity. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 21: 609–638, 1980.
[Craven, 1955] T.L. Craven. An Engineering Application of Boolean Algebra. Celebration of the
Centenary of The Laws of Thought by George Boole, Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy,
57, Section A, No. 6: 121–130, 1955.
[Dudman, 1976] V.H. Dudman. From Boole to Frege. In M. Schirn (ed.), Studien zu Frege –
Studies on Frege, vol. 1, Fromman–Holzboog, 109–138, 1976.
[Feys, 1955] R. Feys. Boole as a Logician, Boole’s Methods of Development and Interpretation.
Celebration of the Centenary of The Laws of Thought by George Boole, Proceedings of the
Royal Irish Academy, 57, Section A, No. 6:97-112, 1955.
[Goodstein, 1963] R.L. Goodstein. Boolean Algebra. Oxford: Pergamon, 1963.
[Goodstein, 1969] R.L. Goodstein. Boolean Algebra Since George Boole. In P.D. Barry (ed.),
George Boole: A Miscellany, 35–42, 1969.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1982] I. Grattan–Guinness. Psychology in the Foundations of Logic and
Mathematics: The Cases of Boole, Cantor and Brouwer. History and Philosophy of Logic, 3:
33-53, 1982.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1991] I. Grattan–Guinness. The Correspondence Between George Boole and
Stanley Jevons, 1863–1864. History and Philosophy of Logic, 12: 15–35, 1991.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1997] I. Grattan–Guinness. Logic in Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of
Logic. In Boole, Selected Manuscripts on Logic and its Philosophy, I. Grattan-Guinness and
G. Bornet (eds.), xxviii–xlvii.
[Hailperin, 1981] T. Hailperin. Boole’s Algebra Isn’t Boolean. Mathematics Magazine, 54: 172-
184, 1981.
[Hailperin, 1984] T. Hailperin. Boole’s Abandoned Propositional Logic. History and Philosophy
of Logic, 5: 39-48, 1984.
[Hailperin, 1986] T. Hailperin. Boole’s Logic and Probability: A Critical Exposition from the
Standpoint of Contemporary Algebra, Logic and Probability Theory. 2nd edition, revised and
enlarged. Amsterdam: North–Holland, 1986.
[Halmos, 1963] P.R. Halmos. Lectures on Boolean Algebras. Princeton: Van Nostrand, 1963.
[Halsted, 1878a] G.B. Halsted. Boole’s Logical Method. The Journal of Speculative Philosophy,
12: 81-91, 1878.
[Halsted, 1878b] G.B. Halsted. Professor Jevons’s Criticism of Boole’s Logical System. Mind, 3:
134-137, 1878.
[Hammer and Rudeanu, 1968] P.L. Hammer and S. Rudeanu. Boolean Methods in Operations
Research and Related Areas. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1968.
[Harley, 1866a] R. Harley. George Boole: An Essay, Biographical and Expository. London, 1866.

378
Dale Jacquette
[Harley, 1866b] R. Harley. George Boole, F.R.S.. The British Quarterly Review, 44: 141-181,
1866.
[Harley, 1867] R. Harley. Remarks on Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of Logic. Reports of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science, 2: 3–6, 1867.
[Harley, 1871] R. Harley. On Boole’s Laws of Thought. Reports of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science, 2: 14-15, 1871.
[Hesse, 1952] M.B. Hesse. Boole’s Philosophy of Logic. Annals of Science, 8: 61-81, 1952.
[Hooley, 1966] J. Hooley. Boole’s Method for Solving Boolean Equations. The Mathematical
Gazette, 50: 114-118, 1966.
[Huntington, 1933] E.V. Huntington. Boolean Algebras:
A Correction. Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, 35: 557-558, 1933.
[Jacquette, 2001a] D. Jacquette. Psychologism Revisited in Logic, Metaphysics, and Epistemol-
ogy. Metaphilosophy, 32: 261-278, 2001; rpt. in D. Jacquette (ed.), Philosophy, Psychology,
and Psychologism, 245-262.
[Jacquette, 2001b] D. Jacquette. On Boole. Belmont: Wadsworth Publishing, 2001.
[Jacquette, 2003] D. Jacquette (ed.). Philosophy, Psychology, and Psychologism: Critical and
Historical Readings on the Psychological Turn in Philosophy. Dordrecht-Boston-London:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003.
[Jevons, 1864] W.S. Jevons. Pure Logic, or The Logic of Quality Apart from Quantity. London,
1864, 1871; rpt. in R. Adamson and H.A. Jevons (eds.), Pure Logic and Other Minor Works,
London and New York, 1890.
[Kant, 1787] I. Kant. Critique of Pure Reason, 1787. Translated by Norman Kemp Smith. New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1965.
[Kneale, 1948] W. Kneale. Boole and the Revival of Logic. Mind, 57: 149-175, 1948.
[Laita, 1977] L.M. Laita. The Inﬂuence on Boole’s Search for a Universal Method in Analysis
on the Creation of his Logic. Annals of Science, 34: 163–176, 1977.
[Laita, 1979] L.M. Laita. Inﬂuences on Boole’s Logic: The Controversy Between William Hamil-
ton and Augustus De Morgan. Annals of Science, 36: 46–65, 1979.
[Laita, 1980] L.M. Laita. Boolean Algebra and its Extra–Logical Sources: The Testimony of
Mary Everest Boole. History and Philosophy of Logic, 1: 37-60, 1980.
[La Palma Reyes et al, 1994] M. La Palma Reyes et al. The Non-Boolean Logic of Natural Lan-
guage Negation. Philosophia Mathematica, 3: 45-68, 1994.
[Lewis, 1918] C.I. Lewis. A Survey of Symbolic Logic. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1918.
[Lukasiewicz, 1951] J. Lukasiewicz. Aristotle’s Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern Formal
Logic. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1951.
[MacHale, 1985] D. MacHale. George Boole: His Life and Work. Dublin: Boole Press, 1985.
[Musgrave, 1972] A. Musgrave. George Boole and Psychologism. Scientia, 107: 593–608, 1972.
[O’Canainn, 1969] T. O’Canainn. The Application of Boolean Algebra to Switching Circuits. In
P.D. Barry (ed.), George Boole: A Miscellany, 53–58.
[Peirce, 1868a] C.S. Peirce. On an Improvement in Boole’s Calculus of Logic. Proceedings of the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 7: 250–261, 1868.
[Peirce, 1868b] C.S. Peirce. Upon the Logic of Mathematics. Proceedings of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences, 7: 402–412, 1868.
[Peirce, 1873] C.S. Peirce. Description of a Notation for the Logic of Relatives, Resulting From
an Ampliﬁcation of the Conceptions of Boole’s Calculus of Logic. Memoirs of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences, 9: 317–378, 1873.
[Peirce, 1880] C.S. Peirce. On the Algebra of Logic. American Journal of Mathematics, 3: 15–
57, 1880.
[Prior, 1948] A.N. Prior. Categoricals and Hypotheticals in George Boole and his Successors.
The Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 27: 171–196, 1948.
[Richards, 1980] J. Richards. Boole and Mill: Diﬀering Perspectives on Logical Psychologism.
History and Philosophy of Logic, 1: 19–36, 1980.
[Rosser, 1955] J.B. Rosser. Boole and the Concept of a Function. Celebration of the Centenary
of The Laws of Thought by George Boole, Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, 57, Section
A, No. 6: 117-120, 1955.
[Rudeanu, 1974] S. Rudeanu. Boolean Functions and Equations. Amsterdam: North-Holland,
1974.

Boole’s Logic
379
[Sikorski, 1964] R. Sikorski. Boolean Algebras. 3rd edition. Berlin: Springer Verlag. Ergebnisse
der Mathematik und ihre Grenzgebiete. New Series, 25, 1964.
[Smith, 1983] G.C. Smith. Boole’s Annotations on ‘The Mathematical Analysis of Logic’. His-
tory and Philosophy of Logic, 4: 27-38, 1983.
[Stone, 1935] M.H. Stone. Subsumption of the Theory of Boolean Algebras Under the Theory
of Rings. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 21: 103-105, 1935.
[Taylor, 1955] G. Taylor. George Boole 1815-1864. Celebration of the Centenary of The Laws
of Thought by George Boole, Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, 57, Section A, No. 6:
66-73, 1955.
[Taylor, 1956] G. Taylor. George Boole, F.R.S. 1815–1864. Notes and Records of the Royal
Society of London, 12: 44-52, 1956.
[Thomson, 1853] W. Thomson (Lord Kelvin). An Outline of the Necessary Laws of Thought.
3rd edition. London: William Pickering, 1853.
[Van Evra, 1977] J.W. Van Evra. A Reassessment of George Boole’s Theory of Logic. Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 28: 363-377, 1977.
[Venn, 1894] J. Venn. Symbolic Logic. 2nd edition. London and New York: Macmillan and Co.,
1894.
[Wallis, 1685] J. Wallis. A Treatise of Algebra Both Historical and Practical, shewing the origi-
nal progress and advancement thereof, from time to time; and by what steps it hath attained
the heighth at which it now is. London: J. Playford for R. Davis, 1685.
[Whately, 1826] R. Whately. Elements of Logic: Comprising the Substance of the Article in the
Encyclopedia Metropolitana. London: Joseph Mawman, 1826.
[Whitehead, 1898] A.N. Whitehead. A Treatise on Universal Algebra with Applications. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1898.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1927] A.N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica. 2nd
edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1927.
[Whitesitt, 1961] J.E. Whitesitt. Boolean Algebra and its Applications. Reading:
Addison–
Wesley, 1961.
[Wilbraham, 1854] H. Wilbraham. On the Theory of Chances Developed in Professor Boole’s
“Laws of Thought”. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal
of Science, series 4, 7: 465-476, 1854.
[Young, 1865] G.P. Young. Remarks on Professor Boole’s Mathematical Theory of the Laws of
Thought. The Canadian Journal, 10: 161-182, 1865.

This page intentionally left blank 

FRENCH ‘LOGIQUE’ AND BRITISH ‘LOGIC’:
ON THE ORIGINS OF
AUGUSTUS DE MORGAN’S
EARLY LOGICAL INQUIRIES, 1805–1835
Maria Panteki
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
An outline of De Morgan’s career in algebra and logic
Of twenty years of experience as a teacher of mathematics, I may now
aﬃrm that the ﬁrst half of the period established in my mind the con-
viction that formal logic is a most important preliminary part of every
sound system of exact science and that the second half has strength-
ened that conviction.
[De Morgan,
1847]1
Augustus De Morgan (1806–1871) matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in
1823, graduating a fourth wrangler2 in 1827. Appointed Professor of Mathemat-
ics at the newly founded London University in 1828, he spent his entire career
there until 1866, apart from his resignation from 1831 to 1836 as a protest against
administrative practices.3 Deeply concerned with the instruction of elementary
mathematics, he perceived in 1831 the utility of Aristotelian logic in the teach-
ing of Euclidean geometry. De Morgan was equally attentive to mathematics and
logic, contributing to the advancement of algebra, the extension of syllogistic logic
and the founding of the logic of relations. In the ensuing outline we can see the
1From a manuscript preface to his Formal logic [De Morgan 1847], University of London
Library, MS. 775/353.
2Cambridge students earned their degree by passing the University Senate House Examina-
tions, known as the Tripos [see fn. 58]. The denomination of “wrangler” was derived from the
process of wrangling, that is “the debating method used to test undergraduates before the ad-
vent of written examinations” [Crilly 1999, 133]. See also, [Becher 1980b, 4–6], [Durand 2000,
140–141] and [Rice 1997b, 20–24].
3On De Morgan’s life and career, see [S. De Morgan 1882] and [Rice 1997b]. The latter focuses
on De Morgan as a teacher in the context of London mathematics, a role previously overlooked.
On his resignation, see [ibid. 87–97]. On De Morgan’s publications, see [Smith 1982, 141–147],
and on his manuscripts, see [Rice 1997b, 349–357].
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.
: British Logic in the Ninteenth Century.

382
Maria Panteki
close interaction between his algebraic and logical queries, along with his smooth
passage from the lower and more speciﬁc to the higher and more general forms of
algebra and logic over the years.4
Stage 1:
From elementary mathematics to algebra and logic (1828–
1839) During this period, De Morgan produced the majority of his textbooks on
elementary mathematics, as well as his articles on the instruction of mathematics.
In his booklet On the Study and Diﬃculties of Mathematics [De Morgan 1831a],
cited as SDM, he paid a singular attention to logic, as a prerequisite to the study
of geometry. His views were elaborated in his First Notions of Logic [De Mor-
gan 1839], a book designed for students of geometry. In 1835 he reviewed George
Peacock’s Algebra [Peacock 1830], eager in promoting this pioneering account of
advanced algebra as an indispensable preliminary part of the calculus and mechan-
ics within Cambridge education. In his review, [De Morgan 1835a], he raised links
between algebra and logic, thus sealing his life-long interest in the foundations of
mathematics and logic. This interest became evident in his article on the “Cal-
culus of functions” (COF), published in the Encyclopedia Metropolitana (EM) in
1836.5 There De Morgan developed his method of abstraction and generalization
in mathematics, visible in the ascent from arithmetic to algebra and from algebra
to the calculi of functions and operations. Successfully applied in the extension
of the domain of algebra, this method would later govern his mature work on logic.
Stage 2: On the foundations of algebra and “formal logic” (1839–1849)
De Morgan furnished his treatise on the Calculus [De Morgan 1842] by drawing,
among other sources, on his COF and the recent development of the calculus of
operations.6 The same sources, including Peacock’s book, served as a basis for his
four papers “On the foundations of algebra”, contributed between 1839 and 1844.
These papers, together with his Trigonometry and Double Algebra [De Morgan
1849] constitute his basic share in the advancement of algebra, including his near
deﬁnition of the axioms which characterize the ﬁeld of complex numbers.7
De
Morgan’s project as regards the extension and formalization of algebra was suc-
ceeded by his attempt to enlarge the system of Aristotelian syllogistic, a concern
rooted in SDM. As a result, he produced his ﬁrst paper “On the syllogism” [De
4The outline is based upon [Panteki 1992, chs. 3, 6] on De Morgan’s mathematical and logical
contributions. For facility, we divide his career into four stages, each stage roughly equivalent
to a decade. However, diﬀerent divisions may be found in [Pycior 1983] and [Merrill 1990], in
connection with De Morgan’s algebraic and logical career respectively.
5Objecting to his “Treatise” (of 75 quarto double pages in small print) being “locked up” in
EM, De Morgan agreed with the proprietors of the encyclopedia to have his article reprinted on
its own account [De Morgan 1838, 15]. The outcome of this agreement remains unclear; see also
[Todhunter 1876 I, 85]. However, although the volume of EM containing this essay bears the
date 1845, there exists a separate oﬀprint, dated 1836.
6De Morgan’s treatise was of signiﬁcant impact on the development of the calculus of opera-
tions, serving as a basic source for Boole’s original contributions in 1844 [Panteki 2000, 173–174].
7See [Koppelman 1971, 218–220], [Panteki 1992, sect. 3.9], [Pycior 1983, 221–224], [Richards
1980, 354–357] and [Smith 1981].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
383
Morgan 1846], followed by his book Formal logic [De Morgan 1847]. The latter,
in conjunction with George Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of Logic (1847), mark
a new era in the development of “algebraic logic”.8 By that time, the Scottish
philosopher William Hamilton had accused De Morgan of plagiarism, in connection
with the issue of “quantiﬁcation of the predicate”.9 The accusation gave rise to a
controversy between the two men in 1846, which continued well after Hamilton’s
death in 1856, motivating De Morgan (and Boole) to speculate on the validity and
utility of applying mathematical methods to logic.10
Stage 3: On the ultimate extension and formalization of logic (1850–
1860) This period witnessed the highlight of De Morgan’s logical contributions,
which consisted of three more papers “On the syllogism” [De Morgan 1850; 1858;
1860a], a booklet on the Syllabus of Logic and an encyclopedic article on “Logic”,
both published in 1860. From amongst these, we single out [De Morgan 1860a]
his masterpiece on the “Logic of relations” (LOR), De Morgan’s achievement of
pure, formal logic. The latter resulted from the method of abstraction and gen-
eralization of the copula, which was developed in [De Morgan 1858], amounting
to the gradual separation of “form” from “matter”. Alluding to his paper on the
COF, De Morgan was happy to note that the “form-matter” distinction “exists
in all thought”, although it is “more familiar” to the mathematician [De Morgan
1858, 82]. The term “Formal logic”, which had featured a decade ago in the title
of [De Morgan 1847], may be said to have attained its full meaning in [De Morgan
1858],11 a paper imbued by Hamilton’s inﬂuence, and one to reveal its debt to [De
Morgan 1836].12
Stage 4: The formalization of algebra revisited (1860–1866) After his
8As recently brought forward in [Valencia 2001], De Morgan reviewed Boole’s book in 1848
pinpointing their distinct approach towards the mathematization of logic (see also [Corcoran
1986]). However, despite their varied procedures, both works belong to the realms of “algebraic
logic”, in so far as they are based on Lagrangian algebras.
Algebraic logic should be distin-
guished from “mathematical logic”, as stemming from Cauchy’s and Weierstrass’ foundations of
mathematical analysis [Grattan-Guinness 2000, 570].
9According to traditional logic, there are four standard forms of categorical propositions
denoted by the letters A, I, E and O. By means of the quantiﬁcation of the predicate, each form
is split into two. For instance, form A “All X is Y”, is split into “All X is some Y” and “All X is
all Y”. On the invention of this doctrine by G. Bentham (1827), T. Solly (1839) Hamilton (late
1830s) and De Morgan (1846), see [Jevons 1873], [Lewis 1918, 33.3], [Panteki 1993, 153, 161–162]
and [Styazhkin 1968, 148–157].
10On the early stage of the De Morgan-Hamilton controversy see [Laita 1979], the ﬁrst historian
to point out its immediate impact upon Boole. On its later impact upon De Morgan’s inquiries,
see [Panteki 1992, sects. 6.6–6.7].
11On the origins and ﬁrst systematic use of the term “formal logic”, with emphasis on [De
Morgan 1858], see [Hodges 2000].
12Motivated by [Grattan-Guinness 1988, 74], [Merrill 1990] and [Panteki 1992] questioned
the plausible impact of [De Morgan 1836] upon his LOR. The two surveys are complementary,
respectively arguing against and for such a signiﬁcant impact. Moreover, the former presents
the LOR from a modern standpoint, which is missing in the latter, while lacking a full-length
exploration of its mathematical background, supplied in the latter.

384
Maria Panteki
breakthrough with logic (enriched with a ﬁnal paper “On the syllogism V” in
1862), De Morgan resumed his algebraic inquiries, considering his former project
of algebra’s formalization from a diﬀerent angle. Until the mid 1840s, logic had
been considered as “a most important preliminary part of every sound system of
exact science”,13 primarily connected with the instruction of geometry and algebra.
From then onwards, algebraic and functional methods served as powerful tools and
devices of utmost utility in De Morgan’s advanced logical contributions, leading
the way to the LOR. That achieved, it was once again time to reverse the role of
the two disciplines, and look for the model for the formalization of algebra in the
general methods of pure logic. This newly-conceived project stood at the core of
De Morgan’s last major contribution to mathematics, his paper “On inﬁnity and
the sign of equality” [De Morgan 1865, 180], where he wrote, referring to Peacock’s
foundation of symbolic algebra: “This is a very near approach to the assertion that
algebra is, like logic, a formal science: nothing was wanted but an introduction and
incorporation of that distinction between form and matter, which now rules in the
deﬁnition of pure logic”. However, his career was nearing its end, with no scope
therefore for the pursuit of this project. His life-long passion for the foundations
of mathematics and logic, along with his deep parallel interest in their history, was
manifested once again in his Speech [De Morgan 1866], which was delivered at the
ﬁrst meeting of the London Mathematical Society (LMS) on 16 January 1865.14
1.2
Survey of the literature and scope of our study
The recollection of these will furnish abundant opportunities for a
very important exercise, the detection of incorrect reasoning, an ex-
ercise which will be the more instructive, as by the occurrence of great
names, in connection with fallacies and misconceptions, the student
will perceive that brilliant intellect, unaccompanied by habits of cor-
rect thinking, has often led its possessor to the direct path of error, and
that if he neglect the constant improvement of the mental faculties, he
may perhaps acquire profound knowledge, but will never reason with
accuracy.
[De Morgan 1828, 24]
The above quotation is from De Morgan’s “Introductory lecture”, delivered at the
opening of his classes at London University on 5 November 1828.15 Characterized
by a “profound mathematical erudition” and a strong educational background, this
lecture reveals above all “the importance De Morgan places on logic and reason in
the development of the intellect” [Rice 1997b, 72–73]. What were the sources that
would inspire a fresh graduate to pay such a singular attention to the import of
13See our introductory quote, fn. 1.
14On the LMS, see [Rice 1995]. Further on [De Morgan 1866], see [Richards 1987]. On De
Morgan’s contributions to the history of science, see [Rice 1996].
15Brought forward in [Rice 1997b, 67–73], this lecture belongs to University College, London,
MS.Add.3, cited as [De Morgan 1828]. Our pagination corresponds to that of the manuscript.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
385
“fallacies” in the establishment of “correct thinking”, apparently leading the way
to his dual contemplation of logic and geometry three years later?
De Morgan’s mature work on logic engaged the attention of historians in the
1870s, ceaselessly continuing to the present day.16 The aim of most surveys was
to record his rather chaotic presentation of logic in a systematic and lucid way,
with a view to evaluating De Morgan’s share in the development of formal logic.17
In the 1990s, new light was shed upon the genesis and status of the LOR, as well
as its mathematical background, by [Merrill 1990] and [Panteki 1992] respectively.
Merrill was the ﬁrst historian to consider the logical novelties introduced in SDM
and the Notions [Merrill 1990, chs. 1, 2]. However, an investigation that would
account for De Morgan’s initiative in reducing geometrical reasoning to syllogistic
form is missing from his survey, a fact hardly surprising, however, given the absence
of similar concerns in the prevailing British tradition of Aristotelian logic in De
Morgan’s time.
On the other hand, De Morgan’s algebraic contributions took longer to be appre-
ciated than those of his logic. Commencing with [Nagel 1935], historians orientated
their research towards an evaluation of De Morgan’s papers “On the foundations of
algebra” from a modern standpoint, while his broader algebraic approach towards
the calculi of functions and relations suﬀered from near neglect.18 The 1980s was a
turning point in the historiography of early 19th century British algebra, marked
by the attempts of H. Pycior and J. Richards to account for the elusive char-
acter of algebra at that time, and also bring forward De Morgan’s idiosyncratic
oscillation between formalism and conceptualism. They did so by stressing the
role of extra-algebraic factors, like philosophy and religion, in shaping the views
of British algebraists, as well as taking under consideration neglected aspects of
De Morgan’s work, such as his educational concerns, his debt to the history of
mathematics, and his review of Peacock’s textbook.19
Nevertheless, there still
remain unexplored areas, as for instance, De Morgan’s apparent background in
16In chronological order we note the following surveys: [Liard 1878, 71–97], [Halsted 1884],
[Lewis 1918, 37–51], [Kneale 1962, 426–428], [Prior 1962, 141–156], [Heath 1966, vii–xxxi],
[Styazhkin 1969, 161–169], [Hawkins 1979], [Merrill 1990], [Panteki 1992, ch. 6], [Hawkins 1995]
and [Grattan-Guinness 2000, 26–37].
17In many histories of logic, “Formal logic” covers both traditions of “algebraic” and “mathe-
matical” logic from mid 19th century onwards. On these terms see fns. 8 and 11.
18Among the early studies of British algebra, hinting at De Morgan’s allegedly formal approach
to algebra, we note: [Nagel 1935], [Clock 1964, 17–105], [Koppelman 1971, 215–220] and [Novy
1973, 189–199]. The last two hinted at the importance of [De Morgan 1836] and its relevance to
his work on algebra. De Morgan’s study of functional equations in 1836, along with Babbage’s
earlier work on this branch, were omitted in [Dhombres 1986], a study of the history of functional
equations in more than one variable.
19Exclusive works on De Morgan’s algebra are relatively few; see [Pycior 1983], [Richards 1980,
354–357] and [Richards 1987]. However, we wish to note additionally [Pycior 1981; 1982; 1984;
Richards 1991; 1992, Durand 1990; 1996; 2000], and [Fisch 1994; 1999], which oﬀer critical reviews
of the studies mentioned in fn. 18, providing new standpoints for the peculiar state of British
algebra early in the century.
Interestingly enough, these studies largely omit to take under
consideration the algebras of operations, functions and logical entities. The latter are brieﬂy
noted in [Grattan-Guinness 1997, ch. 9] in the context of a general history of mathematics, and
in [Grattan-Guinness 2000, ch. 2] in the context of the history of logic.

386
Maria Panteki
French epistemology, or the full import of his review of 1835, which potentially
endangered the stability of the curriculum at Cambridge, as supported in William
Whewell’s treatises on mechanics in 1832.
The aim of our study is to ﬁll in certain of the above-mentioned lacuna in current
bibliography. Focusing exclusively on the very early stage of De Morgan’s career,
between 1828 and 1835, we seek primarily to identify the origins of his interest in
the study of logic in connection with geometry. To this end, we draw attention
to Condillac’ s semiotic philosophy, as elaborated in his Logique [Condillac 1780]
and in La langue des calculs [Condillac 1798].
The latter work, along with S.
F. Lacroix’s Essais sur l’enseignement [Lacroix 1828] — ﬁrst published in 1805
— were both cited with approval in SDM. Although we lack evidence as to De
Morgan’s ﬁrst acquaintance with Lacroix’s survey on mathematical education, we
will nevertheless show that several of its sources underlined De Morgan’s defense of
mathematical studies from 1828 onwards, while his SDM was shaped in line with
the Essais. Last but not least, while the basics of traditional logic as displayed
in SDM drew on R. Whately’s Elements of Logic [Whately 1826], we argue that
De Morgan’s original attempt to apply syllogistic logic to Euclidean geometry
stemmed from Lacroix.
Thus covering De Morgan’s educational and epistemological concerns up to
about 1833, we conclude by shedding new light on his review, where he demanded
the incorporation of logic within the Cambridge curriculum, by holding that it
is “an easier science than algebra” and one which “the student must have in
one sense, before he can ever become a mathematician” [De Morgan 1835a, 293,
311]. Peacock’s foundation of symbolic algebra in 1830 and De Morgan’s critical
reception of it in 1835 will not be discussed, as the subject has been amply dealt
with in recent studies, and does not pertain to De Morgan’s interest in logic at the
time.20 We are challenged, though, by De Morgan’s polemic against the teaching of
mechanics that prevailed through Whewell in the early 1830s, an issue interestingly
linked with De Morgan’s plea for both algebra and logic to be seen as prerequisites
for the study of the calculus and mechanics. This last part of our survey is further
motivated by the following question: was it a pure coincidence that soon after the
review’s publication, Whewell published his Thoughts on the study of mathematics
as a part of a liberal education [Whewell 1835], a polemic against Continental
mechanics, which opened with a comparison between geometry and logic to end
with the dismissal of both advanced algebra and logic from a future curriculum?
Thus questioning De Morgan’s early links between logic and geometry and be-
tween logic and algebra respectively, we wish to stress the subtle blend of his strong
background in French epistemology and his Cambridge heritage in mathematics
and mechanics, hopefully paving the way for a thorough future study on the mu-
tual development of algebra and logic from 1830 onwards. If occasional lack of
suﬃcient evidence results in tentative arguments we feel entitled to carry on and
follow De Morgan’s own motto: “We go as far as we can, and we try to see what
20[Pycior 1981; 1982; 1983] cover a study of Peacock’s Algebra and De Morgan’s reaction to it
respectively. See also [Richards 1980; 1987] and [Fisch 1999].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
387
we can: to ask a question is a step in knowledge, and even if there be no answer
it is a preparation for an answer” [De Morgan 1858, 105].
1.3
Structure of the paper
The joint study of diverse sciences is the most appropriate means to
discover the method, which must direct the human mind in the search
for truth.
[Lacroix 1828, 24]
In §2.1 we investigate the mathematical and epistemological background of
Lacroix’s Essais, pointing out the individual power of its sources, along with clar-
ifying the ambiguous notion of “logique” during his time. We proceed in §2.2 by
questioning the multidimensional meaning of “logique” in Lacroix’s own discourse,
holding that his peculiar approach to traditional syllogistic logic forms a link be-
tween 18th century epistemology and the gradual revival of interest in Aristotelian
logic in early 19th century England [§3.1]. This revival was due to Richard Kir-
wan’s and Richard Whately’s support of the scientiﬁc status of logic in 1807 and
1826 respectively. We conclude with the critical reception of Whately’s Elements
by British logicians and philosophers during the period 1827–1833 [§3.2].
Section §4 covers De Morgan’s Cambridge entourage, dealing in turn with his
mathematical background, as largely inﬂuenced by the contributions of the An-
alytical Society [§4.1], Whewell’s oscillation between Newton and Laplace in the
teaching of mechanics [§4.2], and De Morgan’s potential as a graduate, with a fo-
cus on the inﬂuence of his teachers and tutors [§4.3]. In §5 we illustrate Lacroix’s
multidimensional impact on De Morgan’s educational writings between 1828 and
1833.
We focus ﬁrst on De Morgan’s views on the status of mathematics and
particularly the instruction of arithmetic and elementary algebra, pinpointing nu-
merous similarities between SDM and Lacroix’s Essais [§5.1]. We then move on
with his speculations on the amount of “reasoning” involved in the teaching of
geometry and algebra and his comparative study of the two disciplines in SDM
[§5.2], prior to entering into his application of syllogistic logic to geometry in the
ensuing chapter of the same book [§5.3].
Having thus argued on Lacroix’s impact upon De Morgan’s early logical in-
quiries, we question the background and import of De Morgan’s review of Pea-
cock’s Algebra [§6]. We begin with Whewell’s reaction to the expansion of the
Cambridge curriculum in the early 1830s [§6.1], focusing next on De Morgan’s
critical view of the Cambridge educational system, and his emphasis on the util-
ity of both algebra and logic in 1835 [§6.2]. Hinting at the plausible impact of
his review upon Whewell’s Thoughts [§6.3], we display a summary of our survey,
enriched with questions of potential inﬂuence for further research on that crucial
period of the 1830s, in and around Cambridge University [§7].

388
Maria Panteki
2
LACROIX’S PHILOSOPHY OF INSTRUCTION, 1805
2.1
The epistemological background of Lacroix’s Essais
I have always directed my thoughts to the means of presenting scientiﬁc
results in the most simple manner and the most natural order.
[Lacroix 1828, 168]
An eminent instructor and textbook writer, Lacroix (1765–1843) launched his
career in 1779 by inquiring into planetary mechanics, in line with the leading sci-
entists of his time.21 At Cambridge, he became widely known for the encyclopedic
three-volume Trait´e du calcul (1797–1800), the abridged version of which (1802)
was translated by the Analytical Society in 1816.22 The Cambridge dons, how-
ever, were largely indiﬀerent to his major work on the didactics of mathematics,
his Essais sur l’enseignement en g´en´eral, et sur celui des math´ematiques en par-
ticulier (1805). Addressed exclusively to instructors, this volume was motivated
by Condorcet’s plan of 1792, according to which teachers’ and students’ editions
were diﬀerentiated for the ﬁrst time. Lacroix’s Essais enjoyed several editions in
France, but was never translated into English.23
In its third, enlarged edition of 1828, upon which we draw, the author retained
his admiration for the liberal scientiﬁc spirit of the French Enlightenment [Lacroix
1828, 5–38]. His rich teaching and administrative experience were amply man-
ifested in the ﬁrst part of the Essais [pp. 39–167], which included an in-depth
survey of the diverse institutions that ﬂourished in France after 1789. The sec-
ond part focused on the philosophy [pp. 168–230] and practice [pp. 231–344] of
mathematical instruction, with emphasis on the teaching of algebra and geometry.
Lacroix’s discourse was characterized by his immense erudition in the history of
instruction, and his awareness of the latter’s relevance to logic. As we shall see, he
deployed the term “logique” in a multiplicity of ways, its conception ranging from
Aristotelian logic to theories of ideas and signs peculiar to the study of language.
In connection with geometry, Lacroix drew almost exclusively on A. Arnauld’s
and P. Nicole’s La logique, ou l’art de penser (1662). Referring to it as the “Port-
Royal Logic” (PRL), he recommended the study of its last part on “Method”,
the main ideas of which were derived from Pascal’s and Descartes’ rules on the
21See [Taton 1959, 127–130] and [Wilson 1980, 280]. Condorcet had also been occupied with
the three-body problem a decade earlier [Baker 1975, 8]. On Lacroix, as a textbook writer and
instructor, see [Grattan-Guinness 1990, 112–115] and [Schubring 1987].
22Lacroix’s Trait´e included D’ Alembert’s limits, the Leibniz–Euler approach and Lagrange’s
algebraic calculus; see [Grattan-Guinness 1990, 139–142] and [Grattan-Guinness 1992b, 17–20].
On the diﬀusion of his work at Cambridge, see [Ashworth 1996], [Becher 1995], [Enros 1983] and
[Topham 2000].
23Commented upon in [Hodgkin 1981, 65–66] and [Richards 1991, 302–303], the historically
neglected Essais was re-edited in 1816, 1828, 1838 and 1894. In text we draw upon the 3rd edition,
providing our own translations of the quoted passages. Our sole evidence for the circulation of
this work at Cambridge prior to 1831 remain Whewell’ s personal notes from the Essais, dated
8 February 1821 [Whewell Papers, Trinity College Library, R.18.98, pp. 14–15].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
389
teaching of geometry.24 His demand for “simplicity” and “natural order” in teach-
ing stemmed from the PRL theory of clear and distinct ideas and signs, and was
consistent with his other major source, Laplace’s lectures on algebra delivered at
the short-lived ´Ecole Normale of 1795.25 The list of authorities cited in the Essais
included Newton, Leibniz, Locke, D’Alembert, Diderot, Voltaire, Condillac, Con-
dorcet, Lagrange and Monge, with references to the educator Pestalozzi [p. 33]
and Rousseau’s ´Emile [p. 306, 323–325].
Lacroix recommended the study of D’Alembert’s and Diderot’s Encyclop´edie
(1751–1772), along with Euler’s Letters to a German Princess (1768–1772), two
sources of opposing views on logic. With no entry on “Logic”, but only with en-
tries on issues pertaining to language, the Encyclop´edie reﬂected the indiﬀerence,
or even hostility, of the French “philosophers” towards formal logic (here standing
for syllogistic logic).26 By contrast, Euler’s text adapted Leibniz’s device of illus-
trating logical relations through geometrical representation, in line with his ﬁrm
belief that “the reasoning by means of which we are led to the truths of geometry
can be reduced to formal syllogism”.27 Given his collaboration with Condorcet
in 1786 on a re-edition of Euler’s Letters, to serve as a text for Lacroix’s course
at the Lyc´ee of Paris [Taton 1959, 153–158], we conclude that Lacroix must have
been familiar with Euler’s ideas on the utility of traditional logic.
There remains, however, an open question as to Lacroix’s acquaintance with two
other contributions to logic: Condorcet’s essay on universal language, intended as a
sequel to his Tableaux historique (1794); and the syllogistic intonations of the PRL
itself. The answer seems to be negative, upon the grounds that Condorcet’s adop-
tion of a kind of symbolic logic, echoing Leibniz’s ideas, was then still unpublished
and apparently unknown [Baker 1975, ch. 6; Granger 1954]. And furthermore, the
semi-mathematical treatment of logical conversion and syllogistic which enriched
the PRL, had no impact upon Lacroix’s predecessors.28
24The PRL, was divided into four parts, dealing respectively with “Conception”, “Judgement”,
“Reasoning” and “Method”. Including elements of syllogistic logic, the PRL
inﬂuenced Enlight-
enment epistemology mainly through its fourth part; see [Auroux 1982], [Baker 1975, 97, 132,
160], [Buickerood 1985, 161, 176, 185] and [Foucault 1970, 52–76]. On the rules for geometry’s
instruction, see [Kneale 1962, 317] and [Lacroix 1828, 275].
25On the ´Ecole Normale, see [Dhombres 1980] and [Glas 1986]. Laplace’s lectures are edited
with notes in [Dhombres 1992]. In text we draw from a reprint of them in Laplace’s CEuvres
completes, cited as [Laplace 1795].
26The origin of the term “formal logic” stems from Kant [Hodges 2000]. In text we deploy it
in line with Buickerood [1985, 159], as a synonym for Aristotelian syllogistic, so as to distinguish
it from other alternative systems on the art of reasoning, attributed to Bacon, Descartes, Locke,
Condillac and others. On the Encyclop´edie, see [Hankins 1985, 163-170] and [Lacroix 1828, 15,
174, 306]. Covering issues on “Etymology” or “Grammar”, this work was strikingly devoid of
articles on “Logic”, as noted by [Aarsleﬀ1982b, 147–148], [Auroux 1982, 21, 53], [Fraser 1989,
329-330, fn] and [Rider 1990, 114].
27[Euler 1812 I, 475].
On logic, and what became known as “Euler diagrams”, see letters
C–CVII at pp. 444–494. See also [Kneale 1962, 349–350] and [De Morgan 1847, 323], where
notice is also taken of Gergonne’s adoption of these diagrams. On Euler’s famous popularization
of science, see [Callinger 1976].
28Auroux [1982] claims that the PRL anticipated Boole’s and De Morgan’s algebraization of
logic in 1847. However, the PRL did not exert any inﬂuence through its unusual treatment of

390
Maria Panteki
Another work pertinent to “logique” which was cited by Lacroix, was Condillac’s
Logique ou les premiers d´eveloppements de l’art de penser [Condillac 1780]. As
implied by its title, Condillac’s book was indebted to the PRL. However, contrary
to the PRL, Condillac was hostile to Aristotelian syllogistic, his conception of
“logique” stemming from Locke’s Essay on human understanding [Locke 1690], a
work misinterpreted by Voltaire and his followers as a treatise on logic [Buickerood
1985]. For, Locke alternatively deployed in its last chapter “Of the divisions of
sciences”, the three terms “Semiotiki” (in Greek), the “doctrine of signs” and
“logic”, so as to deﬁne “the ways and means whereby the knowledge [...] is attained
and communicated” [Locke 1690, 309]. Hence the origin of Condillac’s “semiotic
philosophy”, as based on his conception of science as a language, “probably the
most inﬂuential concept of science developed by the French representatives of the
Enlightenment” [Jahnke 1981, 79].29
Condillac used the term “analysis” in place of “logique” as the method by which
we trace our ideas back to their origin, observing their generation and comparing
them under every possible relation. Analysis stemmed from sensual experience
and the use of signs. As he claimed, “nature gives us the ﬁrst lessons of the art of
thinking” [Condillac 1780, 45], and ultimately the notion of classiﬁcation [ibid, 87–
112]. His next concern was with linking analysis to language, whereas his formal
verdict was based upon the observation that algebra, as handled by Euler and
Lagrange, proved that “the progress of the sciences depends upon the progress of
their languages” [p. 305]. In brief, algebra was considered as an indispensable
analytical method of discovery and a scientiﬁc language par excellence.
Condillac’s epistemology had a great impact on the classiﬁcation and nomen-
clature of science, including Lavoisier’s chemical notation [Baker 1975, 87–128;
Foucault 1970, 54–76; Gillispie 1960, 200–260; Lacroix 1828, 18–24, 151]. In con-
junction with Condorcet’s views on social science, it also motivated the movement
of “id´eologie”, a term devised by Destutt de Tracy in 1796 for the new “science
of the analysis of sensations and ideas”. As it were, “id´eologie” became synony-
mous to “logique” and “universal grammar” exerting inﬂuence upon educational
policies.30 What mainly prevailed with those instructors who followed him, was
formal logic, and this was mainly due to its authors, who cautiously warned their reader against
any detailed study of syllogistic logic, apparently inﬂuenced by Bacon’s and Descartes’ hostile
reaction to Aristotle’s logic [Kneale 1962, 319–320].
29On the inﬂuence of Logique upon the scientiﬁc language of the enlightenment, see [Albury
1980], [Baker 1975, ch. 2] and [Gillispie 1960, 150–190]. On the term “semiotiki”, see [Buickerood
1985, 177]. The PRL was the starting point for both Locke and Condillac, but their conceptions of
“logique” diﬀer in many ways. A comparative study of these three works is yet to be undertaken.
30The term had no political connotation at the time. According to Tracy, “this science may
be called id´eologie if one attends only to the subject-matter, universal grammar if one has
reference only to the method, or logic if one considers only the goal” [Kretzmann 1967, 390]. In
accordance with this conception of philosophy “the traditional chairs of logic and metaphysics
in the ´ecoles centrales [schools of secondary education] were replaced in 1795 with chairs of
universal grammar” [ibid].
On French institutions of education, see [Grattan-Guinness 1990,
ch. 2], [Richards 1991, 299–300] and [Lacroix 1828, 27–36, 56–60]. Another consequence of this
movement was the massive production of new textbooks; see [Baker 1975, 391–395], [Dhombres
1980, 145–148], [Rider 1980, ch. 8], [Rider 1990, 132–140] and [Schubring 1987].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
391
their emphasis on the interaction between progress in language and progress in
scientiﬁc discovery. This was strikingly visible in Laplace’s lectures in 1795.
Laplace compared the derivation of Newton’s binomial formula, a major theo-
rem, with the process with which he arrived at the law of gravity, claiming that
“what one observes in analysis happens similarly in nature” [Laplace 1795, 10–12,
35, 135 and 150–156; Dhombres 1992, 14–43]. His students, armed with a copy
of Condillac’s book, would be initiated into the virtues of the language of algebra
in line with the 7th chapter of Logique.31 Within this context, Laplace discussed
Condillac’s two major principles, that of “analogy” and of the “connection of
ideas”, 32 which constituted the ground of any comparative study [Laplace 1795,
33–37]. He strongly favored “general methods in teaching” [p. 84], admitting that
“algebra furnishes always the best methods” [p. 103]. Lastly, he alluded to his
own intricate method of “generating functions”, 33 eager to persuade his audience
that “the language of Analysis, the most perfect of all languages, is by itself a
powerful instrument of discovery” [p. 156].
Lacroix’s Essais was composed at a time when the inﬂuence of signs upon math-
ematical reasoning in France had reached its peak. Indicatively we refer to J. M.
D´egerando’s Des signes et de l’art de penser (1800), a work which encapsulated
the prevailing conviction of leading philosophers and mathematicians (Condillac’s
enemies included) on the signiﬁcance of algebraic signs in scientiﬁc inquiry.34 This
conviction was shared by Lacroix, by stressing the import of mathematical lan-
guage upon the recent “brilliant discoveries” [Lacroix 1828, 6–27] in physical as-
tronomy, notwithstanding the fact that his own tract was devoid of symbols. In a
text imbued with his predilection for the system of education followed by Laplace
in 1795, Lacroix summarized the latter’s lectures on algebra [pp. 246–273], also
promoting Clairaut’s method of instruction based upon historical discovery.35 Last
31A comparison between [Condillac 1780, ch. 7] and [Laplace 1795, 33–37] is worthy of at-
tention. The former dealt with a problem of arithmetic, ﬁrst using ﬁngers, then spoken words,
then numerals, eventually reducing it to the equations x −1 = y + 1 and x + 1 = 2y −2 [pp.
287–303]. On similar lines, Laplace stated an arithmetical problem rhetorically, so as to clarify
the symbolical representation of the statement “half the sum of two numbers added to half their
diﬀerence gives the greater of the two numbers” [pp. 33–34]. On Condillac’s import upon the
lectures delivered at the Ecole Normale see also [Dhombres 1992, 20, 35, 142, 165, 185].
32The latter principle should be distinguished from Locke’s “association of ideas”. Condillac’s
“liaison des id´ees” was conceived in imitation of the concept of gravity in Newtonian philosophy
[Aarsleﬀ1982b, 199, fn. 1].
33Due to the limited duration of the school, Laplace had no opportunity to lecture on the
calculus. Nonetheless, he advertised his method [pp. 133, 146, 173], proud of its applications in
celestial mechanics and the probability theory. See further [Grattan-Guinness 1990, 161–183],
[Hald 1990, 210–212] and [Panteki 1992, ch. 1].
34On D´egerando, see [Kretzmann 1967, 388–389] and [Rider 1990, 135–140].
From among
Condillac’s most ﬁerce opponents, we single out J. D. Gergonne, editor of the Annales de
math´ematiques pures et appliqu´ees in 1810 [Grattan-Guinness 1990, 135–137, 194].
On the
philosophy of symbolic methods, which ﬂourished in France after Lagrange, and their inﬂu-
ence upon Cambridge analysts, see [Ashworth 1996, 632–641], [Grattan-Guinness 1988, 73–74],
[Grattan-Guinness 1992a, 34–39], [Koppelman 1971], [Panteki 1992, chs. 1–2] and [Sherry 1991].
35Clairaut’s Alg`ebre, a starting point for Condillac and Laplace, was re-edited by Lacroix in
1797 [Dhombres 1992, 16], [Schubring 1987, 47].
See also [Schubring 1996, 368] on Lacroix’s

392
Maria Panteki
but not least, he recommended the writing of elementary textbooks which would
facilitate the perusal of Laplace’s M´ecanique c´eleste (1799–1805), having already
paved the way with his own Trait´e.36
2.2
Lacroix on “Logique”
In order to win a race, it is better to exercise the legs than to reason
upon the mechanism of walking.
[Lacroix 1828, 305]
Lacroix encouraged instructors to ﬁnd their own suitable balance between a “very
superﬁcial” and a “very rigorous” passage to the “true metaphysics” (i.e. founda-
tions) of mathematics [p. 174]. He was ﬁrm in his recommendations when they
stemmed from indisputable authorities, and ardently promoted Laplace’s “general
methods in teaching” [p. 178].37 However, he expressed ambivalence when dealing
with issues for which the current theory and practice of instruction were unable
yet to provide guidelines. Such an example concerned the teaching of algebra and
geometry, and his dilemma about which of the two subjects should be taught ﬁrst
[pp. 306–307]. Although his answer was far from deﬁnite, Lacroix did provide the
reader with a ﬂexible approach and a stimulating question.
We wish to note that this issue of priority was preceded by a similar one concern-
ing the priority of geometry versus logic [p. 305]. Lacroix’s overall consideration
of logic was fragmentary, stemming from three diﬀerent sources. First of all, he
referred to Aristotle and commented upon the role of his logic within the history of
philosophy and instruction [pp. 41–59]. Then Condillac’s Logique entered into his
discourse, when he discussed the current philosophy of instruction [pp. 149–152,
228–224].
Finally, he drew on the PRL, strictly in connection with the teach-
ing of geometry [pp. 274–307]. As we shall see, for all his hostility towards the
pedantries of scholastic logic, Lacroix paid limited, albeit signiﬁcant attention to
the study of formal, deductive logic, strictly distinguishing it from the latter two
sources, which he apparently viewed as two complementary vehicles of methodol-
ogy . When he referred to Condillac, Lacroix deployed the term “logique” as a
synonym for “id´eologie”, which he placed ﬁrst in the list of sciences that resulted
from the “application of judgment” [p. 149]. To ideology, he stressed, we owe the
transformation of sensations into ideas, the combination of ideas into judgments
and lastly the derivation from the latter of the rules that govern the search for
truth [p. 150]. According to Lacroix, Locke and Condillac had rendered their
advocation of D’Alembert’s attitude towards the foundations of algebra.
36See Lacroix’s comments on pp. 37, 180. On Laplace’s contributions to celestial mechanics,
see [Gillispie 1978], [Grattan-Guinness 1990, ch. 5] and [Panteki 1992, ch. 1].
37“Give your preference to general methods in teaching”, wrote Laplace [p.
84], “and de-
vote yourself to presenting them as simply as possible; you will see that they are nearly always
the easiest methods as well”. Laplace meant to instill the spirit of research into students, by
promoting methods that would serve as potential tools for new discoveries. Upon this ”revolu-
tionary” statement, see [Dhombres 1992, 16] and [Richards 1991, 316–317]. In connection with
rigor, Lacroix stressed the importance of providing proof of any mathematical result attained by
induction [Laplace 1795, 8, 41, 152], [Lacroix 1828, 261].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
393
ultimate service to “metaphysics” (i.e. epistemology) by arguing that ﬁrst notions
are derived from the senses and not from imagination [p. 217]. This achievement
pertained, however, only to the ﬁrst stage of instruction. Lacroix accordingly ad-
vised instructors to encourage their pupil to picture his ﬁrst ideas “in objects of his
senses” [pp. 170–l72], but that was the only aspect of Condillac’ s epistemology
appropriate to instruction in any way.
Lacroix was highly critical of Condillac’s method of “Analysis”, and maintained
that the latter had nothing original to oﬀer the study of mathematics. He noted
that by claiming that “algebra was a language” Condillac was not far from the
“lucid and precise” notions as furnished in Clairaut’s Alg`ebre (1748) [p.
205].
Moreover, he pointed out that this method of analysis was based upon vague
deﬁnitions and erroneous conceptions. Just as algebra could serve the purposes
of a synthetic presentation, similarly, argued Lacroix, geometry was not free from
analysis, as in the case of reductio ad absurdum. It was also noted that Condillac
himself had built his Logique synthetically, not analytically, quite contrary to his
own theory.38
Although hardly an admirer of Aristotelian logic, Lacroix criticized Condillac
for his neglect of this discipline. Lacroix had indeed condemned excessive preoccu-
pation with the complicated names and rules of syllogistic logic, and had stressed
instead the import of Descartes’ own rules relating to the process of scientiﬁc
discovery [p. 47]. However, in the realms of instruction, he twice revealed his
appreciation for logic’s educational utility, linked with Condillac’s principle of the
connection of ideas through the aid of signs. He thus stated that “there is no need
to neglect the discussion of logical forms, when they are not abused, they can be
a very useful exercise for the mind” [p. 15l]. He further recommended Euler’s
letters on logic, calling them a “brief but illuminating” study of the “diverse forms
of syllogistic” [p. 221, fn. ]
In line with Laplace, Lacroix regarded algebra as an ideal source for “general
methods”, useful both in teaching and in mathematical inquiry. However, under
the joint inﬂuence of Euler and the PRL, it was geometry which served as a
paradigmatic model for training the mind in the “diverse forms of reasoning”
[pp. 305–306]. As for the teaching of algebra, it suﬃced to follow, after Clairaut,
the route of historical discovery [pp.
250–252].
For the teaching of geometry,
on the other hand, tradition should be avoided, and instructors were urged to
follow the PRL instead. Lacroix praised the PRL contributions to the amendment
of weaknessess spotted in the structure of Euclid’s Elements.39 Were all of his
38Lacroix’s arguments [pp. 203–226] stemmed from Condorcet’s critique of Condillac’s erro-
neous distinction between the “analytic” methods of algebra, as they came to be called, and the
“synthetic” methods of geometry [Baker 1975, 110–118]. By convention, analysis assumes the
solution of a problem known in unknown terms, while synthesis begins with known principles
and leads to the desired result. 18th century mathematicians often associated analysis with alge-
bra and synthesis with geometry, but these connections are very unclear; see [Grattan-Guinness
1990, 135–137], [Otte & Panza 1997] and [Panteki 1992, sect. 1.8].
39For instance, Lacroix advised minimum use of the method of reductio ad absurdum and of
memorizing propositions, stressing, after the PRL, that the ideal teaching of geometry consisted

394
Maria Panteki
recommendations to be taken into account, then [p. 305]:
Elements of geometry thus treated would become as it were excellent
elements of Logic, and would perhaps be the only ones that it would
be necessary to study.
In order to support his claim, Lacroix argued that it is more useful to examine
whether a geometrical proposition is true or not, than delve into a study of the
faculty of reasoning required for this examination. Providing next the metaphor
on walking, cited above, Lacroix quoted (in italics) Condillac on the limited eﬀect
of theoretical rules in general [p. 305]:
Rules are like parapets of bridges, they are not to help a passenger to
walk forward but will keep him from tumbling over.
This quote was apparently borrowed from Condillac’s La langue des calculs, which
was published posthumously by the id´eologue P. Laromigu`ere in 1798. In this
work, Condillac elaborated on his method of natural generalization with a view to
founding algebra upon arithmetic. This quote originally stems from Leibniz, as a
hint against the frustrating rules rules of traditional logic.40
Having discussed the limited educational utility of the rules of logic, Lacroix
came to question the priority of geometry over algebra. At ﬁrst he argued that
geometry should be taught ﬁrst, given that it hardly required a knowledge of
arithmetic and that it fascinated pupils more than algebra [pp. 306–307]. However,
by next considering geometry as a vehicle for “serious forms of reasoning” [p. 307],
he realized that its study required a certain maturity on the part of the pupil, and
thus it should follow the instruction of algebra. Up to this point, Lacroix had
fragmentarily pinpointed few diﬀerences between the two disciplines, by viewing
them strictly as objects of instruction. A deep comparative study, which would
take into consideration the conceptual diﬀerences that governed the subject-matter
of those disciplines, apparently escaped the purposes of his tract, but not the
attention of his followers [§5.2].
Summing up, in line with the PRL and Euler, Lacroix chose geometry as a
paradigmatic model of rigorous reasoning, and attributed to formal logic a sec-
ondary, albeit not insigniﬁcant role. However, for all his limited attention to the
latter, he does oﬀer us reasons to assume that he did foresee the decline of that tra-
dition, which, like Condillac, confused formal logic with semiotic epistemology.41
of choosing the right axioms and notions at the exact point when needed. From among the PRL
rules, we mention two: “To let no term be obscure” and “To require as axioms only what is
perfectly evident” [p. 275]. He also advised instructors to delve into a comparative study of all
existing textbooks on this subject [pp. 285–291, 302].
40See [Leibniz 1890, 14]. Condillac’s La langue, studied in [Dhombres 1983], was meant to
elucidate elementary algebra, including the legitimacy of negative numbers. However, his method
failed in the solution of algebraic equations of the 5th degree and it proved to be the least
successful of his books [Auroux 1982, 87]. Warmly recommended to instructors by De Morgan
in 1831 [§5.1], this work saw a reprint in 1981.
41We may see Lacroix’s Essais as an anticipation of [Kirwan 1807] [§3.1], since it incorporated

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
395
3
LOGIC IN ENGLAND, 1807–1833
3.1
Kirwan (1807) and Whately (1826)
To Whately is due the title restorer of logical study in England.
[De Morgan 1860b, 247]
In Britain, at the turn of the century, Aristotelian logic was still held in disdain.
Commonsense philosophers retained their admiration for “the logic of Locke”,
while intellectuals like John Horne Hooke (1736–1812) or Jeremy Bentham (1748–
1832) conceived logic as universal grammar in line with the id´eologues.42 Inter-
estingly enough, it was a keen follower of the latter who was the ﬁrst to argue
against the prevailing view that Locke’s Essay [§2.1] constituted an exact system
of logic. We refer to the historically neglected chemist and philosopher Richard
Kirwan (1733–1812), and author of Logick; or an essay on the elements, principles
and diﬀerent modes of reasoning [Kirwan 1807].43 Addressed to students of law,
Logick stressed the importance of a theoretical study of logic nearly two decades
before the scientiﬁc character of formal logic became diﬀused through Whately’s
Elements of logic.
Just like Lacroix [§2.2], Kirwan acknowledged Locke and Condillac as “excellent
metaphysicians”, who, however, had erroneously overlooked the value of syllogism
“in legal and theological controversies” [Kirwan 1807, xi]. Eager to make up for
this lacuna, Kirwan not only incorporated the basic elements of syllogistic logic
into his book [pp.
467–528], but also argued convincingly on logic’s utility in
directing the mathematician’s attention to the absurdities of algebra [pp. iii–v].
Above all, no longer was logic merely an “art”, as with the PRL or Condillac
[§2.1], but also existed as a “science”, the latter term deployed by Kirwan in the
sense of a classifying scheme [pp. 1–3].
Possibly inﬂuenced by Kirwan, Richard Whately (1787–1863), an Oxford gradu-
ate in classics and mathematics in 1808, elaborated on a modern scientiﬁc concep-
tion of logic in his Elements. A ﬁrst version originally appeared in the Encyclopedia
Metropolitana in 1823 under the entry “Logic” meeting little response. However,
after its publication in expanded form in 1826, it enjoyed several editions, forming
the two competing conceptions of logic that prevailed at the turn of the century, the formal
and the facultative, daring to attempt a limited, comparative study. As stressed by Buickerood
[1985, 189] a precise understanding of 18th century logic, conceived as an analysis of the cognitive
faculties, deserves further study. On the development of syllogistic logic during the 18th century,
see [Van Evra 2000, 115–121].
42On the stagnation of formal logic in England during the 17th and 18th centuries, see [Dessi
1988, xvi–xvii], [Hamilton 1833, 194–199] and [Van Evra 2000, 116–120].On Locke’s impact, see
[Aarsleﬀ1982a] and [Buickerood 1985]. On the politician H. Tooke and the utilitarian philosopher
J. Bentham, see [Kretzmann 1967] and [Rider 1990, 113–120].
43Born in Ireland of English descent, Kirwan, a close friend of Tooke, was well versed in
linguistics and law [Donovan 1850]. In his Logick, he drew amply on the PRL, Locke and the
ideologues. According to Hamilton [1833, 204], he was the “last respectable writer on logic” in
Britain before Whately. However, his contributions to the revival of the study of logic were to
be acknowledged but recently; see [Panteki 1992, sect.6.2] and [Van Evra 1984, 9–10].

396
Maria Panteki
the starting point for Whately’s successors up to Charles Peirce in the 1860s.44
Whately’s own starting point was H. Aldrich’s Compendium (1691) on syllogistic
logic, which he revised, adding a lucid account of fallacies, a chapter “On induc-
tion” and other issues related to the “Province of Reasoning”.45
Logic’s “most appropriate oﬃce”, claimed Whately, “is that of instituting an
analysis of the process of the mind in Reasoning”, and in this respect, logic is
“strictly a Science” [Whately 1826, 1].
At the same time he maintained that
logic, the “Grammar of Reasoning” [p. 11], is “wholly conversant about language”
[p. 74], a statement apparently contradicting logic’s former deﬁnition. His critics
hurried to detect traces of a tradition hostile to Aristotelian logic in Whately’s
connections between logic and language.46 But Whately’s focus was on the syl-
logism, which he viewed from a novel perspective. As pointed out by Van Evra
[2001, 121]:
No longer, however, was the syllogism merely a way of relating propo-
sitions within a given language; now it was a speciﬁc abstract thing
with a speciﬁc role, i.e. to serve as a canonical test of the validity
of actual argument, regardless of the language, and regardless of their
(actual) form.
This novel perspective is best revealed in Whately’s “striking analogy” between
algebra and logic. Claiming that just as variables are “arbitrary signs representing
numbers in the abstract” [p. 14], he added that:
So also does Logic pronounce on the validity of a regularly-constructed
argument, equally well, though arbitrary symbols may have been sub-
stituted for the terms. And the possibility of doing this (though the
employment of such arbitrary symbols have been absurdly objected to,
even by writers who understand not only Arithmetic but Algebra) is a
proof of the strictly scientiﬁc character of the system.
Whately alluded to the Scottish philosopher Dugald Stewart who had objected
to literal symbols in logic [Van Evra 1984, 11]. Although we lack evidence as to
Whately’s mathematical background, we consider his arguments as congenial to
the algebraic speculations of Woodhouse and Babbage earlier in the century, along
with noting that some identical statements were put forward by Boole in 1848,
44Hamilton accused Whately of not referring to Kirwan as his precursor [Hamilton 1833, 202–
207]. On the impact of the Elements upon British logicians, see [Panteki 1993, 341–346] and
[Van Evra 1984, 14–15]. By 1848 the book saw its ninth edition in London and New York.
45On Aldrich’s work, see [Van Evra 2000, 119–120]. On the content of the Elements, see [Dessi
1988, xix–xxv], [Merrill 1990, ch. 1], [Van Evra 1984, 9–14] and [Van Evra 2000, 121–122]
46By stressing connections between logic and language “as an object”, Whately was “intro-
ducing semantic ascent to logic, a concept which would later be ﬁrmly established by twentieth-
century analytic logicians” [Van Evra 2000, 121, fn. 31]. Whately’s most severe critics were
Hamilton and Solly; see [Hamilton 1833, 208] and [Panteki 1993, 145–146].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
397
while trying to explain the function of his logical variables.47
In addition to his lucid account of fallacies [Merrill 1990, ch. 1], Whately’s prin-
cipal contribution consisted in his defense of logic’s utility in other ﬁelds of inquiry
and its theoretical importance. He oﬀered neither any technical innovations, nor
even the motivation to extend the limited realms of traditional syllogistic logic.
On the contrary, he was happy to claim that “all arguments may be reduced to
syllogism” [p. 12], and by “all” he also referred to the inductive argument, which
he reduced to a syllogism in Barbara. Whately was aware of the deductive vs. in-
ductive opposition that prevailed during the two previous centuries, with its strong
bias in favor of the inductive argument. In his book he meant to show that this
controversy arose from the confusion between induction as an “argument” and as
a “research process”. In the latter case, induction falls outside the provinces of
logic, and was thus omitted from his work [Whately 1826, Book IV, ch. 1].
Whately was able to distinguish between logical and physical inquiries. Aware
that the conclusion of a syllogism is included in the premises, he acknowledged
that the discovery of new truths could not arise from deductive reasoning only.
Nonetheless, deductive reasoning — in mathematics or elsewhere — still plays an
important role in our cognitive activities, by helping us to discover consequences
unnoticed until then. His dubious remarks on induction conceived as an impli-
cation, according to recent commentators [Dessi 1988, xxiv; Van Evra 1984, 13],
attracted the attention of philosophers of science only after the third edition of the
Elements in 1829, which was enriched with an Appendix that included an analysis
of terms related to political economy.
Whately belonged to the so-called group of “Oriel Noetics” at Oxford, who
broadly followed along the lines of D. Ricardo’s (1772–1823) theory of political
economy.48
Among the Noetics was the economist Nassau Senior (1790–1864),
who, based upon D. Stewart, insisted upon the axiomatic nature of political econ-
omy. To this end, Senior wrote in the Appendix to Whately’s Elements of 1829
[Whately 1848, 230]:
The foundation of Political Economy being a few general propositions
deduced from observation or from consciousness, and generally admit-
ted as soon as stated, it might have been expected that there would
be as little diﬀerence of opinion among Political-Economists as among
Mathematicians.
47On Boole, see [Panteki 1992, sect. 8.2]. Connections between English algebra and logic, from
the early 19th century, have been fragmentarily studied so far. For instance, see [Sherry 1991]
on Woodhouse’s debt to Condillac and [Durand 1990] on Peacock’s own to Locke. Stewart’s
nominalistic impact upon Whately is discussed in [Corsi 1988, 42–46 and 150], a book that also
informs us about the diﬀusion of Woodhouse’s work on astronomy at Oxford in the early 1820s
[ibid, 36–48].
However, Whately’s acquaintance with Woodhouse’s or Babbage’s work is still
open to inquiry.
48In 1829, Whately was appointed Professor of Political Economy, furnishing by 1831 his
Introductory lectures on political economy, with the intention of vindicating the usefulness and
scientiﬁc nature of this new discipline. On the “Oriel Noetics”, see [Dessi 1988, xxviii], [Durand
2000, 145], [Corsi 1988, ch. 7] and [Yeo 1993, 102–111].

398
Maria Panteki
This speciﬁc passage, which reﬂected the premature deductivism of the Ricardians
outraged the Cambridge group, and especially Whewell (1794–1866) and R. Jones
(1799–1855) [§3.2].
3.2
The reception of Whately’s Elements, 1827–1833
As for Whately and his logic you may neglect him or kick him as you
like.
[Whewell to Jones, 1832]49
If Whately be right, Aristotle is fundamentally wrong.
[Hamilton 1833, 231]
Whately’s earliest successor was the botanist George Bentham (1800–1884), nephew
of J. Bentham.
Motivated by his uncle’s manuscripts, which were inspired by
Condillac’s Logique, Bentham produced his Outline of a new system of logic [Ben-
tham 1827], which focused on a critical examination of Whately’s “last and most
improved edition of the Aristotelian system” [Bentham 1827, viii]. Noting that
Whately had wrongly conﬁned himself to traditional syllogistic, Bentham set oﬀ
to extend the latter so as to account for the subtleties of classiﬁcation in botany.
To this end, he introduced his unique novelty, the “quantiﬁcation of the pred-
icate”, thus arriving at an augmented syllogistic scheme of an almost symbolic
form. Bentham’s innovation was to be acknowledged by De Morgan in 1850, too
late to bear any impact whatsoever upon the development of algebraic logic.50
Bentham’s book sold badly, but this cannot account for the neglect shown to its
unique novelty since it featured, together with several new publications inspired
from Whately’s Elements—, in an anonymous lengthy review “Recent publica-
tions on logical studies”, which was published in the Edinburgh Review in 1833.
The author of this review was the Scottish philosopher W. Hamilton (1788–1856),
who, after a passing commentary on Bentham’s critique of Whately [Hamilton
1833, 199–202], focused exclusively upon Whately’s work.
For all his polemic
tone, Hamilton admitted that Whately’s Elements communicated new life “to the
expiring study” of logic [p. 199], a fact proved by the eight new publications on
this subject, listed at the opening of his review [p. 194]. This apart, Hamilton
objected to nearly every single statement uttered by Whately that deviated from
the respectable writings of Aristotle.51
Hamilton accused Whately of lacking historical erudition, arguing at length
that the “art-and-science” distinction of logic was not new with him [pp. 201–
210]. Without approving of Aldrich’s Compendium as a basis for syllogistic logic
[pp. 198, 210–213], Hamilton rejected Whately’s links between logic and language,
49See Whewell’s letter to Jones on 21.12.1832 [Whewell Papers, Add.Ms.c.51/149].
50See [De Morgan 1850, 32]. On Bentham’s syllogistic scheme, see [Panteki 1993, 141–143],
[Styazhkin 1969, 148–150], [Van Evra 1992]. On the quantiﬁcation of the predicate see fn. 9.
51On Hamilton’s review, see [Dessi 1988, xxv–xxviii] and [Van Evra 1984, 14–15]. In a passage
where Kant was mentioned as the next eminent authority on logic after Aristotle, Hamilton
claimed, “Logic is a formal science” [p. 215]. See also fn. 26.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
399
accusing him of psychologism [pp. 208–9]. Last but not least, he was opposed to
Whately’s embrace of induction, as inference, within syllogistic logic [pp. 224–
238]. In fact, entering into a comparison between Aristotle and Whately on the
latter issue, he reached the verdict that if Whately was taken to be right, then
Aristotle was wrong [pp. 212, 231].
While Hamilton criticized Whately’s work from the point of view of formal,
deductive logic, Whewell examined it from a diametrically opposed standpoint,
that of inductive logic, which underlined his notion of science. Whewell referred
in print to Whately’s work in his Bridgewater treatise on Astronomy published the
same year as Hamilton’s review. Distinguishing between the inductive and deduc-
tive modes of thinking, Whewell claimed that these two modes entailed diﬀerent
moral and religious attitudes. Kepler and Newton were the inductive discoverers,
while Lagrange or Laplace the mathematical talents, who, unlike the former, were
not religiously inspired by their science. He openly downgraded the role of both
mathematics and logic, using Whately for his purpose, by holding that:
[...] all which mathematics or logic can do, is to develop and extract
those truths, as conclusions, which were in reality involved in the prin-
ciples on which our reasoning proceeded.*
* “Since all reasoning may be resolved into syllogisms, and since in a
syllogism the premises do virtually assert the conclusions, it follows at
once, that no new truth can be elicited by any process of reasoning”.
Whately’s Logic, p. 223.52
Whewell’s polemic against Whately began in 1831, when his close friend Jones
quoted in a letter to him Senior’s passage on political economy [§3.1], as ap-
pended in the third edition of the Elements.53 According to Whewell and Jones,
by supporting Ricardian political economy, the Oriel Noetics wrongly neglected
the virtues of induction and the laborious but sure process of ascending from ob-
servation to general ﬁrst principles. The crux of the controversy concerned the
notion of the nature of science. Whewell looked down at advocators of the de-
ductive mode of reasoning, calling them “Downward road” people. Whately, in
particular, by embracing induction within syllogistic logic, was seen as a severe
threat to Whewell’s and Jones’ attempt to explain the nature of the inductive
method to the public.54
52[Whewell 1833, 335–336]. The asterisks denote the footnote, here appended after the text.
On Astronomy and the inductive-deductive distinction, see [Becher 1991], [Richards 1992, 57–62]
and [Yeo 1993, 116–124].
53See Jones’ letter to Whewell on 24.2.1831 [Whewell Papers, Add.Ms.c.52/20]. On Whewell’s
replies, which amounted to the claim that “The analogy between physical and political or eco-
nomical sciences is yet to be shown”, see [Todhunter 1876 II, 115–124]. These letters reveal that
their sole objection to Whately’s logic concerned his embrace of the inductive argument within
syllogistic, deductive logic.
54As Whewell wrote to Jones in July 1831: “If you will give me illustrations and examples

400
Maria Panteki
As a matter of fact, Whewell and Jones became engaged with the nature of
science around 1822. In 1826, Whewell declared his intention to deliver “grand
lectures on the principles of induction in mixed mathematics” [Todhunter 1876 II,
71–72], but his plans were postponed until the early 1830s. He was motivated to
make his views known on this issue by undertaking to review Herschel’s Discourse
on natural philosophy (1830) and Jones’ Essay on the distribution of wealth (1831),
as well as by revising his treatises on mechanics.55 By that time, De Morgan had
recommended the Elements in his educational booklet [De Morgan 1831a, 71, fn.;
§5.3], citing the third edition of Whately’s book.
4
DE MORGAN’S CAMBRIDGE HERITAGE, 1817–1827
Preface
Thank heaven that I was at Cambridge in the interval between two
systems, when thought about both was in the order of the day even
among undergraduates.
There are pairs of men alive who did each
other more good by discussing x over dx and Newton versus Laplace,
than all the private tutors ever do.
De Morgan to Whewell, 186156
De Morgan entered Trinity College in February 1823.
In 1826, he sat for the
strenuous pre-Tripos “disputations”, which concerned “Newton’s ﬁrst section, La-
grange’s derived functions, and Locke on innate principles” [Morgan 1872, 305],
graduating a fourth wrangler in January 1827.57 In charge of the Tripos58 were
the “examiners” and the “moderators”, the latter ranking higher than the former.
The moderators were responsible for moderating the discussion involved in the
students’ disputations, evaluating the classiﬁcation of wranglers and above all for
posing original problems in the Tripos. Privileged, as they were, with these du-
ties, they had a powerful role in potentially inﬂuencing the educational system at
Cambridge, as De Morgan would note in 1832:
of the ascending method applied to moral sciences we shall have no diﬃculty in ﬁghting the
‘downward road’ people” [Todhunter 1876 II, 125]. On the Oxford–Cambridge controversy, see
[Corsi 1988, 150–158] and [Yeo 1993, 12, 93, 102–105].
55In the early 1820s, Whewell and Jones talked about the “metaphysics” of science, a notion
that gradually developed into what Whewell called in 1837 the “logic of induction”.
On his
reviews and textbooks [§6.1], see [Corsi 1988, 150–158], [Richards 1980, 351–359], [Todhunter
1876 I, 52–57] and [Yeo 1993, 21, 93–99].
56From De Morgan’s letter to Whewell on 20.1.1861, quoted in [S. De Morgan 1882, 305–306].
Apparently due to a misprint, a dot is missing from x, to denote a ﬂuxion.
57Dating back to the Middle Ages, the disputations would be abolished in 1839. Based upon
De Morgan’s own notebooks as a student, [Rice 1997b, 20–28] oﬀers a detailed account of his
student years and graduation exams.
58The name “Tripos” originated in the 15th century when, prior to receiving their degree,
undergraduates went through an oral examination, seated upon a three-legged stool, known as
a tripos; see [Becher 1980b, 1–6], [Becher 1995, 414, 423] and [Rice 1997b, 20–24].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
401
The moderators, or examiners, who are usually younger masters of arts,
and come to the matter with the newest ideas going, feel that great
scope is allowed, and do not conﬁne themselves to any book or system,
further than may appear advisable to themselves.
Hence any great
improvement is of comparatively easy introduction, it only needs one
moderator, who does not fear the appearance of singularity.59
Such a moderator was George Peacock, co-founder of the Analytical Society in
1812 with Charles Babbage and John F. Herschel [Enros 1983]. Due to his eﬀorts
regarding the Tripos of 1817 and 1819, Newton’s long-standing ﬂuxional calculus
was replaced by the diﬀerential calculus. However, when De Morgan began his
studies, “the old system was still remembered and discussed, and excited much
thought about fundamental principles to the great advantage of many” [De Morgan
1865, 146]. The period of his studies was additionally marked by changes in the
teaching of mechanics. Thanks to his tutor, William Whewell, students became
acquainted with the name of Laplace, and were interestingly induced to discuss
the latter’s M´ecanique C´eleste versus Newton’s old-fashioned Principia. As he
wrote in his letter to Whewell in 1861 — quoted above — De Morgan considered
it a great privilege to have been at Cambridge during such an “interval between
two systems”, an interval of an enduring impact upon his career. Impressed by
the force of his arguments in that letter, we oﬀer an overview of the state of
mathematics [§4.1] and mechanics [§4.2] at Cambridge during the period 1817–
1827, prior to stressing the role of his Cambridge education and his potential as a
graduate [§4.3].
4.1
The aspirations of the analytical society
The preceding pages have been devoted to a slight account of the his-
tory and present state of Analytical Science, that branch of human
knowledge, of which Laplace has justly observed “C’est le guide le plus
sur qui peut nous conduire dans la recherche de la verite”.60 [Babbage
and Herschel 1813, xxi]
This statement is from the Preface to the Memoirs of the Analytical Society, for
the year 1813, the unique volume of the journal published anonymously by the
Analytical Society (AS) in 1813. The Preface was written by Babbage in close
collaboration with Herschel, while the main part of the Memoirs consisted of their
own original contributions, in line with the work produced by leading mathemati-
59The quote is from [De Morgan 1832b, 276], his ﬁrst review of a Cambridge textbook, namely
J. Wood’s elementary Algebra [§6.2].
60“It is the most certain guide which can lead us in the search for truth”. Quoted without
an accent, Laplace’s exact statement has not been traced. However, similar statements can be
found in his 1795 lectures [§2], or in subsequent writings, such as his treatise on “Probabilities”
of 1812, cited in the Memoirs [p. xii].

402
Maria Panteki
cians in France at the turn of the century.61
The Preface opened with an ap-
praisal of the language of analysis, as shaped and perfected by Lagrange, Laplace
and Arbogast. There followed a summary of recent work produced in the realm
of diﬀerential, ﬁnite diﬀerence and functional equations, with special attention to
“Lagrange’s theorem” and Laplace’s “method of generating functions”, both char-
acterized by a singular analogy between indices of repeated functional operations
and exponents. Magnetized by the “peculiar grace of Laplace’s Analysis” [p. v],
the two authors paid tribute to his contributions in the ﬁeld of probabilities [p.
xii] and celestial mechanics [p. xvi]. But, besides an astonishing erudition on the
state of Continental mathematics and mechanics, the volume of Memoirs above
all reﬂected the dreams of its authors towards fostering mathematical research in
England, by promoting what they conceived as “pure” mathematics over the so-
called “mixed” or “applied” or “synthetic” mathematics that had prevailed since
Newton’s time.
The mathematical curriculum at Cambridge in the 1800s focused on Euclidean
geometry and Newtonian ﬂuxions, optics, mechanics and astronomy [Becher 1980b,
1–10]. In other words, mathematics, which involved geometrical reasoning, and
were closely linked with intuition and physical concepts. These stood in sharp con-
trast with Lagrange’s “analytics”, that is methods stemming from his algebraic
calculus, founded upon power-series expansions. Devoid of diagrams, limits and
physical concepts, which underlined “synthetic” mathematics, Lagrange’s analyt-
ics were privileged with a powerful symbolic language, which aﬀorded economical
storage of knowledge and the ability towards generalization, thus potentially lead-
ing to new discoveries.62
According to Lagrange, every function f(x + h) could be expanded in a Taylor
series, as follows:
f(x + h) = f(x) + ph + p′h2 + p′′h3 + . . . . . . . . . ,
(4.1.1)
where the symbols p, p′, p′′ etc.
were new functions of x “derived” from f in
a certain algebraic manner. Through suitable transformations and by comparing
the resulting expansions, Lagrange arrived by induction from (4.1.1) at the formula
f(x + h) = f(x) + hf ′(x) + h2
2! f ′′(x) + . . . ,
(4.1.2)
where f ′(x) stood for df(x)/dx, f′′(x) for d2f(x)/dx2 etc. Based next upon the
analogy between indices of operation, as in d2f(x), and exponents, as in (df(x))2
(an analogy noted earlier by Leibniz), Lagrange cast (4.1.2) in the symbolic form
61On the anonymity and scope of this volume, as well as the papers contributed to it by
Babbage and Herschel, see [Enros 1979, ch. 4] and [Panteki 1992, sect. 2.3]. On the drawbacks
of its printing, see [Topham 2000]. The signiﬁcance of the Preface to the Memoirs is raised by
numerous historians; see [Ashworth 1996, 653] and [Koppelman 1971, 181–184].
62On the state of mathematical studies at Cambridge in the 1800s, and the alleged distinc-
tion between “analytics” and “synthetics”, see [Ashworth 1996, 632–636], [Becher 1980b, 1–10],
[Becher 1995, 405–407], [Enros 1981], [Enros 1983] and fn. 38.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
403
Δf(x) = f(x + h) −f(x) = exp(hdf(x)/dx) −1,
(4.1.3)
which he would generalize for the nth ﬁnite diﬀerence of f(x). Named after him,
this symbolic version of Taylor’s theorem proved useful in problems of interpolation
and summation (when n attained negative values), leading ultimately to Laplace’s
method of generating functions in the 1770s.63
Eager to provide alternative proof for Lagrange’s theorem, L. F. Arbogast
furnished his intricate “Calculus of derivations” in his treatise Du calcul des
d´erivations [Arbogast 1800].
While his actual calculus of derivations had very
few followers (among them De Morgan), 64 the epistemological basis of his trea-
tise had an immense impact upon the development of the calculus of operations,
oﬀering an explicit distinction between “operation” and “function”. In a spirit
congenial to Condillac and Laplace, Arbogast paid signiﬁcant attention to the
language of analysis, claiming that “The secret of the power of Analysis consists
in the happy choice and application of signs, which are simple and characteristic
of the things they should repressent” [Arbogast 1800, ii]. Elaborating over this
dictum, Arbogast introduced the “separation of the scale of operation” as follows
[ibid, viii–ix]:
This method is generally thought of as separating from the functions
of variables when possible, the operational signs which aﬀect this func-
tion. Then of treating the expressions formed by these signs applied
to any quantity whatsoever, an expression, which I have called a scale
of operation, to treat it, I say, nevertheless as if the operational signs
which compose it were quantities, then to multiply the result by the
function.
After deploying combinatorial techniques in order to prove the formula (4.1.3),
Arbogast separated the symbols of operation, like d/dx, from those of quantity,
like f(x), so as to obtain the purely symbolic form of Lagrange’s theorem,
Δ = exp(hD) −1, where D = d/dx,
(4.1.4)
thus giving rise to a study of symbolical methods, whose rigorous foundation was
sought after by F. J. Fran¸cais, F. J. Servois and others from the mid-1810s on-
wards.65 At Cambridge, Lagrange’s algebraic calculus attracted the attention of
63On Lagrange’s theory of derived functions, see [Fraser 1987] and [Grattan-Guinness 1990,
129, 161, 195–203]. On the generalization of formula (4.1.3) and its impact upon Laplace and
Arbogast, see [Panteki 1992, ch. 1] and fn. 33.
64On Arbogast’s calculus of derivations, see [Grattan-Guinness 1990, 211–216]. Very few En-
glish mathematicians developed this calculus, among them J. West, A. Cayley and S. Roberts,
mentioned in [Panteki 1992, ch.
5].
On De Morgan’s moderate development of Arbogast’s
calculus, see [De Morgan 1842, 168–174].
65Upon the development of algebraic, symbolical methods in France and England, after Ar-
bogast, see [Koppelman 1971] and [Panteki 1992]. Fran¸cais’ and Servois’ foundational studies
became known after R. Murphy’s and D. F. Gregory’s contributions in the 1830s; see [Allaire
2002; Panteki 1993, 136–140; Panteki 2000, 369–178].

404
Maria Panteki
Robert Woodhouse, a precursor of the AS. In his Principles of analytical calcu-
lations [Woodhouse 1803], he discussed the merits and drawbacks of Lagrange’s
freewheeling use of expansion in the Taylor series, introducing a formal deﬁnition
of “=” as a link between a function and its expansion, so as to overcome problems
of convergence. Although Woodhouse’s attempt for a reform at Cambridge failed
at the time, his book, along with Lacroix’s big treatise on the calculus served as a
starting point for the members of the AS in 1811–12.66
Herschel launched his research in 1813 with a study of functional equations,
treated through an extension of Laplace’s method of ﬁnite diﬀerences. Thereafter,
he focused on a combination of the calculus of diﬀerences with the calculus of
operations, as stemming from Arbogast’s method of separation of symbols, while
Babbage directed all his energy towards functional equations. Whereas the two
friends shared a common passion for analytics, they had distinct preferences as to
the speciﬁc methods they followed in their papers. For instance, Babbage deployed
Monge’s algebraic techniques instead of Laplace’s method of ﬁnite diﬀerences,
moreover refusing to apply Arbogast’s symbolic approach. However, Babbage’s
freewheeling manipulation of iterated functions, like ff = f 2, which betrayed the
nature of his algorithmic reasoning, practised later on in computing, stemmed
largely from Arbogast’s impact upon Herschel. As it were, many of Herschel’s
novelties in foundations or notational issues were hidden for the most part in the
voluminous correspondence between the two friends, which continued ceaselessly
from 1812 to 1820.67
By 1820 both Babbage and Herschel had left Cambridge, after realizing that
their project of fostering the study of analytics had largely failed. To Babbage’s
dismay, the papers they had contributed to the Memoirs had not been reviewed
in any British journal [Enros 1983, 37]. Moreover, their subsequent publications
received negative reviews, apparently from P. Barlow, teacher in the Military
Academy of Woolwich [Enros 1979, 170–193].
The spirit of their research and
professionalization of mathematics at large, were foreign to Cambridge’s “Liberal
education”, according to which most graduates, including the members of the AS,
sought careers elsewhere.68 But even for those who did stay, like Peacock, the
methods developed by Babbage and Herschel seemed too abstract and general to
66On the formation of the AS around 1812, see [Enros 1983].
Woodhouse’s textbooks are
discussed in [Becher 1980b, 8–10]. On his early algebraic concerns, see especially [Becher 1980a],
[Dubbey 1978, ch. 5] and [Sherry 1991]. The latter argues about Condillac’s plausible impact
upon Woodhouse, while the two former hint at Woodhouse’s impact upon Babbage’s manuscripts
on the “Philosophy of analysis” produced in the early 1820s, serving as a stimulus for [Peacock
1830].
67On Babbage’s and Herschel’s distinct contributions to analytics, see respectively [Grattan-
Guinness 1992a] and [Grattan-Guinness 1992b].
On a detailed study of their investigations,
largely based upon their correspondence, see [Panteki 1992, ch. 2]. On a novel perspective as
to the mechanization of thought entailed in their work, to which Whewell would be strongly
opposed, see [Ashworth 1996].
68Using Whewell’s own words, Cambridge graduates were future “lawyers, or men of business,
or statesmen” [Whewell 1835, 40]. On the lack of public institutional encouragement for math-
ematical sciences in England, see [Ashworth 1996], [Becher 1980b, 1–10], [Becher 1995], [Enros
1981] and [Garland 1980, ch. 3].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
405
be assimilated, let alone form part of the curriculum. Peacock’s opposition to their
views was evident in the two common contributions of the AS, the translation of
Lacroix’s abridged textbook on the calculus, published as [Lacroix 1816], and its
sequel of Examples (1820).
After Peacock, [Lacroix 1816] opened with a limit
concept, quite in line with the traditional, intuitive approach at Cambridge.69
Moreover, the main part of the Examples was covered by Peacock’s share in the
diﬀerential calculus, while, as a moderator, he introduced into the Tripos Euler’s
version of the calculus, not Lagrange’s theory of derived functions.70 With Pea-
cock, the textbooks of the AS hardly revolutionized the curriculum, but were seen
to ﬁt into it. The marginalization of Babbage’s and Herschel’s aspirations would
become even more striking with Whewell’s intervention in the 1820s!
4.2
Whewell between Newton and Laplace
Instead of balancing the simplicity and evidence of the mathematics of
a century ago against the generality and rapidity of modern analysis,
it might be better to attempt to combine them.
[Whewell 1823, vi]
For all his lack of enthusiasm for abstract analytics, Peacock did enrich the Tri-
pos with inﬁnite series and diﬀerential equations, moderately expanding the cur-
riculum in the late 1810s. However, the Tripos would soon undergo new changes,
indicative of Whewell’s peculiar tendency to combine 18th century mathematics
with “modern analysis”, as he stated in his above-quoted treatise on Dynamics
[Whewell 1823]. Due to Whewell’s eﬀorts, more questions on mixed mathematics
appeared in the Tripos during the 1820s, along with problems of mechanics and
physics which required two distinct types of solution: one based upon geometrico-
physical reasoning, and another based on analysis.71
Whewell matriculated at Trinity in 1812, but never became a member of the AS,
nor did he participate in its textbook publications.72 In 1818 he became assistant
69Most Cambridge mathematicians endorsed the intuitive-based limit concept in the calculus;
see [Fisch 1999], [Richards 1991], [Richards 1992], [Smith 1980] and [Smith 1984b]. On the social,
philosophical and religious factors that diﬀerentiated Peacock from Babbage and Herschel, see
[Becher 1995].
70Indeed, 507 pages of the Examples were devoted to Peacock’s calculus, 127 to Herschel’s
calculus of ﬁnite diﬀerences and only 42 corresponded to Babbage’s functional equations. Read
by De Morgan as a student, this work would have signiﬁcant impact upon the revival of the
calculus of operations, along Arbogast’s and Herschel’s lines in the late 1830s (see [Panteki 1992,
ch.
4], [Panteki 2000, 169–178]).
On Peacock’s eﬀorts as a moderator in the late 1810s, see
[Becher 1995].
71Certain problems required only a geometrical solution (see [Cambridge 1831, 36, 108]), while
others required both geometrical and analytical solutions (see [ibid, 139, 144]). Forming a par
excellence characteristic of the 1820s, this tendency diminished in the 1830s. Details on the type
of problems posed at the Tripos at that time, are included in [Panteki 1992, sect. 3.2].
72As stressed in [Becher 1991, 1–2], numerous errors have been committed by historians con-
cerning Whewell’s alleged involvement with the AS. In this paper, the author presents a summary
of Whewell’s multi-dimensional personality and career. Thereafter we draw amply on [Becher
1980b], who provides a step-by-step analysis of Whewell’s controversial attitude in connection
with the mathematics education at Cambridge for nearly half a century.

406
Maria Panteki
mathematics tutor, and in 1823 he was head tutor at Trinity, engaged ambitiously
with his plan to update the teaching of mechanics. Whewell’ s plan was far from
congenial with the spirit of the textbooks produced by the AS, and saw that they
gained as limited an audience as possible. [Lacroix 1816] was initially intended to
be taught prior to mechanics. Thus, the students would assume a sound foundation
of the calculus and learn to think in the abstract, able to proceed from general
propositions to speciﬁc applications. However, according to Whewell, the student
ought to move in the opposite direction, that is from speciﬁc examples to general
theories. Moreover, only the best students would be encouraged to proceed with
the advanced material of modern analysis, which was incorporated in [Lacroix
1816] and its sequel [Becher 1980b, 32–34].
Upon these grounds, he ﬁrst produced an Elementary treatise on mechanics
[Whewell 1819], designed so that the students could learn a considerable portion
of mechanics before learning the calculus. Opposed to Lagrange’s formalism in
M´ecanique analytique (1788), Whewell deployed geometrical diagrams and limits,
thus presenting mechanics “as a series of distinct individual constructions, each
with its own proof, rather than a series of deductions from general principles”
[Becher 1980b, 16]. However, he was not hostile to Laplace’s M´ecanique c´eleste
(MC), a less formal approach to mechanics than Lagrange’s, which manifested its
author’s predilection for applications, not foundations.73
It took long for Laplace’s MC to be introduced at Cambridge University, al-
though various reforms took place in Scotland and Ireland under its stimulus,
thanks to individuals like James Ivory and John Brinkley respectively, well before
the foundation of the AS.74 The lack of public institutional encouragement for the
mathematical sciences in England, and particularly the conservatism that ruled
Cambridge’s adherence to Newton’s Principia, were at the core of John Playfair’s
review of MC in 1808 at Edinburgh University. In defense of Laplace’s treatise,
Playfair argued that not only was it not “threatening religion”, but that on the
contrary, it reinforced both “the thesis of the existence of an initial design” and
“the Aristotelian doctrine of ﬁnal causes”.75 Playfair’s “admirable review” was
73Even from a quick glance at the two treatises on mechanics, the reader can see the radically
diﬀerent styles of the two relatively similar analytizations of mechanics. Lagrange’s treatise is
more lucid, formal and general than Laplace’s, focusing on the symmetry of its formulae and
avoiding any appeal to intuition.
On the other hand, Laplace provides an accumulation of
observational and experimental data, omits explanation of his often approximate procedures,
eager to show that his solution is conﬁrmed in practice, by replacing the variables with speciﬁc
values, rather than provide any idea of how he arrived at it in the ﬁrst place. Some similarities
and diﬀerences can be found in [Panteki 1992, ch. 1]. On a larger scale, see [Grattan-Guinness
1990, ch. 5]. On Laplace’s MC, see also fn. 36.
74On Ivory, see [Craik 2000]. On the reforms that took place in Scotland and Ireland, prior
to the AS, see [Guicciardini 1989, chs. 7–9] and [Panteki 1987]. Particularly on Ivory’s original
research into Laplace’s potential theory and Brinkley’s own on analytics, with which Babbage
and Herschel were familiar, see [Panteki 1992, sect. 2.1].
75From Playfair’s review, partly quoted in [Durand 2000, 142].
On the inﬂuential role of
religion upon the administrative and educational system at Cambridge, see [Becher 1995] and
[Richards 1992]. Particularly on the contrasts between Edinburgh and Cambridge University at
the time, see [Ashworth 1996, 639–641] and [Enros 1981, 136–140].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
407
acknowledged in the Memoirs [p. ii], but noting that their own business was “ex-
clusively with pure Analytics” [ibid], Babbage and Herschel focused on the latter,
76 letting Woodhouse take the ﬁrst step towards the diﬀusion of MC at Cambridge.
Woodhouse furnished an advanced treatise on Physical Astronomy [Woodhouse
1818] which he enriched with a comprehensive historical account, still worthy of
attention. Referring with praise to Laplace’s treatment of the three-body prob-
lem, he declared the “superiority of the Analytical over the Geometrical method”
[p. lix], proceeding with an elaborate study of the orbital diﬀerential equation,
indispensable for the study of planetary mechanics. In so doing, he introduced
into the curriculum the method of variation of constants, an issue favoured by cer-
tain moderators from 1820 onwards.77 As it were, without incorporating Laplace’s
theory of the earth’s shape, Woodhouse’s treatise was nearly the only textbook
on physical astronomy to include instances from Laplace’s original procedures well
until J. H. Pratt’s Mechanical philosophy in 1836 [§6.1].
In 1823, Whewell furnished his treatise on Dynamics [Whewell 1823], as a sequel
to his former textbook of 1819, calling students to orientate their studies towards
a simpliﬁcation of Laplace’s work [Whewell 1823, v]:
The student who feels a proper admiration for the system of the Prin-
cipia, ought to look forward to the complete development of it in the
Mecanique Celeste, as the ulterior subject of his labours; and those
who shall simplify the diﬀerent parts of that work, and reduce them
to the level of ordinary readers, as far as they admit it, deserve to be
considered as real benefactors to the commonwealth of science.
But that was as far as he went. By failing to include segments of Laplace’s MC
and to draw the students’ attention to a full exposition of the three-body problem,
Dynamics was deﬁnitely a retreat from Woodhouse’s Astronomy. And even Airy’s
Mathematical tracts [Airy 1826], which included new issues such as the theory
of the earth’s shape, was in many ways inferior to Woodhouse’s treatise, curi-
ously omitting the method of variation of constants and promoting instead only
approximate techniques for the solution of diﬀerential equations.78
76We wish to note, however, that by 1813 Herschel was seriously engaged with the study of
MC, and in the Memoirs, page xvi was devoted to an extract from this work, concerning the
problem of decomposition of forces, which was reduced to a functional equation (see [Panteki
1992, sect. 1.4]). Moreover, plausible applications of their theoretical studies were not omitted
from Babbage’s and Herschel’s projects.
As Babbage held in his second paper on functional
equations, his calculus would soon develop into a powerful tool for physical discoveries [Babbage
1816, 179–180].
77See particularly [Woodhouse 1818, 23, 92–105, 140, 208–211, 271, 400–406]. Instances drawn
from his book would form part of the questions posed in the Tripos (see [Cambridge 1831, 10,
16, 78, 139, 142, 162–164, 171–172] and [Panteki 1992, sect. 3.2]).
78Like [Whewell 1823, 75], Airy acknowledged Woodhouse’s “superior” treatment of the three-
body problem, which he omitted from his account. Moreover, he merely mentioned the orbital
equation, putting forward, however, only approximate techniques for its solution [Airy 1826, iv,
1–5, 27]. On Airy’s Tracts, see further [Becher 1980b, 26, 32–34] and [Panteki 2000, 169–174],
in connection with his inadequate treatment of the earth-ﬁgure equation, a problem favoured by
Tripos moderators.

408
Maria Panteki
A disciple of Whewell, and senior wrangler in 1823, G.B. Airy was a far better
mathematician than Whewell, and a promising astronomer, involved with research
on planetary inequalities along Laplace’s lines.
However, reluctantly following
Whewell’s suggestions, Airy presented the theory of the earth’s shape in accor-
dance with Clairaut’s semi-geometrical, semi-analytical style, based on the 18th
century theory of hydrodynamics, instead of Laplace’s potential theory. Airy’s in-
adequate explanations, and above all his unorthodox combination of “synthetics”
and “analytics” would puzzle generations of students [§6.1]. However, the Tracts
were in full accordance with Whewell’s demands, who not only endorsed Airy’s
book with enthusiasm, but even objected later on to Airy’s suggestions to update
it.79
Whewell’s peculiar oscillation between Newton and Laplace, or between tradi-
tion and progress, was not only evident in his textbooks and lectures. In his own
papers, read for the Cambridge Philosophical Society in the 1820s, he deployed
geometrical methods, elementary algebra, trigonometry, diﬀerentiation and ap-
proximate techniques for the solution of diﬀerential equations, looking for simplic-
ity and close contact with physical concepts. As a typical mixed-mathematician,
he was concerned with answers, not abstract rigour, and upon these grounds he
would deploy, if necessary, even divergent series [Becher 1980b, 16–18]. In 1826 he
produced an article “On the mathematical theory of electricity compared with ex-
periment”, published in Encyclopedia Metropolitana in 1830. Orientated towards
applications, [Whewell 1830] focused on the mathematical properties of what be-
came known after Whewell as “Laplace coeﬃcients” (now Legendre functions),
implicitly promoting a branch of pure analytics, which would have a decisive im-
pact upon the development of algebraic symbolical method in the 1830s.80
4.3
De Morgan’s mentors
We have, in practice, a system, which gives true results; and, to use
the words of a writer to whose Analytical Calculations elective aﬃnity
led me when I was an elementary student, “Since it leads to truth, it
must have a logic”.
[De Morgan 1865, 179]
As a student, De Morgan received tuition from seven men, to whom he remained
faithful until the end of his career. According to his wife’s Memoirs [S. De Morgan
1882, 15–16]:
He never forgot what he owed to his teachers in the University. These
were, as entered in his own book, his college tutor J. P. Higman,
Archdeacon Thorp, G. B. Airy, A. Coddington, H. Parr Hamilton
79See Whewell’s letter to Airy on 11.10.1839, fully quoted in [Todhunter 1876 II, 282] and
[Becher 1980b, 26, 34].
80On Whewell’s article, published anonymously, see [Becher 1980b, 18] and [Todhunter 1876
I, 84–85]. On its impact, see [Panteki 2000, 170–173, 202].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
409
(Dean of Salisbury), G. Peacock (Dean of Ely), and W. Whewell (af-
terwards Master of Trinity). With all these gentlemen he kept up a
friendship and correspondence during their joint lives.
To these men we could add Woodhouse (alluded to in our opening quote), Babbage
and Herschel, with whom at this stage De Morgan was acquainted but through
the perusal of their textbooks.81 Beginning with Woodhouse, the very title and
content of De Morgan’s paper “On inﬁnity and the sign of equality” [De Morgan
1865], cited above, was highly congenial with the former’s research back in 1803.82
In the same paper, he paid tribute to Peacock, as “a friend whom I so highly value,
and to whose thought I have been so much indebted” [De Morgan 1865, 180]. If,
moreover, we consider his essay on the “Calculus of functions” (COF) [De Morgan
1836], we have suﬃcient evidence for supporting the view that De Morgan was a
genuine, perhaps the only genuine, follower of all precursors and founders of the
AS.83
Indeed, in his essay on the COF, De Morgan drew on all the papers furnished
by Babbage and Herschel on functional equations, including those incorporated
in the obscure volume of the Memoirs [Panteki 1992, sects. 3.5–3.9]. Moreover,
he was shrewd to perceive the immense historical value of this volume, which has
remained basically unread to this day, by writing on his own copy of it in 1858:
The time will come, when this work will be sought after by the curious,
as the earliest indication of the change, which was taking place in
English mathematics. I think it is all written by Herschel and Babbage:
the preface by Herschel. No more was published under this name.84
Furthermore, [De Morgan 1836] manifests his historical orientation, which un-
derlined the majority of his educational, mathematical and logical writings. As we
shall see, this inclination was partly due to Lacroix’s inﬂuence. However, many of
his mentors at Cambridge might have provided him with additional stimuli for the
study and use of the history of science. For instance, in 1826 Peacock composed a
lengthy article on “Arithmetic” published in Encyclopedia Metropolitana in 1830,
81On De Morgan’s tutors and his study of the textbooks issued by the AS, see [Rice 1997b,
24–27, 30–33, 50–52]. Most of his tutors wrote excellent testimonial letters for his appointment
at London university in 1828; see [S. De Morgan 1882, 14–17] and [Rice 1997a].
82On [De Morgan 1865], see [S. De Morgan 1882, 328–331], [Panteki 1992, sect. 3.9], [Richards
1987, 28–29] and § 1.1. On [Woodhouse 1803] and the deﬁnition of equality, see [Becher 1980a]
and §4.1.
83According to [Richards 1987, 10], De Morgan can be viewed as a “satellite” of the AS. We
further support her claim with what follows below in text.
84London University Library, L3, [Anal. Soc.]. Well until [Enros 1979], De Morgan appears to
have been the only mathematician to have delved into the contents of this journal. It may be
worth noting, that Whewell referred to the Memoirs in the British Critic in 1831 as a meaningless
“combination of signs” of “extraordinary complexity” (see [Enros 1983, 37]). Although we know
from their correspondence that Babbage undertook to write the Preface, still De Morgan’s remark
is far from surprising, given the fact that many of the comment concerning French publications
actually derived from Herschel, who followed along the lines deﬁned by them in the Memoirs
more closely than Babbage [Panteki 1992, ch. 2].

410
Maria Panteki
while the textbooks and lectures of Woodhouse, Whewell and Airy contained his-
torical comments on physical astronomy.
From the latter, De Morgan also inherited a genuine love of astronomy, with two
papers concerning the orbits of the Moon and the Comets published in 1833. But
De Morgan was not gifted with enough patience to carry out the lengthy numerical
calculations involved in this branch. As he conﬁded to Whewell in 1832: “but by
the powers of calculating and the properties of numbers, I protest, I will never
work out a planetary perturbation, or the place of a comet, and much obliged
do I feel to those who can and will do such things”, alluding to Airy, who had
just received a medal from the Royal Astronomical Society (RAS) for his paper
on planetary inequalities.85
However, by being himself a member of the RAS
from 1830 onwards, De Morgan cultivated his passion for astronomy, contributing
numerous historical articles [Rice 1996].
Mechanics and astronomy in fact seem to have been among De Morgan’s prin-
cipal interests during his residence at Cambridge. The recent discovery of a tract
he wrote in 1827 on “Statics” reveals Whewell’s inﬂuence towards the study of
celestial mechanics, both through his Dynamics in 1823, and his article on “Elec-
tricity”, which De Morgan read in manuscript in 1826 [Becher 1980b, 18, fn. 68].
As it were, De Morgan composed his manuscript on “Statics” with the intention of
producing a sequel on dynamics, ultimately providing the students with a complete
course ranging from ﬁrst principles to Laplace’s physical astronomy [Rice 1997b,
53–54]. De Morgan had good reasons for planning such a project, given the rather
confusing presentation of mechanics’ principles by Whewell and Airy through a
combination of old-fashioned synthetic mathematics and modern analysis [§4.2].
However, he never completed the ﬁrst treatise, and as a result its sequel was never
composed either. Notwithstanding the reasons that impeded the publication of
De Morgan’s tract, it merits attention upon the grounds that it formed the main
testimonial for his election at London University in 1828.86
De Morgan’s tract of 1827 is our earliest evidence of his ability to critically
assimilate and combine diverse mathematical and epistemological stimuli, mani-
festing his enduring interest in the foundations of pure and applied mathematics as
well as his talent for teaching. It further justiﬁes his wife’s claim that he devoted
much time to extensive reading as a student “beyond the bounds marked by his
tutors” [S. De Morgan 1882, 15]. Indeed, in it he deployed functional equations,
such as
f(x + h) + f(x −y) = f(x) · f(y),
(4.3.1)
which were absent from Babbage’s and Herschel’s work, while he also drew on
Lagrange’s principle of virtual velocities, which Whewell had objected to using in
85From De Morgan’s letter to Whewell on 12.11.1832 [Whewell Papers, Add.Ms.a.202/96].
That year, Airy was awarded a medal from the RAS for his paper on planetary inequalities [Rice
1997b, 103].
86On De Morgan’s election, see [Rice 1997a] and on his tract, [ibid, 270-271].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
411
his own treatises.87 Above all, the existence of this tract in the framework of what
appears to be a branch of applied mathematics induces us to re-examine certain
of his subsequent contributions to education, algebra, the calculus and logic.
De Morgan never came to produce a textbook on mechanics, nor any research
work on celestial mechanics. He was largely attentive, however, to issues concern-
ing the ﬁrst principles of applied mathematics. In 1832, he furnished his elementary
Calculus [De Morgan l832a, 133], designed for use prior to the students’ initiation
to mechanics. He also produced a Spherical trigonometry in 1834, a subject that
became his starting point for the study of astronomy as a student [Rice 1997b, 31,
122, 188–193]. Moreover, we note that part of De Morgan’s fame was due to his
contributions in the ﬁeld of probabilities.88 To this end, he devoted a section of
his advanced Calculus [De Morgan 1842, 331–340, 746–749] to Laplace’s method
of generating functions, an issue closely linked to the latter’s work on probabili-
ties. Last, but not least, almost half his review of Peacock’s Algebra in 1835 was
a critical overview of the teaching mechanics at Cambridge, which culminated in
raising interesting links between mechanics, the calculus, algebra and logic [§6.2].
As we saw, De Morgan was in many ways a faithful disciple of Woodhouse,
Peacock, Babbage, Herschel, Whewell and Airy, while the majority of his tutors
stimulated his long-standing interest in the foundations of the calculus.89 By draw-
ing additionally on the original works of Arbogast, Lagrange, Laplace and others,
he deviated largely from “the bounds marked” by his mentors at Cambridge, as
his wife rightly claimed in her Memoirs. Before we proceed to illustrate his debt
to the encyclopedist Lacroix, we should add a note concerning his earliest mentor,
while at school, his teacher J. Parsons. A former fellow of Oriel College Oxford,
Parsons was a close friend of Whately’s, talking of him perpetually to his pupils.
As De Morgan wrote in his Paradoxes: “Before I was sixteen, and before Whately
had even given his Bampton lectures, I was very familiar with his name and some
of his sayings” [De Morgan 1872, 196]. Although Whately would have his “Logic”
published in Encyclopedia Metropolitana the very year De Morgan matriculated at
Trinity, it is quite likely that he acquired an admiration for Whately’s personality
through Parsons, long before he got involved with the study of logic.90
87On Whewell’s objection to Lagrange’s principles, see [Becher 1980b, 15–16]. On equations
(4.3.1), see chapter 2 of the “Elements of statics”, University College Library, MS.Add.27. De
Morgan treated this functional equation using Lagrange’s method of developing f(x+h) in Taylor
series. On this rarely used method, see [De Morgan 1836, 328, 367].
88See [De Morgan 1882, 85–93], [Garland 1980, 34], [Rice 1996, 230–231], [Rice 1997b, 96–99]
and [Smith 1982, 40–55].
89See letters exchanged between De Morgan and Higman in 1847–1848, University College
Library, MS.Add.97/5. See also [Smith 1984b] and [Richards 1991].
90On Parsons’s inﬂuence upon De Morgan, see [S. De Morgan 1882, 3-11] and [Rice 1997b 15–
20]. The “Bampton lectures” at Oxford University were a series of lectures on theology [Corsi
1988, 16, 67, 76, 100–101].

412
Maria Panteki
5
LACROIX’S IMPACT UPON DE MORGAN, 1828–1833
5.1
De Morgan in defense of mathematical studies
In reality, our senses are our ﬁrst mathematical instructors.
[De Morgan 1831a, 2]
After being appointed Professor of Mathematics at London University, De Morgan
undertook to defend the study of this branch against common charges and propose
eﬃcient methods for its instruction at an elementary level. The ideas contained
in embryo in his “Introductory lecture” [De Morgan 1828] — mentioned in § 1.2
— were elaborated on in an ensuing lecture, published as Remarks on elementary
education [De Morgan 1830].
By that time, he had composed an article “On
mathematical instruction” [De Morgan 1831b] and a booklet On the Study and
Diﬃculties of Mathematics [De Morgan 1831a], cited as SDM [§1.1]. SDM was
published by the Society for the Diﬀusion of Useful Knowledge (SDUK), founded
by Lord Brougham in 1825, in association with London University.91 As for his
article “On mathematical instruction”, it was one of the thirty-three articles he
contributed to the Quarterly Journal of Education (QJE), which was sponsored
by the SDUK.92
SDM bears striking similarities, in both its structure and content, with Lacroix’s
Essais, while instances from De Morgan’s earlier and later writings lead to our
viewing Lacroix’s tract as a key-link between the Oxford-based revival of syllogistic
logic and De Morgan’s Cambridge heritage in applied and pure mathematics. In
line with the Essais, SDM was divided into four parts, concerning the teaching of
arithmetic [pp. 4–18], algebra [pp. 18–64], geometry [pp. 65–91] and trigonometry
[pp. 91–93] respectively. Alluding to Laplace’s lectures at the Ecole Normale in
connection with the dangers entailed in the careless use of the method of induction,
93 De Morgan revealed his basic sources, claiming that [p. 63]:
Both the preceptor and the pupil, but especially the former, will derive
great advantage from the perusal of Lacroix, Essais sur l’Enseignement
en g´eneral et sur celui des Math´ematiques en particulier, Condillac, La
91The SDUK aimed to “facilitate the education of the working man by means of intelligible
books on academic subjects published at aﬀordable prices” [Rice 1997a, 270], [Rice 1997b, 108–
110]. According to the latter, De Morgan had proposed submitting his SDM to the SDUK in
March 1830.
SDM proved very successful, reprinted in the USA in our century [MacFarlane
1916, 21–22], [Grattan-Guinness 1992c, 3] and [Pycior 1983, 213].
92During the period of his resignation (1831–1835), De Morgan contributed several book re-
views, a variety of scientiﬁc commentaries and his most signiﬁcant writings on instruction, under
the editorship of George Long (see comments in [S. De Morgan 1882, 407–414] and [Rice 1997b,
98–111 ]). Although, as [Corsi 1988, 118] noted, the QJE was almost entirely written by De
Morgan, we should add another notable contributor, Baden Powell (1796-1860), Professor of
Geometry at Oriel College, Oxford, from 1827. Member of the SDUK from 1830, Powell was a
close friend of both Whately and De Morgan [ibid, 5–6].
93See [SDM, 63]. De Morgan displayed his own translation of [Laplace 1795, 41], without,
however, revealing his exact source. Apparently he became acquainted with Laplace’s lectures
through Lacroix’s Essais [§2].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
413
langue des Calculs, and the various articles on the elements of algebra
in the French Encyclopedia, which are for the most part written by
D’Alembert.
Although this was his only reference to Lacroix’s tract, there are indications which
lead to the impression that he had gone through it much earlier. In 1828, he asked
the beginner “in all his embarrassment” to rely on the word of his instructor [De
Morgan 1828, 40], according to D’Alembert’s motto: “Go forward and faith will
follow”.94 Moreover, in line with Laplace and Lacroix, he argued on the import of
analysis in the invention of fertile theories in physical astronomy, claiming:
Never was the talent of invention so brilliantly displayed as in the
various successful attempts by which, from the time of Newton to that
of Laplace, all the phenomena of the solar system were mathematically
demonstrated to result from the operations of the Newtonian Law of
Gravity.95
Thus proving that mathematics do not “deaden the imagination”, he refuted the
view according to which mathematics “destroy the taste for literature” by praising
the writings of Pascal, Descartes, Leibniz and D’ Alembert equally for “spirit,
taste, and beauty” and for “scientiﬁc talent” [De Morgan 1828, 30–32]. Questions
of priority were not absent from his lecture, which included a comparison between
mathematics and natural philosophy [pp. 40–44].
De Morgan showed a great sensitivity to the study of arithmetic, which he
called the“groundwork of the mathematics” [De Morgan 1830, 12]. It was perhaps
through Lacroix that he also became acquainted with Condillac, furnishing in the
title page of his textbook on Arithmetic (1830) a quote attributed to him:
It is not by means of a routine that one becomes educated, but by
one’s own thinking; it is essential to get into the habit of understanding
rationally what one does: such a habit is acquired more easily than one
thinks; and once acquired, it is never lost.96
In his Remarks [De Morgan 1830, 13] he drew once more on Condillac, choosing
a quote already deployed by Lacroix [§2.2]:
94On D’Alembert’s principle, mentioned in [Lacroix 1828, 175] and [Richards 1991, 298], see
[De Morgan 1828, 38–40].
95De Morgan developed a fascination for Laplace’s celestial mechanics through his tutors at
Cambridge [§4.3]. However, the tone and poetic style of his lecture on this issue hint at a direct
impact of Laplace’s and Lacroix’s appraisal of enlightenment science and philosophy. One may
be surprised today by the erroneous exaggeration of this passage (i.e. “all the phenomena...”);
nevertheless, this was exactly the message delivered by those authors at the turn of the century.
96As a student, De Morgan read Peacock’s article on “Arithmetic” four years before its pub-
lication in the Encyclopedia Metropolitana in 1830. Interestingly enough, Condillac’s La langue
was found in Peacock’s library [Durand 1990, 141–144]. Nonetheless, Peacock did not draw on
Condillac’s work in his article, so we have no means of establishing his plausible inﬂuence upon
De Morgan in the direction of Condillac’s philosophy of arithmetic. In any case, the passage
that follows below in text hints at Lacroix’s inﬂuence in this direction. On the success of De
Morgan’s textbook on arithmetic, see [Rice 1997b, 86–87].

414
Maria Panteki
I would even go as far as to say that the science of arithmetic is more
easy than the art [...] It has been well observed by Condillac, in treating
of this very subject that a rule is like the parapet of a bridge; it may
keep a careless passenger from tumbling over, but will not help him
walk forward.
He claimed next that algebra may be seen as “an easy generalization of arith-
metic” [De Morgan 1830, 14], focusing thereafter on a comparative study between
algebra and geometry. Interestingly enough, he did so in a manner congenial, if
not identical, to Lacroix’s own. He held that “Geometry, which is a science more
pleasing to the majority of learners than algebra and which is for the purposes
of the many, the more useful of the two, might be taught at an earlier age than
is the custom at present” [p. 15]. Noting, however, that the advanced study of
geometry in “the most rigorous form” should best be postponed for a later period
of instruction, he more or less repeated Lacroix’s own arguments [§2.2].
In connection with the teaching of algebra, De Morgan drew on both Lacroix
and Laplace by holding that “The new symbols of algebra should not be all ex-
plained to the student at once. He should be led from the full to the abridged
notation, in the same manner as those were, who ﬁrst adopted the latter” [1831b,
277], De Morgan followed Clairaut’s method based upon historical discovery, rec-
ommended by both his mentors.
Furthermore, after Euler (see [Lacroix 1828,
170–187, 252]), he proposed the creation on the student’s part of a “syllabus of
results only, unaccompanied by any demonstration”, so that the student would
acquire “memory for algebraical formulae, which will save time and labor in the
higher departments of the science” [SDM, 63].
Laplace’s inﬂuence is mostly evident in SDM. In line with the former’s lectures
on algebra [§2.1], De Morgan initiated the student into algebraic notation through
an arithmetical example, with the intention of leading him all the way from nu-
merals to the symbolic formula, by representing the verbal expression of “half the
sum of two numbers added to half their [absolute] diﬀerence, gives the greater of
the two numbers”. However, he enriched his material with more examples than
Laplace, further oﬀering his own original intermediate step between purely numer-
ical and purely symbolical formulae as follows: “(First No+second No)/2+(First
No–second No)/2 = First No” [SDM, 18].
Without yet touching upon the instruction of geometry, we can trace so many
similarities between Lacroix’s and Laplace’s texts on the one hand, and De Mor-
gan’s writings on the other, that we are tempted to accuse him of plagiarism.
Nonetheless, De Morgan engraved his own synthesis of the French philosophy of
education and his training at Cambridge, as revealed, for instance, in his emphasis
on exercising the student’s familiarity with the binomial theorem through exam-
ples, prior to furnishing him with the general proof [SDM, 62].
Lacroix, after
Laplace, had stressed the importance of general methods in teaching, along with
critically considering the majority of English treatises, which allegedly wrongly
introduced pupils to algebra by means of examples alone [Lacroix 1828, 173–176,
203, 264–270]. Between these extremes, De Morgan echoed Whewell by proposing

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
415
a “middle course”, that is by urging instructors to suit “the nature of the proof to
the student’s capacity” [SDM, 62].
Before switching to De Morgan’s views on the teaching of geometry, we wish
to clarify a subtle point concerning his debt to the empirical philosophers, Locke
and Condillac, in his early educational writings. After them, he insisted that a
pupil should be initiated into ﬁrst principles carefully, after being experimentally
trained through “ocular demonstration” [De Morgan 1828, 13–15], by claiming that
our senses are our “ﬁrst mathematical instructors” [SDM, 1–3]. Such instances,
however, should not mislead us into regarding the ﬁrst stage of his career as an
exclusive “traditional empiricist stage” [Pycior 1983] which would be abandoned
from 1835 onwards.97
Just like Lacroix, De Morgan drew on these empirical
philosophers strictly in connection with the instruction of elementary mathematics
and the very early stage of the student’s initiation.
For, in the same writings
[§5.2], De Morgan showed evident traces of his debt to the PRL, foreshadowing
statements put forward in 1835, which would be wrongly considered by historians
as uniquely characterizing his new, modern approach to mathematics.
5.2
Is reasoning peculiar to geometry only?
And we may ask, how comes that reasoning, utterly banished from
arithmetic and algebra, preserved its place as an essential of geometry?
[De Morgan 1831b, 268–269]
In his “Introductory lecture”, De Morgan claimed that, “the success of every
individual in the world must depend on his power of reasoning” [De Morgan 1828,
8].
He went on to defend mathematics against common criticism, concluding,
“wherever previously formed habit of abstraction and generalization are valuable,
the preparation of mathematical studies is useful in the highest degree” [ibid,
43–44]. A few years later, he argued in more explicit terms that mathematical
demonstration is “strictly logical” and that “The same species of logic is used
in all inquiries after truth”, “logic” standing for “accurate reasoning”.98 But if,
in theory, mathematical instruction could nurture the reasoning capacity of the
student, what about its eﬃciency in practice?
De Morgan raised the latter issue in his Remarks. He held that mathematical
education suﬀered not merely from inadequate but rather from erroneous meth-
ods, as instructors tended to emphasize exercising the faculty of “dry memory”
instead of trying to make ﬁrst principle intelligible to the pupils. He argued that,
by directing the students’ attention to “rules only, not to the principles on which
they are established” instructors had excluded “reasoning and reﬂection” entirely
97On De Morgan’s debt to Locke, see [De Morgan 1828, 13–25], [SDM, 1–3], [Pycior 1983, 212–
216] and [Rice 1997b, 69–70]. However, not all of De Morgan’s early educational views stemmed
uniquely from Locke’s empirical philosophy [see §5.2].
98See [De Morgan 1831a, 3], [De Morgan 1831b, 265]. Ironically, in 1842, De Morgan criticized
Whewell for freewheelingly deploying the term “logic” as a synonym for “reasoning”; see [De
Morgan 1842, 12–13] and [Todhunter 1876 I, 108].

416
Maria Panteki
from arithmetic, which as a science “is the most adapted for the development of
these faculties in the young mind” [De Morgan 1830, 12]. Firmly believing that
arithmetic was a paradigmatic ﬁeld for the mind’s training in the process of “gen-
eralization by induction”, he illustrated his point by drawing on the Pythagorean
number theory.99
In SDM, induction was considered as algebra’s “most powerful engine of demon-
stration”.100 He argued, in fact, that if it is necessary to “learn to reason”, then
“in no case is the assertion more completely veriﬁed than in the study of algebra”
[SDM, 60–63]. In brief, neither arithmetic nor algebra were devoid of reasoning.
How then, he asked, did reasoning preserve its place uniquely within geometry, or,
as it was called, “mathematics” [De Morgan 1831b 268–269]? Moreover, could we
presume with certainty that “all who learn geometry will learn to reason correctly”
[De Morgan 1833b, 238]?
De Morgan felt induced to account for the instructors’ misconception in accept-
ing geometry as the only vehicle for the exercise of mathematical reasoning, and
consequently to restore reasoning within mathematical education, commencing
with an overview of the defective teaching of geometry. The ﬁrst misconception,
he argued, was partly due to the poor instruction of algebra: “It was probably the
experience of the inutility of general demonstration to the very young student that
caused the abandonment of reasoning which prevailed so much in English works of
elementary mathematics” [SDM, 62]. On a diﬀerent note, he wrote: “We suspect
it arose from the fact of the treatise of Euclid being found already established, and
the disinclination to overturn any institution being so great, that this work pre-
served its place in spite of its truth and beauty” [De Morgan 1831b, 269]. And as
for geometry’s instruction, De Morgan pointed out many weaknesses that needed
serious consideration.
It was ﬁrstly noted that the study of mathematics in general was delayed “till
what is comparatively so late a period in life” [De Morgan 1830, 11; De Morgan
1831b, 275]. Moreover, when a pupil was confronted with Euclid’s Elements, he
was unable to follow the route of demonstration, as he lacked any preliminary
experimental training [De Morgan 1830, 14–16]. De Morgan lamented also the
tendency of instructors to demand that the pupil memorize the right order of
propositions.101 Last, but not least, teachers failed to realize that the ﬁrst book
99Namely, that the addition of any successive odd numbers, starting from 1, will always result
in a square number [De Morgan 1830, 9]. The Pythagoreans were not mentioned at this point,
but the history of mathematics was often a source upon which De Morgan based his views; see
[ibid, 8–9], [SDM, 12 and 63]. According to him, arithmetic was considered a most important
prerequisite for the study of algebra; see [De Morgan 1830, 12–14], [De Morgan 1831a, 18], [De
Morgan 1831b, 266–271]. On De Morgan’s own eﬃciency as a teacher, see [Howson 1982, 80–84]
and [Rice 1999].
100He dealt at length with the method of induction, mainly in connection with the binomial
theorem [SDM, 60–63]. We recall his debt to Laplace’s lectures quoted in SDM [§5.1]. In 1838, he
distinguished between “mathematical” and “scientiﬁc” induction, the former being De Morgan’s
own term [Rice 1997b, 122].
101On lines fairly identical to [Laplace 1795, 20–21], De Morgan wrote: “There seems to be
a magic in numbers, which no one can withstand, from Leibniz, who proposed to convert the

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
417
of the Elements hardly aﬀorded a favorable basis for initiating a student into
geometry, commencing, as it were, with certain far from evident deﬁnitions and
axioms, as well as some “troublesome propositions” [De Morgan 1831b, 275].
In an eﬀort to amend the situation, he furnished a paper “On the method of
teaching geometry” [De Morgan 1833a, b], announcing its unusual division into
two parts: the ﬁrst related “to the manner of teaching the terms and the facts of
geometry”, and the second to “the method of deducing them from one another
by reasoning” [De Morgan 1833a, 35]. We might say that what the instructors’
methodological framework seemed to lack until then was a proper distinction be-
tween the “matter” and “form” of geometry respectively, a distinction successfully
deployed in those terms by De Morgan in his mature work on logic.102 The idea
for such a division occurred to him in 1831, in an attempt to advise instructors on
how to avoid the dangers entailed in initiating a pupil into geometry by means of
Euclid’s ﬁrst book. As he wrote [De Morgan 1831b, 275]:
It would not be contrary to good logic, to assume the whole of the
ﬁrst book of Euclid, and from it to prove the second, provided that
afterwards the ﬁrst book were proved, without the necessity of taking
for granted any proposition in the second. The argument [...] would
then stand thus:
If the ﬁrst book be true, the second is true.
But the ﬁrst book is true.
Therefore the second is true.
The order in which the premises come, does not aﬀect the soundness of
the conclusion and provided the pupil understands that the conclusion
depends equally on the premises and the reasoning grounded upon
them, which are two distinct things, an error in one not necessarily
aﬀecting the other, he is perfectly safe, and takes a view of the process
of reasoning not generally given to the young.
Representative of De Morgan’s idiosyncratic style, this passage deserves atten-
tion in so far as he clearly distinguished in it between the “matter” or “premises”
and the “form” or “reasoning” of geometry respectively. In so doing, he prepared
the ground for the arguments put forward in his review of Peacock’s Algebra four
King of China to Christianity, by means of binary arithmetic, to the mathematical master of
the country school, who measures his pupils’ conviction of geometrical truths by their power of
recollecting the order in which they come” [De Morgan 1831b, 269]. Further on the abuse of the
faculty of memory, see [Lacroix 1828, 285–291] and [De Morgan 1830, 14].
102On De Morgan’s “form–matter” distinction within logic, see [De Morgan 1858] and comments
in [Hodges 2000] and [Merrill 1990, ch. 4]. As argued in [Panteki 1992, sects. 3.4–3.9 and 6.3–
6.8], this distinction featured in diﬀerent terms as a methodological tool for his study of the
calculus of functions in 1836, thereafter inﬂuencing his study of algebra an logic. But the origin
of this distinction stemmed from his concern for geometry in 1831, as noted in text below.

418
Maria Panteki
years later, where within a more general context he stressed the diﬀerence between
the “certainty of mathematical conclusions” and the “correctness of mathematical
reasoning” [De Morgan 1835a, 95]. Although De Morgan’s crucial epistemological
distinction as well as his singular attention to the importance of reasoning have not
escaped historians’ attention, we wish to clarify certain misconceptions concerning
the true origins of his statements of 1835.
According to Pycior [1983, 217], the distinction between the truth of mathe-
matical conclusions and the accuracy of reasoning was revolutionary, inducing her
to claim that by 1835 De Morgan was moving “towards a more modern conception
of mathematics [than in the earlier “empirical stage”] which stressed its deductive
nature rather than the self-evidence of its concepts and axioms”. As we noted
above, this distinction was far from new in his review of 1835, but stemmed from
his earlier desire to amend the problematic long-standing tradition governing the
instruction of geometry. What remains is to consider the stimuli that led De Mor-
gan to develop such a systematic concern for geometry and its reasoning in the
ﬁrst place.
According to Rice [1997b, 73], Kant must have been an inﬂuential source in
this respect although not “mentioned by name” in De Morgan’s writings. Due to
lack of substantial evidence we cannot argue for or against this view. However, we
wish to draw attention to an interesting note written by De Morgan on a copy of
his Remarks, found in the Royal Society Library, which runs as follows:
Most of the opinions contained in this lecture which are opposed to
those of Kant’s philosophy were found by the author, about four years
after it was written, in a pamphlet by Mr. (Dr?) Beddoes entitled
“Observations on the nature of demonstrative Evidence with an ex-
planation of the diﬃculties occurring in the Elements of Geometry by
Thomas Beddoes.
London J. Johnson, 1793”.
But the conclusions
drawn are diﬀerent.103
In any case, we hold that De Morgan’s own debt to Locke and Condillac, through
his perusal of Lacroix’s Essais, must had been quite contradictory to any plausible
debt owed to Kant at that stage. Especially in connection to geometry’s instruc-
tion, the inﬂuence of Lacroix and the PRL is too strongly evident in De Morgan’s
writings of that period to leave an open question as to his sources. Indeed, in
line with the PRL, De Morgan asked instructors “To defer every axiom, until that
point is arrived at, where it becomes necessary”, or “To omit those propositions
which are not subsequently useful” [De Morgan 1831b, 276]. Such an inﬂuence
is further evident in [De Morgan 1833a], which concerned the “matter” of Eu-
clidean geometry, and the ideal order of its instruction (compare with [Lacroix
1828, 274–312]).
103The inscription bears no signature, but a comparative study leads to De Morgan as its
author. Thomas Beddoes (1760–1808), an Oxford graduate, was a physician and scientist. The
question of Kant’s inﬂuence upon De Morgan at this stage remains open.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
419
The “form” of geometry was considered in chapter 14 of SDM and consequently
in [De Morgan 1833b] [§5.3]. Interestingly enough, chapter 14 was preceded by
a preliminary one “On the deﬁnitions of geometry” [SDM, 65–68], which opened
with a comparative study between algebra and geometry. This could have been
seen as a rather unusual way of introducing the basic concepts of geometry, had
it not been for Lacroix’s similar comparison soon after he had brieﬂy associated
geometry and logic, as well as for De Morgan’s tendency to furnish links between
diverse issues in his discourse, a tendency once again largely due to Lacroix’s own
encyclopedistic style [§1.3, §2 and §5.1].
De Morgan argued extensively on why geometry was easier for the student to
grasp than algebra. He supported that the results of elementary geometry “are in
many cases suﬃciently evident of themselves to the eye” whereas in algebra “many
rudimentary propositions derive no evidence from the senses” [p. 65]. Moreover,
according to him “there is nothing in the elements of pure geometry comparable,
in point of complexity, to the theory of the negative sign, of fractional indices, or
the decomposition of an expression of the second degree in factors” [ibid]. Above
all, the symbols deployed in geometry were of a “less general nature” than those
of algebra. Elaborating on the latter issue, he wrote [SDM, 65]:
In algebra a general proposition respecting numbers is to be proved.
Letters are taken which may represent any of the numbers in question,
and the course of the demonstration, far from making any use of the
particular case, does not allow that any reasoning, however general in
its nature, is conclusive, unless the symbols are as general as the argu-
ments. We do not say that it would be contrary to good logic to form
general conclusions from reasoning on one particular case, when it is
evident that the same considerations might be applied to any other,
but only that very great caution [...] would be required in deducing
the conclusions. There occurs also a mixture of general and particular
propositions, and the latter are liable to be mistaken for the former. In
geometry, on the contrary [...] any proposition may be safely demon-
strated on any particular case.
Obviously stimulated by Lacroix, De Morgan’s comparative study was more pen-
etrating than his mentor’s, as well as original. For, Lacroix ﬁrmly believed, after
Laplace, that the generality of algebraic methods renders the instruction of algebra
straightforward, dispensing with the necessity of furnishing many appropriate ex-
amples [Lacroix 1828, 274–275, 299]. Moreover, Lacroix argued that the particular
nature of geometry burdened the instructor with the “embarrassing” responsibil-
ity of choosing the right examples [ibid]. Both agreed that geometry could ideally
exercise the student’s capacity in logical reasoning. But whereas for Lacroix the
study of geometry suﬃced for this purpose [§2.2], for De Morgan [1833b, 238] that
was not so:
Geometry, as it is usually studied, does not teach the principles of
reasoning, but applies them [...] to the consideration of the properties

420
Maria Panteki
of space. There is, therefore, no reason to presume that all who learn
geometry will learn to reason correctly.
To sum up, it is clear that De Morgan did not identify mathematics with geo-
metrical reasoning. On the contrary, believing, as he did, that this long-standing
identiﬁcation was largely erroneous, he introduced the basics of traditional syllo-
gistic, with a view to arguing on the indispensability of a student’s training in logic
prior to his acquaintance with the complex nature of geometrical demonstration.
Accordingly, chapter 13 ended as follows [SDM, 68]:
We proceed to the method of reasoning in geometry, or rather to the
method of reasoning in general, since there is, or ought to be, no es-
sential diﬀerence between the manner of deducing results from ﬁrst
principles, in any science.
5.3
An association of geometry with syllogistic logic
Whately’s Logic [...]. A work, which should be read by all mathematical
students.
[De Morgan 1831a, 71, fn.]
Apparently acquainted with Whately’s Elements around 1829, De Morgan explic-
itly referred to it in SDM above quoted.104 Among the merits of the Elements
that plausibly attracted De Morgan’s attention at that time was Whately’s lucid
account of fallacies [§3.1], an issue particularly attended to in Lacroix’s Essais.
Critical towards the prevailing elementary textbooks on mathematics, Lacroix
[1828, 176] had urged instructors to prevent their pupils from “the errors of rea-
soning” and the “seduction of paralogism” through an “analysis of the diverse
forms of reasoning”. Armed with Whately’s study on this issue, De Morgan fol-
lowed Lacroix’s advice in full, devoting to this end chapter 14 of SDM and his
paper [De Morgan 1833b].
As a matter of fact, he prepared the ground for his more systematic treatment
given in SDM in [De Morgan 1831b, 272], where, after claiming that “It is useless
to present reasoning in any shape until the language is perfectly familiar”, he wrote
in reference to pupils that “they have no acquaintance with the more general part
of grammar which is the foundation of the forms of logic”, alluding to Whately’s
link between language and reasoning. Within this context, he noted that pupils
often confound the “converse of a proposition” with “the proposition itself’ [ibid].
Similarly, he called attention to the fact that “every point in ﬁgure A is a point
of ﬁgure B” does not imply that “every point of B is a point of A” [SDM, 69].
Furthermore, he noted that pupils do not have adequate training in acknowledging
a “defect in the method of reasoning, but only by the absurdity of the conclusion”,
as in the case of “all animals are birds” [De Morgan 1833b, 240]. Such fallacies
104In [SDM, 71, fn], he mentioned the third edition of the Elements, dated 1829 [§3.1]. Moreover,
on the copy of SDM in the Royal Society Library, we read the inscription “1829–1831” in his
own handwriting. Thus, he probably began writing this booklet around 1829.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
421
demanded the pupil’s acquaintance with the various forms of strict reasoning,
geometry serving heuristically for this purpose.
In SDM, he assumed, in line with Whately, that “all reasoning” could be reduced
to a number of “single propositions”, each of which is divided into the “subject”,
the “predicate” and the “copula” [SDM, 68].
By means of simple geometrical
assertions, he initiated the pupils into the four basic types of propositions (A, E, I,
O), noting that these assertions must be derived in one of the following ways: from
the deﬁnition, from hypothesis, from the evidence of the assertions (axioms) and
from proof already given [pp. 69–70]. Drawing on the latter case, he claimed that
“no assertion can be the direct and necessary consequence of two others, unless
those two contain something in common” [p. 70]. Repeating in diﬀerent terms an
assertion expressed in common language, for instance, as “geometry is useful, and
therefore ought to be studied” we may arrive at a “syllogism”, such as:
Every thing useful is what ought to be studied.
Geometry is useful,
(5.3.1)
therefore geometry is what ought to be studied.
He saw (5.3.1) as an example of modus ponens, the par excellence reasoning scheme
deployed in Euclid’s Elements. This scheme deviates from traditional syllogistic
logic, and so also does De Morgan’s pioneering acceptance of “is equal to” together
with the traditional copula “is” as distinct copulas in his account [SDM, 68, 73–75].
De Morgan was unaware at that time of Thomas Reid’s (1710–1796) thesis that
traditional syllogism did not suﬃce for mathematical proof. De Morgan would
realize later on the impossible task of casting Euclidean geometry in syllogistic
form. Nonetheless, his endeavour to do so for educational reasons paved a way for
his original work on the logic of relations in the 1850s.105
Drawing on geometry, he illustrated the four ﬁgures and the nineteen legitimate
moods of syllogistic logic, prior to himself being acquainted with Euler’s similar
device [§2.1]. For instance, ﬁgure I, mood AAA was furnished by the example [p.
72]:
All the circle is in the triangle
All the square is in the circle
(5.3.2)
∴All the square is in the triangle.
Or, indicative of ﬁgure III, mood AII, was the following example [p. 73]:
The axioms constitute part of the basis of geometry
Some of the axioms are grounded on the evidence of the senses (5.3.3)
∴Some evidence derived from the senses is part of the basis of geom-
etry.
105Hamilton edited Reid’s works in 1846, so there was no possibility of De Morgan’s acquain-
tance with them in 1831 [Merrill 1990, 15–25]. According to [Merrill 1990, ix and 23–25], De
Morgan’s dual use of “is” and “is equal to” as two distinct copulas was his ﬁrst major innovation
in logic. On De Morgan’s mature views on the utopic connections between geometry and logic,
see [ibid, ch. 7]. On modus ponens, see [ibid, pp. 10, 18, and 28].

422
Maria Panteki
He next deﬁned “Inductive reasoning” and “Reasoning a fortiori”. The former
proves a universal proposition by separately proving each one of its particular
cases. For instance, a ﬁgure ABCD “is proved to be a rectangle by proving each
of its angles separately to be a right angle [p. 73]. The latter type, he held, was
contained in ﬁgure I, mood AAA, in a diﬀerent form:
A is greater than B (or the whole of B is contained in A),
B is greater than C (or the whole of C is contained in B),
(5.3.4)
a fortiori A is greater than C (therefore C is contained in A).
Could one indeed reduce all geometrical arguments to one of these types of syl-
logistic reasoning? As noted above, De Morgan was unaware of the controversy
concerning the reduction of relational forms, such as “is equal to” or “is greater
than”, which involved the transitivity of the copula, to syllogistic form. He con-
ﬁned himself to conﬁrming the alleged adequacy of traditional logic in treating
any valid, deductive type of reasoning, by claiming, that “The elements of geom-
etry present a collection of such reasoning as we have just described, though in a
more condensed form” [SDM, 73]. To support his claim, he picked up Pythagoras’
theorem as “a specimen of a geometrical proposition reduced nearly to a syllogis-
tic form” [ibid]. The reduction he furnished was evidently incomplete, involving
propositions such as “AB and BE are equal”, or “BG is equal to BC”, which were
not questioned as to their capacity to be reduced to the form “A is B”.106
Ironically enough, these incomplete reductions were left as exercises for the
student [pp.
73–75].
Nonetheless, De Morgan’s joint attention to Aristotelian
logic and Euclidean geometry was largely original, including an early perception
of what was to become the logic of relations a few decades later. For, as he wrote
[SDM, 76]:
the validity of an argument depends upon two distinct considerations,
–1 the truth of the relations assumed [...], –2 the manner in which
these facts are combined so as to produce new relations; in the last
the reasoning properly consists [...].
We are accustomed to talk of
mathematical reasoning as above all other, in point of accuracy and
soundness.
This, if by the term reasoning we mean the comparing
together of diﬀerent ideas and producing other ideas from the compar-
ison, is not correct, for in this view mathematical reasoning and all
other reasonings correspond exactly.
Once again, he stressed the deductive nature of geometrical reasoning in 1833,
noting that “we conﬁne the term logic to its strict meaning, not supposing it to
have any reference to the truth or falsehood of assertions themselves, but only to
106The full reduction of Pythagoras’ theorem to syllogistic form — an endeavour ﬁrst attributed
to Dasypodious and Herlinus — requires the full resource of ﬁrst-order predicate logic [Merrill
1990, chs. 1–2]. On the controversy between Reid and Hamilton over the transitivity of equality,
and De Morgan’s failure to cast this theorem in syllogistic form, see [ibid, 27–35].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
423
the circumstances under which two of them give us a right to deduce a third” [De
Morgan 1833b, 243]. Like its former part, [De Morgan 1833b] was in full accor-
dance with Lacroix’s hints, under the inﬂuence of the PRL. De Morgan noted that
special care could be taken in the use of the method of reductio ad absurdum, aware
of the fact that pupils had diﬃculties in discriminating between contradictory and
contrary propositions. Thus, he recommended a minimal use of this method, until
the students could understand this diﬀerence. Furthermore, students were encour-
aged to “retrace the steps” in certain propositions, so as to become accustomed to
“the analytical method, by which alone they can hope to succeed in the solution
of problems” [De Morgan 1833b, 251].
Although De Morgan [1833b] referred to his account of syllogistic logic in SDM,
he omitted any details, and in general, his earlier attempt to cast Euclidean ge-
ometry in syllogistic form never resurfaced in his subsequent writings on logic.
It is also worth noting that it was only in 1833 that he became aware of Euler’s
logical diagrams [De Morgan 1833b, 239; De Morgan 1847, 323–324]. In conclu-
sion, the message delivered in his article of 1833 was that logic was an important
prerequisite for the study of geometry [De Morgan 1833b, 238–239]:
The principles on which geometrical propositions are established be-
long to the totally distinct and equally simple science of logic; and since
geometry without logic would be absurd, it is desirable that the prin-
ciples of the latter science should be studied with precision previously
to employing them upon the former.
6
CAMBRIDGE CURRICULUM REVISITED, 1827–1835
6.1
Whewell’s counter-revolution, 1832
More than a decade of teaching had convinced [Whewell] that as a
young tutor he had taken too analytic an approach.
He began his
counter-revolution with the same weapon the analysts had used: the
textbook. Then he turned to writing pedagogical tracts.
[Becher 1980b, 25]
Soon after declaring to Herschel in 1818 that he “would not be surprised if in
a short time we were only to read a few propositions of Newton, as a matter
of curiosity” [Todhunter 1876 II, 30], Whewell set oﬀto update the teaching of
mechanics at Cambridge. Cautious in taking a middle course between synthetics
(Newton) and analytics (Laplace) in 1823, he encouraged his students to study
and simplify Laplace’s MC. Under his suggestions, Airy’s Tracts in 1826, an in-
termediary between Whewell’s elementary treatises and MC, fostered the theory
of the earth’s shape, to incorporate from 1831 the wave theory of light. By 1830,
Whewell’s article “On electricity” directed the attention of capable wranglers and
Tripos moderators to new topics, such as the theory of electricity, magnetism and
heat, branches related to his own study of Laplace’s coeﬃcients [§ 4.2–4.3]

424
Maria Panteki
Thus, largely due to Whewell’s own eﬀorts, the curriculum was enriched in 1830
with new physical subjects, a fact that met with his full approval. However, in
order to satisfy the demands of such an expansion, the Tripos was accordingly en-
riched with more questions on pure mathematics, including, for instance, deﬁnite
integrals, inﬁnite series and advanced algebra [Becher, 1980b, 23–24]. The curricu-
lum’s growth in the direction of analytics was inconsistent with Whewell’s views
of a liberal education. He reacted by revising his former treatises on mechanics in
1832. By arguing on the merits of Newton’s Principia, along with claiming that
the “admirable” treatises of Lagrange and Laplace were not suited for the “com-
mon” student, Whewell tried to persuade his audience that the ultimate scope of
the teaching of mechanics should be uniquely linked to the mastering of Newton’s
Principia. In full contrast with his initial declarations, Whewell now stimulated
his students towards an attempt “to simplify and explain the Third Book of the
Principia”, rather than the diﬃcult parts of MC.107
Whewell’s early oscillation between the treatises of Newton and Laplace did not
last long. In 1826, he discouraged Airy from including segments from MC in his
Tracts, and then onwards stood ﬁrm against any updating of the Tracts in this
respect [§4.2]. As it were, Whewell gradually developed an aversion for Laplace’s
potential theory, and in his own work on tides in the 1830s, for which he received
a Royal Medal in 1837, 108 he employed 18th century equilibrium theory, which
drew on geometrico-physical procedures. When Airy attacked him for deploying
old-fashioned methods, Whewell replied that Laplace’s analysis only leads to to
diﬀerential equations, “which we cannot integrate” [Becher 1980b, 24–26]. Thus,
if Laplace’s theory did not suit the purposes of Whewell’ s advanced physical
inquiries, how could it possibly suit those of a liberal, non-professional education?
The intricacy of Laplace’s analytical methods, however, formed only one reason
that accounted for Whewell’s predilection for Newton’s work. For all his initial
progressive attitude as a tutor and moderator in the 1820s, Whewell did his best
to ensure that pure mathematics were subordinate to applied by enriching the
Tripos with questions on mixed mathematics [§ 4.2].
However, in 1830 mixed
mathematics were prone to give way to pure, and this meant for Whewell fewer
chances to diﬀuse and practice his current views on education, as formulated over
the years in conjunction with his views on religion, morality and the philosophy
of science. His implicit retreat from MC in 1826, coincided with his intention to
deliver “grand lectures on the principles of induction in mixed mathematics” [Tod-
hunter 1876 II, 71–72], a plan that failed at the time [§3.2]. Inductive reasoning
for Whewell entailed a strong sense of morality, but such matters were disclosed
but to his intimate correspondents, like Richard Jones and the theologian Hugh
James Rose.109 As he wrote to the latter in 1826: “What I hold is that inductive
107See [Whewell 1832c, iv].
On Whewell’s treatises on mechanics, brieﬂy commented upon
below, see [Becher 1980b, 24–26], [Todhunter 1876 I, ch. 2] and [Yeo 1993, 93-99].
108On Whewell’s work on tides, see [Becher 1991, 13–15], [Todhunter 1876 I, ch. 6] and [Yeo
1993, 53–55].
109A close friend of Whewell, Hugh James Rose (1795–1838) was the Christian Advocate at
Cambridge; see [Corsi 1988, 28-30, 40–41] and [Todhunter 1876 I, xxii–xxiii].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
425
science is a good thing, and, as all truth is consistent with itself, I hold that if
inductive science be true it must harmonise with all the great truths of religion”
[ibid, 78].
From 1830 onwards, Whewell decided to progressively unravel his views on the
philosophy of science, stimulated by the Oxford–Cambridge debate on political
economy, and the books published by Herschel and Jones on related issues [§3.2].
He thus resumed his long-standing interest in the neglected virtues of induction,
and proceeded to present some of his views to the public. On a diﬀerent tone,
he included certain of them in the Prefaces to his revised treatises, namely his
First principles of mechanics [Whewell 1832a], Dynamics [Whewell 1832b] and
The free motion of points [Whewell 1832c].
Here, we draw on his Dynamics,
where Whewell argued upon the laborious but sure process of ascending from
observation to successive levels of abstraction and generalization in mechanics
through induction.
After noting that the laws of motion represented a luminous example of a perfect
mature science, he wrote [Whewell 1832b, x]:
We often feel disposed to believe that truths so clear and comprehen-
sive are necessary conditions, rather than empirical attributes, of their
subjects: that they are legible by their own axiomatic light, like the
ﬁrst truths of geometry, rather than discovered by the blind groping
of experience. And even when the experimental foundation of these
principles is allowed, there is still no curiosity about the details of the
induction by which they are established.
On the other hand, he claimed, the process of deduction “ﬁlls the mind at every
step with a conﬁdence of its workings, a consciousness of certainty”, so that men
feel no fascination in following the “more diﬃcult path” that leads to the ascent
of ﬁrst principles, i.e. that of induction [ibid, xi]. And he added that, by reason-
ing deductively there can be “no truth contained in the conclusion, which is not
involved in the premises: good logic is the one thing requisite; and no name can
convert bad logic into good, nor any authority add to the evidence of demonstrated
truth” [ibid, xvi].
In line with a passage quoted in §3.2 from his Astronomy, he deployed above
the term “logic” as synonymous for strict, deductive reasoning, the par excellence
characteristic of that entailed in mathematics, and geometry in particular.110 In
many respects, however, his statements on induction were cryptic or inconsistent
with those he adhered to from 1831 onwards, and would reveal in later works.
By emphasizing the diﬃculties involved in the inductive process of discovery, he
110According to [Becher 1980b, 24], geometry was the only form of pure mathematics that
Whewell “found aesthetically satisfying”; see also [Whewell 1837b]. On Whewell’s use of the
term “logic”, see fn. 98, and on his identiﬁcation of mathematics with deductive syllogistic logic,
see also §3.2 and fn. 52. We note that the tone deployed in his educational tract is milder than
that used in his ensuing Astronomy, “good logic” in the former being indeed “the one thing
requisite”.

426
Maria Panteki
implicitly alluded to a sense of morality, of which analytical methods were devoid
due to their mechanical nature. In his Astronomy [Whewell 1833, chs.5-6] he would
go as far compare the authorities of Newton and Laplace in terms of their religious
beliefs, which accounted largely for their distinct approach towards induction.
Issues concerning religious faith would not enter the discourse of his educational
textbooks. However, in his Thoughts he would establish more clearly the position
put forward in his treatises of 1832, by claiming that “A scheme of study, which
escapes or tries to escape the labor of thinking, will answer none the purposes at
which we ought to aim.”111
On the other hand, his ﬁrst pedagogical tract [§6.3] would incorporate in brief
the position according to which mechanics, unlike political economy, was a mature
science, which could be presented as a series of deductions from well-established
principles, similar to those of geometry, a position formulated clearly only in his
Mechanical Euclid [Whewell 1837b]. This opinion was largely inconsistent with the
viewpoint promoted in his treatises of 1832, that is that mechanics was an inductive
science, which had progressed by confronting a series of empirical problems.112
However, his predilection for Newton remained resolute ever since. He claimed
that the ﬁrst section of the Principia “is eminently instructive with reference to
the fundamental principles of the Diﬀerential Calculus” [Whewell 1832b, vii]. He
also held that “the geometrical method of treating the three bodies might have
had its triumphs to point to as well as the analytical” [Whewell 1832c, xii]. And
while in 1823, he had called the student’s attention to Woodhouse’s treatment of
the three-body problem [Whewell 1823, 75], in 1832 he declared that [Woodhouse
1818] (let alone MC) was no more a “convenient book” for the undergraduates
[Whewell 1832c, iv].
With the exception of Airy, Whewell’s followers encouraged his new attitude
towards the teaching of mechanics. In March 1832, his former student, the as-
tronomer J. W. Lubbock, praised his new textbooks, approving of his overall
approach. In fact, Lubbock argued, to Whewell’s satisfaction, that the true dis-
coverers of MC were Clairaut and D’Alembert, since Laplace “did little more”
than employ their methods by “taking in terms they omitted”.113 But Whewell’s
students would not share the same views. The ﬁrst evidence come in J. H. Pratt’s
Mechanical philosophy [Pratt 1836], a lucid account of the theories of attraction
and the earth’s shape, in line with Poisson’s modiﬁcation of Laplace’s potential
theory. The third wrangler in 1833, Pratt expressed the frustration of genera-
tions of wranglers, who had struggled hard to understand physical astronomy via
111See [Whewell 1835, 42]. On Whewell’s aversion to analytics, as a branch of mathematics
“insensible to moral evidence”, see [Ashworth 1996, 647]. Further on Whewell’s views on morality,
and Newton’s personality, see also [Becher 1991, 18] and [Rice 1996, 211–219]. On the delicate
links between science and religion and the hesitancy of Whewell and his circle to express such
views in public, see [Corsi 1988, 30, fn. 18].
112On Whewell’ s inconsistent views on the issue of induction and the philosophy of mechan-
ics, see [Corsi 1988, 153]. The only reader of Thoughts to notice Whewell’s advocation of the
axiomatic nature of mechanics was Hamilton [§6.3, fn. 131].
113See Lubbock’s letter to Whewell on 2.3.1832 [Whewell Papers, Add.Ms.a.208/85].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
427
Whewell’s and Airy’s textbooks. Without dismissing the pedagogical virtues of
geometry, Pratt criticized his tutors’ clumsy combination of analytics and geome-
try, claiming that “if our course is to be geometrical, let us adhere to geometry, if
analytical to analysis; if we are to admit both (the preferable course) let us keep
our systems apart; and not have our courses of reading confused, here analysis and
there geometry” [1836, iv].
Pratt’s treatise drew on Murphy’s Electricity [Murphy 1833], a work inspired by
[Whewell 1830].114 Robert Murphy, third wrangler in 1829, presented in his book
a strictly mathematical study of Laplace’s coeﬃcients, which attracted Pratt’s
attention. Despite its abstract and general style, reminiscent of that fostered by
the AS as well as anticipating the forthcoming revival of analytics in 1839 [Panteki
2000, 170–174], Murphy’s study was embraced by Whewell, upon the grounds
that the results could be experimentally conﬁrmed [Grattan-Guinness 1985, 106].
Pratt would not be the only Cambridge wrangler, though, to criticize Whewell’s
obsession with mixed mathematics, and his retreat from Laplace. A year prior
to the publication of Pratt’s book, De Morgan dared criticize the teaching of
mechanics at Cambridge, questioning within this context the utility of algebra
and logic [§6.2]. For De Morgan, it all boiled down to a sound knowledge of ﬁrst
principles. We might go as far as saying that Pratt’s intention of providing a new
treatise, which would lead the student “from elementary mechanical principles
to the demonstration of celestial phenomena” [Pratt 1836, v], was akin to De
Morgan’s unﬁnished project of 1827 [§4.3].
6.2
De Morgan’s critical reviews, 1832–1835
We have thus given an abstract of the history and methods of the most
celebrated school of instruction for engineers which have ever existed.
Such an institution is the thing most wanted in this country.
[De Morgan 1831c, 73]
If Newton had not had the resources of a college fellowship or profes-
sorship, we might never have seen the Principia; and the same might
and still may be said of many others.
[De Morgan 1832d, 208]
As a student at Cambridge, De Morgan often deviated from the bounds marked
by his teachers. The best proof of his astonishing mathematical erudition is his
manuscript on “Statics” in 1827, which drew on English and French texts, hardly
recommended to him by his tutors [§ 4.3]. His inaugural lecture at London Univer-
sity, manifested his acquaintance with the history of mathematical education [§1.2,
§5.1], while his ensuing writings revealed his immense debt to famous pedagogues
and teachers, like Condillac, Lacroix and Laplace. We recall also the impact of
Laplace’s lectures upon his remarks concerning the instruction of algebra in SDM,
a book that imitated the structure and content of Lacroix’s Essais [§5]. Here we
114On Whewell’s article, see references in fn. 80. On Murphy and Pratt, see [Allaire 2002,
418–422], [Grattan-Guinness 1985], [Panteki 1992, sects. 3.2–3.3] and [Smith 1984a].

428
Maria Panteki
call attention to his reviews of foreign and English systems of education, in which
he lamented the latter’s lack of professionalization. Our introductory quotes ex-
emplify his attack on the English tradition of liberal education; the former is from
his article on the Ecole Polytechnique (EP), 115 and the latter from the epilogue
to his paper on the “State of the mathematical and physical sciences in the Uni-
versity of Oxford”, which incorporated his ﬁrst comparative study of Oxford and
Cambridge.
De Morgan’s tendency to investigate and compare various educational methods
may have stemmed from his study of Lacroix’s Essais, or was at least reinforced by
it. Indeed, Lacroix had provided an extensive critical survey of the major educa-
tional institutions which had ﬂourished in his country since 1789, revealing his rich
administrative and teaching experience; he even referred to the newly established
methods for the education of the deaf and dumb, a revolutionary accomplishment
of the French Enlightenment [Lacroix 1828, 27–36, 56–60]. This issue inspired De
Morgan’s article on the “Methods employed for the instruction of the deaf and
the dumb” [De Morgan 1832c], holding that their language “is as strict as any
in geometry” and should thus be considered useful for the instruction of those
who can hear and speak [ibid, 203, 217]. Manifesting his debt to French semiotic
philosophy, he cited it for “the student of mathematical symbols” in [De Morgan
1836, 313, fn. ].
However, the template for mathematical education would still be that promoted
at Cambridge, despite its ﬂaws. De Morgan was above all a Cambridge wrangler,
and during the period of his resignation from London University, he was like a
“satellite” of Cambridge University.116 He was very attentive to any new publi-
cations or changes in the curriculum, furnishing reviews of the ninth edition of
James Wood’s Algebra (originally published in 1795) [De Morgan 1832b] and Pea-
cock’s Algebra [De Morgan 1835a]. As we saw in §4.0, in the former he pointed
out the freedom enjoyed by Tripos moderators in establishing a potential reform
in the curriculum, considering that freedom as one of the most basic advantages of
Cambridge’s system. Within this context, he alluded to Peacock’s reforms, eager
to stress that their result was not the mere replacement of the ﬂuxional notation
by the diﬀerential one: “The question was one of greater importance than appears
at ﬁrst sight, since on the way of settling it, it depended the introduction or non-
introduction of the writings of the French and other continental mathematicians”
[De Morgan 1832b, 276]. He further contemplated the issue of notation in his
article “On the notation of the diﬀerential calculus adopted in some works lately
published at Cambridge” [De Morgan 1834], indicative of his close contact with
the events taking place at Cambridge.117
In his review of Wood’s book, De Morgan raised only the positive aspects of
115In his article, [De Morgan 1831c], De Morgan delved into a study of the administrative and
educational policies of the EP [Rice 1996, 205].
116See also fn. 83.
117In that paper, De Morgan made certain rather eccentric statements concerning the issue of
notation, which foreshadowed his attitude in 1835. See particularly [De Morgan 1834, 109]. This
article is highly representative of his historical orientation.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
429
Cambridge’s system, becoming bolder in his attack against its defects three years
later. However, a middle course was taken in his article on Oxford University, in
which he exerted a mild critique on Whewell’s treatises on mechanics, a unique
instance of a direct reference to his tutor. He criticized “the Oxford market of
academical distinctions” noting that, contrary to those of Cambridge, Oxford ex-
aminers were deprived of the liberty of “representing correctly the various grades
of merit, which are found among the candidates of each year” [De Morgan 1832d,
196]. Another issue at stake was the study of Newton’s Principia, “one of the
books which the aspirant for mathematical honours is expected to have studied”
[p. 205]. As “it is now universally confessed”, held De Morgan, modern meth-
ods “are of superior power”, noting that there is much in Newton’s work, “with
which it would be useless for the student to meddle” [ibid]. This last comment
was opposed to Whewell’s views of 1832.
Indeed, while Whewell had claimed that the ﬁrst section of the Principia was
“eminently instructive with reference” to the calculus [Whewell 1832b, vii], De
Morgan held that “The Oxford examination comprises only of the three ﬁrst sec-
tions, which is, perhaps, to be regretted, since those sections do not contain by
any means the most curious or improving part of the work” [De Morgan 1832d,
205]. De Morgan had produced by that time an elementary Calculus [De Mor-
gan 1832a], as preparatory for the student’s initiation to mechanics.118 However,
cautious not to undermine his tutor’s treatise, he praised [Whewell 1832b] not-
ing that “The most remarkable propositions are introduced, solved according to
Newton’s method, in their proper places, after the analytical solutions of the same
questions” [p. 205].
A third issue deserving attention was the inadequate study of logic at Oxford.
De Morgan lamented the fact that “The public examiners have recommended that
logic be not absolutely required for the candidates for mathematical honours”,
adding after Whately: “we cannot see why the theoretical part of a useful science
would not be required for those, of whom it must be supposed, that they are
better versed in the practical application than their fellows” [De Morgan 1832d,
194]. Still, Oxford’s system had at least one merit in comparison with Cambridge’s
own according to [De Morgan 1833b, 251]:
Our readers will see that we have throughout advocated the union of
the forms of logic with the reasoning of geometry. We are convinced
that it would be advantageous to make the former science systemati-
cally a part of education. If we except Oxford, there is no place in this
country where it is still retained; and unfortunately for the study, it is
there more an act of memory about things called moods and ﬁgures,
than an exercise of reasoning.
118In line with his tract on “Statics” [§4.3], De Morgan’s textbook, reprinted successfully in USA
in 1943, included portions from the calculus of functions, and several examples which illustrated
the useful applications of the calculus to mechanics and astronomy [De Morgan l832a, 15, 52–65,
74–77, 96–102].

430
Maria Panteki
De Morgan tried to be objective in his views concerning the educational system
at Cambridge. As he wrote in his review of Peacock’s Algebra [De Morgan 1835a,
300]:
we believe that there is no place of education in the world where the
system is carried so far as at Cambridge, and certainly no place where
original eﬀort is so much the character of education. A better system
of mental training for those, who can bear it cannot be, in our opinion:
that a better plan of making the most of the average student might
easily be superadded to it, we have no doubt.
The review was published in two parts in January [pp. 91–110] and April [pp. 293–
311] respectively. In the ﬁrst part, he introduced the reader to the peculiarities and
utility of algebraic reasoning, commenting upon the instruction of the calculus,
mechanics, algebra and logic in connection with the curriculum at Cambridge
University. In the second part, he discussed the book under review, for the ﬁrst
time revealing his opinion concerning higher algebra. Here we consider the review
exclusively in relation to his defense of both algebra and logic as basic components
of a liberal education, and thereby as a potential means towards achieving an
educational reform by inﬂuencing Cambridge moderators.119
Contrary to Whewell, De Morgan viewed students as potential mathematicians,
who should acquire a proper method, regardless of its plausible utility in physical
applications.
For, as he argued alluding to the student: “If he ever wishes to
become a mathematician, he must not reject absolutely any proposition because he
does not understand it” [p. 95]. Moreover, recommending the perusal of Peacock’s
diﬃcult work, he wrote [pp. 293-294]:
If there be a person who cares little for the application of the pure
sciences, and much for their methods, he will consider the introduction
alluded to as materially increasing their value; if there be another who
treats mathematics only as a proper instrument for obtaining and ex-
pressing physical truths, he will care but little for it. As a matter of
education, we view mathematics almost entirely in the ﬁrst-mentioned
light.
Interestingly enough, De Morgan’s discourse was distinctly imbued by his pref-
erence of Laplace over Newton in the teaching of mechanics. Indeed, he estab-
lished links between Laplace’s MC, algebra and logic, three subjects at odds with
Whewell’s educational views. It is of value to follow the reasoning, through which
he implicitly attacked Whewell’s views on mechanics. Alluding to “the greater
part of our elementary treatises” [pp. 97–98], he wrote:
119This standpoint is new in this survey, accounting for the tone and scope of Whewell’s
Thoughts, which was published a few months later [§1.2, §6.3]. Historians have so far regarded
[De Morgan 1835a] as representative of his new views on algebra and as a critique of Peacock’s
epistemology; see [Pycior 1983], [Richards 1980] and [Richards 1987]. We wish to add another
perspective through which the review might be studied, namely as a motivation towards the
composition of his COF in 1836; see [Panteki 1992, ch. 3].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
431
we consider them as good for the instances they give, and no more;
we have never seen independent power obtained by means of them.
That which the student afterwards acquires he has to labour afresh;
he struggles with an algebraical principle while he is already deep into
the Diﬀerential Calculus, and gets his ﬁrst ideas of a common process
of numbers out of his treatises on mechanics.
In other words, algebra was seen as an indispensable prerequisite for the study of
the calculus, and of Laplace’s celestial mechanics. For, it was algebraic principles,
not rules, that were needed in order for the student to delve deep into current
mechanics. If we take, he wrote, “the whole M´ecanique C´eleste from one end to
the other”, we notice that while “numerical solution” of equations occurs in few
instances only, “many simple principles, not mentioned in our books, are to be
applied in almost every page of the work mentioned” [p. l02]. This argument
strengthened De Morgan’s recommendation of Peacock’s Algebra, who noted that
works such as this, “independently of any other merits”, show “what is actually
taking place in the world of science, and not new editions of works which have
previously appeared on the matters of which they speak” [ibid].
Prior to stressing the educational utility of logic, De Morgan pictured the stu-
dent confronted with the need to choose between the authority of Laplace and that
of his tutor. He solved the dilemma by arguing that “the pupil will do wisely to
prefer the former”, that is “the greater authority”, for: “he may depend upon it,
in nine cases out of ten at least, that those who have most reputation* among the
learned are the best guides to those who have not knowledge to judge for them-
selves” [p. 94]. The asterisk appended a footnote, where he explained that “We
must not be supposed to mean the popular estimate of scientiﬁc character. The
Newton of the world at large is not the Newton of the philosophers” [ibid].
De Morgan proceeded by arguing that a student will never reason correctly
without “the power of rejecting what he thinks wrong” [p.
95], and the basic
principles of logic are absolutely essential in helping him to achieve this.
To
clarify his point, he assumed the case of demonstration: “A is B, B is C, C is
D; therefore A is D”. If the student is not able to immediately see whether “A is
B”, he should nevertheless not reject this proposition, but say instead: “If A is B,
A is D”. Accordingly [p. 95]:
His reasoning will [...]
be perfectly correct: for he must remember
that reasoning is not the aﬃrmation or negation of propositions, but
the right deduction of them from one another; and that though the
certainty of mathematical conclusions depends upon that of the fun-
damental propositions, the correctness of mathematical reasoning has
nothing whatever to do with that circumstance.
This distinction between the form and matter of mathematical reasoning stemmed
from his early inquiries into the instruction of geometry. Moreover, as he had
stressed in 1831, reasoning was hardly peculiar to geometry, but present in alge-
bra as well [§5.2]. Realizing the intricacies involved in Laplace’s techniques, an

432
Maria Panteki
author notorious for omitting details of his mathematical procedures, De Morgan
mentioned the import of logic straight after his appraisal of MC, so as to rein-
force the student’s conﬁdence if he ever decided to delve into it. Further, echoing
Kirwan [§3.1], and anticipating Hamilton’s review of 1836 [§6.3], he claimed:
The art of reasoning is exercised by mathematics, not taught by it. On
the contrary there are principles of other branches of reasoning, which
are not employed in most branches of mathematics.120
Towards the end of his review, he wrote: “We should very much like to add
logic in its most exact form; an easier science than algebra, and which, come by
how he may, the student must have in one sense, before he can ever become a
mathematician” [pp. 293, 311].
Having been aware of Peacock’s treatise since 1832, De Morgan felt induced
to furnish excuses for delaying the writing of his review. Firstly, he admitted his
neglect of the “higher parts” of algebra, partly “on account of the very great extent
and importance of the subject and partly “because it is extremely diﬃcult to draw
the line which separates the elements from the higher parts” [De Morgan 1835a,
91]. Finally, he acknowledged “the very great diﬃculty of forming opinions upon
views so new and so extensive” [p. 311]. Indeed, until then he had been occupied
only with elementary algebra, providing his students in 1828 with a translation of
L. P. M. Bourdon’s Algebra [Rice 1996, 86–87; Richards 1987, 12–13]. Drawing
next on Laplace, he presented the rudiments for the teaching of elementary algebra
in his SDM, and made note of Peacock’s book in his review of Wood’s textbook.
There, confronted with Wood’s non-rigorous presentation of Newton’s binomial
formula, he wrote: “The author seems to think he is bound to give either a proof,
or something that looks like one. We hold that the less that, which is not a proof,
is made to look like one, the better” [De Morgan 1832b, 283]. However, despite
the weaknesses of Wood’s work, he embraced it, suggesting that the “union” of
Wood’s and Peacock’s textbooks “with some parts of Bourdon’s Algebra” would
comprise “all that need to be read on this subject by any student” [ibid, 277–278].
Apparently, the publication of Peacock’s “Report on the recent progress of anal-
ysis” [Peacock 1834] induced De Morgan to re-examine the epistemological frame-
work of his Algebra [Peacock 1830]. The “Report” was devoted to an account of
the many useful applications of algebraic principles in the ﬁeld of analysis, includ-
ing a more detailed elaboration than in Algebra on the epistemological foundation
of these principles. As it were, Peacock’s “Report”, cited in De Morgan’s review,
allowed the latter to overcome his hesitancy in forming opinions “upon views so
new and so extensive”.121
It might have also been Peacock’s “Report”, which
120This quote is from his elementary textbook on algebra [De Morgan 1835b, 198], discussed in
[Pycior 1982, 399–402] and [Richards 1980, 354–357].
121See De Morgan’s appeal to Peacock’s “Report” in a passage quoted above in text, in con-
nection with the utility of advanced algebra in the study of Laplace’s MC [De Morgan 1835a,
102]. In his “Report” [pp. 188-194], Peacock covered the history of algebra from Vieta up to
Cauchy; he did not treat the calculi of operations and functions as algebras, thereby omitting

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
433
urged Whewell to investigate the nature of algebraic principles in a manuscript
book he composed on “The philosophy of the pure sciences” in 1834.122 Although
aware of his colleague’s textbook, Whewell had carefully avoided expressing any
opinion for or against it. Given his current interest in the subject, it is possible
that he read De Morgan’s review in the spring of 1835, and realized that his re-
vised textbooks on mechanics were no longer a suﬃcient weapon for defending his
educational views. Were moderators to follow up De Morgan’s suggestions, then
certainly Whewell’s plans would be under severe threat, and Newton, in particular,
would be subordinate to the authority of Laplace.
6.3
Reactions and consequences
To cultivate logic as an art [...] appears to resemble learning horse-
manship by book.
[Whewell 1835, 6]
It is a great mistake to suppose geometry any substitute for logic.
[Hamilton 1836a, 427]
For Lacroix, the elements of geometry ideally reﬂected those of logic, and thus
“would perhaps be the only ones that it would be necessary to study” [Lacroix
1828, 305]. By adding that “In order to win a race it is better to exercise the legs
than to reason on the mechanism of walking” [ibid], he actually held that for edu-
cational purposes geometry was superior to logic, since the latter’s rules were of no
practical value [§2.2]. According to Kirwan and Whately, however, logic could be
of great value in diverse scientiﬁc pursuits. Kirwan, in particular, perceived that,
though hardly devoid of fallacies itself, logic could serve in detecting the “errors”
frequently committed by mathematicians, especially within algebra [Kirwan 1807,
iii–v]. Overshadowed by Whately’s systematic presentation of traditional logic,
Kirwan’s pioneering account was largely neglected by British mathematicians and
logicians, including De Morgan.123 However, his associations between mathematics
and logic largely anticipated De Morgan’s arguments in favor of logic’s educational
import.
Lacroix’s Essais in conjunction with Whately’s Elements formed the starting
point for De Morgan’s early educational and logical inquiries. The latter oﬀered
him the rudiments of Aristotelian syllogistic logic along with a lucid account on
fallacies, while Lacroix’s near identiﬁcation of geometry with logic induced De Mor-
gan to explore the possibility of rendering geometry in syllogistic form. Notwith-
any reference to Babbage and Herschel. Evidently linked to his indiﬀerence for analytics fostered
by the latter [§4.1], this omission would not escape De Morgan’s attention see [De Morgan 1840]
and [Durand 1990, 140].
122On Whewell’s manuscript of 1834, see [Fisch 1994, 270–275] and [Fisch 1999, 166, fn. 3].
Part of that manuscript would be published in Whewell’s Philosophy in 1840.
123Hamilton formed a unique exception (see §3.2 and [Hamilton 1836a, 440, 452]). Strangely
enough, De Morgan never referred to Kirwan in his writings, although his papers “On the syllo-
gism” manifested his deep erudition in the history of logic.

434
Maria Panteki
standing the diﬃculties entailed in this endeavor, De Morgan realized the immense
utility of logic within and beyond the boundaries of geometry. For, as he wrote in
his article on geometry: “We have said nothing of the other advantages of logic,
as they have no relation to the subject of the article” [De Morgan 1833b, 251].
Indeed, two years later, logic would be strongly recommended as a prerequisite
for the study of algebra and mathematics at large. For, the reasoning entailed
in all mathematical sciences, celestial mechanics included, rested upon a sound
knowledge of ﬁrst principles, which in turn were rooted in deductive logic. Hence
he asked moderators to seriously consider the necessity of both algebra and logic
forming part of Cambridge’s liberal education. A few months later, the same mod-
erators were confronted with the exact opposite request via Whewell’s Thoughts,
that is to consider logic’s and algebra’s inutility within the context of a liberal
education. Whewell’ s rejection of logic challenged Hamilton’s polemic review of
Thoughts, and a short-lived controversy broke out between the two men. According
to historians, the Whewell–Hamilton debate over the educational and epistemolog-
ical status of logic was not without consequences for the development of algebraic
logic, but none has accounted so far for Whewell’s particular arguments against
logic in the context of a hastily written tract like the Thoughts. What we question
here is whether Whewell’s tract was meant as a reaction to De Morgan’s review
of Peacock’s Algebra. However, before we deal with this question, let us provide
the chronicle of the Whewell–Hamilton debate.
A month after the second part of De Morgan’s review appeared in April 1835,
Whewell announced to Jones his plan of composing Thoughts, cautious, however,
about disclosing him the true purpose of his tract.124 Completed by September
of the same year, Whewell’s 40-page booklet was published in November 1835
and was then sent to his friends, who embraced it with approval.125 In its open-
ing, Whewell entered into a comparative study between mathematical and logical
reasoning, which ended with arguments on the superiority of mathematics over
logic [Whewell 1835, 5–8]. According to Hamilton the comparison was ground-
less and its conclusion was in full opposition to his long-standing views on the
import of logic. His response, which was nearly double the length of Thoughts,
was published in the Edinburgh Review in January 1836 [Hamilton 1836a].
In
an authoritative style, Hamilton refuted Whewell’s views, arguing about all the
dangers entailed in any study of mathematics that excluded that of philosophy
and logic. For Hamilton, the two disciplines of mathematics and logic oﬀered no
possibility for comparison, and hence no scope of mutual relation [ibid, 423]. As
124See Whewell’s letter to Jones on 26.5.1835 [Whewell Papers, Add.Ms.c.51/183]. Whewell
brieﬂy informed his friend that the pamphlet would be based “on the principles of the true
philosophy without my telling people more of them than is requisite to be told for the purpose”
[ibid]. See also fn. 131.
125See Jones’ letter to Whewell on 11.11.1835 [Whewell Papers, Add.Ms.c.52/64] and Holland’s
letter on 29.2.1836 [Whewell Papers, Add. Ms.a.203/31]. Henry Holland (1788–1873) was an
eminent physician, glad to have obtained the second edition of Whewell’s Thoughts. We wish to
stress that contrary to his long-standing habit, Whewell had carefully avoided to communicate
portions of his tract to his friends prior to its publication.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
435
it were, he expressed a premonition of a potential union eﬀected between the two
disciplines, a union visible in De Morgan’s SDM, and one to be consolidated ﬁrmly
in the near future. Whewell replied to Hamilton’s accusations by sending a letter
to the Editor of the Edinburgh Review on 23 January 1836 [Whewell 1836a], which
was published together with Hamilton’s reply to it [Hamilton 1836b]. The debate
culminated with Whewell’s second pedagogical tract On the principles of English
University Education [Whewell 1837c]. Appending both his Thoughts and Hamil-
ton’s aggressive letter to the end of his Principles, Whewell commented upon the
latter, pronouncing himself “freed from any obligation to continue the controversy”
[Whewell 1837c, 2–3], and the whole issue was not pursued any further.126
As is known, the Whewell–Hamilton debate stimulated Boole’s algebraization
of logic.127 It reﬂected the long-standing antithesis between Cambridge and Ox-
ford, engaging “a competition between mathematics and logic around the issue of
which could, and should, structure knowledge” [Durand 1966, 446; Durand 2000,
139, 143–152]. However, no commentator has accounted for Whewell’s initiative
to open his discourse by comparing mathematics to logic.128 Moreover, no one
has noticed that almost a decade before Boole’s mathematization of logic, a new
Syllabus of logic saw the light of publication, a work evidently inﬂuenced by the
Whewell-Hamilton debate and one to anticipate Boole’s pioneering contributions.
We are referring to [Solly 1839], a book adorned with a passage from Whewell’s
Principles, devoted ironically enough to the unhappy consequences of a speaker’s
wrongful use of logic.129 Solly’s book remained neglected until 1847, and came
too late to inﬂuence the development of algebraic logic [Panteki 1993]. However,
notwithstanding the absence of Solly’s impact, or the degree of his debt to the
Whewell-Hamilton debate, we note that the debate might never have taken place
had it not been for Whewell’ s endeavor to begin his account by comparing the
two disciplines. Let us now seek the reasons that led to the writing of Whewell’ s
pamphlet. First we will provide a list of De Morgan’s educational views and rec-
ommendations that might have challenged Whewell’s project, and will then raise
Whewell’s counter-arguments. Drawing on De Morgan’s writings up to 1835, 130
126Whewell commented upon Hamilton’s letter in the ﬁfth edition of his Elementary mechanics
[Whewell 1836b, vi–ix], but his full-length reply to the dispute was the Principles; see also fn.
134.
127Hamilton’s review of the Thoughts formed one of the motivations for Boole’s Mathematical
analysis of logic in 1847, as argued in [Laita 1979]. According to [Durand 1996, 470–473; Durand
2000, 159–162], Boole’s mature Laws of thought in 1854 was also plausibly imbued with Whewell’s
philosophy of science. In general, Whewell’s philosophical speculations became widely known
after his debate with Hamilton, bearing considerable impact upon his contemporaries, including
Charles Peirce; see [Agassi 1991, 355, 365; Becher 1991, 16; Fisch 1994, 253, fn.]
128According to [Yeo 1993, 218] Whewell’s argument “was not with logic but with recent views
on mathematics teaching”. But can we diﬀerentiate “logic” from “the recent views on mathe-
matical teaching” in 1835?
129The passage runs as follows: “A single fault of logic may shew that the speaker has no
distinct apprehension of the force of demonstration; and when this judgement is formed of him,
he immediately appears to sink below the standard point of cultivation and connexion of thought”
[Whewell 1837c, 19].
130The background discussion of these topics lies in §4.0, §4.3, §5 and §6.2.

436
Maria Panteki
we distinguish the following:
1. His elaborate defense of mathematics against common charges.
2. A genuine concern for elementary mathematics (arithmetic, geometry, alge-
bra, trigonometry and the calculus) and accordingly an empirical approach
in the early stage of their instruction.
3. His attention to fallacies and his arguments on the insuﬃciency of geometry
in teaching the principles of sound reasoning to students. Hence his plea for
logic as a prerequisite to the study of geometry.
4. The recommendation of Lacroix’s Essais and Whately’s Elements to both
students and instructors.
5. His critical approach to English liberal education and his comparative study
of the systems followed at Oxford and Cambridge.
6. His attribution to algebra of a degree of reasoning equivalent to that tradi-
tionally entailed in geometry. Moreover, his serious consideration of algebra
as an indispensable prerequisite to the study of the calculus and mechanics.
7. His predilection for Laplace over Newton in celestial mechanics, and his
admiration for French institutions, such as the Ecole Normale and the Ecole
Polytechnique.
8. Last, but not least, we note his acknowledgment of the authority possessed
by Cambridge moderators, and his direct appeal to them in 1835 in an
attempt to inﬂuence the shaping of the University’s curriculum to meet with
his educational standpoint.
Whewell’s Thoughts relates to these points thus:
1′ Whewell held that mathematics was viewed either as “a most admirable
mental discipline” or as a habit of thought that makes the mind “captious,
disputatious, over subtle, over rigid” [p. 3], considering it rather “obvious”
that in his discourse it was to be viewed “as an example and exercise of exact
reasoning” [p. 4]. Moreover, at the end he claimed that his purpose had been
to speak “of the study of mathematics as a logical and philosophical discipline
of the mind” [p. 45]. However, his arguments in defense of this view hardly
covered one page of his tract (see point 3′). So when accused by Hamilton
for being inconsistent with his statements, he replied that the main scope
his book was to contemplate only “what kind of mathematics is the most
beneﬁcial part of a liberal education” [Whewell 1836a, 271]. Thus, in a work
devoid of any reference to the history of mathematical instruction, Whewell
accomplished his task in a rather unorthodox way; that is, by dismissing
in turn the teaching of mathematics based (a) on arbitrary deﬁnitions [pp.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
437
11–31], (b) on experience [pp. 32–35] and (c) on general procedures [pp.
35–39]. As it were, points (a) and (c) constituted the basis of algebra, and
analytics at large.
2′ With the exception of geometry [pp. 11–16] and instances from the calculus
[pp. 16–18], elementary mathematics had no place in Whewell’s discourse.
Moreover, Whewell was concerned with issues of instruction only when re-
lated to purely physical notions (see point 6′). In the context of issue (b)
above, he dismissed the empirical approach in education and hinted at his
position on the philosophy of mechanics, which should be regarded in line
with geometry, as an axiomatically grounded science [p 33–35],131 — a strong
indication of his overall indiﬀerence for the instruction of elementary math-
ematics. What mattered to him was mechanics, and to this end the only
required branches of mathematics were those deployed in Newton’s Prin-
cipia.
3′ According to Whewell, a student of mathematics, compelled to ﬁx his at-
tention on the conditions upon which demonstration depends, is presented
with “the most natural fallacies, which he sees exposed and corrected” [p. 6].
Moreover, he becomes accustomed to long chains of deduction and the “usual
forms of inference”, thus learning continuity of attention and coherency of
thought.
Aware that “all depends upon his ﬁrst principles”, the student
“ﬂows inevitably from them”, certain of the “necessity and constant identity
of the conclusion legitimately deduced from them” [p. 7]. These arguments
constituted his sole vindication of mathematical studies against common
charges. At the same time, these advantages were juxtaposed with the prop-
erties of pure logical reasoning, in order to prove geometry’s superiority in
teaching accurate reasoning. As he claimed, logic does not familiarize us
with “trains of strict reasoning”, since it regards special deductions “only as
examples of forms of arguments”; and if a fallacy exists, the student is pro-
vided with rules “by which it may be condemned and made more glaringly
wrong” [p. 7]. Thus mathematics (always conceived as geometry) enables
one to form “logical habits better than logic itself” [pp. 7–8].
4′ As Hamilton observed [Hamilton 1836a, 412], Whewell did not refer to any
authority in order to sustain his arguments.
However, Whewell was well
131Accepting more or less Whewell’s points (a) and (c), Hamilton raised six distinct objections
against Whewell’s philosophical approach as regards issue (b) (Hamilton 1836a, 414, 416–417].
He repeated his arguments in his “Notes” [Hamilton 1836b, 274], to which Whewell alluded to
in [Whewell 1836b, viii]. Consequently, Whewell exposed his views on the axiomatic nature of
mechanics in the “Remarks on mathematical reasoning and on the logic of induction”, appended
to his [Whewell 1837b, 143–182]. From Jones’ reaction to Whewell’s “Remarks” (see Jones’ letter
to Whewell on 13.5.1837 [Whewell Papers, Add.Ms. c.52/69] where he called Whewell’s Euclid a
“pocket-pistol”), it becomes crystal clear that Whewell had feared this reaction since May 1835,
and had been cryptic all along about issue (b), and also that Jones had overlooked this issue
when going through his friend’s pamphlet after its publication.

438
Maria Panteki
acquainted with Lacroix’s Essais, 132 upon which he apparently drew. Note,
for example, the similarity between Lacroix’s metaphor on running and
Whewell’s on horse-riding, deployed with the purpose of proving the inu-
tility of logic’s rules [p. 6]:
For reasoning — a practical process — must, I think, be taught by
practice better than by precept, in the same manner as fencing or
riding [...]. It is desirable, not so much to deﬁne good arguments,
as to feel their force; not so much to classify fallacies as to shun
them; just as the horseman tries to obtain a good seat rather than
to describe one, and rather avoids falling than consider in how
many ways — he may fall.
In this way, Whewell ridiculed the educational utility of logic, along with
refuting the opinion according to which logic was considered necessary for
the proper study of geometry. And such an opinion was but peculiar to De
Morgan’s early writings.
5′ As the title of his tract shows, Thoughts on the study of mathematics as a
part of a liberal education, Whewell took for granted the traditional system
of education at Cambridge. In full accordance to it, he viewed students as
future “lawyers, or men of business, or statesmen” [p. 40], contrary to De
Morgan’s consideration of them as potential mathematicians [§6.2]. In the
opening pages of his tract, he appeared eager to enter into a critical overview
of the prevailing systems of English liberal education. Indeed, by posing the
question “what is the best instrument for educating men in reasoning?” [p.
5], he alluded to Cambridge and Oxford University respectively by claiming
[ibid]:
There are two principal means, which have been used for this pur-
pose in our Universities; the study of Mathematics and the study
of Logic. These may be considered respectively as the teaching of
reasoning by practice and by rule.
Upon these grounds, he was quick to reject the teaching “of reasoning by
rule” [points 3′–4′], and proceeded with still more rejections in connection
with the teaching of mathematics [see point l′ and points 6′–7′ below].
Noting also the Cambridge-Oxford controversy [§3.2], could we infer from
points 3′–5′ that what Whewell had meant to do was to downgrade the whole
132As mentioned in fn. 23, Whewell had been aware of Lacroix’s Essais at least since February
1821. It is quite possible that he recommended it to De Morgan, but this is a purely tentative
assumption. Interestingly enough, when attacked by Hamilton for lack of historical erudition on
mathematical education [Hamilton 1836a, 412], Whewell asked him to propose titles of works
on logic, which could serve as “rival instruments of education” to mathematics [Whewell 1836a,
271–272].
Hamilton found Whewell’s request “misplaced” and declined to provide him with
related bibliography [Hamilton 1836b, 274].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
439
educational system at Oxford University? Neither the rest of the tract, nor
his correspondence at the time (including that with Hamilton) exhibits such
an interpretation. His rejection of logic as a plausible candidate for entering
the curriculum can be accounted for only as a reaction against De Morgan’s
plea in 1835. In fact, Whewell’s ultimate aim was to persuade moderators
about the utmost importance of mixed mathematics in a liberal education
[points 6′, 8′], and the ways he invented to sustain this view appear less
arbitrary and incomprehensible if seen in opposition to the structure and
content of De Morgan’s review.
The message delivered in the latter was
closely linked with De Morgan’s vision; a sound foundation in the principles
of pure mathematics, which would ideally aﬀord the student’s initiation into
Laplace’s most wanted work on celestial mechanics. And to this end, logic
was an indispensable tool. However tentative, this standpoint illuminates a
major part of Whewell’ s Thoughts, in which the author had to refute each
one of De Morgan’s arguments in order to achieve his goal.
Whewell’s pamphlet may be viewed additionally as a vehicle of his current
philosophical position on the axiomatic nature of mechanics, as hinted at
in the context of issue (b), the main novelty of his pamphlet (point 2′).
In fact, his attention to logic seems hardly irrelevant to this latter goal if
examined under the light of his Euclid [Whewell 1837b].133 Still, it is hard
to discern whether Thoughts had been intended as a predecessor of Euclid,
or if it served a posteriori to sustain the philosophical position in the latter
work. But we hold that De Morgan’s review oﬀered at least the incentive
for his sudden plan of May 1835, and in particular the inspiration for the
arguments exposed in points 3′–5′.
6′ Contrary to De Morgan, for Whewell algebraic and symbolical methods af-
forded no scope for the exercise of the faculty of reasoning, since a student
trained in viewing problems in an algebraic manner would miss the whole
point of comprehending physical notions. Indeed, as he claimed in the con-
text of point (a) against arbitrary deﬁnitions, by viewing physical notions in
an algebraic way “it will be no wonder if his notions always remain mere alge-
braical abstractions, without mechanical value or meaning” [p. 26]. Further-
more, algebra was rejected within the context of point (c), as representing
a general mathematical method [point 7′]. Lastly, by addressing moderators
he wrote [p. 44]:
133No matter what might have been Whewell’s initial motivation to open his Thoughts with
a comparative study between mathematics and logic, this study was far from accidental or
trivial. Whewell’s publications in 1837 prove that his views concerning the comparison of the
two disciplines were further consolidated after his short-lived debate with Hamilton. Best proof
for our claim is found in the “Remarks” appended to his Euclid (fn.
131), where Whewell
repeated the same arguments in favour of mathematics in a more sophisticated tone, in order
to proceed from an opposition between logic with geometry to his ultimate comparison between
geometry and mechanics, which culminated with his novel theory on the “Logic of Induction”.
On the latter, we refer the reader to [Fisch 1991, 57; Richards 1980; Richards 1988, 20–27;
Todhunter 1876 I, chs. 7–10 and Yeo 1993, 160].

440
Maria Panteki
[. . . ] let a knowledge of some portions of Mechanics and Hydro-
statics be introduced among the requisites for a degree; and if
necessary let the knowledge of Algebra be required no longer, for
I can hardly believe that this part of our mathematical teaching
is of much value in any point of view,
further arguing that the most “instructive”, “simple” and “philosophical”
branches of mathematics after plane geometry, were mechanics and hydro-
statics [p. 45].
Later evidence can account for his utter rejection of algebra as an impulsive
reaction to the potential threat stemming from De Morgan’s review. For,
happy to note in 1837 that his request for mechanics and hydrostatics had
been met with approval by the moderators, Whewell admitted the utility of
some parts of algebra in the study of mechanics, going as far as speaking with
admiration of Peacock’s Algebra, his ﬁrst public reference to that work.134
7′ Whewell’s opposition to general procedures in teaching in point (c) [pp. 35–
39] may be viewed as a polemic against the preference for analytics used by
the AS at Cambridge, French mathematics and mechanics at large. Indeed,
alluding to Lagrange and Laplace, he wrote [pp. 36–37]:
The great geniuses of the mathematical world have always de-
lighted in the widest generalizations, because they have by nature
possessed this distinctness of particular knowledge, and have thus
been able to perform the ascent to generalities and the descent to
particulars with a secure rapidity. But these are feats of strength
and agility, which it is not given to all to imitate. The talent of
generalization is the last, which is developed in the mathematical
students.
Whewell also elaborated on his former arguments of 1832, stressing again
that the ﬁrst sections of Principia were the best introduction for the student’s
134In both his Euclid and the Principles, Whewell acknowledged the fulﬁllment of his demands
concerning the inclusion of more applied mathematics in the lower examination for a degree
[Whewell 1837b, vii; Whewell 1837c, 17]. The ﬁrst chapter of Euclid was devoted to instances
from Wood’s Algebra, while in his Principles we read: “We ought, therefore, to include in our
course, not only pure mathematical sciences, geometry, arithmetic, and algebra [...]” [Whewell
1837c, 16]. Furthermore, in the “Additional thoughts on the study of mathematics” [pp. 177–
186], which followed the reprint of the Thoughts, he argued for the utility of algebra in the realm
of analytic geometry, praising accordingly Peacock’s treatise [p. 179]. By incorporating such
opposing views on the utility of the algebra (as in the reprint of Thoughts and the “Additional
thoughts”), Whewell’s Principles is a much more controversial work than his initial educational
pamphlet, and merits further attention, especially as regards Whewell’s ﬁnal reply to Hamilton.
On Whewell’s ambivalent approach to symbolic algebra, see additional comments in [Fisch 1994,
270–275] and [Richards 1980, 350–353].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
441
acquaintance with the calculus, hiding between the lines his newly conceived
“Theory of Fundamental Ideas” (FI).135
8′ Whewell’s views on mixed mathematics and Newton were not new in this
pamphlet [§4.2, §6.1]. But here for the ﬁrst time he addressed moderators
directly. Indeed, in the ﬁnal pages of the Thoughts he wrote: “But whether
such a system of mathematical study shall or shall not prevail in this Uni-
versity, must depend entirely upon our Examiners” [p. 43].
His message is summarized thus: “It is highly for the interest of the University
that the over disposition to analytical generalizations should not be fostered; that
a clear acquaintance with ﬁrst principles in all subjects should be demanded, and
that to each subject its own proper principles should be assigned” [p. 42]. He thus
insisted that each subject be treated by particular methods, whereas De Morgan,
although aware of the diﬀerences between diverse branches, such as algebra and
geometry [§5.2], fostered the view of common reasoning underlying all branches of
mathematics, emphasizing logic’s utility upon these grounds.
7
EPILOGUE
When the study of mathematics revived at the University of Cam-
bridge, so also did the study of logic. The moving spirit was Whewell
[...]. Doubtless De Morgan was inﬂuenced in his logical investigations
by Whewell.
[MacFarlane 1916, 29]
The correspondence with Dr. Whewell, which had begun soon after the
pupil left Cambridge, related at ﬁrst to Mathematical questions. But
when Mr. De Morgan began to make the application of Mathematical
principles to Logic, Dr. Whewell was naturally one of the ﬁrst to whom
his ideas were communicated.
[S. DeMorgan 1882, 112–113]
Our survey focused on the origins of De Morgan’s early involvement with logic,
the latter ranging from accurate mathematical reasoning, equally present in ge-
ometry, arithmetic and algebra, to Aristotelian syllogistic logic. The roots of his
relevant concerns were sought after in French semiotic philosophy, the current En-
glish tradition of Aristotelian logic, his Cambridge background in mathematics
and mechanics, and lastly in his own critical reviews and writings on the ideal
instruction of mathematics and mechanics. Indeed, the study of the latter man-
ifested an extraordinary melange of diverse stimuli, indicative of De Morgan’s
135In his text Whewell vindicated the Newtonian “conception” of “limit” [Whewell 1835, 12-
20], where “conception” stood for what was called later on a “fundamental idea” (FI). On the
origins of his theory of FI, see Whewell’s letter to Jones on 21 August 1834 [Whewell Papers,
Add.Ms.c.51/175].
On Whewell’s FI and his philosophy of the calculus (which would be of
signiﬁcant impact upon De Morgan), see [Becher 1980b, 27–30; Fisch 1991, 36, 56–58; Richards
1987, 23–29 and Yeo 1993, 13, 189, 192, 216].

442
Maria Panteki
capacity to critically assimilate ideas stemming from a variety of educational sys-
tems and institutions, such as the Ecole Normale, the Ecole Polytechnique, Oxford
and Cambridge.
For all his critical disposition to its ﬂaws, the educational system of Cambridge
University would have an enduring impact upon his foundational concerns. As
he confessed to Whewell in 1861, he had been fortunate to have studied there in
the “interval between two systems” [§4.0]. During the transitional period of the
1820s, students were challenged by questions such as “ﬂuxions or diﬀerentials” and
“Newton or Laplace”, thus induced to form their own distinct opinions concerning
the unsettled foundations of the calculus and mechanics. Among them De Morgan
retained for over “thirty years” the conviction that he could adopt “any one of the
systems in which inﬁnity is explained” [De Morgan 1865, 146]. But such questions
of priority, and epistemological debates at large, would remain in the order of the
day in and around Cambridge after his graduation in 1827.
Due to the Cambridge–Oxford debate on political economy in 1831, the long-
standing controversy over “deduction or induction” re-emerged, while later on
Tripos wranglers and moderators were called to choose between “geometrical or
analytical procedures”, “pure or applied mathematics” and “mathematics or logic”
at large. By viewing the implications of such questions through De Morgan’s eyes,
we have hopefully shed light not only on the neglected origins of his early logical
inquiries, but also on the latter’s dynamics. In what follows below, we present a
summary of our survey, elucidating its structure, along with raising questions that
may contribute to a more comprehensive future study of the joint development of
mathematics and logic in England of the 1830s.
Our survey was based upon two comparative studies: one of De Morgan and
Lacroix, and another of De Morgan and Whewell, as it was these two men who
drew De Morgan’s attention to the instruction of mathematics and mechanics
respectively. Under their dual inﬂuence, De Morgan became ardently involved with
the study of the ﬁrst principles of the mathematical sciences, eventually raising
the import of logic as a most indispensable prerequisite for them. The role of his
mentors occasionally proved to be subtle and obscure, a fact that accounts for the
length of our inquiry. As a matter of fact, our second comparative study turned
out to be less explicit and exhaustive than the ﬁrst, due to lack of substantial
evidence.
Geometry and mechanics are the key words underlying our two comparative
studies respectively. After having read Lacroix’s Essais, De Morgan was above all
inspired by the critique of the PRL against the traditional teaching of Euclid’s
Elements, and Lacroix’s near identiﬁcation of geometry with formal logic. The
latter’s impact was mostly evident in De Morgan’s SDM, which imitated Lacroix’s
Essais in both its content and structure.
Additionally, armed with Whately’s
Elements, De Morgan ventured to cast Pythagoras’ theorem into syllogistic form.
In so doing, he took the ﬁrst step towards the extension of syllogistic logic, while
along parallel lines he inquired into the wider educational import of logic [§2, §3.1,
§5, §6.2].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
443
In connection with Whewell, we pointed out his peculiar oscillation between
Newton and Laplace [§4.2], arguing that in conjunction with Airy they motivated
De Morgan’s project on “Statics” in 1827 and his enduring passion for astronomy
and its history [§4.3]. As it were, De Morgan gradually switched his attention from
the principles of mechanics to those parts of elementary mathematics with which
a student should be well acquainted prior to his study of that branch [§4.3, §5].
Although a Cambridge outsider, De Morgan kept well informed about both the
curriculum’s expansion as well as Whewell’s counter-revolution [§6.1]. He reacted
accordingly through his numerous critical reviews, eventually asking moderators to
seriously consider higher algebra and logic as basic components of the curriculum
[§6.2]. Lastly, we contrasted De Morgan’s and Whewell’s views on the educational
import of logic in 1835, thus hinting at the apparent instant import of De Morgan’s
early logical investigations [§6.3]. But this last part of our investigation appears
to be in want of further clariﬁcation.
How far are we entitled to assume that Whewell was acquainted with De Mor-
gan’s contributions by 1835? Moreover, was there indeed any ground for a mutual
inﬂuence between the two men as regards the ﬁeld of logic? Interestingly enough, it
was exactly the latter question, which, posed long ago, led us to discover the close
aﬃnity between Lacroix’s and De Morgan’s work. That question had stemmed
from MacFarlane’s and Sophie De Morgan’s claims, partly quoted in the open-
ing of our epilogue. So, at ﬁrst we built our inquiries assuming that De Morgan
derived “an interest in the renovation of logic” from Whewell [MacFarlane 1916,
20], an assumption further reinforced by S. De Morgan’s evidence as regards the
communication between former tutor and pupil on logical issues in the 1840s [S.
De Morgan 1882, 113]. Relatively soon, though, it became clear that both of De
Morgan’s biographers failed to distinguish sharply between inductive and deduc-
tive logic. This is best manifested in MacFarlane’s claim that Whewell was the
“moving spirit” in the renovation of logic, through his two treatises on the History
and Philosophy of the inductive sciences in the late 1830s [MacFarlane 1916, 29].
But before we proceed, let us not wholly dismiss MacFarlane’s somewhat inaccu-
rate claim, given some of the presently acknowledged consequences that Whewell’s
debate with Hamilton had upon the development of formal logic [§6.3].
Under the stimulus of De Morgan’s biographers, we began searching for any
traces concerning Whewell’s own logical concerns, digging up his voluminous cor-
respondence and thus coming across his notes on Lacroix’s Essais and his confes-
sions to Jones in connection with Whately.136 Moreover, puzzled with a passage
from his revised Dynamics in 1832, where he spoke of “good logic” being “the one
thing requisite” [§6.1], and the hostile tone in which “logic” entered his discourse
136In connection with Lacroix and Whately, see respectively fn. 23 and the letters cited in fns.
49, 53 and 54. Aware of the fact that we have treated Whewell’s involvement with induction
very tangentially [§3.2, §6.1], we direct the reader’s attention to Jones’ inﬂuential attempts to
distill into his friend a satisfactory deﬁnition of the process of induction, a topic to enter their
correspondence from 1822 onwards. See, particularly, Jones’ lengthy letter of 7.3.1831 [Whewell
Papers, Add.Ms.c.51/26], a letter imbued by his prominent study of Aristotle and Bacon on the
issue of induction.

444
Maria Panteki
in his Astronomy a year later [§3.2], we were induced to consult all his publications
until 1837, aiming to understand Whewell’ s conception of “logic”. As a result,
we focused on his Thoughts, realizing the import of his poorly studied debate with
Hamilton.137 A great deal of this investigation has been unfortunately considered
irrelevant to the main scope of our survey, and is thus here omitted. Nevertheless,
it gave rise to our overview on French “Logique” and British “Logic” at the turn
of the century [§2, §3], inducing further attention to the diverse interpretations of
the term “logic” in England of the 1830s.
In connection with induction, we refer to De Morgan’s relevant chapter in his
Formal logic [De Morgan 1847, 211–226], a chapter that may well have surfaced in
imitation of Whately’s Elements [§3.1]. In its opening we read that “there is not
much to say upon the genuine meaning of the word [induction], in any system of
formal logic” [De Morgan 1847, 211]. De Morgan’s indiﬀerence for inductive logic
is further revealed in the letters exchanged between him and Whewell from 1846
onwards. These letters, highly indicative of their distinct predilection for deduc-
tive and inductive logic respectively, manifest that the main reason De Morgan
communicated his current logical inquiries to Whewell was to consult him strictly
on issues concerning the nomenclature of logic.138 Thus, if Whewell was of any im-
pact upon De Morgan’s mature work on logic, the degree of his inﬂuence appears
rather insigniﬁcant, and far from pertaining to the period under investigation.
Focusing now on the period from 1823 up to 1831, we have no evidence as
regards a plausible way through which Whewell might have instilled in his pupil
a passion for logic, in the wider meaning of the term.
We recall in particular
that Whewell’s plan to deliver lectures on induction in 1826 had been postponed
for the early 1830s [§3.2, §6.1]. There might have been, however, a subtle way
by which Whewell implicitly attracted De Morgan’s attention to Whately’s third
edition of the Elements (1829), the edition that triggered the Oxford–Cambridge
debate on political economy in 1831 and the one recommended to the reader of
SDM [§3.2]. At the time, Whately was on friendly terms with Baden Powell, an
active member of the SDUK from 1830, and a contributor to the QJE. Being in
close collaboration with De Morgan, Powell possibly acted as a channel between
Oxford, Cambridge and De Morgan in the early 1830s, reinforcing in particular
the latter’s high estimation for Whately.139
137Aspects of the Whewell–Hamilton debate have been discussed in [Durand 1996, 450–459;
Durand 2000, 144–152; Garland 1980, 39–43; Laita 1979, 47–49; Panteki 2000, 191–192; Richards
1988, 20–27; Todhunter 1876 I, 94–95; Yeo 1993, 218–219]. However, a full account of this epoch-
making debate has yet to be written.
138See the letters fully quoted in [S. De Morgan 1882, 194–201, 228–229, 302–308, 315–320], the
earliest dated 21.10.1846. We have traced two more letters, dated 3 and 5.10.1846, in which De
Morgan announced to Whewell his plan of composing a work on “formal logic” [Whewell Papers,
Add.Ms.a.202/104–105]. In fact, a third letter of 30.4.1844 [ibid, a.202/100] reveals that their
discussion upon philosophical issues dated back at least to 1844.
139On De Morgan’s early acquaintances with Whately’s name, see fn. 90. Further on Powell, see
fn. 92 and [Corsi, 1988, 37–39, 44], a work wholly dedicated to Powell’s scientiﬁc and theological
contributions.
In his article on Oxford University, De Morgan mentioned Powell’s preceding
article on the “defects of the scientiﬁc education given at Oxford” with appraisal [De Morgan

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
445
It thus seems unlikely that Whewell inﬂuenced his former pupil in any direct
way in connection with logic. However, a further comparative study of their writ-
ings entice the view that Whewell was well aware of De Morgan’s educational
contributions, and aﬀected by them. Both men had strong views as regards the
status of geometry; Whewell admiring Euclid beyond any criticism, and De Mor-
gan being distinctly under the inﬂuence of the PRL, moreover diﬀerentiating his
position from Lacroix’s as to the alleged suﬃciency of geometry in teaching the
principles of strict, accurate reasoning. It is more than probable that Whewell
read De Morgan’s SDM, and was confronted from its ﬁrst pages with De Morgan’s
initial empirical approach towards the instruction of mathematics, geometry in-
cluded. For, in his Euclid, he repeated De Morgan’s arguments concerning Euclid’s
axiom on straight lines so as to draw conclusions opposed to those put forward
by De Morgan. Interestingly enough, Whewell’s presentation of Euclid’s axiom
on straight lines was to be critically commented upon in De Morgan’s advanced
treatise on the Calculus.140 We are thus tempted to hold that De Morgan and
Whewell “seem to have played a game with each other quoting Euclid passages,
and not citing each other (so that nobody previously has noticed)”.141
Nevertheless, there does exist one evidence as to the diﬀusion of De Morgan’s
early contributions, namely Peacock’s “Report”, delivered in 1833. Peacock noted
De Morgan’s translation of Bourdon’s Algebra in 1828 [Peacock 1834, 287] with
appraisal, addressing De Morgan [ibid] as:
a gentleman whose philosophical work on Arithmetic and whose vari-
ous publications on the elementary and higher parts of mathematics,
and particularly those which have reference to mathematics education,
entitle his opinion to the greatest consideration.
We regard Peacock’s acknowledgement of De Morgan’s work as far from trivial,
given his total absence of reference to the notable contributions of William Wallace,
Babbage and Herschel in analytics.142 Peacock’s “Report” became widely known,
in and outside the realms of Cambridge, as was proven in the case of Wallace
1932d, 191]. Whewell and Jones kept expressing to one another their contempt for the “immoral”
theory of the Ricardians on political economy much earlier than 1831; see Jones’ letter to Whewell
on 27.11.1827 [Whewell Papers, Add. Ms.c. 52/15]. De Morgan seemed already aware of the
importance of this branch in 1828, referring to political economy in his [De Morgan 1828, 2]. We
hold that it is more than plausible that the ensuing Cambridge–Oxford debate was known to
him at the time, and he had a stimulating impact upon his philosophical speculations.
140Compare [SDM, 2] with [Whewell 1837b, 148–149], and consequently the latter with [De
Morgan 1842, 6]. It is quite striking that the “Introductory” chapter of De Morgan’s Calculus
above cited would contain remarks on Euclidian geometry, as well as lengthy comments against
Whewell’s abuse of the term “logic” [De Morgan 1842, 12–13, fn.], without naming him in either
case. See further comments in fn. 98. We wish also to clarify a signiﬁcant detail: although the
Calculus was being published in parts from 1836, the above-cited “Introductory” chapter was
found to have been dated from 1842.
141Interestingly enough, although the preceding arguments presented in our text had not been
included in any of the former versions of this paper, our concluding comment in quotes was
oﬀered by an anonymous referee.
142In connection with Babbage and Herschel, see fn. 121. On Wallace (1768–1843), a Scott

446
Maria Panteki
[Panteki 1987]. Moreover, since Peacock appeared so well versed in De Morgan’s
contributions by 1833, it might not be a bold conjecture to assume that so must
have been other Cambridge dons, and in particular Whewell, who by 1832 had
begun communicating with De Morgan on mechanics and astronomy.143
Focusing on the issue of logic, the Whewell–De Morgan relationship will remain
a mystery. While our study so far largely refutes MacFarlane’s claim concerning
Whewell’s alleged inﬂuence upon De Morgan’s work on logic, instances from their
correspondence induce us to believe that there might have been a deeper degree of
understanding between them, despite the contrasting directions of their research.
For example, De Morgan wrote to Whewell on 12 July 1850 [S. De Morgan 1882,
212–213]:
I have to-day got Sir W. Hamilton’s system for the ﬁrst time in a
full and acknowledged form [...]. I and Boole come in, without being
named, for a lecture against meddling with logic by help of mathemat-
ics. Pray get this work and read it carefully.
And we ask: how far was Whewell, a ﬁerce opponent of formal logic, able or willing
to help his former student deal with Hamilton’s attack, especially on an issue upon
which Whewell himself would have had the same objections as Hamilton?
Resuming De Morgan’s logical contributions, we underline that his account of
traditional, syllogistic logic, enriched with the copula “is equal to” and the “`a
fortiori syllogism”, was elaborated upon in the First notions of logic in 1839,
subsequently constituting the ﬁrst chapter of his Formal logic in 1847. None of his
publications after 1831 incorporated his partial reduction of Pythagoras’ theorem
in syllogistic form, an impossible assignment, as we now know, without ﬁrst order
predicate logic [Merrill 1990, 15]. Realizing the impossibility of this project, De
Morgan wrote in his fourth paper “On the syllogism” that geometry “is of little,
though some, account for technical exercise in the syllogism” [De Morgan 1860a,
241]. As a matter of fact, he never ceased to associate these two branches, and in
his Speech to the LMS he again raised the import of logic in geometry, furnishing
instances from Euclid’s Elements as examples of “bad reasoning” [De Morgan
1866, 5], which were in want of a sound knowledge of logic’s ﬁrst principles. It is
hardly surprising upon these grounds that his Notions was meant, according to its
subtitle, as “Preparatory for the student of geometry”. What is quite surprising,
though, is that it had been additionally destined to form an Appendix to his
Arithmetic.
Indeed, as De Morgan wrote in his third paper “On the syllogism” [1858, 116,
fn. l]:
mathematician, see [Panteki 1987], an annotated commentary upon Wallace’s letter to Peacock
in 1833, in which he lamented the latter’s indiﬀerence to his contributions in the introduction to
analytics in early 19th century Britain.
143See De Morgan’s letters to Whewell on 12.11.1832 and 13.4.1833 [Whewell Papers, Add.Ms.
a.202/96–97].

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
447
Nineteen years ago I wrote my First Notions of Logic, intended, as the
preface states, ultimately to become an appendix to my Arithmetic. I
had not then any glimpse, so far as my memory serves, of the numerical
syllogism: and I doubt if I could have given any very distinct account of
my reason for appending the common syllogism to a book of numbers.
But it may be that my now conﬁrmed notion of the usual form of
syllogism being arithmetical was germinating.
De Morgan’s numerically deﬁnite syllogism was conceived in 1846, to be further
expanded in his Formal logic, thereafter bearing signiﬁcant import on the shaping
of his LOR.144 As an indicative example of this scheme, we append the following:
m Xs are Y s
n Y s are Zs
(7.1)
(n + m −s) Xs are Zs,
where s is the number of Y s given in advance. If De Morgan could not account for
the exact origins of this scheme, we are hardly entitled to oﬀer any interpretation
other than rephrasing his last sentence: i.e., that it was not only geometry which
apparently inspired his early logical inquiries, but that he was also aided by his
parallel inquiry into establishing the science of arithmetic upon as ﬁrm founda-
tions as geometrical reasoning itself [§5.2]. De Morgan’s numerical scheme has
been largely overlooked by recent commentators of his mature logical contribu-
tions. Overstressed in [MacFarlane 1916, 29] as the most “remarkable” aspect of
his Formal logic, De Morgan’s arithmetical scheme had been the par excellence
issue at stake in his notorious debate with Hamilton, oﬀering De Morgan with a
conspicuous opportunity to develop his purely formal logical scheme.145
De Morgan’s Notions deserve a ﬁnal comment before we close our survey. Far
from constituting an original piece of work, when compared to SDM and the
ensuing Formal logic, the Notions acquire a distinct place in the history of En-
glish formal logic when viewed in conjunction with Solly’s Syllabus of logic. Both
works were composed by former Cambridge students, both addressed students of
mathematics, and both appeared early in 1839, not to mention their common anti-
comformistic religious standpoints, which were radically opposed to those enjoyed
by their Cambridge tutors, and Whewell in particular.146 For all their distinct
mathematical illustrations and procedures, the most striking feature of these two
144On De Morgan’s arithmetical scheme [including (7.1) below in text], see [De Morgan 1846,
17–19; De Morgan 1847, 142–145; De Morgan 1860b, 258–263], a novelty amply dealt with in
[Panteki 1992, sect. 6.6]. On a diﬀerent note, see [Rice 1997b, 2–3].
145A study of De Morgan’s numerically deﬁnite syllogism, and of the relevant implications of the
De Morgan–Hamilton debate on the issue of predication, is strikingly absent in [Merrill 1990, 91].
De Morgan’s own writings hint clearly at the import of this debate in his own work, stressing
that Hamilton’s predicated scheme “accidentally” overlapped with his own [De Morgan 1850,
32–35, 42, 49; De Morgan 1860b, 258–263]. De Morgan’s evidence is taken under consideration
in [Panteki 1992, ch. 6].
146Solly was elected a scholar at Gonville and Caius College in 1835, but being a Unitarian he
left in 1837, without obtaining a degree, staying around Cambridge until 1839 [Panteki 1993,

448
Maria Panteki
works was their timing, as well as their ultimate goal. Published only a few months
after the appearance of De Morgan’s Notions, Solly’s Syllabus answers to all of De
Morgan’s aspirations in 1835, along with rendering true all the fears and premoni-
tions of Whewell and Hamilton, his distant mentors.147 For, drawing on the newly
furnished foundation of algebraic symbolical methods by D. F. Gregory, Solly held
that the connection between symbolic algebra and logic would help the student
acquire a sound foundation of logic’s indispensable principles [Solly 1839, iii].148
Upon these grounds, we hold that any future comprehensive study of the de-
velopment of formal logic in England during the ﬁrst half of the century should
incorporate a brief comparative study of Solly’s and De Morgan’s textbooks of
1839, further exploring their distinct connection with the Whewell-Hamilton de-
bate over the epistemological and educational status of mathematics and logic.
Such a survey should also include a reference to De Morgan’s neglected work on
the COF in 1836, and the latter’s debt to the “form–matter” distinction stemming
from L. Carnot’s R´eﬂexions sur la m´etaphysique inﬁnitesimale (1797), whose au-
thor was mentioned with appraisal in De Morgan’s review within the context of
Peacock’s novel jargon: “Except perhaps Carnot, we know of no writer, who has
dwelt upon the meaning of his phrases” [De Morgan 1835a, 310-311].149
But here our study has reached its limits.
We have shown amply that De
Morgan played the role of a visionary, a critic and a catalyst during the crucial
period of the 1830s within the wider sphere of inﬂuence of Cambridge University.
In accordance to our ﬁnal suggestions, we repeat his words while addressing the
LMS, holding that indeed “We want a great deal of study of the connection of
Logic and Mathematics” [De Morgan 1866, 4].
133]. Best source for De Morgan’s upbringing and his religious standpoint, is [S. De Morgan
1882, 1–18]. Solly’s work would ideally ﬁt in the context of [Richards 2002], a paper with which
we became acquainted while ﬁnishing oﬀour epilogue. Her comparative study of Whewell’s and
De Morgan’s diﬀerent views on mathematics and logic in terms of their distinct theological beliefs
[ibid, 144–145, 150] is viewed as complementary to our survey, which has treated such matters
tangentially.
147Solly’s work was published a few months after the appearance of De Morgan’s Notions, but
independently from it, as implied from their ﬁrst communication in 1847 [Panteki 1993, 134–135].
On the signiﬁcance of these two works as regards the Whewell–Hamilton debate, see also [Panteki
2000, 190–193]. While Whewell’s apparent inﬂuence upon the shaping of Solly’s mathematical
and philosophical speculations (which drew heavily on Kant) is hinted at in [Panteki 1993, 143,
152, fn. 23], we wish to add another valuable source, traced later, in connection with Hamilton,
a close friend, as it were, of the Solly family; see [H. Solly 1893 I, 327; II, 65].
148On Gregory’s pioneering contributions to the realms of symbolic algebra, see [Allaire 2002].
On Gregory’s apparent impact upon Solly, see [Panteki 1993, 137–140, 149–151, 163–165; Panteki
2000, 190–193].
149Carnot’s work and its evident impact upon [De Morgan 1836], and consequently upon the
development of the LOR, has been extensively studied and discussed in [Panteki 1992, chs. l, 2,
3, 6, 9]. We suggest here that a further epistemological comparative study of the foundational
principles put forward by Carnot, Babbage, Peacock and De Morgan is worthy of investigation,
being closely linked with the latter’s logical contributions from 1846 onwards.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
449
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The story of this survey started a long time ago.
My initial intention was to
demonstrate the impact of De Morgan’s treatise on the calculus of functions in
1836 upon the shaping of his logic of relations in the 1850s. This proved a lengthy
exercise and so I decided to focus on the largely unexplored origins of his logical
concerns. After two more versions and thanks to the help of the journals’ editors
and the anonymous referees I arrived at the present result.
During this period, little less than 10 years, many people have provided me with
immense help, by supplying me with required material and critically commenting
upon my drafts. I wish to thank Ivor Grattan-Guinness, James Gasser, Adrian
Rice, Harvey Becher, James Van Evra, H.Bos, Umberto Bottazzini, Jonathan
Smith, William Ashworth, Jane Taylor-Reid, Rupert Baker, Gill Jackson, Nikos
Kastanis, Irene Yu, Fani Karamanoli, Tassos Tokmakidis, my two anonymous ref-
erees and few intimate friends who listened attentively to my “De Morgan stories”!
Jane, Rupert and Gill provided me with signiﬁcant material from the Royal Soci-
ety Library in London, often making me feel as if I were working in my beloved
library, despite the distance. Jonathan and William were my contacts with the
Trinity College Library at Cambridge, oﬀering me, in conjunction with Harvey, a
wonderful chance of delving deep into anything Whewellian. It was a great plea-
sure to share with Adrian our deep fascination for De Morgan as a young graduate,
and I consider it a great privilege to have been able to consult all his papers and
thesis at the exact time of their completion. James Van Evra carefully read my
sections on logic, sharing with me his expertise on Whately, while Professor Bos
kindly suggested I scaled down what had been a much longer and chaotic paper.
Professor Bottazzini and Irene encouraged me not to give up after so many years
of strenuous work and severe medical problems. They were kind enough not to
put any strict time barriers or length limits to my revised survey and I feel deeply
indebted to them.
Fani tirelessly corrected all the versions of my paper, suggesting valuable ver-
bal alterations, while Tassos undertook with a smile to print my endless drafts.
Without their ceaseless help, the paper would still be in manuscript form. Re-
cently, my friend and colleague Nikos, to whom I owe my very initiation into the
adventurous world of the history of mathematical ideas, did for me an extremely
valuable research via the Internet, the result of which is mainly reﬂected in the
end of the epilogue. All these people are dear to my heart for their rare generosity
and true appreciation for intellectual work, but above all I would like to express
my gratitude towards my former PhD supervisor and intimate friend Ivor as well
as James Gasser, the organizer of the Boole meeting at Lausanne six years ago.
In fact my correspondence with the latter two occupies hardly fewer pages than
the two volumes of the Whewell Papers oﬀered to me by William! Last, but not
least, I want to thank my friends Athena, Despina and Marina for their support
during a very hard period of my life, as well as my father Tassos, who has shown
great patience and endurance all these years. Hoping I have not missed to thank

450
Maria Panteki
anyone else, I am afraid that like the study of De Morgan’s early logical inquiries,
so the lengthy list of acknowledgments has to reach its end!
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Aarsleﬀ, 1982a] H. Aarsleﬀ. Locke’s reputation in nineteenth-century England. In From Locke
to Saussure, H. Aarsleﬀ, ed., pp. 120–145. London: Athlone Press, 1982.
[Aarsleﬀ, 1982b] H. Aarsleﬀ. The tradition of Condillac. In From Locke to Saussure, H. Aarsleﬀ,
ed., pp. 146–209. London: Athlone Press, 1982.
[Agassi and Wettersten, 1991] J. Agassi and J. Wettersten. Whewell’s problematic heritage. In
William Whewell: A Composite Portrait, M. Fisch and S. Schaﬀer, eds., pp. 345–370. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1991.
[Airy, 1826] G. B. Airy. Mathematical Tracts on the Lunar and Planetary Theories, the Figure
of the Earth, Precession, Nutation and the Calculus of Variations. Cambridge: Deighton,
1826.
[Albury, 1980] W. R. Albury, ed. and transl. Etienne de Condillac: La Logique-Logic. New York:
Abaris Books, 1980.
[Allaire and Bradley, 2002] P. R. Allaire and R. E. Bradley. Symbolical algebra as a foundation
for calculus: D. F. Gregory’s contribution. Historia Mathematica, 29, 395–426, 2002.
[Arbogast, 1800] L. F. A. Arbogast. Du calcul des d´erivations. Strasburg, 1800.
[Ashworth, 1996] W. J. Ashworth. Memory, eﬃciency, and symbolic analysis. Charles Babbage,
John Herschel, and the industrial mind. Isis, 87, 629–653, 1996.
[Auroux, 1982] S. Auroux. L’illuminiso francese e la tradizione di Port-Royal. Bologna: Coop.
Libra. Univ. Edit. Bol., 1982.
[Babbage and Herschel, 1813] C. Babbage and J. F. W. Herschel. Preface to the Memoirs of
the Analytical Society, pp. i–xxii. Cambridge: Deighton, 1813.
[Babbage, 1816] C. Babbage. An essay towards the calculus of functions, Part II. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society, 106, 179–256, 1816.
[Babbage et al., 1820] C. Babbage, J. F. W. Herschel, and G. Peacock. Collection of Examples.
Cambridge: Deighton, 1820.
[Baker, 1975] K. M. Baker. Condorcet:
From Natural Philosophy to Social Mathematics.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975.
[Becher, 1980a] H. W. Becher. Woodhouse, Babbage, Peacock and modern algebra. Historia
Mathematica, 7, 389–400, 1980.
[Becher, 1980b] H. W. Becher. William Whewell and Cambridge mathematics. Historical Stud-
ies of the Physical Sciences, 11, 1–48, 1980.
[Becher, 1991] H. W. Becher. William Whewell’s Odyssey. In William Whewell: A Composite
Portrait. M. and S. Schaﬀer, eds., pp. 1–29. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991.
[Becher, 1992] H. W. Becher. The Whewell story: Essay review. Annals of Science, 49, 377–384,
1992.
[Becher, 1995] H. W. Becher. Radicals, Whigs and conservatives: the middle and lower classes
in the analytical revolution at Cambridge in the age of aristocracy. British Journal of the
History of Science, 28, 405–426, 1995.
[Benthem, 1827] G. Bentham. An Outline of a New System of Logic. London: Hunt and Clark,
1827.
[Buickerood, 1985] J. G. Buickerood. The natural history of understanding: Locke and the rise
of facultative logic in the eighteenth century. History and Philosophy of Logic, 6, 157–190,
1985.
[Callinger, 1976] R. Callinger. Euler’s ‘Letters to a princess of Germany’ as an expression of his
mature scientiﬁc outlook. Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 15, 211–233, 1976.
[Cambridge University, 1931] Cambridge University. Cambridge Problems Proposed by the Mod-
erators to the Candidates for Mathematical Honours at the General Examinations from 1821
to 1830 Inclusive. Cambridge: Hall, 1831.
[Clock, 1964] D. Clock. A New British Concept of Algebra: 1825–1850. PhD dissertation, Uni-
versity of Wisconsin, 1964.
[Condillac, 1780] Abb´e de Condillac. La logique. Paris, 1780. Reprinted with notes and English
translation by W. R. Albury. New York: Abaris Books, 1980.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
451
[Condillac, 1798] Abb´e de Condillac. La langue des calculs. Paris, 1798. In Collected work, Vol.
II, tome 333, pp. 419–529.
[Corcoran, 1986] J. Corcoran. Correspondence without Communication. History and Philosophy
of Logic, 7, 65–75, 1986.
[Corsi, 1988] P. Corsi. Science and Religion: Baden Powell and the Anglican Debate. 1800–
1860. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1988.
[Craik, 2000] A. D. Craik. James Ivory, FRS Mathematician: “The most unlucky person that
ever existed”. Notes and Records Royal Society London, 2, 223–247, 2000.
[Crilly, 1999] T. Crilly. Arthur Cayley as Sadleirian Professor: a glimpse of mathematics teach-
ing at 19th-century Cambridge. Historia Mathematica, 26, 125–160, 1999.
[De Morgan, 1966] A. De Morgan. On the Syllogism, and Other Logical Writings. P. Heath, ed.
London Routledge, 1966.
[De Morgan, 1827] A. De Morgan. Elements of statics. University College London, MS. Add.
27, 1827.
[De Morgan, 1828] A. De Morgan. Introductory Lecture. University College London, MS. Add.
3, 1828.
[De Morgan, 1830] A. De Morgan. Remarks on Elementary Education in Science. London: Tay
lor, 1830.
[De Morgan, 1831a] A. De Morgan. On the Study and Diﬃculties of Mathematics. London:
Society for the Diﬀusion of Useful Knowledge, 1831.
[De Morgan, 1831b] A. De Morgan. On mathematical instruction. Quarterly Journal of Educa-
tion, 1, 264–279, 1831.
[De Morgan, 1831c] A. De Morgan. Polytechnic School of Paris. Quarterly Journal of Education,
1, 57–86, 1831.
[De Morgan, 1832] A. De Morgan. Elementary Illustrations of the Diﬀerential and Integral Cal-
culus. London: Society for the Diﬀusion of Useful Knowledge, 1832. Reprinted by T. J. Mc-
Cormack, ed. La Salle Illinois: Open Court, 1843.
[De Morgan, 1832b] A. De Morgan. Wood’s Algebra: Review. Quarterly Journal of Education,
3, 276–285, 1832.
[De Morgan, 1832c] A. De Morgan. On some methods employed for the instruction of the deaf
and dumb. Quarterly Journal of Education, 3, 203–219, 1832.
[De Morgan, 1832d] A. De Morgan. State of mathematical and physical sciences in the Univer-
sity of Oxford. Quarterly Journal of Education, 4, 191–208, 1832.
[De Morgan, 1833a] A. De Morgan. On the method of teaching the elements of geometry, Part
I. Quarterly Journal of Education, 6, 35–49, 1833.
[De Morgan, 1833b] A. De Morgan. On the method of teaching the elements of geometry, Part
II. Quarterly Journal of Education, 6, 237–251, 1833.
[De Morgan, 1834] A. De Morgan. On the notation of the diﬀerential calculus adopted in some
works lately published at Cambridge. Quarterly Journal of Education, 8, 100–110, 1834.
[De Morgan, 1835a] A. De Morgan. A treatise on algebra. Quarterly Journal of Education, 9,
91–110, 293–311. Review of Peacock 1830, 1835.
[De Morgan, 1835b] A. De Morgan. The Elements of Algebra Preliminary to the Diﬀerential
Calculus. London: Taylor and Walton, 1835.
[De Morgan, 1836] A. De Morgan. Calculus of functions. In Encyclopedia Metropolitana, 2,
305–392, 1836. Oﬀprint dated 1845.
[De Morgan, 1838] A. De Morgan. Remarks on an accusation made by the proprietors of the
Encyclopedia Metropolitana. London: Spottiswoode, 1838.
[De Morgan, 1839] A. De Morgan. First Notions of Logic. London: Taylor and Walton, 1839.
[De Morgan, 1840] A. De Morgan. Operation. Penny Cyclopedia, 16, 442–446, 1840.
[De Morgan, 1842] A. De Morgan. The Diﬀerential and Integral Calculus. London: Baldwin
and Cradock, 1842. Published in parts from 1836.
[De Morgan, 1846] A. De Morgan. On the syllogism I. Transactions of the Cambridge Philo-
sophical Society, 8, 379–408, 1846. Also in [De Morgan 1966, 1–21].
[De Morgan, 1847] A. De Morgan. Formal Logic, London: Taylor and Walton, 1847.
[De Morgan, 1849] A. De Morgan. Trigonometry and Double Algebra. London: Taylor, Walton
and Maberly, 1849.
[De Morgan, 1850] A. De Morgan. On the syllogism II. Transactions of the Cambridge Philo-
sophical Society, 9, 79–127, 1850. Also in [De Morgan 1966, 22–68].

452
Maria Panteki
[De Morgan, 1858] A. De Morgan. On the syllogism III. Transactions of the Cambridge Philo-
sophical Society, 10, 173–320, 1858. Also in [De Morgan 1966, 74–146].
[De Morgan, 1860a] A. De Morgan. On the syllogism IV. Transactions of the Cambridge Philo-
sophical Society, 10, 331–58, 1860. Also in [De Morgan 1966, 208–246].
[De Morgan, 1860b] A. De Morgan. Logic, English Cyclopedia, 5, 340–354. Also in [De Morgan
1966, 247–345].
[De Morgan, 1865] A. De Morgan. On inﬁnity; and on the sign of equality. Transactions of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society, 11, 145–189, 1865.
[De Morgan, 1866] A. De Morgan. Speech of Professor De Morgan, President, at the ﬁrst meet-
ing of the Society, January 16, 1865. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 1, 1–9,
1866.
[De Morgan, 1872] A. De Morgan. A Budget of Paradoxes. London: Longman, 1872.
[S. De Morgan, 1882] S. De Morgan. Memoir of Augustus De Morgan. London: Longman, 1882.
[Dessi, 1988] P. Dessi, ed. Introduction to Whately Elements of Logic (1826), pp. xi–xxix.
Bologna: Instrumenta Rationis, 1988.
[Dhombres, 1980] J. G. Dhombres. L’enseignement des math´ematiques par la ‘m´ethode
r´evolutionnaire’, les le¸cons de Laplace `a l’Ecole Normale de l’an III. Revue d’Histoire des
Sciences, t.33/34, 315–348, 1980.
[Dhombres, 1983] J. G. Dhombres. La langue des calculs de Condillac ou comment propager les
lumi`eres. Sciences et Techniques en perspective, 2, 197–230, 1983.
[Dhombres, 1986] J. G. Dhombres. Quelques aspects de l’histoire des ´equations fonctionelles.
Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 36, 91–181, 1986.
[Dhombres, 1992] J. G. Dhombres, ed. L’Ecole Normale de l’an III: Le¸cons de math´ematiques,
Laplace–Lagrange–Monge. Paris: Dunod, 1992.
[Donovon, 1850] M. Donovan. Biographical account of the late Richard Kirwan, Esq. Proceedings
of the Royal Irish Academy, 4, xxxi–cxviii, 1850.
[Dubbey, 1978] J. Dubbey. The Mathematical Work of Charles Babbage. Cambridge: Cambridge
Univ. Press, 1978.
[Durand-Richard, 1990] M.-J. Durand-Richard. Gen`ese de l’alg`ebre symbolique en Angleterre:
une inﬂuence possible de John Locke. Revue d’histoire des Sciences, 43, 129–180, 1990.
[Durand-Richard, 1996] M.-J. Durand-Richard. L ’Ecole alg´ebrique anglaise: les conditions con-
ceptuelles et institutionnelles d’un calcul symbolique comme fondement de la connaissance. In
L ’Europe math´ematiqure: Histoires, Mythes, Identit´es, C. Goldstein, J. Gray and J. Ritter,
eds., pp. 447–477. Paris: Editions de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, 1996.
[Durand-Richard, 2000] M.-J. Durand-Richard. Logic versus algebra:
English debates and
Boole’s mediation. In A Boole Anthology, J. Gasser ed., pp. 139–166. Dordrecht: Kluwer,
2000.
[Enros, 1979] P. C. Enros. The Analytical Society: Mathematics at Cambridge University in
the Nineteenth Century. PhD dissertation, University of Toronto, 1979.
[Enros, 1981] P. C. Enros. Cambridge University and the adoption of analytics in early
nineteenth-century England. In Social History of Mathematics, H. Mehrtens, H. Bos and
I. Schneider, eds., pp. 135–147. Boston: Birkhauser, 1981.
[Enros, 1983] P. C. Enros. The Analytical Society (1812–1813): precursor of the renewal of
Cambridge mathematics. Historia Mathematica, 10, 24–47, 1983.
[Euler, 1812] L. Euler. Lettres `a une princesse d’Allemagne, Vol. I. Paris: Courcier, 1812. Orig-
inal published in 2 volumes, 1768–1772.
[Fisch, 1991] M. Fisch. A philosopher’s coming of age: a study in esoteric intellectual history.
In William Whewell. A composite portrait, M. Fisch and S. Schaﬀer, eds., pp. 31–66. Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1991.
[Fisch, 1994] M. Fisch. ‘The emergency which has arrived’:
the problematic history of
nineteenth-century British algebra — a programmatic outline. British Journal of the His-
tory of Science, 27, 247–276, 1994.
[Fisch, 1999] M. Fisch. The making of Peacock’s Treatise on algebra: A case of creative indeci-
sion. Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 54, 137–179, 1999.
[Foucault, 1970] M. Foucault. The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences.
London: Tavistock, 1970.
[Fraser, 1989] C. G. Fraser. The calculus as algebraic analysis: some observations on mathe-
matical analysis in the 18th century. Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 39, 317–335,
1989.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
453
[Garland, 1980] M. Garland. Cambridge before Darwin. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press,
1980.
[Gillispie, 1960] C. C. Gillispie. The Edge of Objectivity. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1960.
[Gillispie, 1978] C. C. Gillispie. Laplace, Pierre-Simon, Marquis de. Dictionary of Scientiﬁc
Biography, Vol. XIV, 273–403, 1978.
[Glas, 1986] E. Glas. On the dynamics of mathematical change in the case of Monge and the
French revolution. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science, 17, 249–268, 1986.
[Granger, 1954] G. G. Granger. Langue universelle et formalisation des sciences. Un fragment
in´edit de Condorcet. Revue d’Histoire des sciences, 7, 197–219, 1954.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1985] I. Grattan-Guinness. Mathematics and mathematical physics from
Cambridge, 1815–40: a survey of the achievements and of the French inﬂuence. In Wran-
glers and Physicists, P. Harman, ed., pp. 84–111. Manchester: Manchester Univ. Press, 1985.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1988] I. Grattan-Guinness. Living together and living apart: on the inter-
actions between mathematics and logic from the French Revolution to the First World War.
South African Journal of Philosophy, 7, 73–82, 1988.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1990] I. Grattan-Guinness. Convolutions in French Mathematics, 1800–
1840. 3 vols. Basel: Birkhauser Berlin: Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, 1990.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1992a] I. Grattan-Guinness. Charles Babbage as an algorithmic thinker. An-
nals of the History of Computing, 14, 34–48, 1992.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1992b] I. Grattan-Guinness. The young mathematician. In John Herschel
1792–1871: A Bicentennial Commemoration, D. G. King-Hele, ed., pp. 17–28. London: Royal
Society, 1992.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1997] I. Grattan-Guinness. The Fontana History of the Mathematical Sci-
ences. London: Fontana Press, 1997.
[Grattan-Guinness, 2000] I. Grattan-Guinness. The Search for Mathematical Roots, 1870–1940.
Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 2000.
[Guicciardini, 1989] N. Guicciardini. The Development of Newtonian Calculus in Britain, 1700–
1800. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1989.
[Hald, 1990] A. Hald. A History of Probability and Statistics and their Applications Before
1750. New York: Wiley, 1990.
[Halsted, 1884] G. Halsted. De Morgan as logician. Journal of Speculative Philosophy, 18, 1–9,
1884.
[Hamilton, 1833] W. Hamilton. Recent publications on logical sciences. Edinburgh Review, 57,
194–238, 1833.
[Hamilton, 1836a] W. Hamilton. Thoughts on the study of mathematics as a part of liberal
education. Edinburgh Review, 62, 409–455 1836. Review of Whewell 1835.
[Hamilton, 1836b] W. Hamilton. Notes. Edinburgh Review, 63, 272–275, 1836.
[Hankins, 1985] T. L. Hankins. Science and the Enlightenment. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Press, 1985.
[Hawkins, 1979] B. S. Hawkins. A reassessment of A. De Morgan’s logic of relations: a docu-
mentary reconstruction. International Logic Review, 10, 32–61, 1979.
[Hawkins, 1995] B. S. Hawkins. De Morgan, Victorian syllogistic and relational logic. Modern
Logic, 5, 131–166, 1995.
[Heath, 1966] P. Heath, ed. Introduction to De Morgan, On the Syllogism, and Other Logical
Writings, pp. vii–xxxi. London: Routledge, 1966.
[Hodges, 2000] W. Hodges. A formality. In JFAK: Essays dedicated to Johan van Benthem on
the Occasion of his 50th birthday. J. Gerbrandy, ed. (CD-ROM), 2000.
[Hodgkin, 1981] L. Hodgkin. Mathematics and revolution from Lacroix to Cauchy. In Social
History of Mathematics. H. Mehrtens, H. Bos and I. Schneider eds., pp. 50–71. Boston:
Birkhauser, 1981.
[Howson, 1982] A. G. Howson. A History of Mathematics Education in England. Cambridge:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1982.
[Jahnke and Otte, 1981] H. N. Jahnke and M. Otte. On ‘Science as a Language’. In Epistemo-
logical and Social Problems of the Science in the Early 19th Century. H. N. Jahnke and M.
Otte, eds. pp. 75–89. Amsterdam: Kluwer, 1981.
[Jevons, 1873] W. S. Jevons. Who discovered the quantiﬁcation of the predicate? Contemporary
Review, 21, 821–824, 1873.
[Kirwan, 1807] R. Kirwan. Logick. 2 vols. London, 1807.

454
Maria Panteki
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] M. Kneale and W. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1962.
[Koppelman, 1971] E. Koppelman. The calculus of operations and the rise of abstract algebra.
Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 8, 155–242, 1971.
[Kretzman, 1967] N. Kretzman. History of semantics. Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 7, P. Ed-
wards, ed., pp. 358–406. New York: MacMillan, 1967.
[Lacroix, 1816] S. F. Lacroix. An Elementary Treatise on the Diﬀerential and Integral Calculus.
Translated by C. Babbage, J. F. W. Herschel and G. Peacock. Cambridge: Deighton, 1816.
[Lacroix, 1828] S.
F.
Lacroix.
Essais
sur
l’enseignement
en
general
et
sur
celui
des
math´ematiques en particulier. Paris, 1828. First edition dated 1805.
[Laita, 1979] L. M. Laita. Inﬂuences of Boole’s logic: The controversy between William Hamilton
and A. De Morgan. Annals of Science, 36, 45–65, 1979.
[Laplace, 1795] P. S. Laplace. Le¸cons de math´ematiques profess´ees `a l’Ecole Normale en 1795.
In OEuvres compl`etes, Vol. XIV, pp. 10–177, 1795.
[Leibniz, 1890] G. W. Leibniz. Die philosophischen Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz.
C.I. Gerhardt, ed. Berlin: Weidmansche Buchhandlung, 1890.
[Lewis, 1918] C. Lewis A Survey of Symbolic Logic. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1918.
[Liard, 1878] J. H. Liard. Les logiciens anglais contemporains. Paris: Germer Bailli`ere, 1878.
[Locke, 1690] J. Locke. An essay concerning human understanding, 1690. Edited by J. W. Yolton
in 2 vols, 1961. Vol. I. London: Dent.
[MacFarlane, 1916] A. MacFarlane. Lectures on Ten British Mathematicians of the Nineteenth
Century. London: Chapman and Hall.
[Merrill, 1990] D. D. Merrill. Augustus De Morgan and the Logic of Relations. Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 1990.
[Merrill, 1996] D. D. Merrill. Making sense of Solly’s syllogistic symbolism. History and Philos-
ophy of Logic, 17, 199–207, 1996.
[Murphy, 1833] R. Murphy. Elementary Principles of the Theories of Electricity, Heat and
Molecular Action. Cambridge: Deighton, 1833.
[Nagel, 1935] E. Nagel. Impossible numbers. In Teleology Revisited and Other Essays in the
Philosophy and History of Science, E. Nagel, ed., pp. 166–194. New York: Columbia Univ.
1935.
[Novy, 1973] L. Novy. Origins of Modern Algebra. Leyden: Noordoﬀ/Prague: Academia, 1973.
[Otte and Panza, 1997] M. Otte and M. Panza, eds. Analysis and Synthesis in Mathematics.
History and Philosophy. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997.
[Panteki, 1987] M. Panteki. W. Wallace and the introduction of Continental calculus to Britain:
a letter to George Peacock. Historia Mathematica, 14, 119–132, 1987.
[Panteki, 1992] M. Panteki. Relationships between algebra, diﬀerential equations and logic in
England: 1800–1860. PhD dissertation, London (Council of National Academic Awards),
1992.
[Panteki, 1993] M. Panteki. Thomas Solly (1816–1875): an unknown pioneer of the mathema-
tization of logic in England, 1839. History and Philosophy of Logic, 14, 133–169, 1993.
[Panteki, 2000] M. Panteki. The mathematical background of George Boole’s Mathematical
Analysis of Logic (1847). In A Boole Anthology, J. Gasser, ed., pp. 167–212. Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 2000.
[Passmore, 1968] J. Passmore. A Hundred Years of Philosophy. London: Pelican, 1968.
[Peacock, 1830] G. Peacock. A Treatise on Algebra. Cambridge: Deighton, 1830.
[Peacock, 1834] G. Peacock. Report on the recent progress and present state of certain branches
of analysis. Report to the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 3, 185–352,
1834.
[Pratt, 1836] J. H. Pratt. The Mathematical Principles of Mechanical Philosophy. Cambridge:
Deighton, 1836.
[Prior, 1962] A. N. Prior. Formal Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962. First edition published
1955.
[Pycior, 1981] H. Pycior. George Peacock and the British origins of symbolic algebra. Historia
Mathematica, 8, 23–45m 1981.
[Pycior, 1982] H. Pycior. Early criticism of the symbolical approach to algebra. Historia Math-
ematica, 9, 392–412, 1982.
[Pycior, 1983] H. Pycior. Augustus De Morgan’s algebraic work: three stages. Isis, 74, 211–226,
1983.

French ‘Logique’ and British ‘Logic’
455
[Pycior, 1984] H. Pycior. Internalism, externalism and beyond: 19th-century British algebra.
Historia Mathematica, 11, 424–441, 1984.
[Rice, 1996] A. Rice. Augustus De Morgan: historian of science. History of Science, 34, 201–240,
1996.
[Rice, 1997a] A. Rice. Inspiration or desperation? Augustus De Morgan’s appointment to the
chair of mathematics at London University in 1828. British Journal of the History of Science,
30, 257–274, 1997.
[Rice, 1997b] A. Rice. Augustus De Morgan and the development of university mathematics in
London in the nineteenth century. PhD dissertation, Middlesex University, London, 1997.
[Rice, 1999] A. Rice. What makes a great mathematics teacher?
The case of Augustus De
Morgan. American Mathematical Monthly, 106, 534–552, 1999.
[Rice et al., 1995] A. Rice, R. J. Wilson, and J. H. Gardener. From student club to National
Society: the founding of the London Mathematical Society in 1865. Historia Mathematica,
22, 402–421, 1995.
[Richards, 1980] J. Richards. The art and the science of British algebra: a study in the percep-
tion of mathematical truth. Historia Mathematica, 7, 346–365, 1980.
[Richards, 1987] J. Richards. Augustus De Morgan, the history of mathematics, and the foun-
dation of algebra. Isis, 78, 7–30, 1987.
[Richards, 1988] J. Richards. Mathematical Visions: The Pursuit of Geometry in Victorian
England. Boston: Academic Press, 1988.
[Richards, 1991] J. Richards. Rigor and clarity: foundations of mathematics in France and Eng-
land, 1800–1840. Science in Context, 4, 297–319, 1991.
[Richards, 1992] J. Richards. God, truth, and mathematics in nineteenth century England. In
The Invention of Physical Science, M. N. Nye, et al., eds. pp. 51–78. Amsterdam: Kluwer,
1992.
[Richards, 2002] J. Richards. “In a rational world all radicals would be exterminated”: Mathe-
matics, Logic and Secular Thinking in Augustus De Morgan’s England. Science in Context,
15, 137–164, 2002.
[Rider, 1980] R. E. Rider. Mathematics in the Enlightenment; a study of algebra, 1685–1800.
PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 1980.
[Rider, 1990] R. E. Rider. Measure of ideas, rule of language: mathematics and language in the
18th century. In The Quantifying Spirit in the 18th Century, T. Frangsmyr, et al., eds., pp.
113–140. Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1990.
[Schubring, 1987] G. Schubring. On the methodology of analyzing historical textbooks: Lacroix
as textbook author. For the Learning of Mathematics, 7, 41–51, 1987.
[Schubring, 1996] G. Schubring. Changing cultural and epistemological views on mathematics
and diﬀerent institutional contexts in nineteenth-century Europe. In L’Europe math´ematique:
Histoires, mythes, identit´es, C. Goldstein, J. Gray and J. Ritter, eds. pp. 363–388. Paris:
Editions de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, 1996.
[Sherry, 1991] D. Sherry. The logic of impossible quantities. Studies of the History and Philos-
ophy of Science, 22, 37–62, 1991.
[Smith, 1980] G. C. Smith. De Morgan and the transition from inﬁnitesimals to limits. Aus-
tralian Mathematical Society Gazette, 2, 46–52, 1980.
[Smith, 1981] G. C. Smith. De Morgan and the laws of algebra. Centaurus, 25, 50–70, 1981.
[Smith, 1982] G. C. Smith, ed. The Boole–De Morgan Correspondence 1842–1864. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1982.
[Smith, 1984a] G. C. Smith. Robert Murphy. Monash University, Clayton, Australia, Paper No.
31.
[Smith, 1984b] G. C. Smith. British calculus texts: 1816–1848. Monash University, Clayton,
Australia, Paper No. 33.
[Solly, 1893] H. Solly. These Eighty Years. 2 vols. London: Simpkin, Marshall, 1893.
[Solly, 1839] T. Solly. A Syllabus of Logic. Cambridge: Deighton, 1839.
[Styazhkin, 1969] L. Styazhkin. History of Mathematical Logic from Leibniz to Peano. London:
MIT Press, 1969.
[Taton, 1959] R. Taton. Condorcet et Sylvestre Fran¸cois Lacroix. Revue d’Histoire des Sciences,
12, 127–158, 243–262, 1959.
[Todhunter, 1876] I. Todhunter, William Whewell: An Account of his Writings. 2 vols. London:
MacMillan, 1876.

456
Maria Panteki
[Topham, 2000] J. Topham. A textbook revolution. In Books and the Sciences in History, M.
Franca-Spada and N. Jardine, eds., pp. 317–337. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2000.
[Valencia, 2001] V. S. Valencia. An Athenaeum curiosity: De Morgan’s reviews of Boole and
Jevons. History and Philosophy of Logic, 22, 75–79, 2001.
[Van Evra, 1984] J. Van Evra. Richard Whately and the rise of modern logic. History and
Philosophy of Logic, 5, 1–18, 1984.
[Van Evra, 1992] J. Van Evra. Review of reprint of Bentham 1827. Modern Logic, 2, 405–408,
1992.
[Van Evra, 2000] J. Van Evra. The development of logic as reﬂected in the fate of the syllogism
1600–1900. History and Philosophy of Logic, 21, 115–134, 2000.
[Whately, 1826] R. Whately. Elements of Logic. London, 1826. Reprint by D. Dessi, ed. 1988.
Bologna: Instrumenta Rationis.
[Whately, 1848] R. Whately. Elements of Logic. London: Longman. Reprint of the ninth edition,
1864.
[Whewell, ] W. Whewell. Papers. Trinity College Library: Cambridge.
[Whewell, 1819] W. Whewell. An Elementary Treatise on Mechanics. Cambridge: Deighton.
1819
[Whewell, 1823] W. Whewell.A Treatise on Dynamics. Cambridge: Deighton, 1823.
[Whewell, 1830] W. Whewell. Theory of electricity, Encyclopedia Metropolitana, 4, 41–172,
1830. Oﬀprint dated 1845.
[Whewell, 1832a] W. Whewell. The First Principles of Mechanics: With Historical and Prac-
tical Illustrations. Cambridge: Deighton, 1832.
[Whewell, 1832b] W. Whewell. An Introduction to Dynamics. Cambridge: Deighton. 1932.
[Whewell, 1832c] W. Whewell. On the Free Motion of Points and on Universal Gravitation.
Cambridge: Deighton, 1832.
[Whewell, 1833] W. Whewell. Astronomy and General Physics. Cambridge: Deighton, 1833.
[Whewell, 1835] W. Whewell. Thoughts on the Study of Mathematics as Part of a Liberal Ed-
ucation. Cambridge: Deighton, 1835.
[Whewell, 1836a] W. Whewell. Note to the article on the study of mathematics. Edinburgh
Review, 63, 270–272, 1836.
[Whewell, 1836b] W. Whewell. An Elementary Treatise on Mechanics. Cambridge: Deighton,
1936. Fifth edition of [Whewell 1819].
[Whewell, 1837a] W. Whewell. The History of the Inductive Sciences,
3 vols. London:
Parker/Cambridge: Deighton, 1837.
[Whewell, 1837b] W. Whewell. Mechanical Euclid. Cambridge: Deighton, 1837.
[Whewell, 1837c] W. Whewell. On the Principles of English University Education. London,
1837. Pagination from its second edition, 1838.
[Wilson, 1980] C. A. Wilson. Perturbations and solar tables from Lacaille to Delambres: the
rapprochement of observation and theory, Part I. Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 22,
53–188, 1980.
[Woodhouse, 1818] R. Woodhouse. An Elementary Treatise on Astronomy. Vol. II on Physical
Astronomy, Cambridge: Deighton, 1818.
[Yeo, 1993] R. Yeo. Deﬁning Science. William Whewell. Natural Knowledge and Public Debate
in Early Victorian Britain. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993.

LEWIS CARROLL’S LOGIC
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
It is well known that Augustus de Morgan’s and George Boole’s works on logic
in the mid-nineteenth century opened the way to the mathematisation of logic. We
know much less about the work of de Morgan and Boole’s immediate followers, like
William Stanley Jevons, Hugh MacColl and John Venn. Historiography is almost
silent about the work of the majority of Britain’s logicians in the 1880s and 1890s.
Given that there was no Boolean tradition properly speaking, the historian is
confronted with a multitude of logicians with diﬀerent approaches and individual
conceptions. The study of the main authors of that period is thus necessary for a
better understanding of the status of logic during that very confusing intermediary
period where the old syllogistic was still taught, the new Boolean logic not yet
established, and Russell’s mathematical logic soon forthcoming [Grattan-Guinness,
1988; Anellis and Houser, 1991; Peckhaus, 1999].
Lewis Carroll was one of those writers on logic obscured by contradictory in-
ﬂuences, balanced between the old logic and the new trends. Unlike John Venn,
who had at Cambridge some close colleagues and students (like John N. Keynes,
William E. Johnson, and E. C. Constance Jones) who were acquainted with Boole’s
work, Lewis Carroll worked at Oxford almost alone in that line. His colleagues (like
Thomas Fowler and John Cook Wilson) were conservative in their approaches to
logic. In his Symbolic Logic, he described himself as “an obscure Writer on Logic,
towards the end of the Nineteenth Century.” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 184]. The object
of this chapter is to shed a light on Carroll’s work and legacy, and to discuss how
he became involved in logic, the main elements of his logical theory, notably his
symbolism, his diagrammatic scheme, his approach to the elimination problem and
his work on hypotheticals. We will also discuss his relationship with the logicians
of the time and assess his main contributions to logic.
Lewis Carroll’s “factual” biography is quite easy to summarise. Charles Lutwidge
Dodgson (the real name of Lewis Carroll1) was born on 27 January, 1832, at Dares-
bury (Cheshire, England). He took his BA at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1854 and
1Charles L. Dodgson used “Lewis Carroll” as a pseudonym for the ﬁrst time in 1856. The
editor of the magazine The Train, Edmund Yates, where he published some poems, asked him to
choose a pen name. Dodgson suggested ﬁrst Dares (for Daresbury, his native village). However,
on Yates’ demand, he sent him a new list of suggestions. On 11 February 1856, Dodgson recorded
in his diaries: “Wrote to Mr. Yates, sending him a choice of names, 1. Edgar Cuthwellis (made
by transposition out of “Charles Lutwidge”), 2. Edgar U. C. Westhill (ditto), 3. Louis Carroll
(derived from Lutwidge = Ludovic = Louis, and Charles), 4. Lewis Carroll (ditto).” [Wakeling,
1993, p. 39]. On 1 March, 1856, “Lewis Carroll was chosen.” [Ibidem]. It is well known that
Dodgson wanted to save his anonymity all throughout his life and that he always denied in public
being the same as Lewis Carroll, the author of the Alice tales. This fact led to the development
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

458
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
was appointed mathematical lecturer the next year. He remained at Christ Church
for the rest of his life, and died on 14 January, 1898 at Guildford (Surrey, Eng-
land). Though his many biographers report almost similarly the major events of
his life, there are disputes about his personality, his social life, and the signiﬁ-
cance of his work.2 The richness and complexity of his life might be illustrated
by his numerous activities and his impressive bibliography.3
He was a mathe-
matical teacher, the author of children’s tales, and photographer. He was also a
very proliﬁc letter-writer and puzzle-maker, and regularly wrote pamphlets and
letters to periodicals on matters as various as vaccination, teaching sciences at the
university, child actors, and vivisection.
Carroll’s fame is due mainly to his ﬁctional works, essentially the Alice books
— Alice’s adventures in wonderland (1865) and Through the looking-glass (1872)
— and some other books of ﬁction, which appeal essentially to children, such as
Phantasmagoria and other poems (1869), The hunting of the snark (1876), Sylvie
and Bruno (1889) and Sylvie and Bruno concluded (1893). As a mathematician,
the work he published for the most part under his real name dealt with geometry,
algebra, arithmetic, trigonometry, and political theory; but the majority of his
books and pamphlets were concerned with Euclidean geometry, on which he wrote
several textbooks. His mathematical works included the Elementary treatise on
determinants (1867), Euclid and his modern rivals (1879), Principles of Parlia-
mentary representation (1884), New theory of parallels (1888), Pillow problems
(1893), and some others.4 The logical works appeared later. They include two
during the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century of the dual personality myth, with on the one side
Charles Dodgson the dull teacher of mathematics and on the other Lewis Carroll the fantastic
author of child tales [Lebailly, 1996]. Less known is the fact that Charles Dodgson used many
other pseudonyms, like B. B., R. W. G., etc. One particularly widespread fable is that Queen
Victoria, having enjoyed the Alice tale, asked for the author’s other books and thus received
Dodgson’s mathematical works (there are many variants of this story). Lewis Carroll denied
the story in the second edition of Symbolic logic [Bartley, 1986, p.
49].
On Carroll’s use of
his pseudonym, see also [Gatt´egno, 1976, pp. 229-231; Humberstone, 1995]. In this chapter,
we preferred the use of the pseudonym Lewis Carroll for he signed his logical works with that
pseudonym.
2There are numerous biographies of Lewis Carroll, but they generally deal very little with
Carroll’s non-ﬁctional works. His nephew published the ﬁrst of these as early as 1898 [Colling-
wood, 1967]. The best available one is [Cohen, 1995]. For a discussion of the Carrollian myth and
of how Carroll’s biographers dealt with it, see Karoline Leach’s recent provocative work [Leach,
1999, pp. 15–60].
3The standard bibliography of Lewis Carroll’s works is [Williams-Madan, 1979]. It should
however be used with caution for it contains many errors and omissions [Heath, 1982]. For a
bibliography of Carroll’s contribution to periodicals, see [Lovett, 1999].
4Lewis Carroll’s work in mathematics is today well recognized in at least two areas: de-
terminants and political theory.
On determinants, he invented a new rule for the evaluation
of determinants by condensation [Dodgson, 1867; Abeles, 1986; Rice and Torrence, 2007]. In
political theory, he published several pamphlets dealing with the issues of voting, proportional
representation, choice theory and elections, etc. This work has been ﬁrst recognised by Duncan
Black [Black ,1958; McLean-McMillan-Monroe, 1996]. Carroll’s pamphlets on the subject have
been recently republished in one volume as [Abeles 2001]. As geometer, Lewis Carroll is essen-
tially remembered for his defence of Euclid [Dodgson, 1885], his new theory of parallels [Dodgson,
1890] and his numerous textbooks. Lewis Carroll also made some contributions to probabilities

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
459
textbooks, The Game of Logic (1886) and Symbolic Logic (1896), two contribu-
tions to the journal of philosophy Mind: “A logical paradox” (1894), and “What
the Tortoise said to Achilles” (1895), as well as some other minor works, circulars,
and notes.
1
ON THE WAY TO LOGIC
1.1
Early interests in logic
Although all Carroll’s published works in logic appeared after 1885, his interest in
the subject was much older. In a letter dated 29 December, 1891, to his nephew
Collingwood, he wrote that his interest in logic was forty-years-old:
“At present, when you try to give reasons, you are in considerable
danger of propounding fallacies. Instances occur in this little essay of
yours; and I hope it won’t oﬀend your amour propre very much, if an
old uncle, who has studied Logic for forty years, makes a few remarks
on it” [Collingwood, 1967, p. 299].
Carroll’s diaries conﬁrm his early interest in logic. In the 13 March, 1855 entry, he
includes logic in his reading plan: “Second Logic, ﬁnish Mill and dip into Dugald
Stewart” [Wakeling, 1993, p.
74].
Again, on 6 September, 1855, he records:
“Wrote part of a treatise on Logic, for the beneﬁt of Margaret and Annie Wilcox”
[Wakeling ,1993, p. 129]. This is the ﬁrst reference to his own work on logic.
Certainly, logic was not yet his main interest, but it was probably never com-
pletely absent, as attested to by the numerous logical references in his diaries and
letters, and in his other literary and mathematical works.
In fact, more than his logic textbooks, Lewis Carroll’s fame among logicians
is due mainly to his ﬁctional works, particularly the two Alice tales. In 1918,
Philip E. B. Jourdain annexed to each chapter of his book The philosophy of Mr.
B*rtr*nd R*ss*ll an extract from Carroll’s literary works, particularly from the
Alice books [Jourdain, 1991, p. 335-342]. A. J. Ayer, C. D. Broad, P. Geach, G. E.
Moore, W. V. Quine, B. Russell, G. Ryle, L. Wittgenstein, and many others also
refer to the Alice books and its characters (Humpty-Dumpty, the Cheshire Cat, the
Mad Hatter, the Tweedle brothers, etc) in their works [Heath, 1974, p. 247-249].
Quickly, commentators presented Alice as the work of an “unconscious” logician
who is more ingenious than what we will ﬁnd later in the logic textbooks. The
view that without his mathematical and logical avocation, Lewis Carroll would be
unable to write the Alice books is today largely accepted. It was well explained by
Peter Alexander in his “Logic and the humour of Lewis Carroll”, where he claims
that:
[Seneta, 1993; Dale 1999, pp. 447-464], cryptology [Abeles, 2005b], and recreational mathematics
[Gardner, 1960]. Many anthologies of Carrollian puzzles and problems appeared [Fisher, 1973;
Wakeling, 1992; 1995a; Gardner, 1996]. Lewis Carroll’s mathematical pamphlets were published
in one volume as [Abeles, 1994a]. For more information on Carroll as mathematician, see also
[Eperson, 1933; Weaver, 1956; Beale, 1973; Seneta, 1984].

460
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
“[I]f Lewis Carroll had not been a logician as well as an artist the
“Alice” books would have been much less convincing and aesthetically
satisfying than they are [. . . ] Now, in my view, it was Carroll’s train-
ing in logic which showed him how to construct a setting within which
inconsistency would appear inevitable, and so convincing; or more pre-
cisely, showed him how to use a common fairy-tale setting to contain
more than any normal fairy-tale ever contained.” [Alexander, 1944, p.
551].
This view is perfectly defensible.5
However, there is a tendency in some com-
mentaries to overestimate the logical (and more widely mathematical and philo-
sophical) background of the Alice tales. It has even been written that Alice was a
treatise of logic, and that Lewis Carroll, by writing it, wanted to provide lessons in
correct reasoning to his children readers. There is no evidence for that. It is more
convincing to think that there are no such morals in the Alice books. Remember
how, in the tale, Carroll makes fun of the lessons British children learn in their
schools. One could go further and say that the success of the book is partly due
to the non-existence of a moral. In a radio program, commenting the Alice book,
Bertrand Russell conﬁrms this viewpoint: “. . . When I was young, it was the only
children’s book that hadn’t got a moral. We all got very tired of the morals in
books.” [Russell, 1996, p. 522-523].
Carroll’s early logical avocation is also indicated in his mathematical writings
where he gave a particular importance to the logical structure of the arguments.
His teaching at Oxford coincided with a wide debate in British schools and Colleges
on the use of Euclid’s Elements for teaching geometry. Until the mid-nineteenth
century, Euclid’s book had been the standard textbook for teaching geometry in
England.
But in the 1860s, a number of mathematics teachers questioned the
adequacy of Euclid’s Elements and called for it to be replaced by other texts
[Brock, 1975; Richards, 1988, pp. 161–198; Mokteﬁ, 2007].
In Euclid and his
modern rivals, Dodgson collected together the main textbooks which were intended
to supersede Euclid. He meticulously analysed them. Then he refuted them and
loudly claimed the superiority of Euclid’s book for teaching geometry [Dodgson,
1885]. For Euclid’s defenders, Euclid’s Elements was a textbook of logic as well as
of geometry. Teaching Euclid was an instrument for training the reasoning faculty.
W. H. Brock wrote that:
“[T]he more serious argument in favour of Euclid [. . . ] was formal;
Euclid did not teach geometry but orderly thinking. It was an edu-
cational masterpiece because it concentrated on manipulating things
deductively (and not merely symbols of things, as in algebra). Such
mind-training would prove useful in later life and in science.” [Brock,
1975, p. 26]
5There are at least two annotated editions of Lewis Carroll’s Alice books where the readers
may ﬁnd a good deciphering of the logical structures employed by Carroll in his tales [Heath,
1974; Gardner, 2001].

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
461
Carroll’s work on geometry led him to discuss the validity of arguments, and in
fact, many of the concepts he will introduce later in his logical works already
appear in his geometry books.
There are other connections which help us understand Lewis Carroll’s interest in
logic. In his private writings he often linked logic with religious thought. As early
as 2 February 1857, he recorded in his diaries how correct reasoning is important
for religious belief [Wakeling 1995b, p. 18]. Much later, he insisted in many of his
letters on the importance of logical argumentation in sermons. For example, in a
letter to his nephew S. D. Collingwood, he wrote that:
“The bad logic that occurs in many and many a well-meant sermon,
is a real danger to modern Christianity. When detected, it may se-
riously injure many believers, and ﬁll them with miserable doubts.”
[Collingwood, 1967, p. 301]
Later, he planned to publish a book on religious matters from a logical viewpoint.
In a letter to his publisher, he described it as:
“. . . an attempt to treat some of the religious diﬃculties of the day from
a logical point of view, in order to help those, who feel such diﬃculties,
to get their ideas clear, and to see what are the logical results of the
various views held. Venn’s Hulsean Lectures, which I have just met
with, called Characteristics of Belief,6 is very much on those lines, but
deals with only one such diﬃculty.” [Cohen-Gandolfo, 1987, p. 319]
Unfortunately the book never appeared. However, Carroll’s letters to an agnostic
give an idea of the kind of questions he would have discussed in this book [Abeles,
1994a, 5-8].
1.2
The Game of logic
In his later years, Carroll focused solely on logic. This revival is shown by the
reappearance of entries of logical content in his diaries.
On 25 May 1876, he
recorded: “Have been writing a good deal today about Logic in algebraical nota-
tion (Boole’s plan but with an addition which occurred to me the other day, the
representation of “some a are b” by “ab not equal to 0,”7 instead of “va = b”):
today I further improved it by making it “ab > 0,” which exactly expresses the
logical truth. I have been putting “Barbara” etc. into this notation.” [Wakeling,
2001, pp. 463-464]. This is a rare proof that Carroll knew Boole’s work before the
1880s. Another reference to Boole occurs on 20 November, 1884 when he wrote:
6In his introduction, Venn explains that he treated the question of belief with a logical ap-
proach: “The method of treatment here adopted is logical and not metaphysical, and on the
ﬁeld of logic, as a great authority has told us, people of the most opposite schools may meet and
shake hands.” [Venn, 1970, p. vi].
7This is how the entry appears in the recent edition of Carroll’s diaries by Edward Wakeling.
However, in an early study of Carroll’s logic, Wakeling published the same journal entry with
the symbol “̸=” instead of the expression “not equal to”. [Wakeling, 1978, p. 14].

462
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
“In these last few days I have been working at a Logical Algebra, and seem to
be getting to a simpler notation than Boole’s.” [Wakeling, 2004, p. 153]. This
entry is the ﬁrst of a long and regular list, which testiﬁes that logic became an
important preoccupation for Carroll and occupied a good deal of his time. On 29
March 1885, he made a list of his “literary projects” and included “A symbolical
logic, treated by my algebraic method.” [Wakeling, 2004, p. 180]. The idea of
writing his ﬁrst logic textbook, entitled The Game of logic, occurred to him in
1886, recorded in his 24 July diary’s entry:
“The idea occurred to me this morning of beginning my “logic” publi-
cation, not with “book I” of the full work “Logic for Ladies” but with
a small pamphlet and a cardboard diagram, to be called The Game of
Logic. I have during the day written most of the pamphlet.” [Wakeling,
2004, p. 285]
The pamphlet became a book, which appeared the same year under the suggestive
title The Game of Logic. However, since Carroll was not satisﬁed with the printing
quality, he condemned this edition, and a new one appeared the next year [Imholtz,
2003a]. The title of the book and its preface are perfectly clear about Carroll’s
aims in publishing it. It is presented essentially as a game where, thanks to its
use of a board and counters, the players could ﬁnd it amusing to draw conclusions
from a set of premises. But more than a game, Carroll conceived the book to
popularise logic and thought it could be a source of instruction too:
“A second advantage, possessed by this game, is that, besides being an
endless source of amusement (the number of arguments, that may be
worked by it, being inﬁnite), it twill give the Players a little instruction
as well. But is there any great harm in that, so long as you get plenty
of amusement?” [Carroll, 1958b, unpaged preface]
The book is divided into four chapters: The ﬁrst explains brieﬂy the laws of the
game, the second is a collection of problems, the third gives their answers and the
fourth is a list of problems without answers. Each copy of the book is accompanied
by an envelope containing a diagram on a card, and nine counters, four red and ﬁve
grey. In order to make his game accessible to a large public, Carroll took special
care when writing it. He signed it with his “literary” pseudonym to guarantee
better publicity. The style is very familiar and the problems (where we ﬁnd a
variety of fabulous characters) are often funny.
The Game of logic had a mixed reception from reviewers. An anonymous review
published in The Literary World is very instructive on the diﬃculty of understand-
ing the book as it swings between seriousness and fun. Its author compares Lewis
Carroll to Dickens’ Dr Blimber!
He asks how such a book (on such a subject)
could interest children:
“We confess to having spent some minutes in trying to make out just
how children are to be persuaded to enjoy Mr. Lewis Carroll’s new

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
463
book, The Game of Logic, with its accompanying diagrams and red
and grey wafers [. . . ] We seem to see some pale little Dombey junior
bending a puzzled brow over the book, and trying to convince himself
that it is fun and a game, and not hard work under a thin disguise;
but a sturdy boy, not of the little Paul order and not educated by Dr.
Blimber, would, we are inclined to think, spurn The Game of Logic as
a stupid sham, black rabbits, greedy rabbits, pink pigs, and all, and
clamor for some play that is really play, or else some study that is
really study, on the principle that two things, each good in itself, often
make when mixed a third thing which is neither good nor desirable.”
[Anonymous, 1887]
Thus, despite all Carroll’s hard work, it is diﬃcult to say that The Game of Logic
enjoyed a large success, and it seems that logic fascinated neither children nor
adults.
1.3
Symbolic Logic
Ten years after the publication of The Game of Logic, Carroll published his second
book on the subject, entitled more seriously Symbolic Logic. It was planned to
publish it in three parts. However, only part one, subtitled Elementary, appeared
in 1896 and had three other printings within a year.
Carroll again introduces
his diagrammatic method, but in a more complete and precise way than The
Game of Logic. In his successive prefaces and introductions, Carroll insists on the
importance of logic both as a source of instruction and a mental recreation.
Symbolic Logic. Part 1 contains eight parts called “books”. Lewis Carroll intro-
duces ﬁrst the important logical concepts of things and their attributes (Book I)
and propositions (Book II). Then he introduces his biliteral and triliteral diagrams
(Books III and IV). The next books deal with syllogisms (Book V), the method of
subscripts (Book VI) and sorites (Book VII). Book VIII is a collection of examples
with answers and solutions. Finally, an appendix, addressed to teachers concludes
the book.
The book seems to have been well received by its reviewers. An anonymous
review in the Educational Times described it as “a tour de force of originality,
throwing light on its subject from fresh angles.”[Anonymous, 1896, p. 316]. How-
ever, it obtained only little attention from logicians.8 Rather more appreciated for
8One notable exception was Hugh MacColl who reviewed Carroll’s book for The Athenaeum.
The review was anonymous, however thanks to the Athenaeum marked copies owned by City
University library (London), one can identify Hugh MacColl as its author.
The review was
critical but appreciative [Maccoll, 1896]. Later on, in a letter sent to Bertrand Russell, dated
17 May 1905, he reported how his reading of Carroll’s Symbolic logic encouraged him to return
to logical investigations after about 13 years of abstention: “. . . for. . . twelve or thirteen years,
I devoted my leisure hours to general literature. Then a friend sent me Mr. Dodgson’s (‘Lewis
Carroll’s’) Symbolic Logic, a perusal of which rekindled the old ﬁre which I thought extinct. My
articles since then I believe to be far more important from the point of view of general logic than
my earliest ones. . . ” [Astroh-Grattan-Guinness-Read, 2001, pp. 93-94]

464
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
its humorous examples, its problems were largely reprinted, adapted and imitated
in modern logical manuals. Its scientiﬁc content, elementary as Lewis Carroll him-
self stated it to be, drew little attention, despite the fact that it contained many
interesting inventions.
Carroll was still working on parts 2 and 3 of his Symbolic Logic, intended to be
sub-titled “advanced” and “transcendental”, when he died on January 1898. In a
letter to his sister Louisa, dated 28 September, 1896, he expressed the importance
he gave to these sequels, and even abandoned other projects in order to accomplish
the logic books ﬁrst:
“So I have decided to get Part II [of Symbolic Logic] ﬁnished ﬁrst: and
I am working at it, day and night. I have taken to early rising, and
sometimes sit down to my work before 7, and have 1 1/2 hours at it
before breakfast. The book will be a great novelty, and will help, I fully
believe, to make the study of Logic far easier that it now is: and it will,
I also believe, be a help to religious thoughts, by giving clearness of
conception and of expression, which may enable many people to face,
and conquer, many religious diﬃculties for themselves. So I do really
regard it as work for God.” [Cohen-Green, 1979, p. 1100].
Unfortunately, Lewis Carroll died before accomplishing that promising work. Lo-
gicians thought that the works were lost. Only few believed that the manuscripts
and galley proofs survived. Peter Geach was among them, as is shown by his letter
to the Times literary supplement, published on 26 December, 1968:
“At the time of Lewis Carroll’s death, his Symbolic Logic, Part 2, ex-
isted in proof; but apart from a small fragment in the library of Christ
Church, Oxford, these proofs have disappeared. It is possible, however,
that some complete set of them may exist somewhere; Lewis Carroll
used to send round his work in proof for his friends’ comments. It
would be a great service to scholarship if this work could be found.”
[Geach, 1968]
It was however only in 1977, that the American philosopher, W. W. Bartley III,
published large surviving fragments of the second part of Lewis Carroll’s Symbolic
Logic [Bartley, 1986]. The book, which also reproduces part I, contains the galley
proofs discovered by Bartley, and many other manuscripts, notes and letters on
logical matters.
Bartley’s edition is often said to be the best presentation of
Carroll’s logic ever to be produced. Some authors referred to it as if it was a
deﬁnitive edition.
However, this claim can be challenged.
In eﬀect, Bartley’s
edition is more a collection of surviving manuscripts than a “real” part II.
In an advertisement for part I, Carroll describs brieﬂy the contents of parts
II and III. The former would discuss, among other subjects, “propositions of
other forms”, “triliteral and multiliteral propositions”, hypotheticals and dilem-
mas. Only a few of these subjects appeared to any extent in the volume published
by Bartley, which, of course, didn’t include anything of the expected contents

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
465
of part III as announced by Carroll (Analysis of a proposition into its elements,
numerical and geometrical problems, the theory of inference, the construction of
problems, “and many other Curiosa Logica”). Otherwise, among the eight books
contained by Bartley’s reconstitution of Part II, two books ( IX and X) are in
fact extracts from the appendix of part I, and three are exclusively collections of
problems and their solutions (Books XIII, XIV and XXII). The three remaining
books are a collection of puzzles (Book XXI), a book on symbols and logical charts
(Book XI written essentially by the editor) and a presentation of the method of
trees (Book XII which is probably the most interesting book of part II). Also,
there is a gap between chapters XIV and XXI. Finally, the books themselves are
probably somewhat diﬀerent from what Carroll himself would have published. Not
only were the galley proofs published here sent to friends to be corrected, but one
could note that the books of part II are too long and irregular comparative to the
books of part I. When we remember that Carroll planned to publish later the three
parts of his Symbolic Logic in one volume,9 one could suppose he intended to give
the chapters somewhat equal weight. So, in spite of the high quality of Bartley’s
editorship, historians of logic must always remember when using the book that it
is not exactly part II of Symbolic Logic, but rather a collection of Carroll’s sur-
viving logical papers, including letters, pamphlets and other manuscripts, some
which were intended for part II.
In his introduction (and in the various articles he published prior to the publica-
tion of the book), Bartley claimed a higher place for Lewis Carroll among logicians
[Bartley, 1972; 1973; 1986]. But his enthusiasm is not shared by everybody. Pe-
ter Geach for example, though recognizing the richness of Carroll’s problems and
puzzles, accused Bartley of having absurdly exaggerated Carroll’s merits [Geach,
1978]. Peter Alexander is more severe:
“It is not the fault of the Editor, who deserves our thanks, that this
book is likely to disappoint the Carroll-addicts, among whom I count
myself, who have an interest in logic. It reveals Carroll as less inventive,
less able to proﬁt from the available literature and less philosophically
acute than the “Alice” books lead one to expect.” [Alexander, 1978,
p. 350]
Some other historians of mathematics were more positive. They expected that
this new publication would widen Lewis Carroll’s reputation. For example, Ivor
Grattan-Guinness concluded his review with optimism:
“Lewis Carroll subtitled Symbolic Logic ‘A fascinating mental recre-
ation for the young’. I trust that this edition will help stimulate a
long overdue re-appraisal of Carroll as a logician suitable for the atten-
9In a letter to his publisher Macmillan, dated 1 February, 1893, Carroll writes: “My idea is
to divide the work into 3 Parts, viz. “Elementary,” “Advanced,” and “Higher,” and to publish
them separately, in paper covers (or perhaps stiﬀcovers, like picture-books), and also the 3 Parts
in one volume, in cloth.” [Cohen-Gandolfo, 1987, p. 290].

466
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
tion of the adults, and not just as a puzzle-setter for juvenile minds.”
[Grattan-Guinness, 1979, p. 653].
Though Bartley’s edition has been globally well received, it is not certain that
it has changed Carroll’s reputation as a “logician for children”, among both lo-
gicians and Carrollian scholars. In eﬀect, it is generally assumed that he was an
“unconscious” logician, that he considered logic as a game, and that he intended
his work for children. It is clear that these generally received ideas harm an objec-
tive understanding and a correct appreciation of Lewis Carroll’s work as a logician
[Mokteﬁ, 2005, pp. 139-140]. Let us now look at the content of the logical works
themselves.
2
CLASSES AND PROPOSITIONS
2.1
Things and their attributes
Symbolic Logic opens with a chapter of deﬁnitions on things and their attributes.
The universe contains things. Things have attributes. Any attribute, or any set
of attributes, may be called an “adjunct”.
Classes are the result of a mental
process called classiﬁcation “in which we imagine that we have put together, in
a group, certain Things.
Such a group is called a ‘Class’.”
[Carroll,1958a, p.
11/2]. Note that Carroll constructs his logical concepts by mental processes. There
are two important concepts, which permit us to understand fully Carroll’s logic
of classes: The universe of discourse and the division by dichotomy. Both were
widely discussed by nineteenth century British logicians.
The notion of universe of discourse seems to have been ﬁrst introduced by
Augustus de Morgan [DeMorgan, 1966, p. 2] and then to have been used by Boole
and his followers [Coumet, 1976, pp. 182-186]. In Carroll’s logic, the Universe is
the class “Things” obtained when we have put together all things [Carroll, 1958a,
p. 11/2]. The Universe of discourse, however, is the Genus of which the two terms
of a proposition are specieses10 [Carroll, 1958a, p. 12].
Example:
In the proposition:
“No one takes the Times, unless he is well-
educated.”, the subject is “persons who are not well-educated”, the predicate
is “persons taking the Times” and the Universe of discourse (Univ.) is thus “per-
sons”. [Carroll, 1958a, p. 15]
The notion of division was also widely known in nineteenth century British
logic [Keynes, 1906, pp. 441-449]. Lewis Carroll deﬁnes it as “a Mental Process,
10The notions of “Genus” and “Species”, together with “peculiar”, and “Diﬀerentia” are in-
troduced by Carroll in the chapter II on classiﬁcation: “We may think of the class “Things,”
and may imagine that we have picked out from it all the things which possess a certain Adjunct
not possessed by the whole Class. This Adjunct is said to be ‘Peculiar’ to the Class so formed.
In this case, the Class “Things” is called a ‘Genus’ with regard to the Class so formed: the
Class, so formed, is called a ‘Species’ of the Class “Things”: and its peculiar Adjunct is called
its ‘Diﬀerentia’.” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 11/2]

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
467
in which we think of a certain Class of Things, and imagine that we have divided
it into two or more smaller Classes” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 3]. Division by dichotomy
is the particular case when we divide a class into two (and only two) distinct
complementary subclasses: x and not-x. Here is Carroll’s deﬁnition of Dichotomy:
“If we think of a certain Class, and imagine that we have picked out
from it a certain smaller Class, it is evident that the Remainder of the
large Class does not possess the Diﬀerentia of that smaller Class. Hence
it may be regarded as another smaller Class, whose Diﬀerentia may be
formed, from that of the Class ﬁrst picked out, by preﬁxing the word
“not”; and we may imagine that we have divided the Class ﬁrst thought
of into two smaller Classes, whose Diﬀerentiae are contradictory. This
kind of Division is called ‘Dichotomy’.”[Carroll, 1958a, p. 31/2]
Division and particularly dichotomy surely have taken an important place in
the history of logic, particularly British symbolic logic in the nineteenth century.
One can link it to such fundamental issues as Boole’s law of duality, Jevons’s
logical Alphabet and Venn’s compartmental view of logic. From this viewpoint,
Carroll may really be deﬁned as one of Boole’s followers. Unlike many of them,
Carroll went even further and claimed a perfect symmetry between the two classes
(x and not-x) resulting from dichotomy, and regarded them on the same footing
in his logical system. This matter is discussed in the third part of his appendix
addressed to teachers, in which he condemned the Logicians’ “morbid dread of
negative Attributes” [Carroll 1958a, 172].11 Carroll argues that:
“Under the inﬂuence of this unreasoning terror, they plead that, in
Dichotomy by Contradiction, the negative part is too large to deal
with, so that it is better to regard each Thing as either included in, or
excluded from, the positive part. I see no force in this plea: and the
facts often go the other way [. . . ] For the purposes of Symbolic Logic,
it is so much the most convenient plan to regard the two sub-divisions,
produced by Dichotomy, on the same footing, and to say, of any Thing,
either that it “is” in the one, or that it “is” in the other, that I do not
think any Reader of this book is likely to demur to my adopting that
course.” [Carroll, 1958, 172]
We will see later how Carroll gave an important role to the symmetry between a
term and his negation, in his diagrammatic representation of propositions.
2.2
Propositions
Propositions are introduced in book II (that is chapter II) of Symbolic logic. When
in normal form, a Carrollian proposition, as in traditional logic, consists of four
parts: the sign of quantity (“some” or “no” or “all”), the name of subject, the
11On Lewis Carroll’s treatment of negation, see also [Englebretsen-Gilday 1976].

468
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
copula, and the name of predicate. However, Carroll distinguishes only three kinds
of propositions according to their sign of quantity [Carroll, 1958a, p. 10]:
1. Particular (proposition in I): “Some x are y”.
2. Universal negative (proposition in E): “No x are y”.
3. Universal aﬃrmative (proposition in A): “All x are y”.
There is no particular treatment for propositions in O in Carroll’s logic, given that
he didn’t distinguish between aﬃrmative and negative particulars. In eﬀect, he
considered that the propositions in O “Some A is-not B” could be reduced to the
I form “Some A is not-B”. [Carroll, 1958a, pp. 171–172]
He also distinguished two kinds of propositions according to what they assert:
propositions of existence and propositions of relation. Proposition of existence
have the class “existing Things” for its subject and asserts “the Reality (i.e. the
real existence), or else the Imaginariness, of its Predicate.” [Carroll, 1958a, p.
11]. Its sign of quantity is “some” or “no”.
Examples:
“Some honest men exist”
“No men 50 feet high exist”
Propositions of relation “assert that a certain relationship exists between its Terms”
[Carroll, 1958a, p. 12]. In the ﬁrst part of Symbolic Logic, he discusses only propo-
sitions of relation where the terms are specieses of the same Genus (which is the
Universe of discourse) and “each of the two Names conveys the idea of some
Attribute not conveyed by the other” [Carroll, 1958a, p.
12].
Propositions of
existence’s signs of quantity are “some”, “no” and “all”.
Examples:
“Some apples are not-ripe fruit”.
“No not-brave persons are persons deserving of the fair”.
“All men who do not know what ‘toothache’ means are happy men”.
Lewis Carroll deﬁnes propositions of relation in A as a double proposition equiv-
alent to the conjunction of two propositions (in I and E). Thus the proposition
“All x are y” is equivalent to the two propositions “Some x are y” and “No x is
not-y” [Carroll, 1958a, pp. 17-18].
Example:
“All bankers are rich men” is equivalent to the two propositions:
1. “Some bankers are rich men”.
2. “No bankers are poor men”.

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
469
This equivalence leads Carroll to his decision on the existential import of propo-
sitions. Since universal aﬃrmative propositions contain “necessarily” particular
propositions, Carroll adopts the view that I and A propositions assert the exis-
tence of their subject while E doesn’t [Carroll, 1958a, p. 19 and pp. 165-171].
Though Carroll’s view is diﬀerent from the modern use, he however carefully de-
fends the view that such a choice is a matter of convenience and that “every writer
may adopt his own rule, provided of course that it is consistent with itself and
with the accepted facts of Logic.” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 166]. It is even possible
that Carroll later changed his mind on the question, as is suggested by some late
private writings recently rediscovered [Bartley 1986, pp. 34-35; and Abeles 2005a,
p. 45].
2.3
Symbolism
Most of Carroll’s rules for symbolic representation of propositions appears in the
introductory chapter to the sixth book.
However, some rules were introduced
earlier for classes. Terms are represented by lower case letters (x, y, z, etc.) and
their negation can be represented simply by adding a small accent mark. Thus
not-x may be represented by x′. Propositions in which the terms are represented
by letters are said to be abstract while they are said to be concrete when the
terms are represented by words [Carroll, 1958a, p. 59]. In order to translate a
concrete proposition (Example: “Some soldiers are brave”) into abstract form, we
may simply determine the universe (men) and symbolize the terms (x = soldiers
and y = brave) to obtain the abstract form “Some x are y”.
Carroll provided an easy method to represent propositions by reducing all of
them to propositions of existence12 which are easily represented. The symbolic
representation of propositions follows Carroll’s method of subscripts. All one has
to do is to index a subscript to the symbols of the classes in order to indicate their
existence or emptiness. For instance, given the term x, the subscript 1 indicates
that there are some x.
Thus, x1 means that “Some existing things have the
attribute x” or more brieﬂy that “Some x exist”. Such a proposition is called an
entity. In the same way, the subscript 0 annexed to x means that there are no
x. Thus, x0 means that “no existing things have the attribute x” or more brieﬂy
that “No x exist”. Such a proposition is called a nullity. Also, Carroll introduces
the dagger sign ‘†’ which means “and”.
For implication, he uses the reversed
paragraph sign ‘
¶
’ and writes that it should mean: “would, if true, prove” [Carroll
1958a, p. 70].13 Finally, he uses the therefore symbol ∴as a solution indicator for
logic problems.
This method allows him to represent the various propositions he has already
deﬁned. “Some x are y” is equivalent to “some xy exist” which can easily be
12Some authors observed similarities between Carroll’s method and that of Franz C. Brentano
[Church, 1960, p. 264]. However, there is no evidence for any inﬂuence between the two logicians.
13Carroll already made the same use of the reversed paragraph sign in the ﬁrst edition of Euclid
and his modern rivals [Dodgson, 1879] but dropped it in the second edition [Dodgson, 1885].

470
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
represented as xy1. In the same way, “No x are y” is equivalent to “No xy exist”
and could be represented as xy0. Finally, in order to represent the proposition
“All x are y”, Carroll assumes it to be equivalent to the double proposition “some
x exist” and “no xy′ exist”.14 He thus represented it as x1†xy′
0, which can also be
shortened to “x1y′
0”, given that “each Subscript takes eﬀect back to the beginning
of the expression.” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 72].
This is the method that Carroll uses to represent classes and propositions in the
ﬁrst part of Symbolic logic, where letters were used only to represent terms. Among
all the symbolisms that ﬂourished in the second half of the nineteenth century,
Carroll’s is not the easiest to manipulate.
It has however its own advantages,
notably, unlike many other early symbolisms, its clear distinction between terms
and propositions, at least in this ﬁrst part of Symbolic Logic [Quine, 1977, p. 1018;
Geach, 1978, p. 124].
In the surviving writings that Bartley used to reconstruct the second part of
Symbolic Logic, Carroll seems to have used letters to represent propositions too.
The matter is not clear owing to the non-completeness of the surviving material,
and to Carroll’s use of the same letters also for terms in the same material, for
reasons of convenience. We lack a clear understanding of how Carroll jumps from
terms to propositions, and the surviving material doesn’t actually help us. Propo-
sitions are also represented by capital letters in Carroll’s two contributions to
Mind, which we will discuss later. We know that he also introduced other symbols
described by Bartley in the ﬁrst chapter of book XI. For disjunction, Carroll would
introduce the sign ‘§’ to symbolize “or” in the nonexclusive sense, while equiva-
lence is represented by the triple-bar (≡). Thus, “a ≡b” should be interpreted as
“a
¶
b † b
¶
a” [Bartley, 1986, p. 256].
It is diﬃcult to evaluate the status which Carroll gave to symbolism. Like the
majority of the key-issues of the book, he didn’t comment upon his choices, not
even in the appendix addressed to teachers. The question should have been im-
portant for him given that he entitled his book Symbolic Logic, which is somewhat
too serious for a book intended for a wide public and signed with his pseudonym.
Quine thought that some of the uses that Carroll made of symbols suggest that
“the algebraic notation is for him less a medium of calculation than a shorthand.
The thought is borne out as we read on: he is given to testing implications by de-
scriptive rules rather than by algebraic transformations.” [Quine 1977, p. 1018].
One may adhere to Quine’s judgment, but one should also keep in mind that Car-
roll’s use of symbols is unevan throughout his textbook. The passages in which
he clearly searches for methods for solving problems suggest a more “automatic”
treatment. Carroll’s symbolism was not adopted by any other logician after him.
His diagrammatic representation had more success.
14Note that Carroll’s view here is slightly diﬀerent from the earlier deﬁnition of propositions
in A [Carroll, 1958a, pp. 17-18] which, according to him, contains “superﬂuous information”
[Carroll, 1958a, p. 72]. See also [Englebretsen, 1983, pp. 40-41].

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
471
3
THE DIAGRAMMATIC REPRESENTATION OF LOGICAL
PROPOSITIONS
3.1
Logic diagrams
Logic diagrams constitute the central object of Lewis Carroll’s logical writings pub-
lished during his lifetime. He ﬁrst published them in The Game of Logic (1886),
before explaining their use more extensively ten years later in the ﬁrst part of
Symbolic Logic. Of course, the use of diagrams in logic is much older [Davenport,
1952; Baron, 1969; Gardner, 1983]. Though it is diﬃcult to locate with precision
the introduction of such methods in logic, one can assert with more conﬁdence
that it is with the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler’s Lettres `a une princesse
d’Allemagne, published in 1768, that the use of logic diagrams became more rig-
orous and more popular [Euler, 2003]. However, It became obvious with Boole’s
work that Euler’s diagrams were hardly adaptable to solve some more complicated
problems involving more than three terms. A new diagrammatic scheme was thus
invented by Cambridge logician John Venn. He ﬁrst published them in 1880 [Venn,
1880b], and expounded them in more detail later in his Symbolic logic [Venn, 1971].
Venn’s major innovation was to represent classes ﬁrst and then propositions. One
begins by drawing a diagram representing all the possible combinations of the n
terms involved in the problem (that is 2n combinations). Then, in order to rep-
resent the information contained in the premises of the problem, we introduce
graphical devices to express the emptiness or non-emptiness of the compartments.
For instance, we shade the compartment xy to represent the proposition “no x is
y”. However, Venn’s scheme suﬀered from some deﬁciencies such as its ambigu-
ity in the representation of existential and disjunctive propositions, a matter that
would be more satisfactorily treated later by Charles S. Peirce [Peirce, 1933, pp.
307-315].
Carroll’s diagrams are Venn-type diagrams, in the sense that he too represents
classes ﬁrst, then propositions with graphical devices. Still, his approach is quite
diﬀerent from that of Venn. He starts by representing the universe of discourse by
a square (ﬁgure 1). We divide the square horizontally to obtain two subdivisions
corresponding respectively to x and not-x (ﬁgure 2).15 If we would like to add a
second term y, we have just to divide again our square vertically. We thus obtain
four subdivisions corresponding respectively to the sub-classes xy, x not-y, not-xy
and not-x not-y (ﬁgure 3). Carroll calls this diagram a biliteral diagram.
15This diagram (ﬁgure 2) is called by Lewis Carroll a mononomial diagram in the proofs of
an early table of contents of the book, surviving in the Berol Collection of Lewis Carrol (Fales
Library, New York University) as 2B/12/511C.

472
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 1
x
not-x
x
y
x
y
not-x not-x
not-y
not-y
To represent a proposition, all we have to do is to put a grey counter (or the
symbol ‘0’) on a cell if the corresponding class is empty, and a red counter (or the
symbol ‘I’) if it is not empty. In order to memorise the functions of the coloured
counters, Lewis Carroll composed the following verses, which appear in The Game
of Logic on the unnumbered page opposite the title page [Carroll, 1958b]
“See, the Sun is overhead,
Shining on us, FULL and
RED!
Now the Sun is gone away,
And the EMPTY sky is
GREY!”
For example, to represent the proposition “No x are y”, which asserts that
the sub-class xy is empty, we should simply put a ‘0’ on the corresponding cell
(ﬁgure 4). In the same manner, to represent the existential statement “Some x
are y” which asserts that some x y exist, we have just to put the symbol ‘I’ in the
corresponding cell (ﬁgure 5).
Figure 4
Figure 5
O
I
The representation of aﬃrmative universal propositions follows Carroll’s theory
which asserts that a proposition “All x are y” is equivalent to the conjunction of
“Some x are y” and “no x are not-y”. Thus, to represent the proposition “All
x are y”, all one has to do is to represent on the same biliteral diagram the two
propositions “Some x are y” (by putting a red counter or ‘I’ on the cell xy) and
“No x are not-y” (by putting a grey counter or ‘0’ on the cell x not-y). We obtain
a diagram representing the proposition “All x are y” (ﬁgure 6).

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
473
Figure 6
O
I
The biliteral diagram allows us to represent propositions involving two terms.
For three terms, as one needs to treat syllogisms, Carroll introduced a new diagram
by inserting a small square inside the universe, dividing dichotomically each of
the subdivisions of the biliteral diagram (ﬁgure 7).
The cells inside the small
square correspond to the aﬃrmation of the third term (let it be m) and the cells
outside the small square correspond to the negation of that third term (not-m).
One thus obtains the triliteral diagram with eight cells corresponding to the eight
combinations of the three terms: xym, xym′, xy′m, xy′m′, x′ym, x′ym′, x′y′m and
x′y′m′ (ﬁgure 8).
Figure 7
Figure 8
xy′m′
xym′
xym
xy′m
x′y′m
x′y′m′
x′ym
x′ym′
y′
x′
y
m
x
Suppose now that we would like to represent the existential proposition “Some
x are m”. This proposition is equivalent to the disjunction of the two existential
propositions “Some x are ym” and “Some x are y′m′′. So it asserts that at least
one of the compartments xym and xy′m is not empty. To represent this situation,
Carroll introduces the following graphical convention: To put a red counter (or
the symbol ‘I’) on the boundary between two cells means that at least one of
them is not empty. So to represent the proposition “Some x are m” all we have to
do is to put a red counter (or the symbol ‘I’) on the boundary between the cells
corresponding to xym and xy′m (ﬁgure 9).
Figure 9

474
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
With his inimitable humour, Carroll observed that:
“Our ingenious American cousins have invented a phrase to describe
the condition of a man who has not yet made up his mind which of
two political parties he will join: such a man is said to be “sitting
on the fence.” This phrase exactly describes the condition of the Red
Counter” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 26]
Many modern authors have claimed for Carroll’s diagrams a higher place in the
history of logic diagrams, even their superiority over the more widely used Venn
diagrams. This involves essentially two major points: the representation of the
universe of discourse, and the construction of diagrams for more than four terms.
It is interesting to note that on both matters it was Lewis Carroll himself who
ﬁrst claimed the superiority of his diagrams.
3.2
Enclosing the universe of discourse
Carroll’s ﬁrst criticism of Venn’s diagram concerns the universe of discourse. In
the appendix addressed to teachers, he writes:
It will be seen that [in Venn’s two-terms diagram], of the four Classes,
whose peculiar Sets of Attributes are xy, xy′, x′y, and x′y′, only three
are here provided with closed Compartments, while the fourth is al-
lowed the rest of the Inﬁnite Plane to range about in!
This arrangement would involve us in very serious trouble, if we ever
attempted to represent “No x′ are y′.” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 175]
The representation of the universe of discourse is often considered as one of Car-
roll’s most important contributions to logic. In fact, he was far from being the
ﬁrst to enclose the Universe. One must not forget that the representation of the
universe is an issue that is prior to Venn diagrams themselves and can be quite
naturally asked for in Euler diagrams too. It is thus not surprising to ﬁnd that,
even before Venn published his own diagrams, another British logician, Alexander
Macfarlane, drew Euler diagrams with a closed ﬁgure (square) around to delimit
the universe [Macfarlane, 1879, p.63]. Later on, in a paper published in 1885,
Macfarlane introduced his own diagrammatic scheme called the logical spectrum,
in which the universe is again clearly enclosed. Macfarlane’s comment is explicit:
“Let the universe be represented by a rectangular strip” [Macfarlane, 1885, p.
287]. One may add that Venn himself occasionally represented the universe [Venn,
1880b, p. 17]. Finally, Allan Marquand also represented the universe as early
as 1881 and even used the same graphical convention as would Carroll later on:
“Conceiving the logical universe as always more or less limited, it may be repre-
sented by any closed ﬁgure. For convenience we take a square” [Marquand, 1881,

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
475
p. 266].16 It is thus obvious that Lewis Carroll was not the ﬁrst to represent the
universe, though most modern authors refer to him.
In spite of this priority myth, the question of representing the universe is impor-
tant for understanding Carroll’s method of construction. As we have seen, Carroll
proceeds by a dichotomic (and symmetric) division of the Universe. This involves
not only a logical symmetry between a and not-a, but also a spatial (and visual)
symmetry between the ﬁgures representing a and not-a. On the contrary, Venn
proceeds more by the selection of the members of the class a, leaving the members
of not-a outside. Thus, although one can add a square representing the universe
a-posteriori on a Venn diagram, that doesn’t make it a Carroll diagram. An early
version of the Carroll diagram conﬁrms that Carroll’s approach diﬀers radically
from Venn’s (ﬁgure 10).
Figure 10
This ﬁgure appears in Carroll’s diaries entry of 29 November, 1884 with the
following comment:
“Devised a way of working a syllogism as opposite, Universe divided
into 8 categories, e.g. the upper right corner triangle is (gl′m′) i.e. “g,
not l, not m”, where “m” is the middle term, “g” is the greater, i.e.
the “major” term, and “l” the less, or “minor”.”[Wakeling, 2004, p.
155]
This early triliteral diagram illustrates clearly the symmetric division process used
by Carroll.
Also, it shows that, even for a limited number of terms, Carroll
initially didn’t try to represent all classes by closed continuous ﬁgures, unlike
Euler and Venn. It is only later that Carroll changed his diagram. Thus, by their
method of construction, Carroll’s diagrams diﬀer from Venn’s.
On this point,
his diagrams seem closer to the rectangular diagrams of Marquand [1881] and
Macfarlane [1885].17
16Marquand’s notes of Peirce’s course, conserved with the Marquand papers in Princeton
University Library, include many diagrams with enclosed universes. Such a diagram, dated 1880
is reproduced in [Anellis, 2004, p. 59].
17Other rectangular diagrams, albeit without any established relationship with those of Lewis
Carroll, have been invented since, such as those of Thomas D. Hawley [1896] and William J.
Newlin [1906]. One may add to this family the more recent Karnaugh tables used in computer
science for the simpliﬁcation of propositions and logic circuits [Karnaugh1953].

476
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
3.3
Logic diagrams for more than three terms
The second major criticism that Carroll made regarding Venn diagrams, concerns
their inability to treat problems involving a higher number of terms (more than
ﬁve terms) [Hamburger-Pippert, 2000]. We have already seen how, thanks to his
triliteral diagram, Carroll represented syllogistic arguments involving three terms.
However, in the light of the new Boolean logic, there was no reason to stop at three
terms. One might look at the appendix to teachers in the ﬁrst part of Symbolic
Logic for an idea of Lewis Carroll’s process of constructing logic diagrams for more
than three terms. In eﬀect, he didn’t represent any diagram for more than three
terms in The Game of Logic. The appendix was written to give a ﬁrst idea of
what would appear in the second part of Symbolic Logic:
“This last Diagram [the triliteral diagram] is the most complex that I
use in the Elementary Part of my ‘Symbolic Logic.’ But I may as well
take this opportunity of describing the more complex ones which will
appear in Part II”. [Carroll, 1958a, p. 176]
As we have seen, Carroll died before ending the preparation of the second and
third parts of his work, and unfortunately, there is no mention anywhere of these
diagrams in the fragments published by Bartley in 1977. Fortunately, the appendix
exposes the general lines of the extension process. For four terms (a, b, c, d), Car-
roll improves on the triliteral diagram. He transforms the central square into a
rectangle and adds another rectangle for the fourth term d in such a way as to
obtain sixteen continuous subdivisions corresponding to the sixteen combinations
of the four terms (ﬁgure 11).
Figure 11
For ﬁve terms (a, b, c, d, e), in Symbolic Logic every compartment of the 4-
terms diagram is divided into two parts without attending to the continuity of the
resulting classes (ﬁgure12). It is clear that this 5-class diagram diﬀers from all the
others. In eﬀect, the ﬁfth class e is not represented by a continuous ﬁgure. Carroll
was aware of the disagreements that such a choice involves. He writes:
“Here, I admit, we lose the advantage of having the e-Class all together,
“in a ring-fence”, like the other 4 Classes. Still, it is very easy to ﬁnd;

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
477
and the operation, of erasing it, is nearly as easy as that of erasing any
other Class.” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 177]
Figure 12
Figure 13
The interesting point here is that Carroll knew how to represent a continuous
ﬁfth class, but he preferred ignoring it. In eﬀect, such a diagram (ﬁgure 13) appears
in his diaries entry of Tuesday 27 November 1888:
“Devised a Logic Board, with which ﬁve attributes can be worked. (I
had made the adjoining one for four attributes, last Saturday). The
new one has an additional zigzag line working in and out so as to divide
each one of the existing 16 compartments”. [Wakeling, 2004, p. 434]
Clearly, Carroll prefers to use a regular though non-continuous ﬁgure rather than
a continuous but non-regular ﬁgure. That may be explained by the fact that it is
easier to locate the compartments when the ﬁgures are regular; this is an important
feature when it comes to manipulating the diagram. There is another important
historical lesson that one should take from that 27 November, 1888 entry.
It
contains in eﬀect the ﬁrst reference in Carroll’s writings to logic diagrams for
more than three terms. We have seen that he invented his diagrams about four
years earlier and that he published in the meantime his Game of Logic in which
one ﬁnds no diagram for more than three terms. This late interest in the problem
of extension suggests again that Carroll may have ignored Venn’s work when he
was working on his own diagrams. The question of drawing diagrams for more
than three terms is essential for Venn and appears in all his early writings on the
subject. This question was also important for Marquand and Macfarlane, who
both justiﬁed the invention of their diagrams by the necessity of having diagrams
which could deal with more terms than Venn’s did.18
So Carroll’s motivation
18Allan Marquand began his Philosophical Magazine paper by explaining that he wanted
to construct logic diagrams that are more extendible than Venn’s.
After listing brieﬂy some
limitations of Venn’s scheme, he writes that: “It is the object of this paper to suggest a mode
of constructing logical diagrams, by which they may be indeﬁnitely extended to any number of
terms, without losing so rapidly their special function, viz. that of aﬀording visual aid in the
solution of problems” [Marquand, 1881, p. 266]. Macfarlane proceeds in the same way. After
explaining that it is impossible to draw a four-term diagram with four circles, he introduces his

478
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
for inventing his diagrams seems completely diﬀerent from that of his post-Venn
contemporaries.
There is still a third version of the 5-terms diagram, which is known through a
set of leaﬂets that Carroll printed presumably in 1896 [Carroll, 1896], one of which
represents “quinqueliteral diagrams” as in (ﬁgure 14).
Figure 14
Although it again privileges the regularity of the diagrams and sacriﬁces their
continuity, this version, which Carroll didn’t use in his textbook, has the advantage
of constituting a better transition to the forthcoming diagrams (for more than ﬁve
terms). One can use them more easily to draw immediately a 6-terms diagram
(ﬁgure 15), whereas one has to draw a new diagram to jump from the other version
of the 5-terms diagram (ﬁgure 12) to the 6-terms diagram (ﬁgure 15).
For six terms, Lewis Carroll simply inserts a biliteral diagram in each compart-
ment of a quadriliteral diagram. For instance, for six terms (a, b, c, d, e, h), he
inserts a biliteral diagram (corresponding to the terms e and h) in each compart-
ment of a quadriliteral diagram (corresponding to the terms a, b, c, d) in order to
obtain the 64 combinations of six terms (ﬁgure 15). The classes e and h are rep-
resented by discontinuous ﬁgures. The same method is used in order to represent
respectively 7-term and 8-term diagrams by inserting respectively a triliteral and
a quadriliteral diagram in each cell of a quadriliteral diagram (respectively ﬁgures
16 and 17).
Figure 15
Figure 16
Figure 17
method which, by contrast, could work with any number of terms. He writes: “Another method,
which I propose to call the logical spectrum, is capable of representing quite generally the universe
subdivided by any number of marks” [Marfarlane, 1885, p. 287].

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
479
The 8-term diagram is the most complex that one can ﬁnd in Lewis Carroll’s
works. However, for more than 8 terms, Carroll gives some hints on how to draw
a corresponding diagram. For nine terms (a, b, c, d, e, h, k, l, m), he suggests the
use of two eight-terms diagrams (for the terms a, b, c, d, e, h, k, l): one for the m
part and the other for the not-m part. That is like putting an 8-term diagram in
each compartment of a one-term diagram. For 10 terms (a, b, c, d, e, h, k, l, m, n),
Lewis Carroll suggests simply to put an 8-term diagram in each compartment of
a biliteral diagram, the four cells of which correspond to the four combinations
oﬀered by the ninth and tenth terms (m and n). Though he didn’t go further, it
is easy to imagine a general method for constructing a Carroll diagram for any
number of terms.
An example of such a generalisation has been proposed by
Anthony J. Macula. He furnishes an algorithm for constructing a Carroll diagram
(he called a “Lew k-gram”) for any number k of terms:
“By iterating, one can construct a Lew k-gram for any k: If k is a
multiple of four, then one constructs the Lew-gram on k+1, k+2, k+3,
and k+4 many sets by placing a Lew k-gram in the skewed boxes of the
Lew 1-gram, Lew 2-gram, Lew 3-gram, and Lew 4-gram, respectively”.
[Macula, 1995, p. 271]
Although it is not sure that Carroll would have used this particular algorithm, it
is easy to verify that Macula’s method works not only for Carroll’s diagrams but
also for Venn’s. Macula defends the superiority of Carroll diagrams on this point:
“Have you ever tried to draw a Venn diagram, depicting all possible
intersections, using four, ﬁve, or six sets? It can be quite cumbersome
[. . . ] Lewis Carroll provides an easy method for drawing set diagrams
depicting all possible intersections. Using his method, one can actually
draw these diagrams for ten or more sets. The only limitations are the
patience of the drafter and the size of the paper on which the diagram
is drawn” [Macula, 1995, p. 269].
Carroll himself suggested the superiority of his extension process in comparison
with Venn, observing that Venn couldn’t go beyond six terms while he himself has
diagrams for up to ten terms. In fact, a close look at the diagrams shows that
Carroll and the majority of historians of logic who shared this view, are hardly fair
to Venn. First, like Venn, Carroll didn’t use continuous ﬁgures for more than four
terms, and his method of extension is actually not very diﬀerent from that of Venn.
Second, although he drew diagrams for up to eight terms, he never represented
any proposition on such diagrams and didn’t explain how to do it. One should
remember that the discontinuity of the ﬁgures would necessitate the treatment
of existential propositions as disjunctives, an option that Carroll doesn’t discuss.
Finally, we should keep in mind that nowhere in his published works did Carroll
solve a problem involving more than three terms with his diagrammatic method,19
19There are few manuscript notes where Carroll used diagrams for more than three terms in
order to solve logic problems. For instance, such a diagram is used in a set of logic notes in the

480
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
whereas Venn does much better. The main advantage of Carroll’s diagrams is
visual. They remain symmetric and conserve an apparent unity, thanks to the
representation of the universe and the symmetry of its dichotomy division. That
makes Carroll diagrams for more than three terms easier to draw than Venn’s, but
not necessarily better and easier to use.
3.4
The historical place of Lewis Carroll’s logic diagrams
In our review of Carroll diagrams, we have seen two indications (based on two
entries from his journal) of Carroll’s ignorance of Venn diagrams (and those of
Marquand) when he was inventing his own. First, he proceeds by division rather
than by selection, and doesn’t initially take into account the continuity of all the
classes.
Second, he didn’t initially envisage the construction of logic diagrams
for more than three terms, an issue which is essential in Venn’s and Marquand’s
writings. It is diﬃcult to give a deﬁnitive answer to the question. Of course, Venn’s
priority is established, but there is no evidence concerning a possible inﬂuence.
Historians of logic generally assume without discussion that Venn was Carroll’s
point of departure.
We have already seen that Carroll’s interest in logic was
much older and that he knew the work of Boole earlier.
There are of course
many similarities in their respective works, both entitled Symbolic Logic, though
Venn’s was published ﬁfteen years before Carroll’s. The main point was of course
that they both invented logic diagrams and gave them a high place in their books.
There is however no further evidence that Carroll’s diagrams were “improvements”
of Venn’s, as it is generally assumed.
There is no mention of Venn diagrams
in Carroll’s works before 1896, when he compared his own diagrams with those
of Venn.20 In the Game of Logic (1886) where he ﬁrst published his diagrams,
Carroll makes no mention of Venn.21 So, there is no evidence, either historical or
Houghton Collection, Morgan Library, New York (AAH545). Another such a diagram occurs
in Lewis Carroll’s notebook, conserved with Carroll’s mathematical manuscripts in the Parrish
Collection, Princeton University library (Box 1, Folder 1).
20Carroll himself listed some resemblances and diﬀerences between his diagrams and those of
Venn but didn’t present his own as a modiﬁcation of those Venn : “My method of diagrams
resembles Mr.
Venn’s in having separate compartments assigned to the various Classes, and
in marking these compartments as occupied or as empty; but it diﬀers from his Method, in
assigning a closed area to the Universe of Discourse, so that the Class which, under Mr. Venn’s
liberal sway, has been ranging at will through Inﬁnite Space, is suddenly dismayed to ﬁnd itself
“cabin’d, cribb’d, conﬁned”, in a limited Cell like any other Class! Also I use rectilinear, instead
of curvilinear, Figures; and I mark an occupied Cell with a ‘I’ (meaning that there is at least
one Thing in it), and an empty Cell with a ‘0’ (meaning that there is no Thing in it)” [Carroll,
1958a, p. 176].
21Surprisingly, Venn didn’t mention Carroll diagrams anywhere in his published works. He
didn’t mention them in his second (revised) edition of Symbolic Logic, which appeared in 1894,
while he referred to Marquand diagrams published after the ﬁrst edition too. There is no copy
of Carrol’s Game of Logic in Venn’s rich collection of books on logic as it is described in its
1889 catalogue when he presented it to Cambridge University Library [Venn, 19889]. We know,
however, that Venn knew about Carroll’s diagrams immediately after their publication for the
ﬁrst time in The Game of Logic. In eﬀect, Venn wrote in 1887 a letter to Nature [Venn, 1887]
where he replied to some remarks, regarding the representation of existential statements, made

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
481
conceptual, to say with full conﬁdence that Carroll was aware of Venn diagrams
when he invented his own.
Carroll diagrams have some undeniable advantages over Venn diagrams. The
universe is enclosed and the classes a and not-a are symmetric. His method for
representing existential statements is more clearly explained and more intuitive
for some disjunctive statements (when it suﬃces to put the counter on the border
between the cells). For problems involving more than four terms, his diagrams are
more regular and would have been more interesting had he invented an eﬀective
method for representing disjunctive propositions. Carroll’s use of board and coun-
ters also has pedagogical advantages, given that one need not draw the diagrams
for each problem and that the counters can be simply “slipped on”.
These interesting features didn’t make Carroll’s diagrams popular however.
Though known and cited with respect by logicians and historians of logic all
through the twentieth century, they were seldom used.
One notable exception
is Peter Geach’s Reason and Argument [Geach1976]. The absence of visual logic
itself in the logical works at the beginning of the twentieth century may explain
the little interest accorded to Carroll’s diagrams as well as other diagrammatic
schemes, including Venn diagrams, which were not so widely used by his succes-
sors as one might suspect today. In recent years, there is a growing interest in logic
diagrams, both in philosophy [Shin1994] and mathematics [Edwards2004], and it
may be hoped that this new work will shed new light on the place of diagrammatic
reasoning and its place in the history of logic.
4
THE ELIMINATION PROBLEM
4.1
Syllogisms
Carroll deﬁnes a syllogism as a trio of biliteral propositions of relation, where:
“1) all their six Terms are Species of the same Genus.
2) every two of them contain between them a pair of codivisional
Classes,
3) the three Propositions are so related that, if the ﬁrst two were true,
the third would be true.” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 56].
The eliminated term is called “Eliminand” while the two others are “Retinends”.
To represent symbolically syllogisms, Carroll represents each of its three propo-
sitions in an abstract form then writes them all in a row, with the symbol “†”
between the two premises, and “
¶
” before the conclusion.
by Alfred Sidgwick in his review of Carroll’s Game of Logic in the same journal [Sidgwick, 1887].

482
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
Example: The syllogism
No x are m′
All m are y
∴No x are y′
is represented as: xm′
0 † m1y′
0
¶
xy′
0.
The ﬁrst method used by Lewis Carroll to solve syllogisms is the diagrammatic
method. Though it is possible to use logic diagrams to solve elimination problems
involving more than three terms, Lewis Carroll didn’t introduce any such example
in his published works, even if he exposed possible diagrams for the representation
of more than three terms, as we have seen in the preceding section. Syllogisms are
thus the most complex problems that Carroll treated with his method of diagrams.
For that purpose, one has to reduce ﬁrst the premises of the syllogism into
abstract form (let x and y be the retinends, and m the eliminand). The premises
should be represented together on the same triliteral diagram. Then one has to
ascertain what proposition is represented in terms of x and y [Carroll, 1958a, p.
60], either directly on the triliteral diagram or more suitably by transferring the
information on a biliteral diagram. To transfer the information, it is necessary to
observe two rules for each of the four quarters of the triliteral diagram (containing
each two cells), corresponding respectively to the four compartments of the biliteral
diagram. The ﬁrst rule is that if the triliteral diagram’s quarter contains an “I” in
either of his two cells, then it is occupied, and thus the corresponding compartment
of the biliteral diagram is marked with a “I”. The second rule asserts that if the
triliteral diagram’s quarter contains a “0” in each of its two cells, then it is certainly
empty, and thus the corresponding compartment of the biliteral diagram is marked
with a “0” [Carroll, 1958a, pp. 53-54].
Example: Take the following problem that Carroll submitted to Venn in order
to compare their respective diagrammatic methods [Carroll 1958a, pp. 179-183].
1. No philosophers are conceited
2. Some conceited persons are not gamblers
To translate the syllogism into an abstract form, we take the universe as “persons”,
x = philosophers, m = conceited, and ﬁnally y = gamblers.
The two premises became:
1. No x are m
2. Some m are y′
Let us now represent the two propositions on a triliteral diagram. The ﬁrst propo-
sition asserts that “No xm exist”, so we put a ‘0’ on the xm compartments to
assert that they are empty. The second proposition asserts that some my′ exist,
and thus that the my′ compartments are occupied. Given that the xmy′ is already
empty, we put a ‘I’ on the only available compartment, that is x′my′. This gives
the following triliteral diagram (ﬁgure18):

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
483
I
Figure 19
Figure 18
O
O
I
Examining the information given in the diagram as to x and y, either directly
from the triliteral diagram or more suitably by transferring the information into a
biliteral diagram (Figure 19). We observe that the x′y′ compartment is occupied.
Hence, the conclusion is “Some x′y′ exist”, i.e. “Some x′ are y′”, which is translated
in a concrete form to obtain the ﬁnal conclusion: “Some persons, who are not
philosophers, are not gamblers” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 183].
The second method used by Carroll to solve syllogisms is based on the distinc-
tion of three ﬁgures for all syllogisms; it suﬃces to determine the ﬁgure to which a
given syllogism corresponds. The following table constructed by Carroll [Carroll,
1958a, p. 78] presents three formulae (corresponding to three diﬀerent forms of
pairs of premises) to which Carroll reduces syllogisms.
Figure I
xm0 †ym′
0
¶
xy0
“Two Nullities, with Unlike22Eliminands,
yield a Nullity, in which both Retinends
keep their Signs.
A Retinend, asserted in the Premisses to
exist, may be so asserted in the Conclu-
sion.”
Figure II
xm0 † ym1
¶
x′y1
“A Nullity and an Entity, with Like Elim-
inands, yield an Entity, in which the
Nullity-Retinend changes its Sign.”
Figure III
xm0 † ym0†m1
¶
x′y′
1
“Two Nullities, with Like Eliminands as-
serted to exist, yield an Entity, in which
both Retinends change their Signs.”
Example: Let the following pair of propositions be the premises of a syllogism
[Carroll, 1958a, p. 79].
“All cats understand French”
“Some chickens are cats”
Let the Universe be “creatures”, m = cats, x = understanding French, and y =
chickens.
22Two letters are said to be “like” (respectively “unlike”) when they have the same signs
(respectively opposite signs) [Carroll, 1958a, p. 70].

484
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
The pair of premises is represented in abstract form by: “m1x′
0 † ym1”. We
have an Entity and a Nullity, with like eliminands (m). According to the second
ﬁgure, it yields an Entity in which the Nullity-Retinend (x′) changes it sign (and
becomes x). Thus, the conclusion is “xy1”, which gives in concrete form the ﬁnal
conclusion:
“Some chickens understand French”.
In the appendix addressed to teachers, Carroll insists on the advantage of his
system. Instead of the traditional nineteen forms of syllogisms, “each with its own
special and exasperating Rules”, Carroll proposes only three forms, “each with a
very simple Rule of its own”, to which one can reduce a given problem [Carroll,
1958a, p. 183].
4.2
Sorites
Sorites are inferences involving more than two premises. Lewis Carroll deﬁnes the
problems proposed by Sorites as follows:
“Given three or more Propositions of Relation, which are proposed as
Premisses: to ascertain what Conclusion, if any, is consequent from
them.” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 87].
Carroll’s deﬁnition follows the general object of the elimination problem which
British nineteenth century symbolic logicians considered as a fundamental problem
of logic [Bartley, 1986, pp. 22-23]. John N. Keynes, for instance, wrote:
“The great majority of direct problems involving complex propositions
may be brought under the general form, Given any number of universal
propositions involving any number of terms, to determine what is all
the information that they jointly aﬀord with regard to any given term
or combination of terms.
If the student turns to Boole, Jevons, or
Venn, he will ﬁnd that this problem is treated by them as the central
problem of symbolic logic.” [Keynes, 1906, p. 506]
In order to ﬁnd what conclusion is consequent from the premises of a Sorite, Lewis
Carroll proposes in the ﬁrst part of Symbolic Logic two methods. The ﬁrst one
is the method of separate syllogisms. The rule is to select two premises which
together can be used as the premises of a syllogism and to ﬁnd their conclusion.
Then, one has to ﬁnd a third premise which together with that conclusion can be
used as premises of a second syllogism. And so on, until all premises have been
used, the last conclusion will be the conclusion of the sorite.
Example: Let us take the following set of premises [Carroll 1958a, p. 88]:

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
485
Concrete form
Abstract form
Subscript form
1) All the policemen on this beat sup with
our cook;
1) All k are l
K11′
0
2) No man with long hair can fail to be a
poet;
2)No d are h′
dh0
3) Amos Judd has never been in prison;
3) All a are c′
3) a1c0
4) Our cook’s ‘cousins’ all love cold mutton;
4) All b are e
4) b1e′
0
5) None but policemen on this beat are po-
ets;
5) No k′ are h
5) k′h0
6) None but her ‘cousins’ ever sup with our
cook;
6) No b′ are 1
6) b′10
7) Men with short hair have all been in
prison.
7) All d′ are c
7) d′
1c′
0
Dictionary: The universe is “men”; a = Amos Judd; b = cousins of our cook; c =
having been in prison; d = long-haired; e = loving cold mutton; h = poets; k =
policemen on this beat; l = supping with our cook.
This sorite can be solved by the following process:
8) K1l′
0 † k′h0
¶
l′h0 (premises 1 and 5)
9) l′h0 † dh′
0
¶
l′d0 (the conclusion of 8 and premise 2)
10) l′d0 † b′l0
¶
db′
0 (the conclusion of 9 and premise 6)
11) db′
0 † b1e′
0
¶
de′
0 (the conclusion of 10 and premise 4)
12) de′
0 † d′
1c′
0
¶
e′c′
0 (the conclusion of 11 and premise 7)
13) e′c′
0 † a1c0
¶
a1e′
0 (the conclusion of 12 and premise 3)
The conclusion is a1e′
0, which should then be translated into abstract form (“All
a are e”) and ﬁnally into concrete form to give the ﬁnal solution: “Amos Judd
loves cold mutton”.
Lewis Carroll’s second method for solving sorites is the method of underscoring.
It is in fact a kind of variation on the separate syllogisms method, where one has
simply to mark the eliminated letters (letters of unlike signs) by underscoring them,
with a single score under the ﬁrst letter and a double score under the second. For
instance, if we have the pair of premises: xm0 † ym′
0, after underscoring we obtain:
xm0 † ym′
0. The underscored terms can thus be dropped [Englebretsen, 1989, p.
30]. Before underscoring, Carroll recommends omitting the subscripts:
“In copying out the Premisses for underscoring, it will be convenient
to omit all subscripts. As to the “0s” we may always suppose them
written, and, as to the “1s”, we are not concerned to know which
Terms are asserted to exist, except those which appear in the Complete
Conclusion; and for them it will be easy enough to refer to the original
list.” [Carroll, 1958a, p. 91]

486
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
Example: Let us solve the sorite discussed above. We place its seven premises in
a row as follows:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
k1l′
0
†
dh′
0
†
a1c0
†
b1e′
0
†
k′h0
†
b′l0
†
d′
1c′
0
Then, in order to proceed in the manner of separate syllogisms, we place the
propositions in the requisite order to facilitate the elimination process. This might
be, for example, the following order:
1
5
2
6
4
7
3
kl′
†
k′h
†
dh′
†
b′l
†
be′
†
d′c′
†
ac
Then by successive elimination, we obtain the ﬁnal conclusion as e′a0. Given
that a is given as existing in the third premises, we add a1. The ﬁnal solution is
“a1e′
0”, which gives in concrete form “All a are e”, is the same conclusion obtained
earlier with the separating syllogisms method.
4.3
The method of trees
In the second part of Symbolic Logic, Carroll introduces other methods for solving
logical problems. The method of barred premises, for instance, is an extension of
the underscoring method for solving problems involving multiliteral propositions
[Abeles, 2005a, pp.
36-38].23
More interesting is the method of Trees.
Lewis
Carroll invented this method on 16 July, 1894.24
That day he recorded in his
diary:
“Today has proved to be an epoch in my Logical work. It occurred
to me to try a complex Sorites by the method I have been using for
ascertaining what cells, if any, survive for possible occupation when
certain nullities are given. I took one of the 40 premisses, with “pairs
within pairs,” and many bars, and worked it like a genealogy, each
term proving all its descendants. It came out beautifully, and much
shorter than the method I have used hitherto. I think of calling it the
“Genealogical method.”” [Wakeling, 2005, p. 155]
The Tree method is a kind of Reductio ad Absurdum argument. For instance, ﬁrst
suppose the Retinends to be an Entity. Then we deduce from that assumption
an absurd result, which means that our initial assumption was false and thus that
the aggregate of the Retinends is a Nullity.
Example: Here is an elementary example using the tree method for biliteral
propositions [Bartley, 1986, pp. 283-285]. Note that Carroll also uses this method
for triliteral and multiliteral propositions. Let us take the following premises:
23Mark R. Richards identiﬁes another extension of the underscoring method, which he calls
the method of barred groups. It is used by Lewis Carroll in a manuscript from the Dodgson
family collection [Richards, 2000].
24Francine Abeles [1990] suggests that Carroll might have been inspired, for developing his
method of trees by Peirce and his students’ work Studies in Logic [Peirce, 1883].

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
487
1
2
3
4
5
b′
1a0
†
de′
0
†
h1b0
†
ce0
†
d′
1a′
0
a, b, d and e are the four Eliminands, while c and h are Retinends.
Let us suppose ch to be an entity (i.e. “Some thing having the attributes c and
h exist”). So, ch is called the Root of the tree.
ch
From the fourth proposition “ce0”, we conclude that c and e are incompatible.
Thus, if a thing has the attribute c it should have also the attribute e′. Thus,
we put e′ under ch in the tree, with the reference-number 4 (which refers to the
fourth premise). The tree becomes:
e′
4.
ch
From the third proposition “h1b0”, it follows that h and b are incompatible. If
a thing has the attribute h, it should have also the attribute b′. Accordingly, we
add b′ under ch in the tree, with the reference-number 3. The tree becomes:
3,4. e′b′
ch
This means that the thing having the attributes c and h must also have the
attributes b′ and e′. One now looks for b′ and e′ in the premises. They appear
in the ﬁrst and second propositions: “b′
1a0” and “de′
0”. It follows from them that
the thing having the attributes b′ and e′should also have the attributes a′ and d′.
Thus, che′b′d′a′ is an entity. The tree becomes:
ch
3,4. e′b′
1,2. d′a′
If we look at the premises for d′ and a′, they appear together in the ﬁfth
proposition “d′
1a′
0”. This asserts that d′ and a′ are incompatible and thus that any
thing having the two attributes is a nullity. It follows that che′b′d′a′ is a nullity.
This result is represented in the tree as follows:
ch
3,4. e′b′
1,2. d′a′
5. o

488
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
From the forgoing it follows that ch is a nullity, i.e. “ch0”. We now return to the
premises to examine whether c or h is given as existing. In the third proposition,
h is given as existing, ie: “h1”. So, the ﬁnal conclusion is: “ch0†h1”, i.e. “h1c0”.
Hence, the complete tree is:
ch
3,4. e′b′
1,2. d′a′
5. o
h1c0
∴
The ﬁnal solution is “All h are c′”.
Bartley claims a high place for Carroll’s method of trees in the history of logic
and sees in it anticipations of the Beth’s semantic tableaux published in 1955 [Bart-
ley, 1986, p. 32]. More recent authors defend a similar viewpoint [Okashah, 1992;
Abeles, 2005a; 2007]. They demonstrate how Carroll’s eliminating methods hold
some of the key ideas of modern decision procedures, thanks to their algorithmic
process.25
5
THEORY OF HYPOTHETICALS
5.1
Lewis Carroll’s contributions to Mind
In addition to his textbooks and various pamphlets and circulars, Lewis Carroll
made some logic contributions to periodicals, on the problem of hypotheticals. The
best known are his two articles in the philosophical review Mind: “A logical para-
dox” (1894) and particularly “What the Tortoise said to Achilles” (1895). Both
have been widely reprinted, commented and discussed by logicians and philoso-
phers throughout the twentieth century. They are generally considered as Carroll’s
best contributions to logic. Bertrand Russell, for example, discusses both these
works in his Principles of Mathematics [Russell, 1937]. In 1942, during a radio
program with Mark Van Doren and Katherine Anne Porter, Russell assessed Lewis
Carroll’s logical work as follows:
“I think he was very good at inventing puzzles in pure logic. When
he was quite an old man, he invented two puzzles he published in a
learned periodical, Mind, to which he didn’t provide answers. And the
providing of answers was a job, at least so I found it.” [Russell, 1996,
p. 525]
And later on:
25See [Abeles, 1994b] for other instances of algorithms and mechanical processes in Carroll’s
works.

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
489
“His works were just what you would expect: comparatively good at
producing puzzles and very ingenious and rather pleasant, but not
important. . . None of his works was important. The best work he ever
did in that line was the two puzzles that I spoke of. . . ” [Russell, 1996,
p. 528]
Though Carroll’s Mind papers (notably the Achilles and the Tortoise paper)
are widely known, it is curious to note that commentators haven’t yet agreed on
what is the moral of the story. They tend to share only the view that Carroll
himself didn’t intend his texts to have a single interpretation and that he himself
was not fully conscious of their importance. Braithwaite opines that “[i]n both
these papers in Mind Lewis Carroll was ploughing deeper than he knew.
His
mind was permeated by an admirable logic which he was unable to bring to full
consciousness and explicit criticism.” [Barithwaite, 1932, p. 176]. J. F. Thomson
wonders whether Carroll intended the Achilles and the Tortoise dialogue to have
any moral at all:
“The extreme eccentricity of the behaviour of both of the characters
may well make us wonder whether Lewis Carroll knew what he was
up to in writing the story. Certainly it cannot be merely taken for
granted that he intended to advance some moderately clear thesis or
theses about inference but chose to do so in a veiled and cryptic way.
It is just as likely that the story is the expression of perplexity by
someone who was not able to make clear to himself just why he was
perplexed.” [Thomson, 1960, p. 99].
Even the Carrollian scholar W. W. Bartley III, is drawn to a similar view. Writing
about the Achilles paper, he observes: “As for the story itself, I do not share the
view that there is one clear interpretation of it and its intended moral. It seems
most plausible to understand it as an attempt on Carroll’s part to express some
diﬃculties he felt but could not adequately explain. . . ” [Bartley, 1986, p. 468].
As we are here merely concerned with Lewis Carroll’s logic, we will not discuss
the various (sometimes curious) interpretations of Lewis Carroll’s Mind papers.
We will try rather to examine these writing with a view to understanding his
position on hypotheticals. A look at Carroll’s private papers shows that he was
seriously working on a theory of hypotheticals during the 1890s. His two Mind
papers were surely neither “unconscious” writings nor jokes. They result largely
from this work and from the correspondence he, in parallel, privately maintained
with many contemporary logicians, to whom he sent copies of his problems and
replies to their answers. His diaries of 1894 show that he gave a particular attention
to the problem of hypotheticals during that year, during which both Mind papers
were written. They are parts or steps of a methodical and conscious search for a
theory of hypotheticals.
Though letters, manuscripts and diaries entries exist on the subject, there are
unfortunately no traces of that work in the surviving parts of his forthcoming book
Symbolic Logic. We know that he intended to include a discussion of hypotheticals

490
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
in the book’s second and third parts. In the advertisement for the ﬁrst part, Carroll
brieﬂy describes the contents of the second and third parts. In the former, he
includes “hypotheticals” as one of the subjects investigated, while the latter would
contain a “theory of Inference”. Later on, in the appendix addressed to teachers,
he again announces that the forthcoming second part of the book would discuss
“the very puzzling subjects of Hypotheticals and Dilemmas” [Carroll, 1958a, p.
185]. However, no such writings appear in Bartley’s rediscovered galley proofs.
Only versions of the Mind papers were included in a chapter on logical puzzles.
5.2
The Barbershop problem
Lewis Carroll’s ﬁrst contribution to Mind reports a debate that opposed him to
John Cook Wilson. Wilson was appointed Wykeham Professor of logic at Oxford
in 1889.26 We know from their abundant correspondence that all throughout the
1890s, the two men debated logical matters, as well as problems of geometry and
probability.27 The dispute that leads to the barbershop problem began around
1892 and culminated in 1894. The discussion must have been very passionate as
one can see from Carroll’s numerous entries in his journal. On 21 January, 1893,
he records: “Also I have worked a good deal at Logic, and am still unsuccessfully
trying to convince the Professor of Logic (J. Cook Wilson) that he has committed
a fallacy” [Wakeling, 2005, pp. 50-51]. On 5 February 1893, he adds “Heard from
Cook Wilson, who has long declined to read a paper, which I sent January 12,
and which seems to me to prove the fallacy of a view of his about Hypotheticals.”
[Wakeling, 2005, pp.
52-53].
One has to wait until 1 February 1894 for more
development: “Then I got, from Cook Wilson, what I have been so long trying
for, an accepted transcript of the fallacious argument over which we have had an
(apparently) endless ﬁght. I think the end is near, now.” [Wakeling, 2005, p. 124].
Lewis Carroll wrote successive versions of the problem on which he disagreed
with Wilson, and sent them to many of Britain’s leading logicians, collected their
answers, compared them, and responded.
The list includes notably Thomas
Fowler, J. A. Stewart, Bartholomew Price, John Venn,28 James Welton, F.H.
26In this election, Cook Wilson prevailed over Venn. However, his election was not unanimously
well received. In a letter to Samuel Alexander, F. H. Bradley commented as follows: “I do not
quite know what to think of Wilson’s election. I think that probably they may have done the
very best thing, but it would be diﬃcult for them perhaps to defend their choice by anything
they could state. However that does not matter. Wilson ought to do uncommonly well if he will
give up Aristotle’s text. Otherwise -” [Keene, 1999, p. 41].
27There are more than forty letters from Carroll to J. C. Wilson, together with some (hardly
readable) letters from Wilson to Carroll, in the John Cook papers owned by the Bodleian library
(Oxford) as part of a bequest from John Sparrow. The earliest Carrollian letter is dated 5 June
1890, while the latest is dated 17 May 1897. There are curiously no surviving letters between 1892
and 1894. Some letters from that period were, however, brieﬂy quoted by A. S. L. Farquharson,
Wilson’s posthumous editor in 1926 [Wilson, 2002, pp. xli–xliii].
28Venn was the ﬁrst to discuss the problem in print in the second edition of his Symbolic
Logic, where he called it the Alice problem [Venn, 1971, p. 442]. There is a surviving letter on
the matter in the Venn papers at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. However, it doesn’t

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
491
Bradley, and Henry Sidgwick. We also know from a manuscript note that John
N. Keynes also discussed the problem [Keynes, 1894]. W. W. Bartley III counted
(and published) at least eight versions of the problem, the earliest being dated in
April 1894 [Bartley, 1986, p. 465]. There seems however to be at least one earlier
version dated March 1894. A copy of it sent by Carroll to Bartholomew Price was
already published (in a “slightly modiﬁed” form entitled “Going out”) by Edward
Wakeling in a compilation of Carrollian games and puzzles [Wakeling, 1992, pp.
20-21], where it has been identiﬁed by Mark Richards as an early version of the
Barbershop problem [Wakeling, 1992, pp. 67-68].
The contradictory responses that Carroll collected from his “logical friends”, as
he called them, encouraged him to write a new version of the problem on 03 May
1894 and to send it to the journal Mind for publication.29 In a note annexed to
the problem, he explains that:
“The paradox, of which the foregoing paper is an ornamental present-
ment, is, I have reason to believe, a very real diﬃculty in the Theory
of Hypotheticals. The disputed point has been for some time under
discussion by several practised logicians, to whom I have submitted
it; and the various and conﬂicting opinions, which my correspondence
with them has elicited, convince me that the subject needs further
consideration, in order that logical teachers and writers may come to
some agreement as to what Hypotheticals are, and how they ought to
be treated.” [Carroll, 1894a, p. 438]
The paper appeared in the July issue of the same year [Carroll, 1894a]. After
its publication, the problem was discussed in Mind by other logicians like W. E.
Johnson [1894 and 1895], Alfred Sidgwick [1894 and 1895], and later on Hugh
MacColl [1897, pp. 501-503; and 1900a, pp. 80-81], E. C. C. Jones [1905a and
1905b], John Cook Wilson [1905a and 1905b] and ﬁnally Bertrand Russell [1905,
pp. 400-401]. Even after its publication, Lewis Carroll continued to write other
versions of the problem and to correspond about it with other logicians.30 A last
version (also not recorded by Bartley) appeared posthumously in the Educational
Times [Carroll 1900] and received two replies, one from Hugh MacColl [1900b]
and the other from H. W. Curjel [1900].
The version which appeared in Mind, entitled “a logical paradox”, is mainly
written as a dialogue between two uncles Jim and Joe, disputing about a barber-
shop. As with all the other versions, where the two characters are called Nemo and
contain a discussion of the barbershop problem itself. Lewis Carroll simply gives permission to
Venn to use the problem and to include it in his new book, and asks him not to reveal his real
name in connection with his pseudonym [Dodgson, 1894].
29The manuscript of A Logical Paradox is in the Parrish Collection of Lewis Carroll, Princeton
University Library, Princeton (Box 9, Folder 2).
30It seems that Lewis Carroll also sent oﬀ-prints of his paper to his friends and colleagues. A
copy of the Mind paper was for instance enclosed by Carroll in a letter to his friend Bell, dated
21 November 1896 (conserved in the Berg Collection, New York Public Library). Many copies
of the oﬀ-print are known in various collections though it is not always possible to identify to
whom they were sent.

492
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
Outis, Carroll doesn’t say frankly which position he himself accepts. The problem
is the following. Let there be a barbershop where Allen, Brown, and Carr work.
There are two rules:
1. All three should not be out of the shop at once. This implies that: If Carr
is out, then (if Allen is out, then Brown must be in).
2. If Allen is out, then Brown must be out.
Since “If Allen is out, then Brown must be in” and “If Allen is out, then Brown
must be out” are contraries, and given (2), Carroll concludes that:
3. Not- if Allen is out then Brown must be in.
From (1) and (3), by modus tollens, Carroll concludes that: “Carr must be in”.
This result is paradoxical since Carr can be out when Allen and Brown are both
in, without violating rules (1) and (2).
Lewis Carroll’s version published posthumously in the Educational Times for-
mulates the same problem more brieﬂy:
“It is given that (1), if C is true, then, if A is true, B is not true; and
(2), if A is true, B is true. Can C be true? What diﬀerence in meaning,
if any, exists between the following propositions? – (1) A, B, C cannot
be all true at once; (2) if C and A are true, B is not true; (3) if C is
true, then, if A is true, B is not true.” [Carroll, 1900]
Bertrand Russell discussed the Mind version in his Principles of Mathematics.
Russell oﬀers what is today’s commonly admitted solution to the problem, which
turns on what is commonly known as the paradoxes of material implication. Car-
roll’s argument assumes that the two propositions “If Allen is out, then Brown
must be in” and “If Allen is out, then Brown must be out” are contraries and
thus incompatible, while in fact they can both be true, in which case they simply
imply “not-Allen is out”. In eﬀect, the two propositions “P then Q” and “P then
not-Q” can be both true when P is false, then “principle that false propositions
imply all propositions solves Lewis Carroll’s logical paradox” [Russell, 1937, 18].
Russell’s interpretation is adopted by his immediate followers, and it closed for a
while the debate on the Barbershop problem. One had to wait until 1950 for a
new reading by Arthur W. Burks and Irving M. Copi who linked the problem with
the matter of causal implication [Burks-Copi, 1950].
The note that Carroll annexed to his Mind paper (and which is curiously ex-
cluded in the majority of modern reprints), shows how Carroll asks explicitly in
his problem the question of the legitimacy of the material interpretation of impli-
cation. He, for instance, asks: “Can a Hypothetical, whose protasis is false, be
regarded as legitimate?” [Carroll 1894, p. 438]. Though he didn’t reveal explicitly
his opinion in the Mind text, there is more evidence to believe, as Bartley shows,
that he accepted material implication and thus, that he took up the cause of Outis
rather than Nemo, and Jim rather than Joe, that is, that Carr can leave his shop

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
493
[Bartley, 1986, 448]. Lewis Carroll’s correspondence conﬁrms this view as one can
observe in his letters to an unidentiﬁed “Sir” (now in the Berol Collection, Fales
Library, New York) where he explicitly wrote that “Nemo” was a “friend” of his.
Thus, Lewis Carroll was “Outis” and knew that the Barber shop argument was
not valid. This is notably what is shown in a kind of primitive truth table that
Carroll included in the seventh version published by Bartley, where he lists all pos-
sible combinations of A, B and C, their truth or falsity depending on respectively
Allen, Brown, and Carr’s being out of or in the barbershop. Carroll concludes
from that that there are cases where Carr can be out without violating any of the
rules already listed [Bartley, 1986, p. 465].
5.3
What the Tortoise said to Achilles
Contrary to the barber shop problem, we know little about the genesis of the
Achilles and the Tortoise problem. In 1974, Ivor Grattan-Guinness drew attention
to an 1874 Lewis Carroll manuscript owned by Christ Church library, where he
discusses the Zeno paradox, and suggested a possible link between the two texts
[Grattan-Guinness, 1974, p. 16]. The idea that this manuscript would be an early
version of the Mind paper has also been proposed [Williams-Madan, 1979, p. 82;
Abeles, 1994b, p. 104; Cohen, 1995, p. 501]. However, a look at the content of the
manuscript and the twenty years separating them indicate no such a relationship.31
In fact, the manuscript in question entitled “An inconceivable conversation between
S. and D. on Indivisibility of Time and Space” concerns Zeno’s original paradox
and is thus closer to a number of Carrollian references to that paradox.
It is
more convincing to relate Carroll’s own Achilles and Tortoise problem to his 1894
work on hypotheticals. There is a manuscript version of the problem, dated 23
August 1894, which Carroll sent to the editor of Mind, G. F. Stout.32 After a
brief correspondence between Stout and Carroll, the paper appeared ﬁnally in the
April issue of the next year [Carroll, 1895].33
“What the Tortoise said to Achilles” formulates the following problem. Imagine
Achilles and the Tortoise, the two famous Zeno characters, discussing Euclidean
Geometry after their famous race. Take the following inference:
31John Gatt´egno, who ﬁrst published that manuscript, misdated it and thought that it was
written on 22 November 1894 [Gatt´egno, 1976, p. 305].
32The manuscript of What the Tortoise said to Achilles is in the Parrish Collection of Lewis
Carroll, Princeton University Library, Princeton (Box 9, Folder 7). Lewis Carroll’s correspon-
dence with G. F. Stout is in the same collection, among Carroll’s mathematical manuscripts (Box
1, Folder 6).
33There is a widespread misunderstanding about the date of publication of the Achilles and
the Tortoise dialogue among Carrollian scholars. Carroll’s standard bibliography says that the
text was printed presumably in December 1894 [Williams-Madan, 1979, p. 190]. But there is
no Mind issue in December!
The same error appears in the annotations of Carroll’s diaries
[Wakeling, 2005, p. 161], as well as in certain Carrollian biographies [Gatt´egno, 1976, p. 10] and
studies [Gardner1996, p. 72]. The confusion is due to Carroll himself who printed a copy of the
text with the inscription “Reprinted from Mind for December, 1894” [Carroll, 1894b]. See also
[Goodacre, 1994; Imholtz, 2003b].

494
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
(A)
Things that are equal to the same are equal to each other.
(B)
The two sides of this Triangle are things that are equal to the same.
(Z)
The two sides of this Triangle are equal to each other.
The Tortoise claims that he accepts the premises as true but doesn’t accept the
Hypothetical:
(C)
If A and B are true, Z must be true.
Then, the Tortoise asks Achilles to force him “logically” to accept Z. Carroll shows
that even if the Tortoise admits the truth of the hypothetical proposition (C) and
incorporates it as a premise in the inference, he is still not obliged to accept Z
because he still might deny the validity of the new Hypothetical:
(D)
If A and B and C are true, Z must be true.
And so on, the Tortoise might claim the necessity of further hypothetical state-
ments, ad inﬁnitum.
Bertrand Russell also discusses the Achilles and the Tortoise problem in his The
Principles of Mathematics [Russell, 1937, p. 35]. He claims that Carroll’s story
illustrates the necessity of his fourth indemonstrable principle asserting that: “A
true hypothesis in an implication may be dropped, and the consequent asserted”
[Russell, 1937, p. 16]. After Russell, the Achilles and the Tortoise problem of
inﬁnite regress has been widely discussed by philosophers and logicians.34 Gener-
ally, the accepted “point of the story” is that an inference should not include its
own Hypothetical proposition in its set of premises. One sees this view defended
by Gilbert Ryle: “The principle of an inference cannot be one of its premises or
part of its premises. Conclusions are drawn from premises in accordance with
principles, not from premises that embody those principles. The rules of evidence
do not have to be testiﬁed to by the witnesses.” [Ryle, 1963, pp. 306-307].35 The
abundant literature that was aroused by Carroll’s problem gives little attention
to Carroll’s own conception of hypotheticals. It is true that the text itself is not
explicit enough on what Carroll meant. As we are here concerned by Lewis Car-
roll’s logic, it is necessary to turn to Carroll’s private papers to fathom his own
interpretation.
When the editor of Mind, received Carroll’s contribution, he immediately sent
him a letter (dated 24 August 1894) asking for clariﬁcation of the moral of the
story. Stout asked Carroll whether his paper should not consider the “diﬀerence
between aﬃrming A and aﬃrming the truth of A” [Bartley, 1986, p. 471]. Carroll
34The Achilles and the Tortoise problem is discussed by, among others, W. J. Rees [1951], D.
G. Brown [1954], J. F. Thomson [1960], W. W. Bartley III [1962], John Woods [1965], William
A. Wisdom [1974], Barry Stroud [1979], Simon Blackburn [1995], Pascal Engel [1998], etc.
35Ryle defends the same position in [Ryle, 1946]. Stephen Toulmin, after an explicit reference
to Carroll’s problem, defended a similar view on the laws of nature: “The conclusions about the
world which scientists derive from laws of nature are not deduced from these laws, but rather
drawn in accordance with them or mnferred as applications of them. . . ” [Toulmin, 1967, p. 91]

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
495
responded on 25 August, 1894 that his “... paradox does not attempt to draw any
distinction between these 2 processes: it turns on the fact that, in a Hypothetical,
the truth of the Protasis, the truth of the Apodosis, and the validity of the sequence,
are 3 distinct Propositions.” [Bartley, 1986, p. 472]. He then applies his regression
to the more familiar “Socrates’ mortality” example: If we grant that: 1) “All men
are mortal, and Socrates is a man”, but not 2) “The sequence “If all men are
mortal, and if Socrates is a man, then Socrates is mortal” is valid”, then we do
not grant 3) Socrates is mortal.
This rare testimony shows that Carroll expressly considers the relation of im-
plication between the antecedent and the consequent in a hypothetical and takes
it as a relation of content and not of truth-value. For example, given the propo-
sition: “If A then B”, Carroll holds that the validity of the sequence (that is the
hypothetical proposition itself) doesn’t depend on the truth-value of A and B but
on the signiﬁcance of A and B themselves. This Carrollian interpretation of the
Achilles and the Tortoise problem may deceive modern logicians and philosophers,
who will ﬁnd it less ambitious than is usually claimed.
It has, however, more
historical coherence in regard to the work of some of Carroll’s contemporaries,
notably W. E. Johnson, E. C. C. Jones, and Hugh MacColl [Prior, 1949; Rahman,
2000].
5.4
A “workable” theory of hypotheticals
Lewis Carroll’s two contributions to Mind both deal with the problem of hypo-
theticals. The Barbershop problem suggests that Lewis Carroll knew about and
accepted material implication. However, the Achilles and the Tortoise paper shows
that he also understood the diﬃculties that occur when we adopt such an inter-
pretation of implication. This being so, not only should we acknowledge Carroll’s
complete understanding of the importance of the matter he was discussing, but we
should also remember that both contributions to Mind were steps or intermediary
results of a larger work in progress on this subject, developed by Carroll around
1894. We have no traces of the ﬁnal conclusion which he planned for in the second
part of Symbolic Logic. Assuming that he actually wrote it, it seems neither to
have been published nor to have survived. Two entries from Lewis Carroll’s jour-
nal dated on December, 1894 indicate some further developments and conﬁrm the
early directions suggested by the Mind papers.
On December 11th, 1894, he writes in his diary:
“I am giving all my time to Logic, and have at last got a workable
theory of Hypotheticals — to represent “a
¶
b” by “ab′
0 † a1 † b′
1”,
meaning by “0”, “cannot exist”, and by “1”, “can exist”.” [Wakeling,
2005, p. 184]
As we have seen in our discussion of Carroll’s symbolism, ab′
0 means “No a are
not-b” and a1 means “some a exist”, and in consequence “ab′
0 † a1” (which is
equivalent to “a1b′
0”) means “all a are b”. However, Carroll adds “b′
1” which means

496
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
that “some not-b exist”. This is introduced probably to express contraposition,
for if “all a are b” then “all not-b are not-a” and thus, according to Carroll’s
interpretation of A propositions, “some not-b exist”. Bartley reports some other
writings where Carroll interprets propositional implication as a relation of class
inclusion.
One source is a Carrollian notebook where one ﬁnds, for example,
“α
¶
xyz” interpreted as “α1(xyz)′
0”. Another interesting manuscript quoted by
Bartley makes the matter even clearer:
“Denoting a term which asserts the possession of some property (such
as ‘straightness’) by a single letter (such as a), I shall denote the term
which denies it by not-a, or, yet more brieﬂy by a′. And I shall de-
note the logical copula ‘is,’ which asserts that the possession, or non-
possession, of some property, is necessarily followed by the possession,
or non-possession, of some other, by the symbol
¶
. Thus, if a stands
for ‘human’ and b for ‘mortal,’ the time honoured proposition “all men
are mortal” may be abbreviated into a
¶
b. . .” [Bartley, 1986, pp. 256-
257].
The combination of these references conﬁrms that particular Carrollian interpre-
tation of hyotheticals, with the omission of the superﬂuous “b′
1”. Finally, it is
interesting to note the introduction of the modality in Carroll’s deﬁnition of the
subscripts in the journal entry where “a1” stands for “a can exist” rather than “a
exists”.
Ten days after recording this “workable” theory of hypotheticals in his journal,
Lewis Carroll was still working on the subject and recorded on 21 December, 1894:
“My night’s thinking over the very puzzling subject of “Hypotheticals”
seems to have evolved a new idea — that there are two kinds, (1)
where the Protasis is independent of the Hypothetical, (2) where it is
dependent on it.” [Wakeling, 2005, pp. 185-186]
There are no further records on hypotheticals in Carroll’s diaries on the subject
of hypotheticals. One cannot determine whether Carroll went further in this work
and what results, if any, he obtained. However, from the discussion of the Bar-
bershop and the Achilles and the Tortoise problems, and the numerous private
documents mentioned above, it may be said that Carroll was developing a theory
of Hypotheticals, which can partially be reconstructed from his papers. He tended
to interpret implication materially but felt uneasy with it and expressed some
diﬃculties in that interpretation. All that conﬁrms Bartley’s view that Carroll’s
work on hypotheticals ““sounds” like a foretaste of what was to come a few years
later and from other logicians as strict and causal implication” [Bartley, 1986, p.
448]. Interestingly, C. I. Lewis and Arthur Burks, both refer to Carroll on the this
matter, though in opposite ways. Lewis, in the exposition of his system of strict
implication, inserts a surprising and unexpected footnote: “Lewis Carroll wrote
a Symbolic Logic. I shall never cease to regret that he had not heard of material
implication.” [Lewis, 1918, p. 326]! Burks is more explicit and mentions Carroll’s

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
497
Barbershop problem in the exposition of his system of causal implication [Burks,
1951, pp. 377-378]. On a more “social” level, Carroll’s work on hypotheticals
made him known to his contemporary logicians, chieﬂy thanks to the Barbershop
problem, which was discussed by Britain’s leading logicians up to 1905. Later
on, the Achilles and the Tortoise dialogue brought him posthumous fame among
logicians and philosophers more than any other of his logical writings.
6
CONCLUSION
A few years after Lewis Carroll’s death, Russell published his Principles of Math-
ematics, and the science of logic took a new direction again. Like the majority
of his contemporary British colleagues, Carroll’s work quickly became out-dated.
His only logical contributions, which one still meet(s) with in modern textbooks,
are his logic diagrams and Mind problems. Modern logicians still quote the Alice’s
books and use the voluminous Carrollian collection of logical problems for teach-
ing. For historians of logic, however, Lewis Carroll’s logical work is a rich source
of information for a better understanding of the state of logic toward the end of
the nineteenth century.
Though many features of Carroll’s work are still close to Aristotelian logic, (he
even dedicated his Symbolic Logic to the “memory of Aristotle”), he was conscious
of the fact that recent work in Britain (from Boole to Venn) opened a new and
more eﬀective approach to the subject, and himself claimed to belong to this new
trend. In the appendix to teachers, he describes the whole syllogistic system as
“an almost useless machine, for practical purposes, many of the conclusions being
incomplete, and many quite legitimate forms being ignored” [Carroll, 1958a, p.
183]. In the preface of Symbolic Logic, he considers symbolic logic more helpful
and easier that the old formal logic, which he found to be obscure and cumbrous
[Carroll 1958, p. xiv].36 In a letter to his publisher Macmillan, dated 19 October,
1895, he is even more explicit on the state of logic at that time:
“[T]his book [That is his Symbolic Logic] is not oﬀered as a “school
book.” In the present state of logical teaching, it has no chance of being
“adopted” as “a school book,” as it would be for no use in helping its
readers to answer papers on the Formal logic, which is the only kind
taught in Schools and Universities. It teaches the real principles of
36Note that contrary to many other logicians, Lewis Carroll diﬀerentiated between symbolic
and formal logic, formal logic being that which was still taught in British schools and universities
(that is the traditional Aristotelian logic) while symbolic logic is the logic that John Venn, for
instance, worked (that is the new Boolean logic). Historians of logic generally consider Venn to
be the ﬁrst to use the expression “symbolic logic” in his works, notably in the ﬁrst edition of his
Symbolic Logic published in 1881. In fact, Venn used that expression at least two years earlier
[Venn 1879, p. 580], where its use suggests an even earlier invention. Though it seems true that
it was through Venn’s writings that the expression itself attained a wide publicity, the oldest
known use in print of the full expression “symbolic logic” that came into our knowledge occurs
however in a paper by the forgotten logician and early Boole champion, George Bruce Halsted
[Haslted, 1878, p. 83].

498
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
Logic, and it enables its readers to arrive at conclusions more quickly
and easily that Formal Logic, but it does not enable any one to answer
questions in the form at present demanded.
I have no doubt that
Symbolic Logic (not necessarily my particular method, but some such
method) will, some day, supersede Formal Logic, as it is immensely
superior to it: but there are no signs, as yet, of such a revolution.”
[Cohen-Gandolfo, 1987, p. 323]
Symbolic logic was not yet established, and it surely was less recognised at Oxford
than at Cambridge [Grattan-Guinness, 1986; Marion, 2000]. Oxford’s Professor
of logic, John Cook Wilson strongly opposed the new logic, on the ground that,
among other things, it was mathematics, not logic, and that “[i]n comparison with
the serious business of logic proper, the occupations of the symbolic logician are
merely trivial.” [Wilson, 2002, p. 637]. Wilson was not the only anti-mathematical
logician, as Venn designated them “without oﬀence” [Venn, 1971, ix]. Symbolist
logicians, pleading for the generalisation of symbols to represent operations in
logic, were in the minority. And Lewis Carroll was surely one of them.
Carroll’s logical work shows also that he was acquainted with the logical play-
ers of his time. In his Symbolic Logic, he mentions George Boole, Augustus de
Morgan, William S. Jevons, John N. Keynes, John Venn and members of The
John Hopkins University (Charles S. Peirce and his students). His private library,
contained copies of the main logical works of the time. In addition to the above
mentioned authors, he also owned copies of the works of Bernard Bosanquet, F.H.
Bradley, Thomas Fowler, Rudolph H. Lotze, Henry L. Mansel, J.S. Mill, James
Welton, Richard Whately, and many others [Lovett, 2005]. But, of course, like
his contemporary British logicians, he ignored the work of the German logician
Gottlob Frege.37
Reading Lewis Carroll reveals conﬂicting inﬂuences from both traditional and
modern logicians. It also shows some interesting inventions which deserve more
attention from logicians and historians of logic. One cannot however fully under-
stand Carroll’s work and its importance without paying attention to the eﬀort he
made to make his work accessible to a wide public. He himself taught logic in
many Schools at Oxford. In the preface of Symbolic Logic, he proudly claims it
as “the very ﬁrst attempt (with the exception of [his] own little book, The Game
of Logic, published in 1886, a very incomplete performance) that has been made
to popularise this fascinating subject.” [Carroll, 1958a, p. xiv]. Carroll’s work
should be understood as the work of an author of logic who wrote to be read.
37Frege’s work was almost ignored in Britain before Russell. Venn wrote in 1880 a dismissive
review of Frege’s Begriﬀsschrift for the journal Mind, which he concluded by: “I have not made
myself suﬃciently familiar with Dr. Frege’s system to attempt to work out problems by help of
it, but I must confess that it seems to me cumbrous and inconvenient.” [Venn, 1880a, p. 297].
On the general reception of Frege’s work, see [Vilkko, 1998].

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
499
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This essay has beneﬁted greatly from discussions with Francine Abeles and Edward
Wakeling, to whom I express my gratitude. It draws upon work supported by re-
search grants from the Maison Fran¸caise d’Oxford and The Friends of the Prince-
ton University Library. I express grateful acknowledgements to the archivists and
librarians who helped me to consult the material used in this paper from the
Lewis Carroll papers at Christ Church Library (Oxford), the John Cook Wilson
papers at the Bodleian Library (Oxford), the John Venn papers at Gonville and
Caius College Library (Cambridge), the Sidgwick papers at Trinity College Library
(Cambridge), the Athenaeum marked copies at City University Library (London),
the Joseph Brabant Collection at the Thomas Fisher rare book library (Toronto),
the Parrish Collection and the Allan Marquand papers in Princeton University
Library (Princeton), the Alfred Berol Collection in Fales Library, New York Uni-
versity (New York), the Houghton Collection, Morgan Library (New York), and
the Berg Collection, New York Public Library (New York). I also thank Ms Lucy
Pickering for her proofreading.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Note that Carroll’s writings signed with his real name (Dodgson) are listed separately from
those signed with his pseudonym (Carroll).
[Abeles, 1986] F. F. Abeles. Determinants and linear systems: Charles L. Dodgson’s view, The
British journal for the history of science, vol. 19, part 3, n˚ 63, 1986, pp. 331-335.
[Abeles, 1990] F. F. Abeles. Lewis Carroll’s method of trees:
its origin in Studies in logic,
Modern logic, vol. 1, n˚ 1, 1990, pp. 25-35.
[Abeles, 1994a] F. F. Abeles, ed. The mathematical pamphlets of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson
and related pieces, New York: Lewis Carroll society of North America, 1994.
[Abeles, 1994b] F. F. Abeles. Algorithms and mechanical processes in the work of Charles L.
Dodgson, in Charlie Lovett (ed.), Proceedings of the second international Lewis Carroll con-
ference, New York: The Lewis Carroll society of North America, 1994, pp. 97-106.
[Abeles, 2001] F. F. Abeles, ed. The political pamphlets and letters of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson
and related pieces. A mathematical approach, New York:
Lewis Carroll society of North
America, 2001.
[Abeles, 2005a] F. F. Abeles. Lewis Carroll’s formal logic, History and philosophy of logic, vol.
26, n˚ 1, February 2005, pp. 33-46.
[Abeles, 2005b] F. F. Abeles, Lewis Carroll’s ciphers: the literary connections, Advances in
applied mathematics, vol. 34, May 2005, pp. 697-708. Erratum in vol. 37, July 2006, p. 1.
[Abeles, 2007] F. F. Abeles, Lewis Carroll’s visual logic, History and philosophy of logic, vol.
28, n˚ 1, February 2007, pp. 1-17.
[Alexander, 1944] P. Alexander. Logic and the humour of Lewis Carroll, Proceedings of the Leeds
philosophical and literary society, literary and historical section, vol. 6, part 1, January 1944,
pp. 551-566.
[Alexander, 1978] P. Alexander. review of W. W. Bartley III. Lewis Carroll’s Symbolic Logic
(New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1977), The philosophical quarterly, vol. 28, n˚ 113, October
1978, pp. 348-350.
[Anellis, 2004] I. Anellis. The genesis of the truth-table device, Russell:
the journal of the
Bertrand Russell studies, vol. 24, n˚ 1, summer 2004, pp. 55–70.
[Anellis and Houser, 1991] I. H. Anellis and N.R. Houser. Nineteenth centruy roots of algebraic
logic and universal algebra, in H. andr´eka, J. D. Monk and I. N´emeti, eds., Algebraic Logic,
Amsterdam: North-Holland publishing, 1991, pp. 1–36.

500
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
[Anonymous, 1887] Anonymous. Review of Lewis Carroll, The Game of Logic (London: Macmil-
lan, 1887), The literary world, 16 April 1887, p. 122.
[Anonymous, 1896] Anonymous. Review of Lewis Carroll, Symbolic Logic. Part I (London,
Macmillan, 1896), The Educational Times, 1 July 1896, p. 316.
[Astroh et al., 2001] M. Astroh, I. Grattan-Guinnes and S. Read, A survey of the life of Hugh
MacColl (1837-1909), History and philosophy of logic, vol. 22, 2001, pp. 81-98.
[Baron, 1969] M. E. Baron, A note on the historical development of logic diagrams: Leibniz,
Euler and Venn, The mathematical gazette, vol. 53, n˚ 383, May 1969, pp. 113-125.
[Bartley, 1962] W. W. Bartley III. Achilles, the Tortoise, and explanation in science and history,
The British journal for the philosophy of science, vol. 13, n˚ 49, May 1962, pp. 15-33.
[Bartley, 1972] W. W. Bartley III. Lewis Carroll’s lost book on logic, Scientiﬁc American, vol.
227, n˚ 1, July 1972, pp. 39-46.
[Bartley, 1973] W. W. Bartley III. Lewis Carroll as logician, The Times literary supplement,
n˚ 3719, 15 June 1973, pp. 665-666.
[Bartley, 1986] W. W. Bartley III, ed. Lewis Carroll’s Symbolic logic, new and updated edition,
New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1986.
[Beale, 1973] T. Beale. C. L. Dodgson: mathematician, in Denis Crutch (ed.), Mr. Dodgson,
London: Lewis Carroll society, 1973, pp. 26-33.
[Black, 1958] D. Black. The theory of committees and elections, London: Cambridge University
Press, 1958.
[Blackburn, 1995] S. Blackburn. Practical Tortoise raising, Mind, vol. 104, n˚ 416, October
1995, pp. 695-711.
[Braithwaite, 1932] R. B. Braithwaite, Lewis Carroll as logician, The mathematical gazette, vol.
16, n˚ 219, July 1932, pp. 174-178.
[Brock, 1975] W. H. Brock. Geometry and the Universities: Euclid and his modern rivals, 1860-
1901, History of Education, vol. 4, n˚ 2, 1975, pp. 21-35.
[Brown, 1954] D. G. Brown. What the Tortoise taught us, Mind, vol. 63, 1954, pp. 170-179.
[Burks, 1951] A. W. Burks. The logic of causal propositions, Mind, vol. 60, n˚ 239, July 1951,
pp. 363-382.
[Burks and Copi, 1950] A. W. Burks and I. M. Copi. Lewis Carroll’s barber shop paradox, Mind,
vol. 59, n˚ 234, April 1950, pp. 219-222.
[Carroll, 1894a] L. Carroll. A logical paradox, Mind, vol. 3, n˚ 11, July 1894, pp. 436-438.
[Carroll, 1894b] L. Carroll. What the Tortoise said to Achilles, leaﬂet with the inscription
reprinted from Mind for December, 1894, The Lewis Carroll collection, Christ Church li-
brary, Oxford, UK, Misc.18. Many other copies are known.
[Carroll, 1895] L. Carroll. What the Tortoise said to Achilles, Mind, vol. 4, n˚ 14, April 1895,
p. 278-280.
[Carroll, 1896] L. Carroll. Diagrams, leaﬂets, The Joseph Brabant collection, Fisher rare books
library, Toronto, Canada. C3799622. Many other copies are known.
[Carroll, 1900] L. Carroll. Problem 14122, Mathematical questions and solutions from the ‘Ed-
ucational Times’, vol. 72, 1900, pp. 62-63.
[Carroll, 1958a] L. Carroll. Symbolic logic. Part I: Elementary, fourth edition, reprinted together
with The game of logic, in one bound volume as The mathematical recreations of Lewis
Carroll, New York: Dover, 1958 (originally published in 1897).
[Carroll, 1958b] L. Carroll. The game of logic, reprinted together with Symbolic logic. Part I:
Elementary, in one bound volume as The mathematical recreations of Lewis Carroll, New
York: Dover, 1958 (originally published in 1887).
[Church, 1960] A. Church. Review of Lewis Carroll, Symbolic logic and The game of logic (New
York: Dover, 1958), The journal of symbolic logic, vol. 25, n˚ 3, September 1960, pp. 264-265.
[Cohen, 1995] M. N. Cohen. Lewis Carroll. A biography, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1995.
[Cohen and Gandolfo, 1987] M. N. Cohen and A. Gandolfo, eds. Lewis Carroll and the House
of Macmillan, Cambridge – New York – Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
[Cohen and Green, 1979] M. N. Cohen and R. L. Green, eds. The letters of Lewis Carroll, 2
volumes, New York: Oxford University Press, 1979.
[Collingwood, 1967] S. D. Collingwood, The life and letters of Lewis Carroll (Rev. C. L. Dodg-
son), Detroit: Gale Research Company, 1967 (originally published in 1898).
[Coumet, 1976] E. Coumet. The game of logic: A game of universes, translated by Peter Heath,
in Edward Guiliano (ed.), Lewis Carroll observed, New York: C. N. Potter, 1976, pp. 181-195.

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
501
[Curjel, 1900] H. W. Curjel. Solution to problem 14122, Mathematical questions and solutions
from the ’Educational Times’, vol. 72, 1900, p. 63.
[Dale, 1999] A. I. Dale. A history of inverse probability. From Thomas Bayes to Karl Pearson,
second edition, New York: Springer, 1999.
[Davenport, 1952] C. K. Davenport. The role of graphical methods in the history of logic, Metho-
dos, vol. 4, 1952, pp. 145-164.
[De Morgan, 1966] A. De Morgan. On the syllogism and other logical writings, edited with an
introduction by Peter Heath, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966.
[Dodgson, 1867] C. L. Dodgson. Elementary treatise on Determinants, London: Macmillan,
1867.
[Dodgson, 1879] C. L. Dodgson. Euclid and his modern rivals, ﬁrst edition, London: Macmillan,
1879.
[Dodgson, 1885] C. L. Dodgson. Euclid and his modern rivals, second edition, London: Macmil-
lan, 1885.
[Dodgson, 1890] C. L. Dodgson. Curiosa Mathematica, part I: a new theory of parallels, third
edition, London: Macmillan, 1890.
[Dodgson, 1894] C. L. Dodgson. letter to John Venn, dated 11/08/1894, The John Venn collec-
tion, Gonville and Caius College library, Cambridge, UK, C. 26.
[Edwards, 2004] A. W. F. Edwards. Cogwheels of the mind: the story of Venn diagrams, Balti-
more, Maryland: Johns Hopkins university press, 2004.
[Engel, 1998] P. Engel. La logique peut-elle mouvoir l’esprit?, Dialogue, vol. 37, n˚ 1, 1998, pp.
35-53.
[Englebretsen, 1983] G. Englebretsen. Lewis Carroll on logical quantity, Jabberwocky. The jour-
nal of the Lewis Carroll society, vol. 12, n˚ 2, spring 1983, pp. 39-41.
[Englebretsen, 1989] G. Englebretsen. It was his own invention: Carroll on cancellation, Jab-
berwocky. The journal of the Lewis Carroll society, vol. 18, n˚ 3/4, summer/autumn 1989,
pp. 27-31.
[Englebretsen and Gilday, 1976] G. Englebretsen and N. Gilday. Lewis Carroll and the logic of
negation, Jabberwocky. The journal of the Lewis Carroll society, vol. 5, n˚ 2, spring 1976,
pp. 42-45.
[Eperson, 1933] D. B. Eperson. Lewis Carroll mathematician, The mathematical gazette, vol.
17, n˚ 223, May 1933, pp. 92-100.
[Euler, 2003] L. Euler. Lettres `a une princesse d’Allemagne, edited by Srishti D. Chatterji,
Lausanne: Presses polytechniques et universitaires Romandes, 2003.
[Fisher, 1973] J. Fisher, ed. The magic of Lewis Carroll, New York: Bramhall house, 1973.
[Gardner, 1960] M. Gardner. The games and puzzles of Lewis Carroll, Scientiﬁc American, vol.
202, n˚ 3, March 1960, pp. 172-176.
[Gardner, 1983] M. Gardner. Logic machines and diagrams, second edition, Brighton, Sussex:
The Harvester press, 1983.
[Gardner, 1996] M. Gardner. The universe in a handkerchief: Lewis Carroll’s mathematical
recreations, games, puzzles, and word plays, New York: Copernicus, 1996.
[Gardner, 2001] M. Gardner, ed. The annotated Alice by Lewis Carroll: the deﬁnitive edition,
original illustrations by John Tenniel, London: Penguin books, 2001.
[Gatt´egno, 1976] J. Gatt´egno. Fragments of a looking-glass, translated by Rosemary Sheed, New
York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1976.
[Geach, 1968] P. Geach. Symbolic Logic (letter to the editor), Times literary supplement, n˚
3487, 26 December 1968.
[Geach, 1976] P. Geach. Reason and argument, Berkeley – Los Angeles: University of California
Press, 1976.
[Geach, 1978] P. Geach. Review of W. W. Bartley III, Lewis Carroll’s Symbolic logic (New York:
Clarkson N. Potter, 1977), Philosophy, vol. 53, 1978, pp. 123-125.
[Goodacre, 1994] S. Goodacre. Lewis Carroll’s contributions to Mind, Jabberwocky. The journal
of the Lewis Carroll society, vol. 23, n˚ 1, winter 1993/1994, pp. 10-11.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1974] I. Grattan-Guinness. Achilles is still running, Transactions of the
Charles S. Peirce society, vol. 10, n˚ 1, 1974, pp. 8-17.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1979] I. Grattan-Guinness. Review of W. W. Bartley III, Lewis Carroll’s
Symbolic logic (New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1977), Annals of Science, vol. 36, n˚ 6, 1979,
pp. 652-653.

502
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
[Grattan-Guinness, 1986] I. Grattan-Guinness. Russell’s logicism versus Oxbridge logics, 1890-
1925: a contribution to the real history of twentieth-century English philosophy, Russell: the
journal of the Bertrand Russell studies, vol. 5, n˚ 2, winter 1985-1986, pp. 101-131.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1988] I. Grattan-Guinness. Living together and living apart. On the inter-
actions between mathematics and logics from the French Revolution to the First World War,
The South African journal of philosophy, vol. 7, n˚ 2, 1988, pp. 73-82.
[Halsted, 1878] G. B. Halsted. Boole’s logical method, The journal of speculative philosophy,
vol. 12, n˚1, January 1878, pp. 81-91.
[Hamburger and Pippert, 2000] P. Hamburger and R. E. Pippert. Venn said it couldn’t be done,
Mathematics magazine, vol. 73, n˚ 2, April 2000, pp. 105-110.
[Hawley, 1896] T. D. Hawley. Infallible logic. A visible and automatic system of reasoning, Lans-
ing, Michigan: Robert Smith, 1896.
[Heath, 1974] P. Heath, ed. The philosopher’s Alice, London: Academy editions, 1974.
[Heath, 1982] P. Heath. The Carrollian paperchase, in James Russell Kincaid and Edward Guil-
iano (ed.), Soaring with the dodo: essays on Lewis Carroll’s life and art, Boulder: University
of Colorado, 1982, pp. 126-130.
[Humberstone, 1995] L. Humberstone. Names and pseudonyms, Philosophy, vol. 70, n˚ 274,
October 1995, pp. 487-512.
[Imholtz, 2003a] C. Imholtz. The history of Lewis Carroll’s The Game of Logic, The papers of
the bibliographical society of America, vol. 97, n˚ 2, 2003, pp. 183-213.
[Imholtz, 2003b] A. A. Imholtz. Lewis Carroll in Mind. The Carrollian: the journal of the Lewis
Carroll society, n˚ 12, autumn 2003, pp. 22–35.
[Johnson, 1894] W. E. Johnson. A logical paradox, Mind, vol. 3, n˚ 12, October 1894, p. 583.
[Johnson, 1895] W. E. Johnson. Hypotheticals in a context, Mind, vol. 4, n˚ 13, January 1895,
pp. 143-144.
[Jones, 1905a] E. C. C. Jones. Lewis Carroll’s logical paradox, Mind, vol. 14, n˚ 53, January
1905, pp. 146-148.
[Jones, 1905b] E. C. C. Jones. Lewis Carroll’s logical paradox, Mind, vol. 14, n˚ 56, October
1905, pp. 576-578.
[Jourdain, 1991] P. E. B. Jourdain, Selected essays on the history of set theory and logics (1906-
1918), edited by I. Grattan-Guinness, Bologna, Italy: Editrice, 1991.
[Karnaugh, 1953] M. Karnaugh. The map method for synthesis of combinational logic circuits,
Transactions of the American institute of electrical engineers, Part1, vol. 72, November 1953,
pp. 593-599.
[Keene, 1999] C. A. Keene, ed. F. H. Bradley. Selected correspondence. June 1872-December
1904, volume 4 of the Collected works of F. H. Bradley, Bristol: Thoemmes, 1999.
[Keynes, 1894] J. N. Keynes. Dodgson’s problem, manuscript note sent to Henry Sidgwick, not
dated (assumed 1894), The Henry Sidgwick papers, Trinity College library, Cambridge, UK,
add. Ms. c. 104. 64.
[Keynes, 1906] J. N. Keynes. Studies and exercises in formal logic, fourth edition, London:
Macmillan, 1906.
[Leach, 1999] K. Leach. In the shadow of the dreamchild. A new understanding of Lewis Carroll,
London – Chester Springs, PA: Peter Owen, 1999.
[Lebailly, 1996] H. Lebailly. Dr Dodgson & Mr Carroll: de la caricature au portrait, Cahiers
Victoriens et Edouardiens, n˚ 43, April 1996, pp. 169-183.
[Lewis, 1918] C. I. Lewis. A survey of symbolic logic, Berkeley: University of California press,
1918.
[Lovett, 1999] C. Lovett. Lewis Carroll and the press: an annotated bibliography of Charles
Dodgson’s contributions to periodicals, New Castle, DE, USA: Oak Knoll P. - London: British
library, 1999.
[Lovett, 2005] C. Lovett. Lewis Carroll among his books. A descriptive catalogue of the private
library of Charles L. Dodgson, Jeﬀerson, North Carolina - London: McFarland, 2005.
[MacColl, 1896] H. MacColl (published anonymously). Review of Lewis Carroll, Symbolic Logic.
Part I (London, Macmillan, 1896), The Athenaeum, n˚ 3599, 17 October 1896, pp. 520-521.
[MacColl, 1897] H. MacColl. Symbolic reasoning II, Mind, vol. 6, n˚ 24, October 1897, pp.
493-510.
[MacColl, 1900a] H. MacColl. Symbolic reasoning III, Mind, vol. 9, n˚ 33, January 1900, pp.
75-84.

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
503
[MacColl, 1900b] H. MacColl. Solution to problem 14122, Mathematical questions and solutions
from the ‘Educational Times’, vol. 73, 1900, pp. 125-126.
[Macfarlane, 1879] A. Macfarlane. Principles of the algebra of logic, Edinburgh: David Douglas,
1879.
[Macfarlane, 1885] A. Macfarlane. The logical spectrum, London, Edinburgh, and Dublin philo-
sophical magazine and journal of science, vol. 19, 1885, p. 286-290.
[Macula, 1995] A. J. Macula. Lewis Carroll and the enumeration of minimal covers, Mathematics
magazine, vol. 68, n˚ 4, October 1995, pp. 269-274.
[Marion, 2000] M. Marion. Oxford realism: knowledge and perception. The British journal for
the history of philosophy, vol. 8, 2000, n˚ 2, pp. 299–338, and n˚ 3, pp. 485–519.
[Marquand, 1881] A. Marquand. On logical diagrams for n terms, London, Edinburgh, and
Dublin philosophical magazine and journal of science, vol. 12, 1881, pp. 266-270.
[McLean et al., 1996] I. McLean, A. McMillan, and B. L. Monroe, eds. A mathematical approach
to proportional representation: Duncan Black on Lewis Carroll, Boston – Dordrecht – London:
Kluwer, 1996.
[Mokteﬁ, 2005] A. Mokteﬁ. How did Lewis Carroll become a logician?, Proceedings of The Cana-
dian society for the history and philosophy of mathematics, edited by Antonella Cupillari, vol.
18, 2005, pp. 136-144.
[Mokteﬁ, 2007] A. Mokteﬁ. How to supersede Euclid: geometrical teaching and the mathemati-
cal community in nineteenth-century Britain, in Amanda Mordavsky Caleb, ed., (Re)creatring
science in nineteenth-century Britain, Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2007, pp.
220–234.
[Newlin, 1906] W. J. Newlin, A new logical diagram, The journal of philosophy, psychology and
scientiﬁc method, vol. 3, n˚ 20, 27 September 1906, pp. 539-545.
[Okashah, 1992] L. A. Okashah, Lewis Carroll’s contributions to artiﬁcial intelligence, Comput-
ers and industrial engineering, vol. 23, n˚ 1-4, 1992, pp. 377-380.
[Peckhaus, 1999] V. Peckhaus. 19th century logic between philosophy and mathematics, the
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 5, n˚ 4, December 1999, pp. 433–450.
[Peirce, 1883] C. S. Peirce, ed. Studies in logic, Boston: Little, Brown, and company, 1883.
[Peirce, 1933] C. S. Peirce. Collected papers, vol. 4, edited by Charles Hartshorne and Paul
Weiss, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1933.
[Prior, 1949] A. N. Prior. Categoricals and hypotheticals in George Boole and his successors,
The Australasian journal of philosophy, vol. 27, n˚ 3, December 1949, pp. 171–196.
[Quine, 1977] W. V. O. Quine. The algebra of attributes, Review of W. W. Bartley III (ed.),
Lewis Carroll’s Symbolic Logic (New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1977), The Times literary
supplement, n˚ 3937, 26 August 1977, pp. 1018-1019.
[Rahman, 2000] S. Rahman. Hugh MacColl and George Boole on hypotheticals, in J. Gasser,
ed., A Boole anthology, Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer, 2000, pp. 187–310.
[Rees, 1951] W. J. Rees. What Achilles said to the Tortoise, Mind, vol. 60, 1951, pp. 241-246.
[Rice and Torrence, 2007] A. Rice and E. Torrence. “Shutting up like a telescope”: Lewis Car-
roll’s “curious” condensation method for evaluating determinants, The college mathematics
journal, vol. 39, n˚ 2, March 2007, pp. 85–95.
[Richards, 1988] J. L. Richards. Mathematical visions: the pursuit of geometry in Victorian
England, London: Academic Press, 1988.
[Richards, 2000] M. R. Richards. Dodgson’s methods of solving sorites problems: an investiga-
tion and a newly discovered process, The Carrollian, n˚ 6, autumn 2000, pp. 35-40.
[Russell, 1905] B. Russell. The existential import of propositions, Mind, vol. 14, n˚ 55, July
1905, pp. 398-401.
[Russell, 1937] B. Russell. The principles of mathematics, second edition, New York: W. W.
Norton, 1937.
[Russell, 1996] B. Russell. A fresh look at empirism (1927-42), volume 10 of The complete works
of Bertrand Russell, edited by John G. Slater with the assistance of Peter K¨ollner, London
and New York: Routledge, 1996.
[Ryle, 1946] G. Ryle. Knowing how and knowing that, Proceedings of the Aristotelian society,
vol. 46, 1946, pp. 1-16.
[Ryle, 1963] G. Ryle. If, So, and Because, in Max Black (ed.), Philosophical analysis, Englewood
Cliﬀs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1963, pp. 302-318.
[Seneta, 1984] E. Seneta. Lewis Carroll as a probabilist and mathematician, The mathematical
scientist, vol. 9, n˚ 1, January 1984, pp. 79-94.

504
Amirouche Mokteﬁ
[Seneta, 1993] E. Seneta. Lewis Carroll’s ’Pillow problems’: on the 1993 centenary, Statistical
science, vol. 8, n˚ 2, 1993, pp. 180-186.
[Shin, 1994] S.-J. Shin. The logical status of diagrams, New York: Cambridge University Press,
1994.
[Sidgwick, 1887] A. Sidgwick. Review of Lewis Carroll, The game of logic (London: Macmillan,
1887), Nature, vol. 36, n˚ 914, 5 May 1887, pp. 3–4.
[Sidgwick, 1894] A. Sidgwick. A logical paradox, Mind, vol. 3, n˚ 12, October 1894, p. 582.
[Sidgwick, 1895] A. Sidgwick. Hypotheticals in a context, Mind, vol. 4, n˚ 13, January 1895, p.
143.
[Stroud, 1979] B. Stroud. Inference, belief and understanding, Mind, vol. 88, 1979, pp. 179-196.
[Thomson, 1960] J. F. Thomson. What Achilles should have said to the Tortoise, Ratio, vol. 3,
1960, pp. 95-105.
[Toulmin, 1967] S. E. Toulmin. The philosophy of Science. An Introduction, London: Hutchin-
son University Library, 1967.
[Venn, 1870] J. Venn. On some characteristics of belief: scientiﬁc and religious, London and
Cambrige: Macmillan, 1870.
[Venn, 1879] J. Venn. Review of Alexander Macfarlane, Principles of the algebra of logic (Ed-
inburgh: Douglas, 1879), Mind, vol. 4, n˚ 16, October 1879, pp. 580-582.
[Venn, 1880a] J. Venn (signed J. V.). Review of Gottlob Frege, Begriﬀsschrift (Halle: Nebert,
1879), Mind, vol. 5, n˚ 18, April 1880, p. 297.
[Venn, 1880b] J. Venn. On the diagrammatic and mechanical representation of propositions and
reasonings, London, Edinburgh, and Dublin philosophical magazine and journal of science,
vol. 10, July 1880, pp. 1-18.
[Venn, 1887] J. Venn. “The game of logic”, Nature, vol. 36, n˚ 916, 19 May 1887, pp. 53–54.
[Venn, 1889] J. Venn. Catalogue of a collection of books on logic, Cambridge: University Library,
1889.
[Venn, 1971] J. Venn. Symbolic Logic, second edition, Bronx, New York: Chelsea, 1971 (origi-
nally published in 1894).
[Vilkko, 1998] R. Vilkko. The reception of Frege’s Begriﬀsschrift, Historia mathematica, vol. 25,
1998, pp. 412-422.
[Wakeling, 1978] E. Wakeling. The logic of Lewis Carroll, privately published, 1978.
[Wakeling, 1992] E. Wakeling, ed. Lewis Carroll’s games and puzzles, New York: Dover, 1992.
[Wakeling, 1993] E. Wakeling, ed. Lewis Carroll’s diaries. The private journals of Charles
Lutwidge Dodgson (Lewis Carroll), vol. 1, Luton, Beds: Lewis Carroll Society, 1993.
[Wakeling, 1995a] E. Wakeling, ed.Rediscovered Lewis Carroll puzzles, New York: Dover, 1995.
[Wakeling, 1995b] E. Wakeling, ed. Lewis Carroll’s diaries. The private journals of Charles
Lutwidge Dodgson (Lewis Carroll), vol. 3, Luton, Beds: Lewis Carroll Society, 1995.
[Wakeling, 2001] E. Wakeling, ed. Lewis Carroll’s diaries. The private journals of Charles
Lutwidge Dodgson (Lewis Carroll), vol. 6, Cliﬀord, Herefordshire: Lewis Carroll Society,
2001.
[Wakeling, 2004] E. Wakeling, ed. Lewis Carroll’s diaries. The private journals of Charles
Lutwidge Dodgson (Lewis Carroll), vol. 8, Cliﬀord, Herefordshire: Lewis Carroll Society,
2004.
[Wakeling, 2005] E. Wakeling, ed. Lewis Carroll’s diaries. The private journals of Charles
Lutwidge Dodgson (Lewis Carroll), vol. 9, Cliﬀord, Herefordshire: Lewis Carroll Society,
2005.
[Weaver, 1956] W. Weaver. Lewis Carroll: mathematician, Scientiﬁc American, vol. 194, n˚ 4,
April 1956, pp. 116-128.
[Williams and Madan, 1979] S. H. Williams and F. Madan. The Lewis Carroll handbook, ﬁrst
published in 1931, revised and augmented by Roger Lancelyng Green in 1962 and 1970, now
further revised by Denis Crutch, Kent, England: Dawson, 1979.
[Wilson, 1905a] J. C. Wilson (signed W.). Lewis Carroll’s logical paradox, Mind, vol. 14, n˚
54, April 1905, pp. 292-293.
[Wilson, 1905b] J. C. Wilson (signed W.). Lewis Carroll’s logical paradox, Mind, vol. 14, n˚
55, July 1905, p. 439.
[Wilson, 2002] J. C. Wilson. Statement and inference, 2 volumes, edited from the MSS. by A.
S. L. Farquharson, with an introduction by Mathieu Marion, Bristol, England: Thoemmes,
2002.
[Wisdom, 1974] W. A. Wisdom. Lewis Carroll’s inﬁnite regress, Mind, vol. 83, 1974, pp. 571-573.

Lewis Carroll’s Logic
505
[Woods, 1965] J. Woods. Was Achilles’ Achilles’ heel Achilles’ heel?, Analysis, vol. 25, 1964-
1965, pp. 142-146.

This page intentionally left blank 

JOHN VENN AND LOGICAL THEORY
James Van Evra
1
INTRODUCTION
John Venn (1834–1923) lived in what for logic were interesting times. He was in
his early teens when George Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of Logic and Augustus
De Morgan’s Formal Logic appeared, and he died eight years after the publica-
tion of volume 3 of the ﬁrst edition of Principia Mathematica. His remarkable life
thus spanned the development of logic from the beginning of its sustained involve-
ment with mathematics through the appearance of the now standard version of
quantiﬁcation theory.
Though Venn is best known for the widely recognized diagram that bears his
name,1 his primary contribution to logic lies in the critical commentary on con-
temporary work in the foundations of the subject that he produced over a period
of thirty years. Venn was ideally suited to the task; A meticulous scholar and
antiquary, he had both a wide ranging command of mathematics and logic and a
thorough grasp of the history of the formal sciences.2 He also made contributions
to probability theory and to areas now included in the social sciences.
The nineteenth century was a period of signiﬁcant change in logic generally, and
especially in British logic. At its beginning, texts in the subject were constrained
more by tradition than self conscious theory, and Aristotle’s name continued to
be invoked more as authority than carefully considered source. As mid century
approached, however, theory began to intrude in the form of analogical connec-
tions between logic and mathematics proposed by Boole, De Morgan and others.
The introduction of mathematical links produced, in turn, a marked division of
opinion about the nature of the subject. On one side, there were those, often more
traditionally inclined, who considered logic to be an immediate representation of
human mental processes (a view that Venn later called the “conceptualist” theory
of logic).3 In their view, to mathematize logic was to introduce something inher-
ently foreign into the subject, for there is nothing overtly mathematical in the way
we reason. On the other, those more abstractly inclined, including Boole, De Mor-
gan, Venn and others saw no necessity in maintaining a recognizable connection
1As the time of this writing, for instance, a web search of “Venn diagram” produced references
to 1,050,000 www sites containing the term.
2His collection of works on logic, housed in Cambridge, remains one of the best in existence.
See [Venn, 1889].
3Among those mentioned by Venn who held such a view are Lambert, Jevons, Spalding and
Baynes.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

508
James Van Evra
between logic and apparent thought processes. As Venn put it, The interpreta-
tion of propositions in terms of classes. . . “may not be the most fundamental in
a Psychological sense; but when. . . we are concerned with logical methods merely,
this does not matter.” (5)4 For them, logic was a science, and mathematics was a
powerful tool for the representation of the formal basis of logical inference.
When Symbolic Logic appeared in 1881, the debate had been ongoing for more
than thirty years. In large part, the book presents both an account of symbolic
logic (Venn’s term) that brings it up to date by including post-Boolean contribu-
tions made by C. S. Peirce, Ernst Schr¨oder, and others, as well as a defense of it
against ongoing criticism from those still maintaining the older point of view. In
the book, he uses the common or traditional logic as a foil by ﬁrst describing how
various topics are handled in the older logic, followed by a reasoned justiﬁcation
for diﬀerences in the way symbolic logic deals with the same topics. The eﬀect is
a topic by topic redeﬁnition of logic set against a traditional background.
2
BIOGRAPHY
Venn was born on 4 August 1834 to a family of intellectuals prominent in the
evangelical movement in the 18th century. After early private schooling, he entered
Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge in 1853. His ability in mathematics quickly
became apparent. He was elected mathematical scholar in 1854, was sixth wrangler
in the mathematical tripos of 1857 (the highest ranking in his college), and as a
result was elected fellow of the college. With the exception of a period from 1858
to 1862 during which he served as an active member of the clergy, his life was
spent within its conﬁnes, beginning as lecturer in Moral Sciences on his return,
and culminating in his tenure as president from 1903 until his death.
He was
elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1883.
Venn’s major philosophical works include The Logic of Chance (1866), Some
Characteristics of Belief, Scientiﬁc and Religious (1869), Symbolic Logic (1881),
and Principles of Empirical or Inductive Logic (1889). As the titles make clear,
his interests were not conﬁned to symbolic logic narrowly conceived.
Though
obviously inﬂuenced by Boole and De Morgan in the narrower ﬁeld of formal logic,
his work in probability and philosophical psychology reﬂect another inﬂuence on
his thought, i.e. that of John Stuart Mill.
From the mid-1880s to the end of his life, Venn’s interest turned to antiquarian
research. During that period, he published historical works on his college and a
roster of Cambridge alumni from its founding to 1900. He died on 4 April 1923 in
Cambridge.
4Page references are to [Venn, 1894].

John Venn and Logical Theory
509
3
VENN’S CONCEPTION OF LOGIC
Venn’s commentary on logic is largely a detailed development and defense of
George Boole’s conception of the subject.5 He supports Boole on major points,
including a commitment to extensionalism, to the exclusive interpretation of dis-
junction (in opposition to W.S. Jevons’ intentionalist, inclusive reading)6, and to
treating the syllogism as a systematic elimination of middle terms. He did not
intend it, on the other hand, to be a “mere commentary on Boole,” for despite
his defense of the Boolean conception on major points, in those cases in which he
disagreed with Boole, (for instance on Boole’s handling of existential commitment
(436)), he was just as quick to point out ﬂaws in Boole’s approach. Also, while
he identiﬁed Boole as the “main originator” (436) of symbolic logic, he also recog-
nized that “It would certainly seem that Boole had no suspicion that anyone before
himself had applied algebraic notation to logic.” (xxix)7 Hence Venn’s aim was
also to complete the picture by placing Boole’s achievements in a larger historical
context by recognizing the contributions of Leibniz, and the eighteenth century
logicians who followed him (especially Lambert, but also Segner, Ploucquet, and
von Holland).
Symbolic logic arose in part as a result of changes occurring within logic itself,8
but also as a result of a broader change that occurred in thinking about formal
science in Britain in the early nineteenth century. Mathematics in Britain had long
been settled in its own tradition, centered on Newton’s conception of the calculus
and a strict arithmetical interpretation of algebra. In 1806, Three Cambridge un-
dergraduates, George Peacock, Charles Babbage and John Herschel,9 formed the
Analytical Society with the speciﬁc goal of promoting the more abstract continen-
tal version of the calculus by replacing the “dot-age” of Newton’s ﬂuxions with
the “d-ism” of Leibniz’ functional notation. Later, in his 1830 Treatise on Algebra,
Peacock turned his reforming attention to algebra. There he introduced an ab-
stract (“symbolical”) conception of the subject by separating algebraic structure
from interpretation, thus permitting more than one interpretation of an algebraic
expression while maintaining equivalence of formal operations, i.e. whatever is true
under one interpretation remains true under the other (this is his “principle of the
permanence of equivalent forms”).10 While Peacock did not mention logic, and
limited the extension of interpretation of algebraic symbols to geometry, the later
5According to A. N. Whitehead [1898, 115n], “The task of giving thorough consistency to
Boole’s ideas and notation, with the slightest possible change, was performed by Venn in his
‘Symbolic Logic.’
6Jevons [1864, p. 4] claims that his work is “. . . founded on that of Professor Boole. . . The
forms of my system may, in fact, be reached by divesting his system of a mathematical dress,
which. . . is not essential to it.”
7Venn was quick to deny that such a characterization of Boole amounts to a criticism, given
the modest resources available to Boole during his early years.
8See, e.g. my [1984].
9And joined later by William Whewell and others.
10Curiously, while Venn mentions the principle (431n) he neither attributes it to Peacock, nor
mentions him elsewhere in the book.

510
James Van Evra
algebraic logicians brought the ideal of an abstract system to logic. Both Boole
and Venn describe such a system as being largely uninterpreted, and bounded only
by a few elementary laws (such as transitivity, commutativity, etc).11 In terms of
this ideal, Venn begins with the idea that there is “no vested right in the use of +
and −.” (xiv) The standard operators can thus be assigned one interpretation in
arithmetic, and another, formally similar, but not identical interpretation in logic.
It is this idea that forms the basis for the creation of analogical links between
algebra and logic.
The major advantage of such links, according to Venn, was that it permits logic
to be at once both essentially separate from mathematics, while being (“acciden-
tally,” as he puts it) dependent on it.. However, Venn was also aware of problems
such association brings. Like Boole, for instance, he realized that the inverse op-
erations of subtraction and division are not readily interpretable in logic without
signiﬁcant auxiliary assumptions (which Venn discusses at length; cf. pp. 73-96).
He was also aware that even the seemingly simplest cases demand a clear grasp
of the scope and limits of the analogy.
Thus he points out that although the
operations are formally similar, arithmetic addition and class aggregation are not
identical; “We do not,” he says, “add together the English, French, Germans and
so forth in order to make up the Europeans.” (54)
3.1
An Example of Venn’s Analysis: Existential commitment
Venn’s treatment of existential commitment in logic serves as a good example of
his style of analysis. While some of the greatest logicians (e.g. Aristotle, Leibniz
and Peirce) were heavily involved with questions of ontology, Venn points out
that “Many logicians, if not a majority of them have . . . passed the subject by
entirely. . . ” (141). The reason for such neglect, he suggests, was the widespread
acceptance of conceptualist view of logic, mentioned above, in terms of which logic
is conﬁned to a study of the relations between mental concepts. That being the
case, there is no need to question the referential status of X or Y , for they can
only refer to mental entities. Rejecting such a view, Venn posed the key existential
question for logic by asking whether, from a strictly logical point of view, uttering
‘All X is Y ,’ “asserts or implies” that there are such things as X or Y , i.e. “do
such things exist in some sense or other?”(141) He attacks the problem by using
a method that reﬂects the inﬂuence of Hume and anticipates W. V. O. Quine’s
method of semantic ascent, i.e. rather than confronting substantive metaphysical
questions about the sorts of things that exist, he focuses instead on criteria used
for the acceptance or rejection of existence claims.
That is, regardless of how
diﬀerently existence is construed from one universe of discourse to another, and
hence how widely criteria vary for the veriﬁability of such claims, the logician’s
interest lies in the fact that acceptance or rejection remains a uniform possibility
11Although both Boole and Venn were aware of the diﬃculties facing such a conception, i.e.
the non-commutative algebras recently devised by William Rowan Hamilton.

John Venn and Logical Theory
511
and a real distinction, regardless of how questions about the nature of existence
or its veriﬁcation are settled.
Venn confronts the original question from three perspectives: common language,
the older common logic, and symbolic logic, asking how each in turn deals with
the question of implied commitment on the utterance of each of the four standard
forms of proposition. His answer is that generally speaking, common language does
entail such commitment, given the fact that ordinarily, we do not utter proposi-
tions without believing that their subjects and predicates refer. As he puts it,
“Broadly speaking, the statement that All X is Y does imply that there are Xs,
and consequently indirectly that there are Y s.” (145) The same holds true for I
and O propositions. E propositions, on the other hand, are slightly more problem-
atic, given that it is not clear that the predicates in such statements need refer if
they are universally denied subjects. But all of this is only true generally speaking,
for there are always problem cases. Claims about the future, for instance, or talk
of ideal states are ontologically problematic regardless of the form of proposition
in which they occur. What Venn sought, by contrast, was an analysis of existence
claims for logic that avoids all such problems.
To arrive at such a view, Venn next turns to (traditional) logicians. After dis-
cussing their penchant for conceptualism and the problems it brings, he notes that
while some attempt to tie questions of existential import to hypothetical propo-
sitions (151), that will not work either, for the distinction between hypothetical
and categorical propositions is merely one of expression, i.e., as other logicians had
noted, there is no real distinction between the two.
What Venn suggests instead is a (remarkably modern) view “. . . almost neces-
sarily forced on us by the study of Symbolic Logic,” (157) that “the burden of
implication of existence is shifted from the aﬃrmative to the negative form.” (159;
ital his) All questions of the existence of the subject or predicate are, accordingly,
reformulated as follows: given the proposition ‘All x is y’ containing two class
terms, there are four ultimate (i.e. possible) classes involved: xy, x not-y, y not-x
and not-x not-y. “Now what we shall understand the proposition ‘All x is y’ to do
is, not to assure us as to any one of these classes (for instance xy) being occupied,
but to assure us of one of them (viz. x not-y) being unoccupied.” (158; ital his)
Hence “we are led to the following result . . .
; that in respect of what such a
proposition aﬃrms it can only be regarded as conditional; but in respect of what
it denies it may be regarded as absolute.”(159) It is this form, he says, that renders
conclusions about existence “appropriate and unambiguous.” (158)
Given this analysis, Venn goes on (correctly) to conclude that within the square
of opposition, the old assumption that A and E propositions imply I and O propo-
sitions fails, for if none of the subject terms refer, the former are true while the
latter are false. Similarly, the old relations of contrariety between A and E and
subcontrariety between I and O also fail, for if the subject terms fail to refer, the
former can both be true and the latter both false.

512
James Van Evra
3.2
Diagrams
In his introduction to the diagrams that would later bear his name, Venn is quick
to acknowledge that diagrams similar to his had often been used in the past, and
particularly the two ﬁgure diagram devised by the mathematician Leonard Euler.12
Venn saw nothing inherently wrong with the older diagrams, in fact he thought
that an Euler style diagram was perfectly adequate for the representation of the
conclusion of an argument. What he sought, on the other hand, was a way of going
further by serially representing each of the steps in a complex series of inferences
within a single diagram. Beginning with the representation of one premiss using
two ﬁgures, that is, one can then add premises by adding ﬁgures one by one. In
the end, various conclusions can be seen in the ﬁnished diagram.
Venn sought supreme generality in the ﬁgures and their interpretation. He sug-
gested that any closed ﬁgures can be used in the diagrams, and any number of
ﬁgures can be incorporated into one diagram (although, as he pointed out, dia-
grams containing more than ﬁve ﬁgures are rarely needed in the representation of
actual inferences). In addition, and consistently with the larger aims of symbolic
logic, Venn regarded the ﬁgures as having no ﬁxed interpretation, but rather un-
derstood them, prior to interpretation, to be merely ﬁgures enclosing spaces. They
may then be taken to represent either classes, in which case a diagram represents
the relation between classes as such, or as representing propositions.13
4
CONCLUSION
Given the sophistication of his logical analysis, and in particular the close proxim-
ity of his conclusions to results in truth functional sentential logic and ﬁrst order
logic that are now taken for granted, it is clear that Venn stands at the apogee of
nineteenth century algebraic logic. Yet however close his results were to current
logical theory, he remained on the term logic side of the divide separating it from
the logic of Frege and Russell and Whitehead. His understanding of the scope of
logic is particularly evident in his reaction to Frege’s Begriﬀsschrift. Venn refers
to Frege’s work twice, once early in SL, where he makes the (ironically prescient)
remark that it “has no reference to any symbolic predecessor except a vague men-
tion of Leibnitz.”(xxx) He did not, that is, recognize that the reason for the lack
of reference is that Frege’s work presents a new conception of the subject that
depended on no such ties. Venn’s other reference to Begriﬀsschrift occurs in a
ﬁnal chapter entitled “Historical notes,” in which he compares thirty logicians on
their respective formulations of E propositions. Of Frege, he says “Here again we
have an instance of an ingenious man working out a scheme — in this case a very
cumbrous one — in apparent ignorance that anything better of the kind had ever
12Venn remarks (110n) that a canvass of sixty books produced 34 that employed diagrams.
13An informal discussion of mathematical properties of the diagrams, together with a helpful
bibliography, can be found in Edwards [2004]. A more formal analysis can be found in Ruskey
and Weston [2005].

John Venn and Logical Theory
513
been attempted before.” (493/4) Once again, Venn interprets Frege from the point
of view of the logic of terms. Further, he makes no mention of Frege’s concep-
tion of quantiﬁcation. For Venn, propositions were still interpreted as complexes
of terms, which in turn remained the primary carriers of meaning, and although
he recognized truth functional properties of compound propositions, he did not
recognize truth functions as such. While he did not make the leap, however, the
algebraic style of logic was far from moribund, instead going on to ﬁnd application
in the twentieth century work of Thoralf Skolem, and later in the work of Alfred
Tarski.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Edwards, 2004] A. W. F. Edwards. Cogwheels of the Mind, Baltimore, 2004.
[Jevons, 1864] W. S. Jevons. Pure Logic, or the Logic of Quality apart from Quantity, London,
1864.
[Ruskey and Weston, 1997] F. Ruskey and M. Weston. A Survey of Venn Diagrams. The Elec-
tronic Journal of Combinatorics, DS #5, 1997. http://www.combinatorics.org/Surveys/
ds5/VennEJC.html, 2005.
[Van Evra, 1984] J. Van Evra. Richard Whately and the Rise of Modern Logic. History and
Philosophy of Logic, 5, 1–18, 1984.
[Venn, 1881] J. Venn. Symbolic Logic, New York, 1881, 1894.
[Venn, 1889] J. Venn. A Catalogue of a Collection of Books on Logic, Cambridge, 1889.
[Whitehead, 1898] A. N. Whitehead. Universal Algebra, Cambridge, 1898.

This page intentionally left blank 

WILLIAM STANLEY JEVONS AND THE
SUBSTITUTION OF SIMILARS
Bert Mosselmans and Ard Van Moer
1
INTRODUCTION
William Stanley Jevons was born in Liverpool on 1 September 1835. He went to
University College School in London in 1850, at the age of ﬁfteen, and in 1851 he
became a student at the University College. He studied chemistry under Graham
and Williamson, two pioneers in the development of atomic theory and the theory
of molecular motion. Chemistry remained important during Jevons’ life, and he
even published two papers on Brownian Motion in 1870 and 1878. Another major
inﬂuence at University College was Augustus De Morgan (1806–1871), with his
courses on mathematics and logic. Jevons’ own approaches to scientiﬁc method,
probability, logic and mathematics were inﬂuenced by De Morgan. Jevons had
also a lively interest in botany, which probably stemmed from his mother. Jevons’
interest in political economy is not surprising, given his non-conformist intellectual
and family background, but it can also be explained by the context of economic
development he lived in, with both its dark and good sides. Jevons left University
College without taking his degree and went to Australia to become an assayer at
the Australian Mint.
Jevons sailed from Liverpool on 29 June 1854, and he arrived in Melbourne on
6 October. At ﬁrst Jevons found the assaying business exciting: he experimented
and even wrote an article on ‘Gold Assay’ which appeared in Watt’s Dictionary of
Chemistry [1864]. However, after April 1855 it became a sinecure and he devoted
much more time to other scientiﬁc investigations. Jevons’ ‘science of man’ project
entailed an interdisciplinary utilitarian approach to diﬀerent aspects of individual
and social life. His work covered many diﬀerent areas, as is shown by the bibliogra-
phy collected by Inoue and White [1993]: railway policy, meteorology, protection,
land policy, cloud formation, gunpowder and lightning, geology, etc. Jevons es-
tablished a detailed meteorological account of Australia and studied the city of
Sydney, and not surprisingly the problem of sanitation received a central place in
these investigations. Another study in this context is Jevons’ work on ‘division of
labour’ and ‘classiﬁcation of occupations’: Jevons wanted to investigate how the
interaction of diﬀerent kinds of labour resulted in ‘the industrial mechanism of
society’.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

516
Bert Mosselmans and Ard Van Moer
Jevons left Australia in 1859 and returned to University College in London to
complete his education. The early 1860s are important for Jevons’ intellectual
development, and he reports in his diary that he received signiﬁcant insights in
both economics and logic: a ‘true comprehension of value’ and the ‘substitution
of similars’. In 1863 A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold was published, and for
the ﬁrst time Jevons became recognised as a political economist. Jevons published
two important theoretical works: The Theory of Political Economy [1871] and The
Principles of Science [1874]. He drowned in 1882, at the age of 47.
2
THE LAWS OF THOUGHT
Jevons evades the question about the nature of the Laws of Thought when he
argues that they are true both “in the nature of thought and things”. This question
is diﬃcult to decide, and should be investigated by psychologists rather than by
logicians. Logicians simply assume the truth of the Laws of Thought and apply
these laws in a variety of diﬀerent circumstances. In this application the truth of
the Laws of Thought may be manifested. The profession of the logician is similar
to the mathematician’s: the latter develops the formal laws of plurality, but does
not investigate the nature of unity and plurality [Jevons, 1874, p. 8].
The question remains whether the Laws of Thought are in the human mind (and
hence subjective) or in nature (and hence objective). Since science is in the mind
and not in the things, scientiﬁc laws must be in accordance with the laws that
formed them (i.e. the laws of the human mind). This seems to suggest that the
Laws of Thought are purely subjective, and only veriﬁed in the observation of the
external world. However, it is impossible to prove the fundamental laws of logic
by reasoning, since they are already presupposed by the notion of a proof. Hence,
the Laws of Thought must be presupposed by science as “the prior conditions of
all thought and all knowledge”. Furthermore, our thoughts cannot be used as a
criterion of truth, since we all know that mistakes are possible and omnipresent.
Hence, we need to presuppose objective Laws of Thought in order to discriminate
between correct and incorrect reasoning [Jevons, 1874, pp. 6–7].
It follows that Jevons (with a reference to Herbert Spencer) tends to regard the
Laws of Thought as objective laws. The Laws of Thought are “the prior conditions
of all consciousness and all existence”, are objectively true in both nature and the
mind, but the subjective mind can make mistakes in reasoning. Ultimately, logic
deals with both thoughts and things. Directly, the logician deals with symbols,
just like the mathematician does. However, these symbols are only instruments
of reasoning; and since the outcome of the reasoning must be veriﬁed, it follows
that symbols and signs only make sense when they correspond to the thoughts
and things that they are supposed to express [Jevons, 1874, pp. 7–8].

William Stanley Jevons and the Substitution of Similars
517
3
THE SUBSTITUTION OF SIMILARS
Jevons’ conception of the Laws of Thought can be summarised by his dictum
“Substitution of Similars”, the origin of which can be traced in his (published)
personal journal. On 18 December 1861 Jevons writes in his journal that he spent
the last two years working chieﬂy on philosophical subjects. “For a year perhaps
I have entertained hopes of performing a general analysis of human knowledge, in
which the fallacies of words would be as far as possible avoided — and phil. would
be shown to consist solely in pointing out the likeness of things” [Black, 1973, Vol.
1, p. 179, original emphasis].
The fundamental mental powers for knowledge acquisition are the power to
discriminate, to detect identity and to retain. Discrimination occurs in every act
of perception, otherwise we would not be able to diﬀerentiate between perceptions.
Even more important seems the power to identify, or the ability to detect “common
elements of sameness” in (past and present) perceptions.
The latter power is
present in diﬀerent individuals to a greater or a lesser extent, and “furnishes the
true measure of intellect” [Jevons, 1874, pp. 4–5].
The fundamental laws of thought are threefold: the Law of Identity, the Law of
Contradiction and the Law of Duality. The ﬁrst law is described as “Whatever is,
is” and implies that a thing is always identical with itself. Jevons does not provide
a deﬁnition of the concept of “identity” and suggests that the meaning of the word
should be explained by providing an example. The second law is the classical law
of contradiction: “A thing cannot both be and not be”. Jevons traces this law
back to Aristotle and argues that a demonstration for “self-evident truths” like this
law is not required. (Jevons also argues that all truths cannot be demonstrated,
since that would imply an inﬁnite chain of demonstrations). The third law, which
originates from Aristotle as well, is known as the law of the excluded middle: “A
thing must either be or not be.” Jevons suggests that these three laws are merely
diﬀerent aspects of one and the same Law, although it seems impossible to express
this Law in less than three lines (Jevons did not live to see the invention of the
Sheﬀer stroke) [Jevons, 1874, pp. 5–6].
The absence of a clear deﬁnition of ‘identity’ is striking, especially since Jevons
recognises that there are diﬀerent kinds and degrees of sameness. “Sameness or
identity presents itself in all degrees, and is known under various names; but
the great rule of inference embraces all degrees, and aﬃrms that so far as there
exists sameness, identity or likeness, what is true of one thing will be true of
the other” [Jevons, 1874, p.
9, original emphasis].
Jevons recognises that the
main problem is to point out a “suﬃcient degree of likeness or sameness”. The
simplest form of inference is making use of a pattern, proxy, example or sample.
If the sample “exactly represents the texture, appearance, and general nature” of
a certain commodity, then what is true for the sample will also be true for the
commodity as a whole. This approach evades deﬁning similarity, as it presupposes
that the sample is an ‘exact representation’ of the commodity whereas it is unclear
under what conditions that would be the case [Jevons, 1874, p. 9].

518
Bert Mosselmans and Ard Van Moer
Jevons argues that the same mode of reasoning is applied when magnitudes are
concerned. In order to compare magnitudes of diﬀerent objects, we do not need
to compare the objects directly (e.g. the height of two churches), but we can do
it indirectly using a standard. In this case the sample would be length, but since
lengths can be used in calculations, the proxy does not need to be as large as the
object. Jevons provides a “beautiful instance of representative measurement”: Sir
David Brewster used liquids with the same refractive power as a mineral, which
is shown by the fragment becoming invisible when put into the liquid. It would
then be possible to determine the refractive power of the mineral by measuring
the refractive power of the liquid [Jevons, 1874, pp. 10–11].
All processes of inference are based on the principle of substitution. All knowl-
edge is derived from sensual experience, which implies that all knowledge is in-
ductive. Deduction is the inverse process of induction, and both rely upon the
nature of identity. “Our ﬁrst task in this work, then, must be to trace out fully
the nature of identity in all its forms of occurrence. Having given any series of
propositions we must be prepared to develop deductively the whole meaning em-
bodied in them, and the whole of the consequences which ﬂow from them” [Jevons,
1874, pp. 11–12].
Jevons denotes terms by capital letters A, B, C, etc. and their negative coun-
terparts by small italic letters a, b, c, etc. (see below). The relation of identity or
sameness is represented by the sign ‘=’. This sign is already customary in many
disciplines (including philology and chemistry), although mathematicians such as
De Morgan argue that its use should be restricted to mathematics. Jevons argues
that there is an analogy between logical propositions and mathematical equations,
and hence the use of the same sign in both cases is justiﬁed. The common verb ‘is’
(or ‘are’) is too ambiguous. The expression ‘A ∼B’ indicates that A and B are not
identical with each other; ‘A § B’ indicates that there exists any relation between
A and B, which includes but is not restricted to the relations of equality or in-
equality. The general formula of logical inference implies that from A = B § C we
can conclude that A § C. “In whatever relation a thing stands to a second thing,
in the same relation it stands to the like or the equivalent of that second thing”.
Moreover we can replace a part of a whole by its equivalent and leave the whole
unchanged: “Same parts samely related make same wholes”. Jevons concludes
that making identical copies of parts of a certain object, for instance a house,
must result in a new house similar to the original one. The houses would be only
“numerically diﬀerent” [Jevons, 1874, pp. 14–19]. This indicates that the theory
of number has an important role to play — see section 10 for an investigation of
this topic.
4
TERMS
Jevons deﬁnes the concept ‘term’ in his Pure Logic: “Term will be used to mean
name, or any combination of names and words describing the qualities and circum-
stances of a thing” (PL 7). Jevons distinguishes between the extent and the intent

William Stanley Jevons and the Substitution of Similars
519
of a term or a name. “The objects denoted form the extent of meaning of the
term; the qualities implied form the intent of meaning”. It follows that extent and
intent of meaning are negatively correlated: when the intent of meaning increases,
the extent of meaning diminishes [Jevons, 1874, pp. 24–27]. In other words, when
more qualities are added to the meaning of a term, less objects will correspond to
that meaning.
Abstract qualities, denoted by abstract terms, originate when objects are com-
pared and resemblances and diﬀerences identiﬁed. Abstract terms possess only
one kind of meaning. Substantial terms, such as ‘gold’, denote substances. These
terms are not abstract since they denote visible bodies, but they share with ab-
stract terms that they are one and the same everywhere, irrespective of shape or
size. The combination of the simple terms A and B is written as AB. The second
law of thought — that a thing cannot both be and not be — is represented sym-
bolically by Aa = 0. Nothing is hence denoted by the symbol ‘0’, which in logic
means “the non-existent, the impossible, the self-inconsistent, the inconceivable”
[Jevons, 1874, pp. 27–32].
Jevons lists several “special laws” which govern the combination of terms. The
“Law of Simplicity” implies that a term combined with itself has no eﬀect, hence
A = AA = AAA = etc. The law of commutativeness indicates that the order of
the combination does not matter, hence AB = BA, ABC = ACB = BCA = etc.
Throughout the text Jevons refers several times to Boole’s use of logical terms and
symbols [Jevons, 1874, pp. 33–35].
5
PROPOSITIONS
The truths of science are expressed in the form of propositions. “Propositions
may assert an identity of time, space, manner, quantity, degree, or any other cir-
cumstance in which things may agree or diﬀer” [Jevons, 1874, p. 36]. Simple
propositions A = B express the most elementary judgment regarding identity.
Jevons remarks that these simple propositions have no recognised place in Aristo-
tle’s logic, although it is impossible not to use them in scientiﬁc reasoning (which
Aristotle does in at least one place). Aristotle’s conclusion that singulars cannot
be predicated of other terms is rejected (as it obviously blocks the road towards
the quantiﬁcation of the predicate) [Jevons, 1874, pp. 36–39]. Instead, Aristotle
used what Jevons calls ‘partial identities’ as the foundation of his system. Aris-
totle’s principle of inference implies that what is true of a certain class, is also
true of what belongs to that class. Following the quantiﬁcation of the predicate,
several logicians (including Boole) opted for what Jevons calls the “indeterminate
adjective” ‘some’, represented symbolically by ‘V ’. Jevons rejects the usage of
indeterminate symbols and suggests that A = V B (All As are some Bs) should
be written as A = AB. Propositions of this kind express an identity between a
part of B and the whole of A [Jevons, 1874, pp. 40–42]. Propositions of the kind
AB = AC express limited identities, since they imply B = C within the limited
sphere of things called A [Jevons, 1874, pp. 42–43].

520
Bert Mosselmans and Ard Van Moer
The law of duality implies that everything must either belong to a certain class
or to its opposite. Hence, whenever we deﬁne a certain term, we are simultane-
ously deﬁning its corresponding negative term. The symbolic representation of a
negative proposition is A = b. Given that (according to Jevons) all logical in-
ference consists of the substitution of equivalents (and hence that “diﬀerence is
incapable of becoming the ground of inference”) we should not transform aﬃrma-
tive propositions into their negative counterpart [Jevons, 1874, pp. 43–46]. Due
to the law of commutativeness A = B and B = A express the same identity. It
is also possible to conclude B ∼A from A ∼B, although the relation of diﬀering
things is not wholly reciprocal (A does not necessarily diﬀer from B in the same
way as B from A — for instance, if A is smaller than B, it follows that B is larger
than A) [Jevons, 1874, pp. 46–47].
Propositions can be interpreted in two ways — the qualitative meaning of a
name denotes the intent of meaning, whereas the quantitative meaning denotes
the extent of meaning. Jevons argues that the primary and fundamental meaning is
the qualitative or intent of meaning. Every creation or destruction of individuals
belonging to a certain class, denoted by a certain term, changes the extent of
meaning of that term, whereas the intent of meaning may remain ﬁxed [Jevons,
1874, pp. 47–48].
6
DIRECT INFERENCE AND DEDUCTIVE REASONING
Direct inference consists of applying the ‘substitution of similars’ to certain premises
in order to arrive at logical conclusions. Immediate inference is the simplest form
of inference: from A = B we can infer AC = BC (by substituting B for A in the
right side of the identity AC = AC). Inference with two simple identities entails
that from B = A and B = C we can conclude that A = C. According to Jevons
the analogy with Euclid’s ﬁrst axiom (“things equal to the same thing are equal
to each other”) is “impossible to overlook”. Jevons discusses several other forms
of inference:
• with a simple and a partial identity (A = B and B = BC imply A = AC);
• of a partial from two partial identities (A = AB and B = BC imply A =
ABC);
• of a simple from two partial identities (A = AB and B = AB imply A = B);
• of a limited from two partial identities (B = AB and B = CB imply AB =
CB);
• and miscellaneous forms of deductive inference.
Jevons indicates that traditional syllogistic forms such as Barbara, Celarent,
Darii etc. can be represented easily in his logical system. It is also convenient to
represent more complicated cases, such as inferences derived from more than two

William Stanley Jevons and the Substitution of Similars
521
premises. Jevons insists that logical fallacies are impossible when we strictly stick
to the rules of the ‘substitution of similars’ [Jevons, 1874, pp. 49–65].
7
DISJUNCTIVE PROPOSITIONS
Direct inference and deductive reasoning are fairly simply, but disjunctive propo-
sitions are a “more complex class of identities”. They are employed in the inverse
process of class formation, i.e. “distinguishing the separate objects or minor classes
which are constituent parts of any wider class”. In other words, disjunctive propo-
sitions are used whenever an abstract term is ‘developed’ in its constituent parts
or subclasses — whenever the extent of meaning of a term is explored. In or-
der to represent disjunctive propositions, Jevons suggests to use the symbol ‘ ·|· ’.
The words ‘and’ and ‘or’, used in everyday language, can denote exclusive or in-
exclusive alternatives: Bacon died either in 1284 or 1292 (it can be only one of
these years), but an unselﬁsh despot should be either a saint of philosopher (but
he could also be both). Where Boole used ‘and’ to discuss exclusive alternatives,
Jevons’ symbol ‘ ·|· ’ refers to alternatives that are not exclusive.
The law of
commutativeness holds true for this symbol: A ·|· B = B ·|· A [Jevons, 1874, pp.
66–71].
The law of unity, A ·|· A = A, reveals an imperfect analogy between mathe-
matics and logic. In his earliest work on logic Jevons used the symbol ‘+’ instead
of ‘ ·|· ’, but in The Principles of Science he recognises that the analogy between
logic and mathematics is imperfect. Using the symbol ‘+’, Jevons’ law of unity
would imply x+x = x. Indeed Jevons writes: “In extent x+x means all xs added
to all xs (...)” and if we “take all the xs there can be no more left to add to them”
[Grattan-Guinness, 1991, p. 25]. Jevons and Boole corresponded on this issue
(see also section 10). Boole, obviously bored with Jevons’ letters, writes: “To be
explicit, I now however reply, that it is not true that in Logic x + x = x though
it is true that x + x = 0 is equivalent to x = 0” [Grattan-Guinness, 1991, p. 30].
The replacement of ‘+’ by ‘ ·|· ’ does not, however, end all problems. In his review
of The Principles of Science, Robertson [1876, p. 21] was highly critical: “Mr.
Jevons is (...) anxious to extrude [the particular symbol +] from logic; but I do
not see why it does not tell with equal force against the use of the symbol =, the
true fount and origin of the evil against which he ﬁnds it thus necessary to protest”.
The ‘imperfect analogy’ between logic and mathematics remains problematic in
Jevons’ work, which can also be seen in Jevons’ theory of number (see section 10).
The unexclusive disjunction is especially helpful when negating combined terms,
since the negative of ABC is a ·|· b ·|· c (the negative of malleable dense metal is
everything which is not malleable, not dense or not a metal, where the ‘or’ is used
nonexclusively) [Jevons, 1874, pp. 71–74].
Considering the law of duality, Jevons ﬁrst introduces the “fundamental logical
axiom that every term has its negative in thought”. Jevons then rewrites the laws
of thought using the newly introduced symbolic apparatus:

522
Bert Mosselmans and Ard Van Moer
Law of identity A = A
Law of contradiction Aa = 0
Law of duality A = AB ·|· Ab.
Jevons then considers some examples and then proceeds to inference by disjunctive
propositions. Disjunctive terms can be combined with simple terms: A(B ·|· C) =
AB ·|· AC. Two disjunctive terms can be combined following (A ·|· B)(C ·|· D ·|·
E) = AC ·|· AD ·|· AE ·|· BC ·|· BD ·|· BE. Jevons’ system also includes the
modus tollendo ponens, i.e. from A = B ·|· C it follows that Ab = Bb ·|· Cb,
which (by non-contradiction) implies Ab = Cb [Jevons, 1874, pp. 74–80].
8
INDIRECT INFERENCE
Indirect inference or indirect deduction consists of pointing out “what a thing is, by
showing that it cannot be anything else”. According to Jevons this is an important
method, since “nearly half our logical conclusions rest upon its employment”. The
simplest form of indirect inference starts from A = AB.
The law of duality
implies that b = Ab ·|· ab, or by substitution b = ABb ·|· ab.
Since ABb = 0
(a contradiction), it follows that b = ab.
Hence, if a metal is an element, it
follows that a non-element is a non-metal. Jevons refers to this conclusion as the
“contrapositive proposition” of the original. The contrapositive proposition can
be employed in syllogisms such as Camestres, Cesare and Baroko [Jevons, 1874,
pp. 81–86].
The contrapositive of a simple identity A = B is a = ab, and since A = B
implies B = A it also follows that b = ab. The two contrapositives taken together
let us conclude that a = b.
The method of indirect inference can be used to
describe a class of objects or a term, given certain conditions. The class is ﬁrst of
all ‘developed’ using the law of duality, then alternative expressions taken from the
premises are substituted, and ﬁnally all contradictory alternatives are scrapped.
The remaining terms may be equated to the term in question [Jevons, 1874, pp.
86–90].
Next Jevons introduces the logical alphabet — a series of combinations that
can be formed with a given set of terms. For instance, A and B produce the four
combinations AB, Ab, aB and ab. Jevons’ table is reproduced below.
Using the logical alphabet, logic becomes simply an exercise of fully developing
all terms and eliminating the contradictory terms. However, when the amount
of letters increases, the amount of possible combinations becomes considerable.
Jevons considers some techniques and devices to facilitate these endeavours, such
as a ‘Logical slate’ (the logical alphabet engraved upon a school writing slate).
Nevertheless, when more than six terms are involved, it becomes almost impossible
to solve the problem [Jevons, 1874, pp. 91–96]. To facilitate this kind of reasoning
Jevons developed a logical abacus, which operates on simple mechanical principles.
It can be seen as one of the ﬁrst computers.

William Stanley Jevons and the Substitution of Similars
523
Figure 1. The Logical Alphabet
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VIII.
X
AX
AB
ABC
ABCD
ABCDE
ABCDEF
aX
Ab
ABc
ABCd
ABCDe
ABCDEf
aB
AbC
ABcD
ABCdE
ABCDeF
ab
Abc
ABcd
ABCde
ABCDef
aBC
AbCD
ABcDE
ABCdEF
aBc
AbCd
ABcDe
ABCdEf
abC
AbcD
ABcdE
ABCdeF
abc
Abcd
ABcde
ABCdef
aBCD
AbCDE
ABcDEF
aBCd
AbCDe
ABcDEf
aBcD
AbCdE
ABcDeF
aBcd
AbCde
ABcDef
abCD
AbcDE
ABcdEF
VIII (cont.)
abCd
AbcDe
ABcdEf
aBcDEF
abcD
AbcdE
ABcdeF
aBcDEf
abcd
Abcde
ABcdef
aBcDeF
aBCDE
AbCDEF
aBcDef
aBCDe
AbCDEf
aBcdEF
aBCdE
AbCDeF
aBcdEf
aBCde
AbCDef
aBcdeF
aBcDE
AbCdEF
aBcdef
aBcDe
AbCdEf
abCDEF
aBcdE
AbCdeF
abCDEF
aBcde
AbCdef
abCDeF
abCDE
AbcDEF
abCDef
abCDe
AbcDEf
abCdEF
abCdE
AbcDeF
abCdEf
abCde
AbcDef
abCdeF
abcDE
AbcdEF
abCdef
abcDe
AbcdEf
abcDEF
abcdE
AbcdeF
abcDEf
abcde
Abcdef
abDeF
aBCDEF
abcDef
aBCDEf
abcdEF
aBCDeF
abcdEf
aBCDef
abcdeF
aBCdEF
abcdef
aBCdEf
aBCdeF
aBCdef

524
Bert Mosselmans and Ard Van Moer
9
INDUCTION
Induction is the inverse process of deduction, but it is a much more complicated
mode of reasoning. Whereas deduction consists of deriving several results from
certain given laws, induction attempts to do the opposite.
Induction proceeds
according to certain rules of thumb, trial and error, and past attempts. Jevons
draws an analogy with mathematics: whereas it is fairly simple to diﬀerentiate
very complex functions, it may be almost impossible to integrate even relatively
simple expressions.
General laws are usually rather simple and it is therefore
relative easy to derive conclusions from them. Starting from a ﬁnished result is
much more complicated, since several laws are mixed up in the production of the
result [Jevons, 1874, pp. 121–127].
Induction of simple identities becomes very complex as soon as more than just
a few terms are involved.
Induction of partial identities starts from a certain
premise in disjunctive form A = B ·|· C ·|· D ·|· . . . ·|· P ·|· Q, and then we need
propositions that ascribe a certain property to all individuals: B = BX, C =
CX, . . ., Q = QX. Substituting and rearranging yield the desired result A = AX.
According to Jevons this is the most important scientiﬁc procedure, as “a great
mass of scientiﬁc truths consists of propositions of this form A = AB” [Jevons,
1874, pp. 127–131].
Jevons distinguishes between perfect and imperfect induction. Perfect induction
can be done when all individuals belonging to a class can be examined; otherwise
we need to resort to imperfect induction. Although most scientiﬁc endeavours will
encounter uncertainty and hence require imperfect induction, in some cases perfect
induction is very useful, i.e. whenever our investigation is limited to a restricted
amount of observations (e.g. all the bones of a certain animal, all the caves in a
mountain side). Although it can be argued that this perfect induction consists of
nothing more than a summing up of already known information, it still leads to
an abbreviation of mental labour, which is important for knowledge acquisition.
Jevons’ section on induction ends with a brief discussion of the problem of induc-
tion — we can never be sure to predict the future based on past knowledge. In
order to continue the discussion of this topic, Jevons needs to bring in principles
of number and theory of probability [Jevons, 1874, pp. 146–152].
10
PRINCIPLES OF NUMBER AND PHILOSOPHY OF MATHEMATICS
Jevons’ principles of number reﬂect his insistence that mathematics should be
based on logic, not the other way round. Grattan-Guinness [1988] identiﬁes two
traditions in the interaction between mathematics and logics: the algebraic tradi-
tion includes Boole and De Morgan; the mathematical tradition Peano and Russell.
Boole gave mathematics priority over logic, whereas Russell tried to found mathe-
matics on Peano’s mathematical logic. Jevons occupied a somewhat contradictory
position in between of these opposites: he tried to found mathematics on logic,
but his form of logic was inspired by the works of Boole and De Morgan.

William Stanley Jevons and the Substitution of Similars
525
Jevons attempts to deﬁne ‘number’ by counting ‘units’ in space or time. When
counting coins, every coin should receive a proper name: we should count C′ +
C′′+C′′′+C′′′′+. . .. The coins are equal to each other (they all belong to the class
C); they are diﬀerent only because they reside on diﬀerent points in space. Before
counting, we should reduce all identical alternatives; the remaining ‘units’ reside
on diﬀerent points in space and time. “A unit is any object of thought which can
be discriminated from every other object treated as a unit in the same problem”
[Jevons, 1874, p. 157]. The concept of ‘unit’ encounters some severe diﬃculties, as
Frege notes : “If we use 1 to stand for each of the objects to be numbered, we make
the mistake of assigning the same symbol to diﬀerent things. But if we provide the
1 with diﬀerentiating strokes, it becomes unusable for arithmetic” [Frege, 1884,
p. 50, translated by J. L. Austin]. In other words, we can only add up Cs that
are identical, but they cannot denote diﬀerent things if the same symbol C is
used. Jevons was unable to resolve this contradiction. Jevons’ problem to deﬁne
‘similarity’ blocks the establishment of a genuine deﬁnition of a ‘unit’, as Frege’s
criticism shows.
Moreover, similarity as such does not provide a satisfactory explanation, as
Hempel and Oppenheim [1948, p. 323] note: “The same point may be illustrated
by reference to W. S. Jevons’ view that every explanation consists in pointing
out a resemblance between facts, and that in some cases this process may require
no reference to laws at all and ‘may involve nothing more than a single identity,
as when we explain the appearance of shooting stars by showing that they are
identical with portions of the comet’. But clearly, this identity does not provide
an explanation of the phenomenon of shooting stars unless we presuppose the
laws governing the development of heat and light as the eﬀect of friction. The
observation of similarities has explanatory value only if it involves at least tacit
reference to general laws”.
Jevons did not bridge the gap between particular
entities and the abstract notion of number, or between particular facts and a
general law.
Jevons had a logical positivist attitude (the project of a Uniﬁed
Science, the reduction of the laws of thought to one fundamental expression, logic
as the base of knowledge), but he used a logic from the algebraic tradition whereas
a mathematical logic would be required.
Neurath [1983, p. 67] praises Jevons’ mechanical logic: “All this [physicalistical
expression of equivalence] could be developed experimentally with the help of a
’thinking machine’ as suggested by Jevons. Syntax would be expressed by means
of the construction of the machine, and through its use, logical mistakes would be
avoided automatically. The machine would not be able to write the sentence: ‘two
times red is hard’.” On the other hand, Neurath [1970, pp. 1–27] criticizes Jevons
for not applying his reasonings to all the sciences: “But neither Mill nor other
thinkers of similar type [including Jevons] applied logical analysis consistently to
the various sciences, thus attempting to make science a whole on ‘logicalized’
basis.”

526
Bert Mosselmans and Ard Van Moer
11
COMPARISON WITH BOOLE
It is an interesting exercise to compare Jevons’ ideas about logic with those of
George Boole. It has already been mentioned above that Jevons often used the
same kind of notation as Boole did. Both wrote ‘AB’ when referring to the con-
junction of A and B, and wrote ‘A + B’ when referring to the disjunction of A
and B. However, Boole and Jevons were not the ﬁrst who realized that there are
certain similarities between the multiplication of numbers and the logical conjunc-
tion, or between the addition of numbers and the logical disjunction. In algebra,
it was already customary to write ‘A.B’ or just ‘AB’ to indicate the multiplication
of A and B. And in ordinary language, it is perfectly normal to write ‘a big black
box’ to refer to a box that is big and black. So a simple succession of symbols
was used in algebra for the multiplication of numbers, and in ordinary language
for the conjunction of certain properties.
Boole, however, realized that the analogy between algebra and logic runs much
deeper than this.
It is not only possible to use the same kind of notation for
algebra and logic, it also possible to use similar rules in algebra and logic. For
instance, Boole uses the following premises in his ‘algebra of logic’ [Kneale and
Kneale, 1962, p. 412].
1. xy = yx
2. x + y = y + x
3. x(y + z) = xy + xz
4. x(y −z) = xy −xz
5. If x = y, then xz = yz
6. If x = y, then x + z = y + z
7. If x = y, then x −z = y −z
It is obvious that there is, for each of these seven rules, an analogous rule in
numerical algebra. In Boole’s algebra of logic, however, these rules express logical
truths. In this algebra of logic, the third premise, for instance, would be interpreted
as ‘the class of the objects that belong to class x, and that belong either to class
y or to class z, is identical to the class of the objects that either belong to class x
and class y, or belong to class x and class z’. In the fourth premise, the expression
y −z should be interpreted as ‘the class of all objects that belong to class y, but
do not belong to class z’.
However, Boole also uses an eighth premise in his algebra of logic:
8. x(1 −x) = 0
The symbol ‘1’ in this premise refers to what De Morgan called the ‘universe of
discourse’, the class of all objects that are under discussion at a certain moment.

William Stanley Jevons and the Substitution of Similars
527
The symbol ‘0’ refers to the so-called ‘null class’, which contains no objects at all.
It follows that the expression ‘1 −x’ refers to the class of all the objects under
discussion that do not belong to class x. So premise (8) should be interpreted
as the logical truth that there is no object that belongs to class x and does not
belong to class x.
The rule x(1 −x) = 0 is not generally true in numerical algebra. So it would
seem that the analogy between algebra and logic is not perfect and breaks down
at this point. It should be noted, however, that premise (8) is true in a so-called
‘two-valued algebra’. This is an algebra in which there are only two numbers or
values, viz. 0 and 1.
Now suppose that a new rule is introduced to the system:
9. Either x = 1 or x = 0
In numerical algebra, this rule is equivalent to premise 8. So the system is not
really changed if we interpret it as a system about numerical algebra. It is still
possible to interpret the system as describing a two-valued algebra. Indeed, in this
interpretation, rule (9) states explicitly that an arbitrary variable can have only
two values, viz. 0 and 1.
But how should the new system, including rule (9), be interpreted as a logical
system? It is not true that every class is either the universe of discourse or the null
class. (In fact, this would only be true if the universe of discourse contains but
a single object, and in this case, the development of an elaborate logical system
would seem rather pointless.) Boole suggests another logical interpretation: x = 1
means that proposition X is true, and x = 0 means that proposition X is false. In
this way, Boole’s algebra of logic can be interpreted in terms of the ‘truth-values’
of propositions.
It should be mentioned, however, that Boole did not include rule (9) in his
system. He just used the system with eight premises and realized that it can be
interpreted in many diﬀerent ways: in terms of classes of objects, in terms of the
truth-values of propositions, and as a two-valued algebra. In his book The Laws of
Thought he points out that there is still another possible interpretation, namely an
interpretation in terms of probabilities. This interpretation will not be discussed
here.
Boole wrote two monographs on his algebra of logic: The Mathematical Analysis
of Logic [1847], and The Laws of Thought [1854], or, more precisely, An Investi-
gation of the Laws of Thought, on which are founded the Mathematical Theory of
Logic and Probabilities. The titles of these texts are, however, somewhat mislead-
ing.
The title ‘The Mathematical Analysis of Logic’ might seem to imply that Boole
regarded logic as a branch of mathematics. This is, however, not the case. Al-
though Boole used mathematical symbols (such as ‘+’, ‘=’, ‘0’ and ‘1’) in his
algebra of logic, and although certain inference rules in his system can be inter-
preted most easily as rules about numbers (see, for instance, premises (5), (6) and
(7) above), he did not think that logic should be founded on mathematics. At ﬁrst

528
Bert Mosselmans and Ard Van Moer
sight, Boole’s system seems to be an indication that logic (as a theory about the
truth-values of certain propositions) is just mathematics restricted to two values,
viz. 0 and 1. It should be realized, however, that it is, in this transition from
mathematics to logic, necessary to re-interpret almost all symbols used in Boole’s
system. The interpretation of the symbol ‘1’ in numerical algebra (as the number
one) seems to be unrelated to the interpretation of this symbol in logic (as the
truth-value ‘true’ of a proposition). Boole was, unlike Jevons, not a reductionist.
He did not want to reduce logic to mathematics. He merely pointed out a deep
analogy between mathematics on the one hand, and logic on the other hand.
The title ‘The Laws of Thought’ is also somewhat misleading. Although Boole
himself might have believed that he was describing certain ‘laws of thought’, it is,
in retrospect, one of Boole’s greatest achievements that he freed logic from all sorts
of epistemological and psychological considerations. By developing his calculus of
logic, Boole showed that it is possible to study logic as a separate science, without
reference to thought processes. The fact that his algebra of logic can be interpreted
in many diﬀerent ways and that no ﬁxed meaning can be attached to the inference
rules of this algebra, is an indication that Boole’s system cannot be used to describe
universal ‘laws of thought’.
12
THEORY OF PROBABILITY, STATISTICS AND ECONOMETRICS
Given the problems that we encountered above, the role and importance of Jevons’
system of logic and philosophy of mathematics seems to be limited. It seems to be
limited to a pedagogical aspect: Jevons’ writings on logic, such as his Elementary
Lessons in Logic, were widely used as textbooks and saw numerous reprints, up to
decades after his death. This appraisal would not, however, do justice to Jevons’
most important achievement: the introduction of statistics and econometrics in
the social sciences and the use of empirical data.
Stigler [1982, pp. 354–7] argues that statisticians in the ﬁrst part of the 19th
century were concerned with the collection of data, but not with analysis. The
data suggested too many diﬀerent causes, and the hope to establish a Newtonian
social science using statistics faded away. Statistical journals published tables and
numbers, but graphical representations and analysis remained absent. Jevons’ in-
terest in empirical economic work is probably derived from meteorology, another
ﬁeld in which he was active and for which he collected data and drew diagrams.
In 1863 Jevons’ use of empirical methods in economics resulted in a ﬁrst practical
survey: A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold. This survey studied the inﬂuence of
Australian and Californian gold discoveries of 1851 on the value of gold. For this
purpose he compared the prices since 1851 with an average price drawn from the
previous ﬂuctuation of 1844–50, in order to eliminate ﬂuctuations of price due to
varying demand, manias for permanent investment and inﬂation of credit. The
investigation showed that prices did not fall to their old level after a revulsion,
which indicates a permanent depreciation of gold after the gold discoveries. Prices
rose between 1845–50 and 1860–62 by about ten per cent, which corresponds to a

William Stanley Jevons and the Substitution of Similars
529
depreciation of gold of approximately 9 per cent [Jevons, 1884, pp. 30–59]. Stigler
[1982, pp. 357–61] states that Jevons’ methodology is remarkable and novel for
his time. The survey computes, for 39 major and 79 minor commodities, the ratio
of the average 1860-2 price to the average 1845-50 price. A diagram with a loga-
rithmic scale reveals that 33 of the 39 major commodities and 51 of the 79 minor
commodities encountered a rise in price. The 9 per cent gold depreciation is calcu-
lated using a geometric mean of the price changes. The use of the geometric mean
prevents that large values receive disproportionate weights. In 1863 the choice of
the geometric mean relies on intuition, and in later publications on inadequate
explanations. One of these explanations is statistical, saying that multiplicative
disturbances will be balanced oﬀagainst each other using the geometric mean.
There is however no empirical veriﬁcation of this ’multiplicative disturbances’ hy-
pothesis. Stigler [1982, pp. 362–4] regards the absence of a probabilistic analysis
and the measurement of the remaining uncertainty in the averages as an anomaly
in Jevons’ work. But it should nevertheless be seen as a milestone in the history
of empirical economics, because his conceptual approach opened the ways for a
quantiﬁcation of uncertainty and for the development of statistics for the social
sciences.
Aldrich [1987, pp.
233–8] denies that Jevons has no interest in probability.
Quite the contrary is the case, as his Principles of Science contains an elaborate
discussion of probability. Jevons did not use the laws of probability to describe
the behaviour of empirical entities, but rather as rules for the regulation of beliefs.
Probability enters when complete knowledge is absent, and it is therefore a measure
of ignorance. Aldrich [1987, pp. 238–51] argues that Jevons used probability in
two main patterns of argument: in the determination whether events result from
certain causes or are rather coincidences, and in the method of the least squares.
The ﬁrst approach entails the application of the ‘inverse method’ in induction:
if many observations suggest regularity, then it becomes highly improbable that
these result from mere coincidence. An application of this principle can be found
in A Serious Fall, where Jevons concludes that a large majority of commodities
taken into consideration show a rise of price, and therefore a rise in exchange
value relative to gold. The ‘inverse inductive method’ leads to the conclusion that
a depreciation of gold is much more probable than mere coincidences leading to the
rise of prices. The second approach, the method of the least squares, appears when
Jevons tries to adjudge weights to commodities (giving more weight to commodities
that are less vulnerable to price ﬂuctuations), and when he tries to ﬁt empirical
laws starting from an a priori reasoning about the form of the equation. These
methods show at least some concern for probability and the theory of errors. But
Jevons worked on the limits of his mathematical understanding, and many ideas
that he foreshadowed were not developed until decades after his death. A Serious
Fall is not so much remembered for its limited use of probability theory, but rather
for its construction of index numbers. In his Principles of Science Jevons refers
several times to Adolphe Quetelet. Elsewhere I elaborate on Quetelet’s inﬂuence
on Jevons’ writings [Mosselmans, 2005].

530
Bert Mosselmans and Ard Van Moer
13
CONCLUSION
We conclude that Jevons’ work occupied a somewhat contradictory position in
the history of logic and philosophy of science. He had a logical positivist attitude,
tried to build up a uniﬁed science and wanted to reduce mathematics to logic. But
the form of his logic (taken from Boole) was not compatible with these ambitions,
as can be seen in his failed attempts to deﬁne concepts such as ‘similarity’ and
‘number’.
His works on logic were widely used as textbooks, but he did not
found a ‘school’ in the history of logic.
This may also be partly explained by
his early death. Jevons’ most important contribution to the history of science
lies in the introduction of statistics and empirical methods in the social sciences.
Contemporary research in applied economics and econometrics owes a lot to this
methodological pioneer (a ‘logical positivist avant la lettre’).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Adamson, 1881] R. Adamson. Review of W. S. Jevons’ ‘Studies in Deductive Logic’. Mind
6:427–33, 1881. Reprinted in: Wood, J. C. (ed.) William Stanley Jevons: Critical Assessments
Vol. I, pp. 30–36. London & New York: Routledge, 1998.
[Aldrich, 1987] J. Aldrich. Jevons as Statistician: The Role of Probability. Manchester School
of Economics and Social Studies 55(3):233–56, 1987.
[Baldwin, 1901] J. M. Baldwin. Logical Machines. In: Baldwin, J. M. (ed.) Dictionary of Phi-
losophy and Psychology, Vol. III, pp. 28–30. New York: MacMillan, 1901, 1925. Reprinted in:
Modern Logic, Vol. 7, nr. 1, pp. 78–80, January 1997.
[Black, 1792–1981] R. D. C. Black, ed. Papers and Correspondence of William Stanley Jevons.
7 Volumes. London and Basingstoke: MacMillan.
[Frege, 1884/1968] G. Frege. Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik. The Foundations of Arithmetic.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1968
[Grattan-Guinness, 1988] I. Grattan-Guinness. Living Together and Living Apart. On the In-
teractions between Mathematics and Logics from the French Revolution to the First World
War. South African Journal of Philosophy 7(2):73–82, 1988.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1991] I. Grattan-Guinness. The Correspondence between George Boole and
Stanley Jevons, 1863–1864. History and Philosophy of Logic 12:15–35, 1991.
[Hempel and Oppenheim, 1953] C. G. Hempel and P. Oppenheim. The Logic of Explanation.
in: H. Feigl and M. Brodbeck (eds.) Readings in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 319–52. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1948/1953.
[Inoue and White, 1993] T. Inoue and M. V. White. Bibliography of Published Works by W. S.
Jevons. Journal of the History of Economic Thought 15:122–47, 1993. [Updated and reprinted
in Jevons, 2001, Collected Economic Writings Volume 1. London: Palgrave/MacMillan.]
[Jevons, 1869] W. S. Jevons. The Substitution of Similars. in [1890] 1991. Pure Logic and Other
Minor Works. Bristol: Thoemmes, 1869.
[Jevons, 1874/1879] W. S. Jevons. The Principles of Science: A Treatise on Logic and Scientiﬁc
Method. London: MacMillan, 1874/1879.
[Jevons, 1884/1909] W. S. Jevons. Investigations in Currency and Finance. London: MacMil-
lan, 1884/1909.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962/1968] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1962/1968.
[MacLennan, 1972] B. MacLennan. Jevons’ Philosophy of Science. The Manchester School
40(1):53-71, 1972.
[Mays, 1962] W. Mays. Jevons’ Conception of Scientiﬁc Method. Manchester School of Eco-
nomics and Social Studies 30(3):223-49, 1962.

William Stanley Jevons and the Substitution of Similars
531
[Mays and Henry, 1952/1988] W. Mays and D. P. Henry. Exhibition of the Work of W. Stanley
Jevons. Nature 170:696-7, 1952. Reprinted in: Wood, J. C. (ed.) William Stanley Jevons:
Critical Assessments Vol. III. London & New York: Routledge, 55–7, 1988.
[Mays and Henry, 1953/1988] W. Mays and D. P. Henry. Jevons and Logic. Mind 62:484-505,
1953. Reprinted in: Wood, J. C. (ed.) William Stanley Jevons: Critical Assessments Volume
I, pp. 167–87. London and New York: Routledge, 1988.
[Mosselmans, 1998] B. Mosselmans. William Stanley Jevons and the Extent of Meaning in Logic
and Economics. History and Philosophy of Logic 19:83–99, 1998.
[Mosselmans, 2005] B. Mosselmans. Adolphe Quetelet, the Average Man and the Development
of Economic Methodology, European Journal of the History of Economic Thought, Vol. 12:4,
565–583, 2005.
[Mosselmans and Chryssides, 2005] B. Mosselmans and G. D. Chryssides. Unitarianism and
Evolutionism in W. S. Jevons’ Thought. Faith and Freedom, Vol 58 Part 1, No 160, pp
18–44, 2005.
[Neurath, 1970] O. Neurath. Uniﬁed Science as Encyclopedic Integration. in: Neurath, Otto,
Rudolf Carnap and Charles Morris (eds.) Foundations of the Unity of Science Volume I. pp.
1–27. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1970.
[Neurath, 1983] O. Neurath. Philosophical Papers 1913-1946. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1983.
[Neurath, 1987] O. Neurath. The New Encyclopedia. in: B. McGuinness, (ed.) United Science,
pp. 132–41. Kluwer: Dordrecht, 1987.
[Peirce, 1887] C. S. Peirce. Logical Machines. American Journal of Psychology, Vol. 1, pp. 165–
170, 1887. Reprinted in: Modern Logic, Vol. 7, Nr. 1, pp. 71–77, 1997.
[Robertson, 1876/1988] G. Robertson. Mr. Jevons’ Formal Logic. Mind
1:206–22,
1876.
Reprinted in: Wood, J. C. (ed.) William Stanley Jevons: Critical Assessments Volume 1,
pp. 11–25. London and New York: Routledge, 1988.
[Schabas, 1990] M. Schabas. textitA World Ruled by Number. William Stanley Jevons and the
Rise of Mathematical Economics. Princeton: Princeton Unversity Press, 1990.
[Stigler, 1982] G. J. Stigler. Jevons as Statistician. The Manchester School 50(4):354–65, 1982.

This page intentionally left blank 

HUGH MACCOLL
AND THE BIRTH OF LOGICAL PLURALISM
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
INTRODUCTION
Hugh MacColl (1837–1909) was a mathematician and logician who was born, raised
and educated in Scotland and after a few years working in diﬀerent areas of Great
Britain moved to Boulogne-sur-Mer (France), where he developed the greater part
of his work and went on to become a French citizen.
Hugh MacColl was well
known in his time for his innovative contributions to logic. Despite the fact that
one can hardly say that his work satisﬁes the standards of rigour of Frege’s phi-
losophy of mathematics and logic it might represent one of the ﬁrst approaches to
logical pluralism. His ﬁrst contribution to the logical algebras of the 19th century
was that his calculus admits not only a class interpretation (as in the algebra of
Boole) but also a propositional one. Moreover, MacColl gave preference to the
propositional interpretation because of its generality and called it pure logic. The
main connective in his pure logic is the conditional and accordingly his algebra
contains a speciﬁc operator for this connective. In Symbolic Logic and its Applica-
tions (1906) MacColl published the ﬁnal version of his logic(s) where propositions
are qualiﬁed as either certain, impossible, contingent, true or false.
After his
death his work suﬀered a sad destiny. Contrary to other contemporary logicians
such as L. Couturat, G. Frege, W.S. Jevons, J. Venn, G. Peano, C. S. Pierce,
B. Russell and E. Schr¨oder, who knew MacColl’s work, his contributions seem to
have received neither the acknowledgement nor the systematic study they certainly
deserve. Moreover, many of his ideas were attributed to his successors; the most
notorious examples are the notion of strict implication, the ﬁrst formal approach to
modal logic and the discussion of the paradoxes of material implication normally
attributed to C. I. Lewis. The same applies to his contributions to probability
logic (conditional probability), (relational) many-valued logic, relevant logic and
connexive logic. Less known is the fact that he also explored the possibilities of
building a formal system able to handle reasoning with ﬁctions. The latter seems
to be linked to his formal reconstruction of Aristotelian Syllogism by means of
connexive logic.
Two main factors might have been determinant for the fact that his work fell
into oblivion. One is related to technical issues and the other to his philosophical
position.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

534
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
The strong inﬂuence of the logistic methodology triggered by the work of Frege
immediately after MacColl’s death accounts for the ﬁrst factor. Indeed, the logistic
methods of presenting a logical system as a set of axioms closed under a conse-
quence relation initiated by Frege and further developed by Peano, Russell and
others rapidly replaced the algebraic methods of calculation of the 19th century
employed by MacColl.
The second factor relates to his philosophy of logic. MacColl’s philosophical
ideas were based on a kind of instrumentalism which was extended beyond both
of the mainstream paradigms of formal logic in the 19th century, namely math-
ematics as logic (logicism) and logic as algebra (Boole’s algebraic approach). It
is interesting to note that his philosophical position could be linked to French
conventionalism and instrumentalism such as developed by his younger contempo-
raries Henri Poincar´e and Pierre Duhem and the American pragmatism of Charles
Saunders Peirce rather than to empiricism or logicism. MacColl was probably the
ﬁrst to explicitly extend conventionalism and instrumentalism to logic.
Beyond his scientiﬁc contributions, MacColl had literary interests. Following
the spirit of the century, he published two novels, Mr. Stranger’s Sealed Packet
(1889) and Ednor Whitlock (1891) and the essay Man’s Origin, Duty and Destiny
(1909). The ﬁrst is a novel of science ﬁction, namely a voyage to Mars. In fact
it was the third novel about Mars to be published in English. In his two last
works MacColl discusses the conﬂicts between science and religion and the related
problems of faith, doubt, and unbelief.
It is impossible to resist the temptation to compare MacColl’s contributions
to science with his literary incursions.
MacColl penned both one of the most
conservative Victorian books on science ﬁction of his time and one of the most
innovative proposals on logic of the 19th century.
Let us trace back, brieﬂy, the revival of the interest in MacColl’s work. During
the nineteen-sixties Storrs McCall (1963–1967) drew attention to MacColl’s work
particularly in relation to the paradoxes of material implication, connexive logic
and MacColl’s reconstruction of Aristotle’s Syllogism.1 Between the eighties and
nineties at the Erlangen-N¨urnberg Universit¨at, Christian Thiel and his collabora-
tors rediscovered the work of our author in the context of a research project on the
social history of logic in the 19th century. The project led to the ﬁrst systematic
historic explorations into the work of Hugh MacColl by Christian Thiel [1996],
Volker Peckhaus [1966] and Anthony Christie [1986; 1990]. The Erlanger group
motivated Michael Astroh to deepen the research on Hugh MacColl’s logic and
philosophy of language. [1993; 1995; 1996; 1999a; 1999b], as then did Shahid Rah-
man [1997a; 1997b; 1999; 2000]. Together Michael Astroh and Shahid Rahman
conceived a workshop, ﬁnally organized in Greifswald, on “Hugh MacColl and the
Tradition of Logic” with the participation among others of Stephen Read, Peter Si-
mons, Volker Peckhaus, G¨oran Sundholm, Christian Thiel and Ian Wole´nski. The
workshop yielded a special volume of the Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic,
edited by Michael Astroh and Stephen Read [1999]. This volume constitutes the
1See too Spencer [1973].

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
535
main secondary source of our paper.
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
Figure 1. MacColl in 18862
Unfortunately there are no precise records about MacColl’s life. We will rely on the
information contained in MacColl’s second marriage contract, signed by himself.
We follow here the strategy used in the biography of MacColl published in 2001
by M. Astroh, I. Grattan-Guinness and S. Read which in addition to Rahman’s
paper [1997b] contains the main contents of the present biographical outline.
Hugh MacColl was born in Strontian, Argyllshire, on 11 or 12 January 1837. He
was the son of John MacColl and Martha Macrae. Hugh was their youngest child.
He had three brothers and two sisters. The father was a shepherd and tenant-
farmer from Glencamgarry in Kilmalie (between Glenﬁnnan and Fort William)
who had married Martha Macrae in the parish of Kilmalie on 6 February 1823.
The early loss of Hugh’s father had a strong impact on the whole family. The
father was 45 and the little Hugh only three. After he passed away, the mother
and all the children moved on to Letterfearn and from there to Ballachulish. It
was only from that moment that the children learned English, since their mother
only spoke Gaelic. In 1884 Hugh’s elder brother Malcolm, then aged nine, was
2by courtesy of Michael Astroh.

536
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
living alone with his aunt and grandmother. Malcolm did so well at school that
a wealthy lady paid for him to attend a seminary in Dalkeith, near Edinburgh,
where schoolteachers were trained. He taught in diﬀerent places and was ordained
priest in St Mary’s, Glasgow by the Bishop of Glasgow in August 1857.
At this time Malcolm was supporting his younger brother Hugh in his studies.
But unfortunately this aid ﬁnished before Hugh completed them: his brother
became involved in a dispute which divided the Episcopal Church in 1857-1858, and
since he refused to support the Bishop’s position he was consequently dismissed
from his post.
From 1858 Hugh took up various positions as a schoolmaster in Great Britain,
until he left the country a few years later. In 1865 he moved to Boulogne sur
Mer (France) and settled there for the rest of his life. The reasons why he left his
country are unknown but it is not diﬃcult to imagine economic motivations. If we
take account of the immense emigration from Great Britain in the 19th century,
it is not so diﬃcult to imagine changing country a sensible option. At that time
Boulogne-sur-Mer was a prospering town with close economic and cultural links
with Britain. Thus, a pleasant place for people who left Great Britain.
Before MacColl left he married Mary Elisabeth Johnson of Loughborough in
Leicestershire.
She moved with him to France, where in April 1866 their ﬁrst
daughter Mary Janet was born. All ﬁve children, four girls and a boy, were born
there.
During these years the economic situation of the MacColls was very vicissi-
tudinous and often precarious. Hugh worked principally as a private instructor
teaching mathematics, English and logic.
In contrast with this description, an obituary published in La France du Nord
on 30 December 1909 depicts MacColl as a teacher of the Coll`ege Communal.
However it has not been possible to identify MacColl as one of the members of
the teaching staﬀbecause he did not appear in the college’s advertisements and
brochures.
But the economic restrictions and the growing family did not prevent him from
continuing to study. He prepared for and took a BA in Mathematics as an external
student at the University of London in 1876.3
From his frequent publications in diﬀerent scientiﬁc journals and the interchange
of letters with same of the most famous men of science of his time, we can presume
that MacColl hoped for recognition of his achievements in logic. We can imagine
too that he hoped for a university post. The latter is on record in a letter addressed
to Bertrand Russell in 1901 in which MacColl, at the age of 64, recommends himself
as a lecturer in logic.4
His ﬁrst wife Mary Elisabeth died on 2 February 1884 after a long disease. Three
years later, on 17 August 1887, MacColl married Mlle Hortense Lina Marchal,
who came from Thann (Alsace).
For MacColl it was an economic and social
improvement of his condition, especially due to the regular ﬁnancial position of
3University of London. 1877. Calendar for the Year 1877. London: Taylor and Francis.
4MacColl [1901c].

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
537
his new wife’s family. Hortense and her sister Mme Busch-Marchal were running a
well-known ‘pensionnat de jeunes ﬁlles’ in a selected area of Boulogne. The parents
of Hortense were living on a private income, while her brother Jules Marchal and
her brother-in-law Gustave Busch were shopkeepers at Boulogne. The couple built
up a harmonious family life with a solid economic basis.
In the successive years after his ﬁrst wife’s death, MacColl abandoned his cus-
tomary publications for a literary interest. In 1888 and 1891 he published two
novels: Mr Stranger’s Sealed Packet and Ednor Whitlock, respectively. The for-
mer is a work of science ﬁction.
Even though in standard books of history of logic one can rarely ﬁnd a sys-
tematic study or even description of his work, in his time his scientiﬁc contribu-
tions were widely discussed. This is testiﬁed by his publications and the scientiﬁc
interchange with among others, Bertrand Russell and Charles Sanders Peirce.
Actually, at least from 1865 onwards MacColl contributed to diﬀerent prestigious
journals such as: The Educational Times and Journal of the College of Preceptors,
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Mind, The London, Edinburgh
and Dublin philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science and L’Enseignement
Math´ematique.
His ideas were discussed and quite often severely criticized as well.
A very
fruitful discussion took place between MacColl, Russell and T. Sherman on the
existential import of propositions. Unfortunately, many inﬂuential logicians com-
ing from Boole’s tradition such as W. S. Jevons, were hostile to MacColl’s innova-
tions. In an article from 1881, Jevons criticized the propositional formulation of
the conditional “if. . . , then. . . ” presented by MacColl in the paper “Implicational
and equational logic” from the same year.5 MacColl writes there
Friendly contests are at present waged in the ‘Educational Times’ among
the supporters of rival logical methods. I hope Prof. Jevons will not
take it amiss if I venture to invite him to enter the lists with me, and
there make good the charge of “ante-Boolian confusion” which he brings
against my method.
The answer from Jevons came without delay:
- It is diﬃcult to believe that there is any advantage in these innovations
[...]. His proposals seem to me to tend towards throwing Formal Logic
back into its Ante-Boolian confusion [...] I certainly do not feel bound
to sacriﬁce my peace of mind for the next few years by engaging to
solve any problems which the ingenuity and leisure of Mr. MacColl or
his friends may enable them to devise.6
Actually, the point is, precisely in relation to the conditional, that MacColl was
searching for a logical formulation of the conditional compatible with the notion of
5MacColl [1880o], paragraph 43.
6Jevons [1881], p. 486.

538
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
hypothetical judgements (of the philosophical tradition [Rahman, 2000]. A notion
of conditional which people like Jevons and Venn, as we will discuss further on,
wanted to get rid of.
Gottlob Frege too knew about the work of MacColl (but unfortunately not the
contrary). He compares his Begriﬀsschrift with the works of Boole and MacColl
in the paper ¨Uber den Zweck der Begriﬀsschrift,7 where he criticizes the Achilles’
heel of MacColl’s project, the lack of precise notion binding the propositional with
the ﬁrst-order level.
Ernst Schr¨oder, who in his famous Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik
quotes and extensively discusses MacColl’s contributions, ﬁrst had quite a neg-
ative impression of MaColl’s innovations though later he seems to have changed
his mind, conceding that MacColl’s algebra has a higher degree of generality and
simplicity in particular in contexts of applied logic. What Schr¨oder deﬁnitively
rejects is MacColl’s propositional interpretation of the Aristotelian Syllogistic.
C. Ladd-Franklin, in those days a very well-known disciple of Peirce, accuses
the British scientiﬁc community of having ignored MacColl’s contribution to the
formalization of universal propositions with help of a conditional:
The logic of the non-symmetrical aﬃrmative copula, ”all a is b”, was
ﬁrst worked out by Mr. Maccoll. Nothing is stranger in the recent his-
tory of Logic in England, than the non-recognition which has befallen
the writings of this author. [...], it seems incredible that English logi-
cians should not have seen that the entire task accomplished by Boole
has been accomplished by Maccoll with far greater conciseness, simplic-
ity and elegance. . . 8
In fact, most of the positive comments did not come from Great Britain: in his
Formulaire de Math´ematique of 1895 G. Peano acknowledges his debt to MacColl’s
propositional logic. The case is similar to G. Vailati and L. Couturat’s lines on
MacColl published in 1899 in volume VII of the Revue de m´etaphisique et morale.
Couturat works out MacColl’s propositional logic, though he leaves out his modal
and probability logic:
Ceci n’est vrai que pour les propositions `a sens constant, qui sont tou-
jours vraies ou toujours fausses, mais non pour les propositions `a sens
variable, qui sont tantˆot fausses, en d’autres termes, qui sont
prob-
ables. C’est ce qui explique la divergence entre le Calcul logique que
nous exposons ici et le Calcul des jugements ´equivalents de M.
MacColl, fond´e sur la consid´eration des probabilit´es.9
The most inﬂuential reception of MacColl’s work is certainly the one contained in
C. I. Lewis’ development of strict implication and formal modal logic.
7Frege [1882], p. 4 or p. 100 in Angelleli’s edition of 1964.
8Ladd-Franklin [1889].
9Couturat [1899], p. 621.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
539
But at the end of the 1890s, the London Mathematical Society refused to pub-
lish further contributions by MacColl. Searching for another way to present the
ﬁnal developments of his logic, he attended to the First International Congress
of Philosophy10 in Paris (1901) and in further publications of L’Enseignement
Math´ematique11. A few years later he published an extended English version in
a book: Symbolic logic and its Applications (1906).
Three years after that he
published Man’s Origin, Destiny and Duty,12 an essay with his ideas about sci-
ence and religion. As we will see in our appendix the image of MacColl we can
draw from these works of literature contrasts with the image of the innovative and
tolerant logician of his scientiﬁc work. Sadly, as is so often the case in the history
of science, his ideas on politics, society and ethics did not stand on the same high
level as his open-minded spirit in logic.
MacColl died in Boulogne on 27 December 1909 as a French citizen. Hortense
died on 13 October 1918.
1
THE ELEMENTS OF MACCOLL’S PHILOSOPHY OF LOGIC AND
LANGUAGE
There are two leading principles which separate my symbolic system
from all others. The ﬁrst is the principle that there is nothing sacred
or eternal about symbols; that all symbolic conventions may be altered
when convenience requires it, in order to adapt them to new conditions,
or to new classes of problems [...]. The second principle which sepa-
rates my symbolic system from others is the principle that the complete
statement or proposition is the real unit of all reasoning.
(Symbolic Logic and Its Applications, 1906a, pp. 1-2).
Symbolical reasoning may be said to have pretty much the same relation
to ordinary reasoning that machine-labour has to manual labour [...].
In the case of symbolical reasoning we ﬁnd in an analogous manner
some regular system of rules and formulae, easy to retain [...], and
enabling any ordinary mind to obtain by simple mechanical processes
results which would be beyond the reach of the strongest intellect if left
entirely to its own resources.
(Symbolic Logic I [1880p], S. 45).
Mais la logique symbolique fait pour la raison ce que fait le t´elescope
ou le microscope pour l’œil nu.
(La logique symbolique, 1903d, p. 420)13
As already mentioned in the introduction MacColl’s philosophy is a kind of in-
strumentalism in logic which led him to set the basis of what might be considered
10MacColl [1901f].
11MacColl [1903e], MacColl [1904j].
12MacColl [1909a].
13Cf. Frege’s almost identical remark in his Begriﬀsschrift, xi.

540
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
to be the ﬁrst pluralism in logic14. The point condensed in the epigraph amounts
to the following: it could well be that in some contexts of reasoning the existing
argumentation demands a type of logic which is not applicable in others. When
constructing a symbolic system for a particular type of logic, the corresponding
expressions in use should therefore be taken into careful consideration. Actually
this position of his is based on a pragmatic notion of statement and proposition
where the communicative aspect of signs (signs used to convey information) is
at the centre of his philosophy. This aspect of MacColl’s philosophy of language
leads him to explore the possibilities of a formal system sensitive enough to cap-
ture the nuances and features of natural language. The result of these explorations
are impressive: the use of restricted domains to render the formal counterpart of
the grammatical notion of subject, the use of terms for individuals and individual
concepts, the distinction between the negation of propositional formulae and the
negation of predicates, the use of both a predicate for existence and a predicate
for non-existence, the criticism of the paradoxes of material implication in the
framework of modal logic and strict implication, many-valued logic, probability
logic, relevant logic, connexive logic. Unfortunately, most of his ideas were not
developed thoroughly and many others remained in a state which makes them
diﬃcult to grasp. One of the main reasons for the unﬁnished character of his work
is linked to the lack of an appropriate technical framework able to implement his
various ideas. Not only did MacColl not know the axiomatic approaches to logic,
he did not realize the insight provided by quantiﬁers (and bound variables), despite
the fact that his formal language contains operators which come very close to the
notion of (restricted) quantiﬁers. Moreover, there is a fundamental tension in his
notion of statement and proposition between a semiotic and pragmatic approach
and a semantic one which is not solved and which in some passages confronts the
reader with a hard interpretative task. In general it is quite diﬃcult to render a
systematic description of his work which is subject to unexpected and manifold
changes. Nevertheless, some critics might judge more mildly if we came to a bet-
ter understanding of his instrumentalist conception of formal language. MacColl’s
formal language is essentially context-bound in the sense that the logical nota-
tion cannot be read independently of the informal context in which the formal
instruments are to be applied. MacColl’s language is not a universally applicable
ready-made notation, but rather a ﬂexible system conceived so as to adapt to dif-
ferent contexts and built over a tacit (metalogical) background of knowledge of the
environment involved. It is, in fact, a framework rather than a system. We will
continue to use the word system following MacColl’s own use, but it is important
to always remember that MacColl’s logical language is indeed a formal framework.
When he is studying natural language the framework takes on the features of a
formal grammar — though his main approach is that of a logician rather than
that of a linguist.
In the following paragraphs we will try to outline the path that led MacColl
from his notion of statement to his various proposals for innovating logic.
14Cf. Grattan-Guinness [1999].

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
541
1.1
Two Basic Notions in MacColl’s Ideas on a Formal Grammar:
Statements and Propositions
MacColl presents the ﬁnal version of his system of logic in his book Symbolic logic
and its applications of 1909 which will be the main source of our discussion.
In MacColl’s view a statement is any sound, sign or symbol employed to convey
information, and a proposition is a statement which, in regard to form, may be
divided into two parts respectively called subject and predicate. It seems that
according to MacColl a symbol is a sign in an artiﬁcial language and expressions
for propositions are the main symbols of the artiﬁcial language. Here artiﬁcial
includes natural language, that is, artiﬁcial is meant here as a cultural product,
and symbol is meant here as a code. Moreover the artiﬁcial language where the
expressions for propositions are embedded is conceived here as being provided
with some grammatical structure. A proposition expresses more speciﬁcally and
precisely what the simpler statement express more vaguely and generally. Every
proposition is thus a statement but not the contrary It is clear that in any case
(according to MacColl) we can convey the same information with both of them.
For example, if someone asks us if we would like to smoke a cigar, we can answer
by shaking the head: a statement, or with a proposition: “I don’t smoke cigars”.
I deﬁne a statement as any sound, sign, or symbol (or any arrangement
of sounds, signs, or symbols) employed to give information; and I deﬁne
a proposition as a statement which, in regard to form, may be divided
into two parts respectively called subject and predicate. [...] A nod, a
shake of the head, the sound of a signal gun, the national ﬂag of a
passing ship, and the warning ”Caw” of a sentinel rook, are, by this
deﬁnition, statements, but not propositions. The nod may mean ”I see
him”; the shake of the head, ”I do not see him”; the warning ”Caw” of
the rook, ”A man is coming with a gun”, or ”Danger approaches”; and
so on. These propositions express more specially and precisely what the
simpler statements express more vaguely and generally.15
MacColl’s theory of statement is rather a complicated one and stands in relation
to his theory of the evolution of language in human culture. This has been stud-
ied thoroughly by Michael Astroh, who discussed the relations between MacColl’s
notion of statement and the linguistic traditions of his time.16 Furthermore, Mac-
Coll recasts the traditional theory of hypotheticals in the terms of his deﬁnition
of statement and propositions of pure logic (roughly: valid propositions).17 For
our purpose let us retain here the idea that a statement is a chain of signs used to
convey information and which can become what MacColl calls a proposition. The
latter assumes a Subject-Predicate structure.
This subject-predicate structure
actually represents the relation between a restricted domain (MacColl’s subject)
15MacColl [1906a], pp. 1-4.
16Astroh [1999b] and Astroh [1995].
17Cf. Sundholm [1999], Rahman [1998], [2000].

542
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
and a predicate (MacColl’s predicate) deﬁned over this domain.18
The insight
that the grammatical notion of subject corresponds to the concept of restricted
domains of a formal grammar is, in our opinion, one of MacColl’s major contri-
butions. This restricted domain (subject) can be a qualiﬁed one, that is, qualiﬁed
by means of the introduction of a term, or an unqualiﬁed one. The latter consists
only of the domain and a predicate deﬁned over some or all of the elements of
the domain. Unqualiﬁed domains (subjects) are thus MacColl’s version of exis-
tential and universal quantiﬁcation. Actually this type of quantiﬁcation does not
necessarily assume ontological commitment.19 To avoid confusion we will call Mac-
Coll’s notion of unqualiﬁed subjects, quantiﬁed propositions. Furthermore, within
quantiﬁed propositions (unqualiﬁed subjects) we will distinguish A-propositions
(universal propositions) from I-propositions (existential propositions). Indeed the
basic expressions of MacColl’s formal language are expressions of the form
HB
where H is the domain (subject) and B a predicate. He gives the following exam-
ple:
H :
The horse
B :
brown
HB :
The horse is brown
MacColl remarks that the word ‘horse’ is a class term. To distinguish between the
elements of the class denoted by H we may either
i)
introduce numerical suﬃxes: H1, H2, etc.
or
ii.1) attach to each individual a diﬀerent attribute, so that HB would in this case
mean “the brown horse” or HW “a particular horse which won the race”.
ii.2) introduce a sub-class (proper or otherwise), so that HW would in this case
mean “all those horses which won the race”.20
Class terms seem to correspond to our modern notion of restricted domain for the
scope of quantiﬁers such as found nowadays in formal grammars. Here MacColl
closely follows natural language.
Actually, he also assumes a universal (tacit)
18As mentioned above, MacColl seems to think that the passage - within a given human com-
munity - from the stage where information has been somehow conveyed by means of a statement,
to the articulation of an adequate proposition - which assume subject-predicate structure – is
a sign of a higher degree of the evolution of that human community.
Furthermore, MacColl
believes, that in a higher degree of evolution this passage will be introduced by conventions into
the linguistic stock of the source language. (cf. MacColl [1906a], pp. 3-4).
19Cf. Rahman/Redmond [2005].
20MacColl’s use of the natural language articles “the” and “a(n)” is hard to follow. Sometimes
MacColl uses them to distinguish between “all” and “some” and sometimes to distinguish between
the quantiﬁed expression and a particular instance of these expressions.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
543
domain, which as we will discuss further on includes non-existents, but at the
object level of his logical language only some restrictions (portions) of that universe
will be expressed. Those portions (restrictions of the universal domain) constitute
the domain the propositions are about.
Let S denote our Symbolic Universe or “Universe of Discourse” con-
sisting of all the things S1, S2, &c, real, unreal, existent, or non-
existent, expressly mentioned or tacitly understood in our argument or
discourse. Let X denote any class of individuals X 1,X2, &c., forming
a portion of the Symbolic Universe S.21
MacColl’s use of suﬃxes — as described in i and ii.1 — seem to correspond to
our modern-day notion of individual term (including terms for individuals and
individual concepts).
On the other hand, S B and H k [...]. These are not complete proposi-
tions; they are merely qualiﬁed subjects waiting for their predicates.22
Symbols such as B, H, W ... can be used both as a class term or as suﬃxes.
While explaining their diﬀerent uses MacColl speaks of the diﬀerence between an
adjectival and a predicative use of those symbols.
Thus the suﬃx w is adjectival; the exponent s is predicative [...].
The symbol H W , without an adjectival suﬃx, merely asserts that a
horse, or the horse, won the race without specifying which horse of the
series H 1, H2, &c.23
The expression HW is in fact ambiguous: It might mean be both “the horse of the
series” (such as in “the horse is an animal”) which must be read as the universal
proposition “every horse of the series ”:
“The horse has been caught”. [...] asserts that every horse of the series
H 1,H2, &c., has been caught.24
It might also, however, mean a portion of the restricted domain and therefore
read as the particular proposition “a horse has been caught”, that is, “some of the
horses [of the series] have been caught”.
21MacColl [1906a], pp. 1-4.
22MacColl [1906a], p. 5.
23MacColl [1906a], p. 5. The interpretation of this passage is not so straightforward. Here
we chose to understand HW as a quantiﬁed proposition, which seems to be compatible with
MacColl’s uses in the rest of the book. Another choice would be Russell’s interpretation (and
criticism); he seems to understand MacColl’s expression as propositional functions (see Mac-
Coll’s reply to Russell in MacColl [1910c,d]). Russell’s reading might be supported by the fact
that MacColl stresses that those expressions do not have existential import. The problem with
Russell’s reading is that it does not match with most of the explanations and commentaries given
by MacColl himself.
24MacColl [1906a], p. 41.

544
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
In order to remove any ambiguity posed by the expression MacColl uses two
special exponents, namely ε, for universal, and θ for particular.25 These devices
yield the expressions for the A- and I-propositions respectively
(HW )ε and (HW )θ
Unfortunately MacColl uses the same exponents as modal operators. Presumably
he thought of them as a kind of general quantifying expressions (see chapter 2.1
below). The expression (HW )ε indicates that the predicate W applies to all of the
elements of the domain H. Dually, θ indicates that the predicative applies to a
sub-class of horses.
This is the closest MacColl comes to the notion of (restricted) quantiﬁer, whereby,
with some hindsight, the expressions ε and θ could be seen as the second order
interpretation of quantiﬁers propagated by Frege. Sadly, MacColl did not use ex-
plicitly bounded variables for individuals. This prevented him from realizing the
insight that the notion of quantiﬁer gives.
Another interpretation MacColl gives to adjectivals is that of sub-classes (possi-
bly with only one element) of the domain. Thus, say, the adjectival H (for horse)
in AH represents that sub-class from the domain A (animals) containing either all
of those animals which are horses or some of the animals which are horses. Here
we meet MacColl’s notion of unrestricted (and restricted) use of predicates: if the
sub-class contains all those animals which are horses, then the use of the adjecti-
val is said to be unrestricted (we might write A(H)u) and dually for the restricted
sub-class containing some of animals which are horses (we might write A(H)r).
Moreover, we might combine this with the exponents for quantiﬁcation in the
following way: In All horses won the race (HW )ε the predicate won is said to
be unrestricted, as opposed to All brown horses won the race (HW
B )ε, which is
a diﬀerent device MacColl uses to express the I-proposition At least some of the
horses (namely, all those which are brown) won the race. In fact, MacColl proposes
replacing any indication of a speciﬁc adjectival with r, which works here as a
variable over adjectivals (or sub-classes)26 to obtain: (HW
r )ε At least some of the
horses (namely, all those that are elements of a given sub-class) won the race, that
is, Some horses won the race.
Quite often, if the predicative is unrestricted and part of an A-proposition
MacColl omits the exponent ε. If there is an unrestricted adjectival he also omits
the explicit indication of this assumption — that is, in such cases MacColl omits
to introduce the expression u.
MacColl points out that the use of B (for brown) as an adjectival in HW
B assumes
HB. Clearly, if it is possible to select an individual which is brown or a sub-class
of brown individuals of the class H of horses, this assumes that the class of horses
is a sub-class (proper or otherwise) of the class of brown objects.
It is important to see that in MacColl’s system the classes involved in expres-
sions such as HW
B are never empty and thus the propositions expressed have no
25Cf. MacColl [1906a], pp. 40-41.
26Notice that this comes very close to the medieval theory of restricted suppositio.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
545
ontological commitment. Notice that since MacColl’s universal domain includes
non-existent objects neither HB nor HB
1 necessarily have ontological commitment.
With this important proviso we could say that the adjectival use of a logical pred-
icate (or predicates) when they are used as expressions for individual-terms (that
is, used in the sense ii.1)) seem to relate to the modern-day term-use of a deﬁnite
description — recall that nowadays in the case of deﬁnite descriptions we imple-
ment their term-use with the help of the iota operator. A thorough study of the
evolution of Russell’s theory of deﬁnite descriptions in relation to his discussion
with MacColl is still lacking. Perhaps, since MacColl’s adjectivals lack ontologi-
cal commitment, these expressions are better understood as non-rigid designators
rather than Russellian-deﬁnite descriptions.
Most importantly MacColl’s adjectival devices have some advantages over Frege-
Russell’s ﬁrst-order logic. Indeed, take
The fast turtle is brown (the turtle which is fast is brown)
In standard ﬁrst-order logic we translate such an expression with the help of a
conjunction: one individual of the domain is fast, a turtle and brown. This trans-
lation expresses something which is generally false. It may well be that the turtle
in question is fast (for a turtle), but even fast turtles are slow creatures in the
animal kingdom. MacColl’s logical language allows the more accurate translation
(Tf)B
Where the expression Tf signalizes that from the universe of turtles we picked up
the one which is fast and of which the predicate B (being brown) can be said to
hold.
N-places predicates and second-order predicates can be embedded in MaColl’s
formal language (presumably) in the following way. A predicate L(oves) like in
Hugh loves Hortense can be treated in MacColl’s notational system as an expres-
sion which, when applied to an individual constant (suﬃxes of the form 1, 2...)
which designate elements of the domain H of human beings, results in a one place
predicate. This one-place predicate expresses the property of loving the individual
designated by the suﬃx 1 (: Hortense).
(H1)L(where H is the domain of human beings, L stands for loving and 1
designates Hortense)
Let us now, write the result of this operation, namely the predicate loving
Horstense as a new predicate, namely L1.
And this predicate can in turn be
applied to the individual constant which designates Hugh, as a result of which we
have a formula that says that the individual designated by the suﬃx 2 (: Hugh)
has the property of “loving the individual 1 (Hortense):
(H2)L(1)(where H is the domain of human beings, L(1) stands for
loving Hortense, and 2 designates Hugh)
Also second-order predicates can be expressed within MacColl’s framework. Take
a one-place second order predicate like in Red is a colour. The predicate C(olour)

546
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
is treated as an expression which when a applied to an element of the domain
yields the one-place predicate R(ed) which results in a formula expressing the
proposition Red is a colour. That is, we build ﬁrst the ﬁrst order predicate R(red)
(O1)R(where O is the domain of objects, R stands for red, and 1 des-
ignates a given red object)
and then we predicate of R that it is a colour
((O1)R)C (where O is the domain of objects, R stands for red, 1 des-
ignates a given red object and C stands for colour)
Another, simpler, possibility would be to capture the result of the second order
construction with the help of the use of adjectivals.
((P)R)C (where P is the domain of one-place predicates, R stands for
one speciﬁc element of P, namely the one place predicate red, and C
stands for colour)
This possibility is simpler but does not show (formally) the second-order structure
of the expression. Most probably MacColl would prefer this last formal expression
adding informally the intended interpretation.
As mentioned already, MacColl’s formal approach to natural language strongly
resembles to the translation devices of modern formal semantics such as DRT and
DPL. MacColl tried to reﬂect the distinctions of natural language in his formal
system rather than the other way round, as for example Frege would do. This
relates to his instrumentalism, where context sensitivity plays a crucial role.
The connection of MacColl’s notational system with the way of thinking in
modern formal grammar becomes even stronger when we consider the ways he
deals with negation. In fact, MacColl’s logical language contains two symbols for
negation. The ﬁrst one is an external negation which aﬀects the whole expression
(de dicto) such as in (AB)′, (AB)′ and while the second aﬀects only the predi-
cate (de re) such as in A−B, A−B.27 The second one requires some structure of
the predicate. Let us test once more MacColl’s notational system in relation to
standard ﬁrst-order logic with the help of the following example:
Smoking is unwise
In this example the problem lies not only with the second-order properties in-
volved here but also with the translation of unwise because in standard ﬁrst- and
second-order logic the negation applies to formulae expressing propositions not to
predicates. Frege and Russell explicitly rejected negative predicates. However, in
many natural languages there is a productive process allowing words for negation
to combine with expressions of various types, including predicates. Modern formal
grammars provide some structure to the predicates (usually via the λ-operator).
MacColl did not have such a device and was severely criticized because of negated
27Cf. Rahman [1999] and Rahman [2001].

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
547
predicates. However, MacColl’s notation can reﬂect the natural language struc-
ture of the negative predicates of our examples. More precisely, the negation of
an adjectival allows MacColl to capture expressions such as unwise, uncaught and
so on in his formal language with the negation+predicate structure of natural
language. Accordingly, in MacColl’s notation the formal analysis of the sentence
above renders the formula:
((P)S)−W (where P is the domain of one-place predicates, S stands for
a speciﬁc element of P, namely the one-place predicate to smoke and
-W stands for the negation of wise)
Certainly a shortcoming of this translation is that it does not show the diﬀerence
between a second-order and a ﬁrst-order predication. But this can be implemented
in the way described above while discussing the formulation of second-order pred-
icates.
Notice that the negation of a predicative as opposed to the negation of the
whole propositional formula where this predicative occurs has strong similarities
with Russell’s theory of the two scopes of negation as applied to predicates on
deﬁnite descriptions. Indeed Russell’s distinction between
1. It is not the case that (there is one and only one individual that is now the
King of France and this individual is bald)
2. There is one and only one individual that is now the King of France and this
individual is not bald
can be reﬂected in MacColl’s notation in the following way:
1*. (HB
K)’ (where H is the domain of individuals, K: the present king of France
and B: bald)
2*. (HK)−B
Unfortunately MacColl does not realize the full expressive power of the distinctions
of his own notational system and sees formulae such as 1* and 2* as equivalent.28
A particularly diﬃcult part of MacColl’s system relates to the way he introduces
quantiﬁed propositions with ontological commitment. In this context he introduces
the predicate 0 which might be negated de re. Unfortunately the way he combines
this with expressions for quantiﬁed propositions is rather cumbersome (see 2.2
below).
Let us conclude this section with the following remark: the use, within a for-
mal language, of restricted domains of quantiﬁcations, the distinction between
an adjectival and predicative function of predicates, the negation of the latter,
the introduction of a non-existence predicate, the distinction between quantiﬁed
expressions with and without ontological commitment are bold ideas, despite the
28MacColl [1909a], p. 5.

548
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
manifold uses and distinctions MacColl accords to his notational system sometimes
without any warning.
Let us now present some details of MacColl’s logic of non-existence
1.2
MacColl’s Logic of Non-Existence
1.2.1
The Symbolic Domain and its Dynamics
The most inﬂuential approach to the logic of non-existents is certainly the one
stemming from the Frege-Russell tradition. The main idea is relatively simple and
yet somehow disappointing: to reason with ﬁctions is to reason with propositions
which are either (trivially) true, because with them we deny the existence of these
very ﬁctions, or otherwise they are false in the same trivial way. The problem is the
otherwise: Every proposition (unless it is a negative existential one) which contains
ﬁctional terms and which you may come to assert is false. For example, if, relative
to a given domain, Pegasus is an empty name, then the sentences “Pegasus has
two wings” and “Pegasus has three wings” both express false propositions relative
to this given domain, though the sentence “Pegasus does not exist” expresses a
true proposition.
The justiﬁcation for this way of tackling the problem is pretty straightforward
too: in science we are interested in talking about what counts as real in our domain.
Do you want to reason with the help of a mental experiment where counterfactual
propositions other than negative existential ones are asserted? Consider, then, that
the objects of your mental experiment are elements of your domain and then apply
the good old ﬁrst-order logic. That is, reason as if the world described by your
ﬁction were real, and for this nothing else as standard classical logic is needed. At
this point one might start to suspect that something has gone wrong here. Quite
often, when we introduce ﬁctions we would like to establish connections between
two domains sorted in diﬀerent ontological realms. In other words, one point of
reasoning with counterfactuals is to be able to reason within a structure which
establishes relations between what has been considered in our model to be real
and not real. The challenge is indeed to reason in a parallel fashion. Moreover,
such reasoning requires an understanding of how the ﬂow of information between
these parallel worlds works. In fact, Frege’s way is not exactly the one the Russell
tradition propagated, and in the history of the development of modern logic one
ﬁnds some dissidents to the solution mentioned above. One of the most important
dissidents was indeed MacColl. It is in regard to the notions of existence and
arguments involving ﬁctions that MacColl’s work shows a deep diﬀerence from the
work of his contemporaries. In fact, he is the ﬁrst to attempt to implement in a
formal system the idea that to introduce ﬁctions in the context of logic amounts to
providing the logic not only with a many- (ontologically) sorted language but also
with devices for establishing connections between the diﬀerent ontological realms.
Nevertheless, his dynamic approach to the logic of ﬁctions might motivate new
and deeper researches of his work, particularly in intentional contexts.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
549
To achieve his target of a logic of non-existences MacColl ﬁrst introduces two
mutually complementary and contextually determined classes:
• the class of existents and the class of non-existents. He calls the class of real
existents “e” containing the elements: e1, e2, . . . . Every individual of which,
in the given circumstances one can truly say “it exists” belongs to this class.
• the class of non-existents, “the null class 0”. That he calls this class the
null class, although it is actually full, is unfortunate. For it contains objects
01, 02, . . .
which correspond to nothing in our universe of admitted reali-
ties. Objects such as centaurs and round square, belong to this class. The
notational mistake of MacColl’s in calling the class of non-existents “null
class” opened the door to criticism such as that of Bertrand Russell and
diverted the scientiﬁc community’s attention from one of MacColl’s most
original contributions. Actually Frege uses a null class too in the context of
ﬁctive entities. Moreover Frege even uses this class as an object.29
and then a third one,
The Symbolic Universe which includes the former two.
Furthermore, if a set is included in the set of non-existents, then its complement
is included in the set of existents and vice versa.
Thus we have the following
structure of the domain:
e:
Real existence. The elements are also elements of the class S but not of the
class 0.
0:
Non existence or only symbolic existence. The elements are also elements of
the class S but not of the class e.
S:
Symbolic existence. The elements are also elements of the classes 0 and e.
MacColl introduces these classes into the object language by means of the cor-
responding predicatives, e.g. (H3)S, ((H1)B)S, ((H1)B)0, (H2)e (the horse 3 is
an element of the symbolic class, the horse 1 is brown and is an element of both
the symbolic and the non-existent classes and the horse 2 is brown an element
of the class of non-existents). The notational system also allows the classes to
29Recall that for Frege an expression with sense may have no denotation. Thus, if we assume
compositionality of denotation, those sentences which contain expressions without denotation will
not have any denotation either. Now, for Frege the denotation of an assertion is its truth-value.
Thus, if a given assertion contains any ﬁctional (or empty) term, this assertion will lack a truth-
value. But this would, in Frege’s view, ban this kind of assertion from the paradise of science.
Moreover we could not even truly assert that ﬁctional or empty terms do not exist. If, on the
contrary, we would like to assert negative existentials about ﬁctional entities, Frege’s solution
is to assume that each diﬀerent ﬁctional term denotes the same null-class (Grundlagen der
Arithmethik, paragraph 53). This device has the consequence that any proposition containing
ﬁctional entities is false unless it is a negative existential. MacColl thinks of a null class too,
but it is neither empty nor does it necessarily produce false propositions. More precisely, since
MacColl’s null class is not empty it allows diﬀerent non-existent entities as its elements.

550
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
be introduced too as the domains of discourse: e.g. (S3)H, ((01)H)B, ((S1)H)B,
(e2)H (the element 3 of the symbolic class is a horse, and so on).30
As already mentioned, if the suﬃxes are adjectivals representing classes, and
they are elements of one of the classes 0 and e, MacColl’s assumption that the
complements of these adjectivals are elements of the complementary ontological
classes amounts to the following: if the class e containing as its only element the
horse, say Rocinante, then the complement of any other class of horses of 0 is a
sub-class of e. The sense of the other direction of the class inclusion seems harder
to grasp. Indeed, if the singleton Rocinante is a sub-class of the class of horses
H, then MacColl’s assumption requires that the complement of this singleton be
a sub-class of e. This same assumption makes it diﬃcult to understand suﬃxes as
individuals; a theory of complements of individuals is due.
It is interesting that MacColl assumes that these domains interact, or more
precisely that there is an interaction between the symbolic and the other two
ontological classes. In fact, MacColl’s view seems to be more epistemic and dy-
namically oriented than ontological. For instance, assume that at a given point of
an argument, the following proposition is asserted:
(H3)S (horse 3 has a symbolic existence)
This proposition might have been asserted because at the moment of the asser-
tion, the context lacked precise information concerning the ontological status of the
horse at stake. But in a further state of information fresh data about the ontolog-
ical status of the object in question might arrive. This might allow a more precise
assertion such as asserting that the brown horse we are talking about does not re-
ally exist. MacColl provides some examples of this dynamics in cases of deception
which link the dynamics of his symbolic universe with contexts of intentionality.31
Examples such as:
The man whom you see in the garden is really a bear.
The man whom you see in the garden is not a bear.
The examples are interesting and challenging. MacColl takes the point of view of
an observer which asserts the above propositions and studies what happens with
the ontological assumption implied by these propositions. He concludes that the
ontological status of the individual man is that of not-existent in the ﬁrst example
and existent in the second. MacColl did not analyze the dynamics produced within
the sentence:
The object that you see in the garden and that you think is an existent
man is really a existent bear.
Still, MacColl’s examples are exciting and deserve detailed further exploration.
30MacColl [1905o], pp. 74-76 and [1906a], pp. 76-77.
31MacColl [1905o], p. 78.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
551
1.2.2
Propositions With and Without Ontological Commitment
MacColl attempts to capture in his formal language quantiﬁed propositions with
and without ontological commitment.
Let us come once more to the expression of an I-proposition concerning Mac-
Coll’s paradigmatic brown horse:
((Hr)B)ε (At least some of the horses are brown)
that in MacColl’s view does not commit itself to the existence of horses. Thus the
universal expression
(HB
r )’ (It is not the case that there is a brown horse =no horse is
brown)
In order to obtain expressions for I-propositions with ontological commitment,
MacColl introduces, as explained above, a non-empty symbolic universe including
existent and non-existent objects. Furthermore, on page 5 of his book MacColl in-
troduces the predicate of non-existence 0 in the context of formulating expressions
for I-propositions which might be negated de re. With the help of the non-existence
predicate we obtain expressions such as
(Hc)−0
which, according to MacColl, reads Every one of the caught horses is existent. Or
At least some of the horses (namely, all those which were caught) are existent.32
MacColl employs here the unrestricted adjectival C as standing for the sub-class of
all caught horses and the negation of the non-existence predicate as the assertion
that any such class is included in the set of (non-non-) existent objects. Thus the
formula (Hc)−0 expresses an I-proposition with ontological commitment. A more
explicit formulation would be
((Hr)e)ε (Some horses are existent)
At least some of the horses (namely, all those which are elements of a
given sub-class) are existent.
In fact, MacColl uses a special case of the latter notation in his reconstruction of
traditional syllogism where he omits the exponent ε:33
(XY )e
At least some of the X (namely, all those which are elements of Y) are
existent.
That is,
Some of the X are Y (and are existent).
32MacColl [1906a], p. 5.
33MacColl [1906a], p. 44.

552
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
Similarly for the O-propositions:
(X−Y )e
Some of the X are not Y (and are existent).
MacColl also introduces in his system expressions for A-propositions with onto-
logical commitment, such as
(H−c)0
Which accordingly expresses:
Every one of the non-caught horses is non-existent.
But according to MacColl, this implies (recall MacColl’s assumption of comple-
mentarity)
Every horse that has been caught exists, or Every horse has been caught
(and is existent)34
Actually, MacColl’s notational system has a more direct way of achieving I-propositions
with ontological commitment, namely
((Hr)e)ε (Some horses are existent).
The notion of propositions as conveying information seems to furnish the moti-
vational background of all his conception of a logic where data from the context
might have logical consequences. In the section above we outlined how data about
the ontological status of the subjects on which propositions are built might deter-
mine the set of consequences which could be drawn. It is an interesting fact that
MacColl attempted to formulate a logic where data of any kind might have logical
consequences. The result of these explorations of his yielded the basis of modern
formal modal logic and the start of the philosophy of the conditional.
2
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE CONDITIONAL
MacColl’s central notion is that of the conditional. He not only acknowledges that
this connective holds a privileged place in his logic, he also makes the conditional
the center of his philosophy. This triggered a whole series of reﬂections on the
conditional the repercussions of which never faded since MacColl’s ﬁrst challenges
on the logical meaning of material implication. Moreover, many of todays discus-
sions involving the pragmatic aspects of meaning can be seen as sharing MacColl’s
central philosophical background, namely, the basic units of meaning in logic are
to be linked to convey information.
MacColl did not work out thoroughly his
theory of meaning, but he approached it from diverse angles, all of which seem to
be connected to the idea that the passage of information must yield a logic where
the income of data might make a diﬀerence.
34MacColl [1906a], p. 5.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
553
2.1
The Invention of The Modal Logic T: MacColl’s Criticism of
Material Implication
Let us start with two quotes of Stephen Read who puts the historical point suc-
cinctly35:
The received wisdom is that strict implication was invented and devel-
oped by the American logician C. I. Lewis. 36
C. I Lewis repeatedly exempts MacColl from criticisms of his prede-
cessors in their accounts of implication.
They had all taken a true
implication, or conditional, to be one with false antecedent or true con-
sequent. MacColl uniquely, and correctly in Lewis’ view, rejected this
account, identifying a true implication with the impossibility of true an-
tecedent and false consequent. Lewis’s development of the calculus of
strict implication arises directly and explicitly out of MacColl’s work.37
Indeed the received wisdom on the origins of formal modal logic is wrong — and
Lewis was far from innocent in the propagation of this mistaken wisdom.38 The
contributions of MacColl in this ﬁeld came at a time when the long ancient Greek,
Arabic and Medieval traditions were put aside due to the suspicion of psycholo-
gism. In fact MacColl understood his work as building a bridge between the philo-
sophical and the new mathematical approach to logic39 and discussed the main
ideas of his modal logic in an epistolary interchange principally with Bertrand
Russell. The ﬁrst paper containing the ﬁnal version of his modal logic was pre-
sented in Paris (1901) at the 1`ere Congr`es International de Philosophie. Logique
et Histoire des Sciences,where among others Couturat, Frege, Peano and Rus-
sell were members of the scientiﬁc committee. Further publications on the same
subject were published in France between 1903 and 1904. Eventually the most
developed formulation of MacColl’s logic was presented in this book of 1906 Sym-
bolic logic and its applications. But let us come back to his reﬂections on material
implication:
For nearly thirty years I have been vainly trying to convince them that
this assumed invariable equivalence between a conditional (or implica-
tion) and a disjunctive is an error, and now Mr. Shearman’s quotation
supplies me with a welcome test case which ought, I think, to decide
the question ﬁnally in my favour. Take the two statements “He is a
doctor” and “He is red-haired”, each of which, is a variable, because it
35See too Rahman [1997b].
36Read [1999], p. 59.
37Read [1999], p. 59.
38Cf. Rahman [1997b] and Read [1999], p. 59.
39The writer of this paper would like to contribute his humble share as a peacemaker between
the two sciences, both of which he profoundly respects and admires. He would deprecate all idea
of aggression or conquest [...]. Do not Englishmen and Scotchmen alike now both “glory” as
George III said he did, “in the name of Briton”? Why should not logicians and mathematicians
unite in like manner under some common appellation? (MacColl [1880p], p. 46-47).

554
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
may be true or false. Is it really the fact that one of these statements
implies the other? Speaking of any Englishman taken at random out of
those now living, can we truly say of him “If he is a doctor he is red-
haired”, or “if he is red-haired he is a doctor?” Is it really a certainty
that either “all English doctors are red-haired”, or else “all red-haired
Englishman are doctors?”
[...]
Thus, Mr. Russell, arguing correctly from the customary convention of
logicians, arrives at the strange conclusion that (among Englishmen)
we may conclude from a man’s red hair that he is a doctor, or from his
being a doctor that (whatever appearances may say to the contrary) his
hair is red.40
MacColl’s strict implication grew out of his dissatisfaction with the material impli-
cation contained in the text (and similar) quoted above. His notion of conditional
is the known deﬁnition of strict implication: “A implies B” is understood by
MacColl as “it is impossible that A and not-B” (in MacColl’s notation (AA’)η):
Let W denote the ﬁrst proposition and E the second. It is surely an
awkward assumption (or convention) that leads here to the conclusion
that “either W implies E or else E implies W”. War in Europe does
not necessarily imply a disastrous earthquake the same year in Europe;
nor does a disastrous earthquake in Europe necessarily imply a great
war the same year in Europe.
[...]
with Mr Russell the proposition “A implies B” means (AB’)ι,
whereas with me it means (AB’)η.41
MacColl’s modal language is conceived as development of the “Boolian” values
‘true” and “false” which he thought to be not general enough and even not a
faithful description of human reasoning abilities.42 MacColl introduced the further
40MacColl [1908b], p. 152.
41MacColl [1908c], p. 453.
42MacColl seems to have taken the ability to drive conclusions by means of strict implication
as a sign of a higher degree of evolution of men over animals. The following text is probably
aimed against the Boole and followers who were the mainstream and had no connective for the
conditional:
Brute and man alike are capable of concrete reasoning; man alone is capable of
abstract reasoning [...]. The brute as well as is capable of the concrete inductive
reasoning [...] that is to say, from experience -often painful experience- the brute
as well as man can learn that the combination of events A and B is invariably
followed by the event C [...]. We have seen that from two elementary premisses A
and B, brutes as well as men can [...] draw a conclusion C. But no brute can, from
the two implicational premisses [...] draw the implicational conclusion A:C [it is
impossible that A not C]. It is evident that the latter is not only more diﬃcult,
but also that it is on a higher and totally diﬀerent plane. In the former the two
premisses and the conclusion are all three elementary statements [...] while the
whole reasoning is a simple implication. In the latter, the two premisses and the

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
555
modalities “certain” (or “necessary”), “impossible” and “contingent” (or “neither
impossible nor necessary”. One motivation for this was the probabilistic interpre-
tation. In fact on page 7 of his book of 1906 we ﬁnd the following presentation:
Truth
τ
Aτ :
A is true in a particular case or instance.
False
ι
Aι :
A is false in a particular case.
Certain
ε
Aε :
A is always true (true in every case) within
the limits of our data, so that its probability is 1.
Impossible
η
Aη :
A contradicts some datum or deﬁnition, so
that its probability is 0.
Variable
θ
Aθ :
A is possible but uncertain (A is contingent).
It is equivalent to A−ηA−ε: A is neither impossible
nor certain; A is possible but uncertain. The prob-
ability is neither 0 nor 1, but some proper fraction
between the two.
On page 14 MacColl adds the modality “possible” (π) deﬁned as not-impossible,
and explains that this modality indicates that the probability is not 0 but might
be 1 or less than 1.
On the same page we ﬁnd the resolution of the internal (de re) negation of
these operators. MacColl does not make use here of two diﬀerent signs one for
de re negation and one for de dicto negation (as he did before for the negation of
predicates). To introduce the distinction here MacColl makes use of the diﬀerence
between the adjectival and predicative positions. We will not follow the latter
device but simply change the positions:
Internal
Nega-
tion of Truth
(A′)τ
Aι
Negation of False
(A′)ι
Aτ
Internal
Nega-
tion of Certain
(A′)ε
Aη
To be distinguished from the external negation
(Aε)’: Ais not necessary
Internal
Nega-
tion of Impossi-
ble
(A′)η
Aε
To be distinguished from the external negation
(Aη)’: A is not impossible
Internal
Nega-
tion of Variable
(A′)θ
Aθ
To be distinguished from the external negation
(Aθ)’: A is not contingent
Internal
Nega-
tion of Possible
(A′)π
It is possible that notA
To be distinguished from the external negation
(Aπ)’: A is impossible
conclusion are all three implications, while the whole reasoning is an implication
of the second order. MacColl [1902i], pp. 367-368.

556
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
These modalities combine with propositional logic in the following way:
A + B
disjunction
A′
negation
AB
conjunction
A:B
strict implication
(AB′)η
Deﬁnition of strict implication
MacColl repeatedly claims the superiority of his logic over the “Boolian Lo-
gicians” (Jevons, Schr¨oder, Venn et al.)
on the grounds of its greater success
in solving speciﬁc problems of logic and mathematics, particularly in relation to
probability.
In fact, MacColl explains explictly that his logic had its origin in
problems of probability.43 Theodor Hailperin, who studied MacColl’s application
of logic in probability, links him to the ﬁrst results on conditional probability.44
Later on MacColl gives a more general interpretation to his modal logic. Unfortu-
nately the interpretation of his expressions for modalities always oscillate between
values, predicates, operators and variables for propositions of the corresponding
kind. Peter Simons claims that MacColl modalities do not yield a many-valued
functional logic and are better understood as probability logic.45 Werner Stelzner
and Ian Wole´nski prefer the operational interpretation.46 Read reconstructs Mac-
Coll’s modal logic within the style of his times, that is, as an algebra suitable for
diverse interpretations.47 We would like to recall that, as already explained in 1.1,
MacColl’s modalities are also used as operators to produce quantiﬁed expressions.
It looks as if sometimes, in order to achieve generality, MacColl considered the
data over which the modalities are deﬁned as of any kind: individuals, contexts,
probabilities and so on. However, in the following, we will in principle take modal-
ities as exponents to stand for operators over formulae and the non-exponential
use of these modalities to stand for formulae. Nevertheless, Read shows that the
43It may interest some of the readers to be told that this method owes its origin to a ques-
tion in probability (No. 3440), proposed by Mr. Stephen Watson in the Educational Times.
My solution of this question, with an introductory article, entitled “Probability Notation”, was
published in the Educational Times for August, 1871; and in this introductory article may be
seen the germs of the more present method. Shortly after this I gave up all mathematical in-
vestigations, and my thoughts did not again revert to the subject till two or three months before
the appearance of my article on “Symbolical Language” for July, 1877. [...] I noticed that this
“Symbolic Language”, as I called it, might also be employed, without change or modiﬁcation,
and with unerring certainty, in tracing to their last hiding-place the limits which often escape
so mysteriously from the mathematician’s grasp when he ventures to change the order of inte-
gration or the variables in a multiple integral. I still looked upon the method, however, as an
essentially mathematical one - grafted on a logical stem, but destined to yield mathematical fruit,
and mathematical fruit only. (MacColl [1878d], p. 27).
44According to Hailperin, unlike with Boole and Peirce, MacColl’s notation clearly distin-
guishes between an argument (event, proposition, class) and its probability (cf. Hailperin [1996],
pp. 132-134).
45Cf. Simons [1999].
46Cf Stelzner [1999], Wole´nski [1999].
47Cf. Read [1999].

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
557
following theorems of MacColl’s modal logic amount to the logic nowadays known
as T.
In fact MacColl assumes following validities on modalities48:
1. (A + A′)ε
2. (Aτ + Aι)ε
3. (AA′)η
4. (Aε + Aη + Aθ)ε
5. Aε : Aτ
6. Aη : Aι
7. Aε = (A′)η
8. Aη = (A′)ε
9. Aθ = (A′)θ
It is interesting to compare formula 2 with formula 1. In the second formula
the truth of the proposition involved is brought into the object language. Stelzner
interprets this device of MacColl’s as the introduction into the object language of
names for contexts.49
Formula number 4 (and its dual 5) correspond(s) to the axiom characterizing
the nowadays well known normal modal logic T. Moreover, as pointed out by
Read, MacColl explicitly rejects S4-axiom
Aε:Aεε 50
and accepts the normality axiom
ηη = ε51
where the exponential notation signalizes the use of the modality as
an operator
All this conﬁrms Read’s reconstruction of MacColl and even the claim that the
system T was penned by MacColl far before it received the name T. Read’s claim
opposes the reading of Storrs MacCall who thinks that MacColl’s logic corresponds
to one of the non-normal logics. Up to this point of the discussion Read’s argument
seem to be the right one nevertheless, as we will say further on there might be
some kind of compromise. The point is that MacColl did not have only one system
and this was particularly the case when he tackles the issue of the conditional. Let
48MacColl [1906a], p. 8.
49Cf. Stelzner [1999].
50Cf. MacColl [1896c], p. 13 and Read [1999], p. 579.
51Cf. MacColl [1906a], p. 13 and Read [1999], p. 74.

558
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
us thus come back to the start and present MacColl’s solution to the paradoxes of
material implication in the framework of his modal logic.
MacColl realizes that his strict implication avoids the paradoxes of material
implication mentioned above. That is,
1. (A : B) + (B : A)
2. B : (A : B)
3. A′ : (A : B)
are certainly non-valid.
Notice that if A and B are formulae with the structure = necessity opera-
tor+propositional variable, then the disjunction (1) is not valid either. We know
today that this particular case of the disjunction characterizes the logic S.4.3,
which, when formulated in the framework of a Kripke semantics, amounts to as-
suming a reﬂexive, transitive and linear frame. However if A stands for a con-
tradiction and/or B for a tautology then all of 3 turns out to be valid. In fact,
MacColl points out that nevertheless instances of the following are valid in his
system:
4. A : ε
5. η : A
where ε stands for a formula expressing an arbitrary necessary proposition and
similarly for η. Clearly the following are valid too:
6. Bε : (A : B)
7. Aη : (A : B)
Moreover the following is also valid:
8. η : ε
such as the instantiation
9. (BB′) : (A + A′)
MacColl concedes that they might give the impression of paradoxical-looking for-
mulae. But they are not. MacColl simply states, as do many modern-day modal
logicians, that they have to be accepted because the meaning which follows from
the deﬁnition of strict implication is not paradoxical.52 On the very same page
where he concedes the validity of the formulae above he explicitly rejects
10. Aη : Aε53
52MacColl [1906a], p. 13.
53MacColl [1906a], p. 13

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
559
MacColl’s argument for this rejection is hard to follow, but if we put all his expla-
nations on this issue together54 it looks as if he rejects substitutions such as
11. (AA′)η : (AA′)ε
The construction of this formula seems to follow from the diﬀerence between the
predicative position of the modalities deﬁned over a class-term and their interpre-
tation as formulae. His main explanation is based on the remark that formulae
such as 10 assert that every impossibility of the class η is also an individual of the
class of certainties ε which is absurd.55 This would make the following formula
hard to understand:
12. (A + A′)η : (A + A′)ε
On the one hand it should be accepted because the consequent (antecedent) is valid
(a contradiction), furthermore the subject-formula of the antecedent (A + A′) is
the same as the subject-formula of the consequent (and apparently contained in
the class ε). On the other hand, the reading of this formula in terms of classes
proposed by MacColl would render the antecedent hard to read: A + A′ is not an
element of the class of impossible formulae. Still, one could argue that if the latter
is the case, then 12 must be valid.
Another possibility is to come to the conclusion that the construction rules for
formulae implicit in 8 and 10 do not allow formulae such as 12 and the two below
to be built from them:
13. (AA′) : (AA′)
14. (A + A′) : (A + A′)
Does MacColl accept 4), 5) and 8) under the assumption that the scope of the
modalities of antecedent and consequent is not the same formula (see 2.2.1.2 be-
low)? Certainly, this does not necessarily mean that MacColl rejects 13 and 14,
only that they do not follow from 8.
The predicative use of a modality is not an operator after all but a kind of
a metalogical predicate over propositions. Actually this seems to be related to
MacColl’s use of the theses of connexive logic — which cannot be proved in the
standard versions of the normal modal logic T — and to his methods of elimi-
nating the redundant formulae in an implication. In MacColl’s connexive logic,
according to our reconstruction, neither 13 nor 14 are valid. Moreover the use of
the metalogical predicates “true” and “false” in (Aτ + Aι)ε seem to be linked to
metalogical restrictions on the connexive conditional.56 Here we ﬁnd ourselves at
the start of another story.
54MacColl [1906a], pp. 13, 78-79.
55MacColl [1906a], 78.
56See the operator V and F in section three below. With help of these operators the formula
(Aτ + Aι)εcould be read as expressing that it is valid that the proposition A is either logically
contingently true or false (Cf. MacColl [1906a], p. 16).

560
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
2.2
Towards Connexive Logic and Relevance
MacColl recasts the philosophical tradition of connexive logic in his formal system.
Connexive logic is strongly linked to his criticism of material implication because
in connexive logic the following substitution of the disjunction (A : B) + (B : A)
is not only not valid, it is invalid
(A′ : A) + (A : A′)
Indeed, connexive logic contains as theses the negation of the disjunction. That is
(A′ : A)′
(A : A′)′
Furthermore, connexive logic is at the center of MacColl’s reconstruction of the
syllogism which allows him some generalizations on the notion of sub-alternation
by means of the derived theses
(A : B) : (A′ : B)′
(A : B) : (A : B′)′57
To embed these theses in a logical system is not a trivial task. MacColl achieved
this by introducing some metalogical restrictions on the modalities of the an-
tecedent and the consequent which are linked with our remarks about his identi-
ﬁcation of necessary with valid propositions. Let us ﬁrst brieﬂy present a more
general description of connexive logic.
2.2.1
Connexive Logic
Many of the discussions about conditionals can best be put as follows: can those
conditionals that involve an entailment relation be formulated within a formal
system? The reasons for the failure of the classical approach to entailment have
usually been that they ignore the meaning connection between antecedent and
consequent in a valid entailment. One of the ﬁrst theories in the history of logic
about meaning connection resulted from the stoic discussions on tightening the
relation between antecedent and consequent of conditionals, which in this context
was called συναρτησις (connection) and played an important role in the history
of philosophy.
This theory gave a justiﬁcation for the validity of what we today express in
standard classical logic through formulae such as ¬(a →¬a) and ¬(¬a →a) (let
us here, and below, use the standard terminology symbol ‘→’ for the material
implication).
Let us ﬁrst discuss two examples which should show what the ideas behind
connexive logic are. The ﬁrst example is a variation on an idea of Stephen Read’s
[1994], who used it against Grice’s defence of material implication. The second is
based on an idea of Lewis Carroll’s.
57MacColl [1906a], pp. 49-65, 92-93.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
561
The Read Example
This example shows how a given disjunction of conditional propositions, none of
which is true, is, from a classical point of view, nevertheless valid. Imagine the
following situation:
Stephen Read asserts that dialogical relevance logic is not logic any more. Sup-
pose further that Jacques Dubucs rejects Read’s assertion.58 Now consider the
following formulae where a, b, stand for propositional variables:
1. If Read was right, so was Dubucs: (a →b)
Now (1) is obviously false. The following proposition is also false:
2. If Dubucs was right, so was Read: (b →a)
Thus, the disjunction of (1) and (2) must be false:
3. (a →b) ∨(b →a)
From a classical point of view, however, this disjunction is valid and this seems
counterintuitive. Recall MacColl’s criticism of the material implication based on
counterexamples of precisely this form of disjunction.
If we reformulate (3) in the following way:
4. (a →¬a) ∨(¬a →a)
the truth-functional analysis of this disjunction, which regards the disjunction as
valid, shows how awkward such a theory can be. Certainly, the disjunction is not
intuitionistically valid, but the intutionistically valid double negated version is not
plausible either.
The point of connexive logic is precisely that this disjunction is invalid. Thus,
in connexive logic the following holds:
5. ¬((a →¬a) ∨(¬a →a))
or
6. ¬(a →¬a)
and
7. ¬(¬a →a).
Proposition (6) is known under the name ﬁrst Boethian connexive thesis. Number
(7) is the ﬁrst Aristotelian connexive thesis.
Actually we should use another symbol for the connexive conditional:
8. ¬(a ⇒¬a) (ﬁrst Boethian connexive thesis)
9. ¬(¬a ⇒a) (ﬁrst Aristotelian connexive thesis).59
58The content of these examples is ﬁctional.
59At this point it should be mentioned that the connexive theses are given various names in
the literature. What we call the ﬁrst Boethian thesis is often referred to as the Aristotelian thesis
and what we call the second Boethian thesis is often called simply the Boethian thesis.

562
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
The Lewis Carroll Example
In the 19th century Lewis Carroll presented a conditional which John Venn called
Alice’s Problem and which resulted in several papers and discussions. The condi-
tional is the following:
10. ((a →b) ∧(c →(a →¬b))) →¬c
If we consider a →¬b and a →b as being incompatible the conditional should be
valid. Consider, for example, the following propositions:
11. If Read was right, so was Dubucs: (a →b)
12. If Read was right, Dubucs was not: (a →¬b)
They look very much as if they were incompatible, but once again, the truth-
functional analysis does not conﬁrm this intuition: if a is false both conditionals
are true.
Boethius presupposed this incompatibility on many occasions.
This
motivated Storrs MacCall to formulate the second Boethian thesis of connexivity:
13. (a ⇒b) ⇒¬(a ⇒¬b) (second Boethian connexive thesis)
Aristotle instead used proofs corresponding to the formula:
14. (a ⇒b) ⇒¬(¬a ⇒b) (second Aristotelian connexive thesis)
which is now called the second Aristotelian thesis of connexivity. Aristotle even
showed in Analytica Priora (57a36-b18) how the ﬁrst and second Aristotelian
theses of connexivity are related. Aristotle argues against (a ⇒b) ⇒(¬a ⇒b) in
the following way: from a ⇒b we obtain ¬b ⇒¬a by contraposition, and from
¬b ⇒¬a and ¬a ⇒b we then obtain ¬b ⇒b by transitivity, contradicting the
thesis ¬(¬b ⇒b).
The problem with this logic is that if we embed the ﬁrst Aristotelian connexive
thesis in a logic such as standard classical logic, then, because of the validity of
¬(¬a →a) →¬a
by modus ponens, for any a (and we obtain as a theorem) ¬a
It gets worse if we embed the Boethian thesis, because similarly we obtain a.
It should now be clear, that the connexive theses cannot be incorporated all
that easily.60 As quite often with his work, MacColl did hit the right ideas, but
he did not explore them systematically.
60Routley and Montgomery [1968] studied the eﬀects of adding connexive theses to classical
logic.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
563
2.2.2
MacColl’s Connexive Logic and his Explorations on Relevance
2.2.2.1
Connexivity and Sub-alternation
MacColl was the ﬁrst to attempt
to embed the connexive theses in a formal system. In his papers The Calculus of
Equivalent Statements he gives the following condition for the second Boethian
thesis:
Rule 18- If A (assuming it to be a consistent statement) implies B,
then A does not imply B’ [i.e. not-B].
Note.- The implication α:β’ asserts that α and β are inconsistent with
each other; the non implication α ÷ β’ asserts that α and β are con-
sistent with each other.
[...] α is a consistent statement – i.e., one which may be true.61
MacColl introduces the metalogical requirement of consistency into the object
language while stating the second Boethian thesis of connexivity. That the propo-
sition A is a consistent one, explains MacColl in the footnote quoted above, means
that A is possibly true. That is, no logical contradiction follows from the assump-
tion of the truth of A. In the ﬁnal versions of his logic he makes use of the modality
of contingency. More precisely, MacColl requires that antecedent and consequent
of the connexive conditional must be contingent propositions.62 Now, contingency
means, here, a formula which is neither a contradiction nor a validity. The inter-
pretation of the modality here is the one we mentioned above in relation to the
diﬀerent interpretation MacColl gives to modalities in a predicative position. The
modalities at issue here introduce metalogical properties into the object language,
and this might support the idea that he came close to considering a non-normal
logic alongside the logic T. Actually MacColl warns explicitly that his modalities
might be read either as formal (not bound to any data or information) or material
(bound by data or information).63
As mentioned above, MacColl makes use of the connexive theses to formulate a
general version of sub-alternation with and without ontological commitment. As
also mentioned above, Aristotle uses the connexive theses to prove some proper-
ties of his syllogistics. It is interesting to note that MacColl’s reconstruction of
Aristotle’s logic yields a Syllogistic without ontological commitments. In order to
put the point clearly, let us combine the nowadays standard quantiﬁer notation
with MacColl’s propositional one. With such a combination sub-alternation will
be then formulated as follows:
∀x(Ax : Bx) : ∀x(Ax : B′x)′
Clearly, MacColl’s version of sub-alternation is valid if we assume the validity of
(A : B):(A : B′)′.Furthermore, the validity of this version of sub-alternation does
not assume any ontological commitment.
61MacColl [1877p], p. 184.
62MacColl [1906a], pp. 45, 49-65, 92-93.
63MacColl [1906a], p. 97.

564
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
Once more, the main idea here, so far as we have reconstructed MacColl, is that
the connexive conditional is a kind of strict implication with the two additional
restrictions that there is no contradiction in the antecedent and no tautology in
the consequent. This way of producing several logical systems seems to be typical
of MacColl’s style. In fact he also explored the idea of eliminating redundancies
occurring in an implication in order to tighten the relations between antecedent
and consequent.
2.2.2.2
Towards Relevance and Concluding Remarks
As early as 1878
in the third paper of his series The Calculus of Equivalent Statements MacColl
seems to be interested in developing methods to eliminate redundancies of a given
formulae. MacColl states there in relation to eliminating redundancies occurring
in a disjunction (he calls it indeterminate statement):
Any term of an indeterminate statement may be omitted as redundant
when this term, multiplied by the denial of the sum of all its co-terms,
gives the product 0.64
Actually, as pointed out by MacColl further on, the method is based on the idea of
transforming the disjunction into a material implication, where the presumably re-
dundant disjunct constitutes the antecedent. If the resultant material implication
is valid, then that disjunction at stake is indeed redundant.
Given A0 + B + C, the material implication (A0(B + C)′)′ is valid. In fact this
is one case of the paradoxes of material implication discussed above. Dually, we
obtain the other case of the paradoxes of material implication if it happens that
one of the factors is materially implied by one or more of the others. Thus, take
A1BC, the resulting material implication (BC(A1)′)′ is indeed valid.
Now, one could certainly use the same method to obtain a tighter notion of im-
plication, that is, a notion of implication without redundancies. This seems to be
the background for his diverse methods of obtaining the strongest premise or/and
the weakest conclusion.65 Rahman (1997a) suggested that MacColl’s method of
eliminating redundancies contains the following concept of relevance. Recall that
in this section and in the sections below we come back to standard classical nota-
tion and use ‘→’.
Let us call a set of (labelled occurrences of) propositional variables truth-
determining for a formula A iﬀthe truth value of A may be determined as true
or false on all assignments of true or false to the set. Let us say further that
(the labelled occurrence i of) a propositional variable in A is redundant iﬀit is
known that there is a truth-determining set for A that does not contain (the la-
belled occurrence i of) this propositional variable. Thus, clearly, the set {a} is not
truth-determining for a →b, but the set {a1,a2} is truth-determining for a →a.66
64MacColl [1878d], p. 17.
65MacColl [1906a], pp. 27-33.
66Cf. Rahman [1998], p. 37.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
565
According to this all of the following formulae which contain redundancies
should be rejected in the context of inference:
((a →b) →a) →a
a →(b →a)
((a →a) →a) →a
a →(a →a)
a →(b ∨¬b)
a →(a ∨b)
a →(a ∨¬a)
a →(a ∨a)
(a ∧¬a) →b
(a ∧b) →a
(a ∧¬a) →a
(a ∧a) →a
In his last papers and in his book, MacColl combines this concept of redundancy
with his strict implication.
Notice that in this context MacColl’s rejection of
formula 11 (in 2.1 above) could be explained because of containing redundant
occurrences of the antecedent.
It is challenging to fasten all the threads together and produce a connexive
relevant logic which meets MacColl’s suggestions. A further philosophical task
would be to connect all this with the notion of information contained in MacColl’s
notion of statement. The notion of redundancy understood as loss of information
seems to be a good candidate for a start.
Let us conclude our paper with a work in his honour. A reconstruction of the
notion of connexive logic in the proof-theoretical style which started to ﬂourish
some years after his death.
3
TABLEAUX FOR MACCOLL’S CONNEXIVE LOGIC67
3.1
Introduction
MacColl and more recently R. Angell [1962], S. McCall (from 1963 to 1975), and
C. Pizzi [1977; 1993; 1996] searched for a formal system in which the validity of
the connexive formulae could be expressed. New results have been achieved by R.
Angell [2002], M. Astroh [1999a], Cl. Pizzi/T. Williamson [1997], G. Priest [1999],
S. Rahman/H. R¨uckert [2001] and H. Wansing [2005]. Wansing also penned a very
thorough overview on connexive logic in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
The present paper presents a new tableau system for connexive logic as an
attempt to push forward Hugh MacColl’s original ideas and as a non-dialogical
version and revision of Rahman/R¨uckert [2001].
In this context we recall (see
1.2 above) that Stephen Read showed that MacColl’s modal logic amounts to an
algebraic form of the modal system T and contests Storrs MacCall claim that
MacColl’s logic corresponds to what is known since Lewis as the LS3 logic. My
aim is to show that there might be some kind of compromise. Indeed MacColl
had the system T but when he is talking about the connexive conditional, which
is essential to his reconstruction of syllogism, MacColl preﬁgured a logic which
involves metalogical properties of the system T and of what seems to be related to
67This section has been written mainly by Shahid Rahman.

566
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
what we nowadays call non normal modal logics (worlds where tautologies might
fail).
Furthermore we provide the main ideas for a Kripke-semantics for these tableaux.
We follow here MacColl’s idea that the connexive conditional is a a kind of strict
implication with the two additional conditions that there is no contradiction in
the antecedent and no tautology in the consequent. That is, the worlds (of the
corresponding models) where the antecedent and the consequent are evaluated, do
contain neither contradictions nor tautologies.
In the present reconstruction of MacColl’s connexive logic in the context of
tableau systems we will make use of two operators with the intended interpreta-
tions “α is not a logical truth” and “there is at least a model where α is true”.
These operators will yield a kind of implicit modal logic. In the third part of
the paper we introduce a Kripke-style semantics where two distinguished sorts of
sets of worlds take care of logically contingent true and logically contingent false
formulae. At the end of the paper we will sketch the way how to combine Mac-
Coll’s connexive logic with his notion of logical relevance of the preceding section
(2.2.1.2).
Contrary to the main-stream style we will go from the proof-theoretical seman-
tics to the model-theoretic semantics. Philosophy is contentious, to use the words
of Graham Priest, but actually, this was the way that nowadays relevant logic
was developed. Moreover we think that the dialogical interpretation is a suﬃcient
framework to implement the semantic intuitions behind such diﬃcult issues as
relevance and “logical connection”.
3.2
Tableaux for Connexive Logic
The present tableau system is based on a ﬁrst formulation of a dialogical connexive
conditional introduced by Rahman [1997a] in his Habilitationsschrift and further
developed in Rahman/R¨uckert [2001].
It uses two pairs of signs, namely {O, P} and {•, ◦}.
The intended interpretation for the pair {O, P} is Opponent, Proponent and
for the pair {•, ◦} is burden of the proof of validity, no burden of the proof of
validity. If you do not like this dialogical interpretation change it for true, false;
denial, assertion or whatever. Actually it is the second pair, namely {•, ◦} which
corresponds to the well known f , t signs ((left)right-sequent-rules) of standard
tableau systems (sequent calculus).
The tableau rules must then include the combinations of the two pairs of signs.
For the sake of simplicity the rules will be formulated for X and Y, where these
letters (X̸=Y) are slots for O, P. For the standard logical constants we thus have
the following set of rules:

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
567
(Y◦)-Cases
(X•)-Cases
Σ, (Y◦α ∨β
Σ, (Y◦)α|Σ, (Y◦)β
Σ, (X•)α ∨β
Σ, (X•)α
Σ, (X•)β
Σ, (Y◦)α ∧β
Σ, (Y◦)α
Σ, (Y◦)β
Σ, (X•)α ∧β
Σ, (X•)α|Σ, (X•)β
Σ, (Y◦)α →β
Σ, (X•)α|Σ, (Y◦)β
Σ, (X•)α →β
Σ, (Y◦)α
Σ, (X•)β
Σ, (Y◦)¬α
Σ, (X•)α
Σ, (X•)¬α
Σ, (Y◦)α
The closing rules are the following
• A tableau for (X•)α (i.e. starting with (X•)α) is closed iﬀeach branch
(including those of each possible subtableau) is closed by means of either the
occurrence of a pair of atomic formulae of the form ((Y◦)a, (X•)a) or of a
special closing rule. Otherwise it is said to be open.
The reasons for including clauses on subtableaux and on special closing rules
will be given in the next section.
The Operators V and F
As mentioned above, the present reconstruction of MacColl’s connexive conditional
makes use of the following operators: the satisﬁability operator V and its dual
the operator F. The operator F is related to the well-known failure operator of
Prolog.68 Let us introduce the corresponding tableau rules for them.
The operator V
The intended interpretation of this operator is “there is at least a model where
α is true”. In the context of a tableau system the intended interpretation of the
occurrence of formula Vα in a branch is “there is an open (sub)tableau for α”.
Actually, one could see any tableau for α as a ﬁnite sequence of subtableaux
such that the ﬁrst tableau is a single-point one, whose origin is α, and the other
68Gabbay [1987] used this operator for modal logic. Hoepelmann and van Hoof [1988] applied
this idea of Gabbay’s to non-monotonic logics.
Finally Rahman ([1997a], chapter II(A).4.2),
introduced the F-Operator in the formulation of semantic tableaux and dialogical strategies for
connexive logic.

568
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
members of the sequence are obtained by application of the tableau rules. We will
however, only label explicitly the subtableau opened by the V and F operators.
To keep track between tableau and subtableau we will make use of a system of
labels: If the branch where one of both operators occurs carries the label i, then
the subtableau has the label i.1.
More generally, the intuitive idea is that a label i names a subtableau and iA
tells us that A is to be evaluated at the subtableau i names. Moreover, our labels
will be ﬁnite sequences of positive integers such as 1.1.1 and 1.1.2.
DEFINITION 1.
• A label is a ﬁnite sequence of positive integers.
A labelled formula is an
expression of the form iϕ, where i is the label of the formula ϕ.
• If the label i is a sequence of length >1 the positive integers of the sequence
will be separated by periods. Thus, if i is a label and an n is a positive
integer, then i.n is a new label, called an extension of i. The label is then
an initial segment of i.n.
Let us assume that the expression (P•)Vα occurs in a branch with the intended
interpretation:
“the proponent who in this branch has the burden of the proof of
validity states that there is an open tableau for α”.
This formula will generate a subtableau for P◦α with the intended interpretation
“the proponent who in this subtableau does not have the burden of the
proof of validity states that there is an open (sub)tableau for α”.
The tableau rules for the operator V must include the combinations of the two
pairs of signs {O, P} and {•, ◦}:
(Y◦)-Cases
(X•)-Cases
n, (Σ, Y◦)Vαi.
n + 1, Σ, (Y◦)αi.1
n, Σ, (X•)Vαi.
n + 1, Σ, (X◦)αi.1
“n” is the number of the step in the (sub)tableau i where Vα occurs.
The conditions of the closing of the whole branch (the branch which starts
with the main formula of the whole tableau and which end with a subtableau with
the label i.1) should be now clear:
• The branch of (sub)tableau i where Vα occurs is open at step n if the
subtableau i.j is closed and dually if the subtableau is open then i will be
closed at n.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
569
Examples
In the following examples n indicates the point in the branch of the tableau i where
V occurs and 1.i is the subtableau generated by an application of the rule V.
EXAMPLE 1.
...
n(P•)Vα ∧¬ai
(P◦)a ∧¬ai.1
(P◦)ai.1
(P◦)¬ai.1
(O•)ai.1
The branch of i is open at n because
the subtableau i.1 closes with
{(P◦)a, (O•)a}
Notice that the subtableau corresponds to the standard tableau for t a ∧¬a.
EXAMPLE 2.
...
n(P◦)V¬ai
(P◦)¬ai.1
(O•) i.1
The branch is closed at n because
the subtableau is open
Notice that the subtableau corresponds to the standard tableau for t¬a.
The operator F
The operator F is the dual of V. The intended interpretation of this operator is
“the formula α is not a logical truth”. In the context of a tableau system the
intended interpretation of the occurrence of formula Fα in a branch is “there is
no closed (sub)tableau for α”
More precisely let us assume that the expression (P•F)α occurs in a branch
with the intended interpretation:
“the proponent who has in this branch the burden of the proof of
validity states that there is no closed tableau for α”.
This formula will generate a subtableau for O•α with the intended interpretation:
“the Opponent states that there is a closed (sub)tableau for α where
he has the burden of the proof of validity”.

570
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
The tableau rules are the following:
(Y◦)-Cases
(X•)-Cases
n, Σ, (Y◦)Fαi
n + 1, Σ, (X•)αi.1
n, Σ, (X•)Fαi
n + 1, Σ, (Y•)αi.1
Notice that this operator produces the change from X? to Y? and vice versa
• The branch of (sub)tableau i where Fα occurs is open at step n if the
subtableau i.j is closed and dually if the subtableau is open then i is closed
at n.
EXAMPLE 3.
...
n(P•)Fa ∨¬ai
(O•)a ∨¬ai.1
(O•)ai.1
(O•)¬ai.1
(P◦)ai.1
The branch is open at n because
the subtableau closes with
{(P◦)a, (O•)a}
EXAMPLE 4.
...
n(P◦)F¬ai
(O•)¬ai.1
(P◦)ai.1
The branch is closed at n because
the subtableau is open
The Connexive Conditional
Tableau rules for the connexive conditional
As we understand it, MacColl’s reformulation of the connexive conditional com-
prises the following restrictions on the strict implication:
1. The antecedent must be logically contingent (not inconsistent)
2. The consequent should not be tautological.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
571
3. The strict implication is to be thought of in a frame with reﬂexivity. That
is, the material implication holds in the world where the strict implication
holds.
These three conditions can be expressed in the framework of an implicit modal
logic and in the language of the tableau system described above by means of the
operators V and F:
• α ⇒β is connexively valid if the antecedent (of the strict implication) yields
an open subtableau, i.e. there is at least one model where the antecedent is
true (that is, if Vα holds). The idea here is that ex contradictione nihil
sequitur (nothing follows from contradiction). Similarly:
• α ⇒β is disconnexive if the consequent (of the strict implication) yields
a closed subtableau, i.e. there is at least one model where the consequent
is false (that is, if Fβ holds). The idea here is that ex quodlibet verum
nequitur (there is no proposition from which tautological or assumed truth
follows).
This yields the following tableau rules
(Y◦)-Case
(X•)-Case
Σ, (Y◦)α ⇒βi
Σ, (Y◦)α →βi
Σ, (Y◦)Vαi
Σ, (Y◦)Fβi
Σ, (X•)α ⇒βi
Σ, (x•)α →βi
|
(X•)Vαi
|
(X•)Fβi
Thus, the application of the rule of the connexive conditional for the (X?)-case
produces a conjunction with three members, namely the formulae with the two
operators V and F and the standard material implication. We will now introduce
rules which will have the eﬀect of producing an implicit modal logic in the following
sense:
• The subtableaux produced by Vα and Fα will contain, the subformulae of
Vα and Fα, material implications and no other formula than the subfor-
mulae of these implications. Think of the subtableaux as worlds where the
only formulae which will be carried from the upper branch are precisely the
corresponding material implications. Thus it is as every implication on the
upper tableau works as a strict implication.
• The subtableau produced by V and F are diﬀerent. That is though the
subtableaux have a common ancestor (namely the material implication) one
is not accessible to the other.

572
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
To implement this we use an idea similar to the deleting device of intuitionistic
logic: the formulae V (or F) will generate subtableaux which contain no other
formulae than the subformula of the V-formula (or F-formula), and the standard
conditionals (material implications) of the upper section. The subtableaux gener-
ated by the operators V and F will start with a set 
[→] where “
[→]” reads as
follows:
• 
[→]-rule:
If α is the subformula of a V-formula (or a F-formula) and  ∪α the start
of the corresponding subtableau, then replace in  ∪α every connexive
conditional occurring in the upper tableau as the main connective by the
corresponding material implication, change the burden of the proof of
the material implication(s) if necessary and according to the rule for the
operator at stake. No other formula is an element of 
[→].
In other words, each subtableau will at its start only contain either the an-
tecedent or the consequent of the connexive conditional and the corresponding
material conditional. The emphasis on every conditional will be made clear in
Example 7.
(Y◦)-Cases
(X•)-Cases
Σ, (Y◦)Vαi.
Σ[→], (Y◦)αi.n
Σ, (X•)Vαi.
Σ[→], (X◦)αi.n
Σ, (Y◦)Fαi.
Σ[→], (Y◦)αi.m
Σ, (X•)Fαi.
Σ[→], (X◦)αi.m
The main tableau starts for α with (P?)α
• Starting rule for strategies for connexive logic:
We assume that a tableau for α starts with (P?)α. Thus, a closed tableau
(a tableau with all its branches closed) for α proves that α is valid.
Though the practice of closing branches is straightforward the precise formu-
lation of the adequate closing rules is quite tricky because it must include cases
where the branch ends with a subtableau and branches where subtableaux do not
occur.
• R-C: Closing rules for Ω (Ω is either V or F): Let us assume a tableau
the origin of which is (P•)α.
If a branch of such a tableau ends with a
subtableau generated by either a (P•)Ω-formula or a (P◦)Ω-formula then
the whole branch is closed iﬀthe subtableau does not close. A branch of the
same tableau which does not end with a subtableau of the form described

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
573
before69 is closed iﬀit ends with a pair of the form (O◦)a, (P•)a. Otherwise
it is open.
• Notice that we consider that a branch includes the entire sequence of sub-
tableaux generated:
In the following examples the numeration to the left of the formula indicates the
step in the proof while the number to the right labels the tableau and subtableau:
EXAMPLE 5.
1. (P•)¬(a ⇒¬a)1
2. (O◦)a ⇒¬a1 (negation rule on 1)
3. (O◦)a →¬a1 (left-rule for connexive conditional on 2)
4. (O◦)Va1 (left-rule for connexive conditional on 2)
5. (O◦)F¬a1 (left-rule for connexive conditional on 2)
6. (O◦)a1.1 (V rule on 4)
7. (O◦)a →¬a1.1 (
[→]-rule on 4)
Now at the subtableau 1.1, the standard rule on the material implication (O◦)a →
¬a applies:
8. (P•)a1.1
|
9.
(O◦)¬a1.1
|
10.
(P?)a1.1
The (unique) branch for the tableau ends with a subtableau generated by a
(O◦)V-formula. The two branches of the subtableau (1.1) close with (O◦)a,(P•)a.
Thus, according to R-C, the whole branch and tableau is closed.
The proof for ¬(¬a ⇒¬a) is very similar but makes use of the other operator:
EXAMPLE 6.
1. (P•)¬(¬a ⇒a)1
2. (O◦)¬a ⇒a1 (negation rule on 1)
3. (O◦)¬a →a1 (left-rule for connexive conditional on 2)
4. (O◦)V¬a1 (left-rule for connexive conditional on 2)
5. (O◦)Fa1 (left-rule for connexive conditional on 2)
6. (P•)a1.1 (F rule on 5)
69That is, if it ends with no subtableau or if it ends with a subtableau generated by a (O•)Ω-
formula, or (O•)Ω-formula.

574
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
7. (O◦)¬a →a1.1 (
[→]-rule on 5)
Now at the subtableau 1.1, the standard rule on the material implication (O◦)¬a →
a applies:
8. (P•)¬a1.1
|
9. (O◦)a1.1
10. (O◦)a1.1 |
The two branches of the subtableau 1.1 generated by (O◦)Fa close with (O◦)a,(P•)a.
Thus, according to R-C, the (unique) branch for the whole branch and tableau
is closed.
EXAMPLE 7.
In the following example the full strength of the 
[→]-rule is put into action.
This rule allows “carrying” every connexive conditional as a material impli-
cation into the generated subtableaux.
1. (P•)(a ⇒b) ⇒¬(a ⇒¬b)1
2. (P•)(a ⇒b) →¬(a ⇒¬b1 | 3. (P•)V(a ⇒b)1 | 4. (P•)F¬(a ⇒¬b)1
At this stage it should be clear that the development of the V and F formulae
(3, 4) will produce closed branches, because antecedent and consequent of the
connexive conditional are logically contingent.
Let us see what happens in the outmost left branch (2) if we develop the rule
of the material implication.
LEFT (LEFT) BRANCH
5. (O◦)(a ⇒b)1 (material implication on 2)
6. (P•)¬(a ⇒¬b)1 (material implication on 2)
7. (O◦)a ⇒¬b1 (negation on 6)
8. (O◦)a →b1 (left-rule for connexive conditional on 5)
9. (O◦)Va1 (left-rule for connexive conditional on 5)
10. (O◦)Fb(left-rule for connexive conditional on 5)
11. (O◦)a1.1 (V rule on 9)
12. (O◦)a →b1.1 (
[→]-rule on 5)
13. (O◦)a →¬b1.1 (
[→]-rule on 7)
14. (P•)a...1.1
|
16. (O◦)b1.1
|
17. (P•)a1.1
|
18. (O◦)¬b1.1
|
|
19. (P?)b1.1

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
575
The subtableau closes because of the pair(s) ((O◦)a, (P•)a) and ((O◦)a, (P•)a).
Thus, according to R-C, the whole branch is closed. As already mentioned the
other branches (3, 4) close too, thus the whole tableau closes.
The following example displays the case of a formula that is dangerous for
connexive logic.
It is the formula which indicates that if you add both of the
connexive theses the logic will explode into triviality. Indeed if one adds ¬(α→¬α)
and ¬(¬α→α) to classical logic, then the following holds
¬(α →¬α) →α
¬(¬α →α) →¬α
Let us prove that this type of trivialization will not happen in our system. Indeed
we show here that a tableau for ¬(α ⇒¬α) ⇒α does not close. The proof for
the dual ¬(¬α ⇒α) ⇒¬α is very similar.
EXAMPLE 8.
1. (P•)¬(a ⇒¬a) ⇒a1
2. (P•)¬(a ⇒¬a) →a1 | 3. (P•)V¬(a ⇒¬a)1 | 4. (P•)Fa1
(right-rule for ‘⇒’ on 1)
Branches 3 and 4 yield closed branches. The outmost right branch (4) closes
because (P•)Fagenerates a subtableau which will remain open.
To show that branch 3 closes is a little more complicated. The subtableau which
it generates will start with (P◦)¬(a ⇒¬a), and follow with (O•)a ⇒¬a. The
three branches of this subtableau will close and cause the whole branch to close.
Indeed, the ﬁrst branch of the subtableau containing the material implication
(:(O•)a →¬a) will be open by the standard rules and this will yield the closing of
the branch. The second branch of the subtableau containing (O•)Va, will generate
a subsubtableau where the formulae (O◦)a, (O◦)a →¬a will yield the closure of
the branch with (O◦)a, (P•)a. The case can be shown to be similar for the last
branch of the subtableau containing (O•)F¬a.
Unfortunately we are not through yet. Moreover, there is a branch which will
cause the whole tableau to be open. Let us show this for the branch containing 2
(P•)¬(a ⇒¬a) →a:
LEFT (LEFT) BRANCH
5. (O◦)¬(a ⇒¬a) 1 (material implication on 2)
6. (P•)a1 (material implication on 2)
7. (P•)a ⇒¬a1 (negation on 6)
8. (P?)a →¬a1
|
9. (P•)Va1
|
10. (P•)F¬a1
(right-rule for connexive conditional on 7)

576
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
The application of the standard tableau rule on 8 yields (O◦)a. (P•)¬a which
closes with 6 (P•)a. We will develop the middle branch (9) and open the sub-
tableau 1.1.
11. (P◦)a1.1 (V rule on 9)
12. (P◦)a →¬a1.1(
[→]-rule on 6)
13. (O•)a... 1.1
|
14. (P◦)¬a1.1
|
15. (O•)a1.1
The subtableau generated by the formula (P•)Va closes because of the pair(s)
((P◦)a, (O•)a). Thus, according to R-C, the whole branch and tableau are open.
3.3
Kripke-Style Semantics for Connexive Logics
Here we can at last spell out the model-theoretical semantics. The idea is very
close to Routley/Meyer semantics for relevant logic where a ternary accessibility
relation is introduced for the conditional Rwiwjwk, such if the conditional is true
at wi and the antecedent true at wj; then the consequent of the conditional is true
at wk. Moreover, as already mentioned the whole idea seems to come very close
to Priest’s “Negation as Cancellation and Connexive Logic” [1999], though the
present work was developed independently and arouse as a result of a dialogical
approach to connexive logic already suggested in Rahman [1997a].
The point of MacColl’s connexive logic as understood here is that MacColl’s use
of the contingency operators is ambiguous: sometimes it is the standard modal use
(a proposition which is possible but not necessary in a model set in the framework
of modal logic) and sometimes he is rather thinking of logical contingency (a
formula which is non valid and non-contradictory).
We introduce two sets of
worlds Wθt and Wθf in order to implement the latter idea.
Given a model ⟨W, R, v⟩for standard modal logic extended as ⟨W, Wθt, Wθf,
R, R∗, v⟩with
1. two sets of worlds Wθt and Wθf, Wθt ∩Wθf = ∅, such that the formula ϕ
is said to hold at wθt, wθt ∈Wθt, iﬀthe valuation v of the model renders ϕ
true at wθt. Dually, the formula ϕ is said to hold at wθf, wθf ∈Wf, iﬀthe
valuation v of the model renders ¬ϕ true at wθf.
Tautologies do not hold in worlds from Wθf and dually wθt ∈Wθt does not
contain contradictions. Indeed, let us assume that ϕ is a ∨¬a, then ϕ does not
hold at wθf, wθf ∈Wθf,because there is no model with a valuation which renders
¬ϕ true at wθf.
2. a quaternary relation R* between worlds such that w ∈W, wθt ∈Wθt, wθf ∈
Wθf
R∗wwwθtwθf
(that is, the relation R*, establishes that w is accessible to w, and that from
w there is access to wθt and to wθf).

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
577
Intuitively, the idea is that the connexive implication α ⇒β is true in a given
world iﬀthe material implication is true in that world; and there are two accessible
diﬀerent worlds, in one of which the antecedent and the consequent are true and
in the other of which the negation of the antecedent and the negation of the
consequent are true:
α ⇒β is true at w ∈W
iﬀw ∈W, wθt,wθf such that R∗wwwθtwθf
and all of the following conditions hold
1. vw(α)=0 or vw(β)=1
2. vwθt (α)=1
3. vwθt (β)=1
4. vwθf (¬β)=1
5. vwθf (¬α)=1
Validity is deﬁned over normal worlds. Clearly, no valid formulae (other than
contingencies) could hold in the non-normal worlds.
It should be clear what happens if in the antecedent we have a contradiction or
if in the consequent we have a tautology. The connexive conditional fails because
of the failure of conditions 2 and 4 respectively.
EXAMPLE 9.
Let us show that ¬(a ⇒¬a) is valid.
Let us assume that it is false at w
then (a ⇒¬a) is true at w.
The relevant conditions are 2 and 3 — we leave the others to the reader. Ac-
cording to these conditions, the following must also be true at wθt:
a
¬a
but this is contradictory: both cannot be true at wθt. Thus, there is no counter-
model to ¬(a ⇒¬a).
EXAMPLE 10.
Let us show that ¬(a ⇒¬a) ⇒a is not valid and does not make our system
trivial.
We will only show the main parts of the proof.
Let us assume that ¬(a ⇒¬a) ⇒a is false at w.
Because of condition 1, ¬(a ⇒¬a) must be true and a must be false at w
hence a ⇒¬a must be false at w.

578
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
If a ⇒¬a is false, then it is false that some of the truth conditions given above
hold in relation to this formula. Indeed this is the case. Let us take once more the
conditions 2 and 3: according to these conditions a and ¬a should be true at wθt.
But this cannot be. Hence it is false that conditions 2 and 3 hold, and therefore
the formula is not valid.
Proofs of Soundness and Completeness
The proofs can developed from the following considerations:
1. Subtableaux for V and F correspond to worlds of the sets Wθt and Wθf.
2. The condition Wθt∩Wθf= ∅corresponds to the fact that the subtableaux
for V and F will always be in diﬀerent branches.
3. Given an open branch of a tableau which does not contain a subtableau and
interpretation can be read oﬀfrom the branch in a quite standard way: If
(O◦)a occurs at a node on the branch, assign a the Boolian valuation 1; if
(P•)a occurs assign a the value 0.
4. If there is an open branch which starts with the thesis and ends with a
subtableau and (X◦)a occurs at a node on the branch of the subtableau,
assign 1 to a; if (Y•)a occurs, assign a the value 0.
5. If a given branch starting with the thesis and ending with a subtableau
generated by either an (O◦)Ω-formula or an (O•)Ω-formula is open, then
there is at least one world which according to 1 is an element of one of the
sets Wθt and Wθf such that it satisﬁes the values described in 4.
6. If a given branch starting with the thesis and ending with a subtableau
generated by either a (P◦)Ω-formula or a (P•)Ω-formula is open, then there
is no world which according to 1 is an element of one of the sets Wθt and
Wθf such that it satisﬁes the values described in 4.
3.4
Relevance and Connexivity
Many proponents of relevant logic might think that the preceding systems for con-
nexive logic are not satisfactory, on the grounds that there are intuitively correct
principles concerning the conditional that they do not validate and that there are
others that they should validate. For the ﬁrst group we have (α∨¬α)→(α∨¬α)
which is not valid in the systems displayed above, and for the second group we
have the paradoxes of material implication. In fact, one of MacColl’s motivations
was to solve the paradoxes of material implication. As detailed before, MacColl
tried to develop a method by means of which no formula should contain (occur-
rences of) propositional variables which are truth functionally redundant for the
truth conditions of the formula involved (see 2.2.1.2).

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
579
Thus, e.g., a →(a ∨a) and a →(a ∨b) will be “eliminated” from the set of
validities because in the ﬁrst conditional the ﬁrst occurrence of a can be substi-
tuted by any other propositional variable and this substitution is redundant for
establishing its truth condition. A similar argument can be put forward for the
occurrence of b in the second conditional. To implement this in a tableau system
is simple; roughly speaking, every occurrence of a propositional variable has to
be used to close a branch. Actually two systems are possible, one in which every
propositional variable of the main formula has to be used to close a branch (this
allows (a ∨¬a) →(a ∨¬a) and a →(a ∨a) to be valid) and another system which
requires that every occurrence of a propositional variable has to be used in the
sense described above. In the second system the formulae (a∨¬a) →(a∨¬a) and
a →(a ∨a) will not yield closed tableaux.
The point is how to combine this relevance logic with connexive logic in such a
way as to have a conditional that it is both connexive and relevant.
The idea is quite simple from the point of view of tableaux: if the formula at
stake is relevantly valid, then the connexive conditional expressing this formula
holds. If the connexive conditional expresses a formula that is one of the Aris-
totelian or Boethian axioms, then the formula at stake is valid.
Let us write α ↣β for a relevant conditional in any of the relevant systems
mentioned above. The connexive conditional will arise through adding metalogical
conditions on this conditional by means of the operators V and F.
However, here we will assume the weaker system (where diﬀerent occurrences of
propositional variables can make a diﬀerence — see 2.2.1.2) for the simple reason
that connexive logic then arises as a conservative extension of this type of relevant
logic, in the sense that every formula valid in this relevant logic will be valid too
in the fragment where the connexive formulae have been added. It is particularly
interesting that the infamous trivialization formulae for connexive logic, namely
¬(α →¬α) →α, and ¬(¬α →α) →¬α do not even hold relevantly. Here we
assume tableaux with labels for worlds as standard in these type of proof systems
for modal logic.
(Y◦)-Case
(X•)-Case
Σ, (Y◦)(α ⇛β) wi
Σ, (Y◦)α ↣β
Σ, (Y◦)Vαwi
Σ, (Y◦)Fβwi
Σ, (X•)(a ⇛β) wi
Σ, (X•)α ↣βwi|Σ, (X•)Vαwi|Σ, (X•)Fβwi
Here we have assumed a truth-functional semantics for the relevant part of the
implication. A fully-ﬂedged model-theoretic semantics for this type of connexive
logic is still an open problem, but the following considerations should help:
• α ⇛β is true at w ∈W iﬀ
w ∈W, wθt,wθf such that R*wwwθtwθf is deﬁned just as before

580
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
and all of the following conditions hold
vw(α ↣β) = 1. That is, vw(α) = 0 or vw(β) = 1 and there is no propo-
sitional variable which is not an element of the truth-determinant set for
¬α ∨β.
vwθt(α) = 1
vwθt(β) = 1
vwθf(¬β) = 1
vwθf(¬α) = 1
• Given an open branch of a tableau which does not contain a subtableau and
interpretation can be read oﬀfrom the branch in the following way: If (O◦)a
occurs at a node on the branch, assign a the boolian valuation 1, if (P•)a
occurs assign a the value 0. If there is a pair (O◦)a, (P•)a and the branch
is open then there is a truth-determinant set for the thesis such that at least
one (occurrence) of a propositional variable is not an element of that set.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Shahid Rahman would like to thank Heinrich Wansing (Dresden) who read an ear-
lier draft of section 3 and suggested many and important corrections, and Cheryl
Lobb de Rahman who between the activities with our children and her own man-
ifold obligations found time to greatly improve our evident non-native English.
Both authors would also like to thank too to Helge R¨uckert, Tero Tulenheimo
and Ahti Pietarinen (Helsinki) for exchanges on MacColl’s notational system, the
“pragmatisme dialogique” team at the University of Lille 3 for fruitful discus-
sions, particularly Nicolas Clerbout, C´edric D´egremont, Laurent Keiﬀand Gildas
Nzokou, and the active “newcomers” to the group: Mathieu Fontaine, Coline
Pauwels and S´ebastien Magnier.
APPENDIX
MACCOLL ON LITERARY FICTION
The planet Mars has always been a disturbing presence. As early as the ancient
times, because of its provocative movement across the sky, or more recently for
the material similarities with our planet.
In fact, there are a lot of troubling
similarities: its magnitude, its solid surface and atmosphere, the probability of the
presence of water. All these characteristics have led to thoughts of the perhaps not
so remote possibility of life on Mars. Moreover, in 1877 the American astronomer
Asaph Hall (1829-1907) had discovered two moons of Mars, Deimos and Phobos.
But there is another fact, most interesting from the point of view of how ﬁction
might have consequences for our real world.
The Italian astronomer Giovanni
Virginio Schiaparelli (1835-1910) reported that with the help of a telescope he
had observed groups of straight lines on Mars. He called these lines “channels” in

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
581
Italian but they were erroneously (or maybe intentionally) translated as “canals”.
This translation might support the speculation about the presence of intelligent
beings who built these “canals”. Not surprisingly, this inaccurate translation of
the report increased popular expectations and fantasy.
As already pointed out by Stein Haugom Olsen in his thorough paper on Mac-
Coll’s literary work (1999), all these elements made that planet very popular in the
days Hugh MacColl decided to write science ﬁction. In addition to Man’s Origin,
Destiny, and Duty and his work on logic, MacColl also published two novels, Mr.
Stranger’s Sealed Packet (Chatto & Windus, London, 1889) and Ednor Whitlock
(Chatto & Windus, London, 1891). In Mr. Stranger’s Sealed Packet, MacColl was
also something of a pioneer in his choice of subject: a voyage to the planet Mars.
Some years before him, another writer explored the possibility of a journey to outer
space: Jules Verne. The French writer chooses the moon as his destination in the
novels De la Terre `a la Lune from 1865 and Autour de la lune from 1870. The
success of Verne’s novels, which was a public aﬀair in France, might have inspired
MacColl to expand the idea to Mars. Actually MacColl was not the ﬁrst but the
third to propose a novel in English involving such a kind of adventure. In 1880
Percy Gregg published Across the Zodiac (in which an inhabitant of the Earth
uses negative gravity to travel through space, discovering on Mars a Utopian soci-
ety that is highly advanced technologically and that practices telepathy); in 1887
Hudor Genone published Bellona’s Bridegroom: A Romance. (in which, again,
an inhabitant of the Earth discovers on Mars an ideal Anglophone society that
rejuvenates instead of growing old). Of course MacColl was not the last. A few
years later the most popular book on the ﬁeld was published: The War of the
Worlds (1898) by H.G.Wells.
The striking fact is that it is not a fantasy work, as in Edgar Allan Poe’s Ad-
ventures of Hans Pfaall (1835), but science ﬁction in the style of Verne, although,
sadly, in MacColl’s work the pedagogical aim of popularizing science is to the
detriment of the literary quality.
Indeed, a ﬁrst approach to his novels will be disappointing for a modern reader
of science ﬁction. In fact MacColl was not really inspired at the time to imagine a
“diﬀerent world”. In Mr. Stranger’s Sealed Packet he actually was projecting onto
Mars the world around him. In this respect the novel does not diﬀer much from
the ﬁrst two works of science ﬁction published about Mars. The point is that he
did not have really a literary approach to science ﬁction but understood the gender
rather as a means to illustrate or make popular natural science. Unfortunately
the reader notices this from the very start. What is surprising for the reader who
knows MacColl from his logical writings is his very conservative of thinking about
alternative worlds. In his logic, MacColl conceives worlds where all sort of ﬁctions,
including contradictory objects, have their place, but this is not the case in the
world of his science ﬁction.
The main person of his work of science ﬁction, Mr. Stranger, carries out the
wish of his dead father that he should dedicate himself exclusively to science. His
father had been working on science and he continues developing his father’s the-

582
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
ories and discoveries, building a vehicle that produces artiﬁcial gravitation. With
this anti-gravitational spaceship he visits Moons of Mars — already discovered
in the real world — and then the red planet itself. Though the planet is red its
inhabitants are bluish. Mars itself is like the Earth, and the Martians are humans
transferred to Mars in a prehistoric disaster when the proximity of the red planet
allowed the gravitational transfer of a large number of people. The Martians be-
have like humans, but there is a Utopian constituent in their description. Their
society is very rational, with a rigid and superior moral, with a uniform and har-
monious structure. There is no illness, no social conﬂict, and it completely lacks
the technology of war.
In both of MacColl’s novels we recognize issues typically representative of the
Victorian era, namely the conﬂicts between religion and science. It is a period
in which the reexamination of centuries of assumptions began because of the new
discoveries in science, such as those of Charles Darwin and Charles Lydell. It was in
the order of the day to hold discussions about Man and the world, about science
and history, and, ﬁnally, about religion and philosophy. This inescapable sense
of newness resulted in a deep interest in the relationship between modernity and
cultural continuities. MacColl reﬂects this interest through his novels. Though the
two novels are diﬀerent, they share a number of motifs and concerns and anticipate
a number of the arguments MacColl was later to present in Man’s Origin, Destiny,
and Duty.70
MacColl shows conservative attitudes and opinions when it comes to these fun-
damental questions, particularly when he writes about the role of men and women,
the family, marriage and so on. In this period in Great Britain, the emphasis on
female purity was allied to the stress on the homemaking role of women, who
helped to create a space free from the pollution and corruption of society.71
On Mars Mr Stranger meets a family and is welcomed into it.
He falls in
love with the daughter of the family and marries her. His new wife has all the
characteristics a Christian man of the Victorian era in England could expect. She
is obedient to her husband, compassionate, a loving woman with enough emotional
strength and wisdom to become the guardian of the central values of the family
and the (Victorian) society in general. She dies upon a visit to the Earth because
of her intolerance to the bacteria there. Quite a common issue in ﬁction: the
ﬁctional alternative world is pure and the Earth is impure. The ﬁctional persons
die when they encounter the Earth. The Earth, the point where ﬁction meets
reality, makes the ﬁctional persons die. As in Don Quijote, the ﬁctional character
dies of “reality”.
Unfortunately MacColl did not make very much out of this
exciting feature of ﬁction. Once more, the reader who knows MacColl from his
writings on the logic of ﬁction might expect the same author to explore the logical
and literary possibilities resulting from the intersection between inhabitants of
diﬀerent worlds, since MacColl does suggest some thoughts on this possibility in
his logic of ﬁction, where some domains contain objects of the real world and of the
70See Cuypers [1999] and the remarks of the already mentioned paper of Olsen [1999].
71Cf. Cuypers [1999] and Olsen [1999].

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
583
purely ﬁctional world. But if the same reader reads MacColl’s ﬁctional literature
he will be utterly disappointed. MacColl doesn’t apply MacColl here.
As already mentioned, the novel has an educational aim: instructing his audi-
ence in the possibilities opened up by science. MacColl makes full use of known
scientiﬁc theories and facts to make Stranger’s story as plausible as possible. Not
unsurprisingly, this defeats the literary value of the whole enterprise.
Ednor Whitlock is not a novel of science ﬁction, but presents similar character-
istics. The beginnings are suﬃcient to give us an idea of what is going on: Ednor,
a young lad of nineteen, looking for shelter from the rain in the local library,
by chance picks up an issue of the Westminster Review. There he ﬁnds a paper
and becomes absorbed by the arguments against his religious beliefs. His faith
is undermined by becoming aware of the new scientiﬁc ideas and the historical
criticism of the Bible. MacColl’s own beliefs are concerned in this tale. This novel
is technically simpler than the other but develops more carefully the thesis that
unbelief causes immorality.
Another characteristic we want to point out here is the relationsip MacColl had
with Germany and with the German culture. In the ﬁrst place, he did not know
the German language – thus he could not read the work of the German thinkers.
He stressed this himself in a letter to Bertrand Russell:
. . . unfortunately all German works are debarred to me because I do not
know the language, so that I know nothing of Cantor’s and Dedekind’s
views on inﬁnity.72
But it seems hard to believe that MacColl simply did not read German thinkers
because he did not know the language, especially since MacColl, who lived and
worked in France for many years, had experience of how to handle situations where
diﬀerent languages are in use.
A role might have been played by some social and political prejudices against
Germans shared by British and French society. As already remarked by Cuypers
and Olsen, the work Ednor Whitlock give us some indices for this hypothesis. In
the novel the German motif is presented by means of the Reverend Milford and
Fr¨aulein Hartman. The later is an unpleasant character in the novel that MacColl
equips with unattractive qualities that are clearly connected with her German
ancestry. The former develops arguments in support of theism.
These social and political prejudices were quite often based on what was taken as
an attack on Christian faith. Actually, Germany and German universities were the
source of the “German Higher Criticism”, due especially to the scientiﬁc rational-
ism that became so popular in Germany as a result of Ernst Haeckel’s (1834-1919)
eﬀorts to turn Darwin’s science into a popular movement. He created the condi-
tions for Darwinism to engage a wider public. In fact, Haeckel appears as the main
target of attack in Man’s Origin, Destiny, and Duty, the last book of MacColl’s
that summarized all his points of view about the conﬂict between religion and
science.
72MacColl [1909c].

584
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
It is sad that these prejudices prevented him from reading the German mathe-
maticians and logicians of his time. It could have provided him with the instru-
ments he needed to accomplish his various innovative proposals in logic.
MACCOLL’S BIBLIOGRAPHY
The following bibliography was based on the following publications:
Shahid Rahman, “Hugh MacColl: Eine bibliographische Erschliessung seine Haup-
twerke und Notizen zu ihrer Rezeptionsgeschichte”, History and philosophy of
logic; vol. 18, 1997, pp. 165-83; and
Michael Astroh and Johan W. Kl¨uwer, Bibliography: Hugh MacColl, Nordic
Journal of Philosophical Logic, vol. 3, n˚1, November 1999 (on line version)
The “The Educational Times′′ correspond to “The Educational Times and
Journal of the College of Preceptors′′.
[1865a]
[Question No.] 1709. The Educational Times, vol. 18, p.20.
[1865b]
[Question No.] 1739. The Educational Times, vol. 18, p.69.
[1865c]
[Question No.] 1761. The Educational Times, vol. 18, p.94.
[1865d]
[Question No.] 1788. The Educational Times, vol. 18, p.114.
[1865e]
[Question No.] 1830. The Educational Times, vol. 18, p.166.
[1865f]
Solution to [Question No.] 1739. The Educational Times, vol. 18,
p.211.
[1865g]
[Question No.] 1709. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 4,
p.57.
[1865h]
Solution to [Question No.] 1709. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 4, pp. 57-58.
[1865i]
[Question No.] 1739. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 4,
p.102.
[1865j]
[Question No.] 1761. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 4,
pp. 102-103.
[1865k]
Solution to [Question No.] 1739. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 4, p.102.
[1865l]
[Question No.] 1761. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 4,
pp. 103-105.
[1865m]
On the Numerical Solution of Equations. (Continued from the Solutions
of Questions 1739, 1761.), The Educational Times (Reprint), vol.
4, pp. 105-107.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
585
[1866a]
Angular and Linear Notation. A Common Basis for the Bilinear (a
Transformation of the Cartesian), the Trilinear, the Quadrilinear, &C.,
Systems of Geometry The Educational Times, vol. 19, p.20.
[1866b]
[Question No.] 2008. The Educational Times, vol. 19, p.89.
[1866c]
[Question No.] 2245. The Educational Times, vol. 19, p.134.
[1866d]
[Question No.] 1898. The Educational Times, vol. 19, p.258.
[1866e]
Angular and Linear Notation. A Common Basis for the Bilinear (a
transformation of the Cartesian), the Trilinear, the Quadrilinear, &c.,
Systems of Geometry, The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 5,
pp. 74-77.
[1866f]
Solution to [Question No.] 1950. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 5, pp. 105-107.
[1870a]
Algebraical Exercises and Problems with Elliptical Solutions,
Longmans, Green and Co., London.
[1870b]
Formulae of Reduction, The Educational Times, vol. 23.
[1870c]
[Question No.] 3209. The Educational Times, vol. 23, p.135.
[1870d]
Solution to [Question No.] 3207. The Educational Times, vol. 23,
p.159.
[1870e]
[Question No.] 3264. The Educational Times, vol. 23, p.185.
[1870f]
[Question No.] 3292. The Educational Times, vol. 23, p.209.
[1870g]
An easy way of remembering the Formulæ of Reduction in the Integral
Calculus, both as regards their Investigation and their Application, The
Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 14, pp. 43-45.
[1870h]
Solution to [Question No.] 3210. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 14, p.73.
[1871a]
Probability Notation. The Educational Times, vol. 23, pp. 230-231.
[1871b]
Solution to [Question No.] 3279. The Educational Times, vol. 23,
p.231.
[1871c]
[Question No.] 3322. The Educational Times, vol. 23, p.232.
[1871d]
Solution to [Question No.] 1100. The Educational Times, vol. 23,
pp. 259-260.
[1871e]
[Question No.] 3342. The Educational Times, vol. 23, p.261.

586
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
[1871f]
Solution to [Question No.] 3322. The Educational Times, vol. 23,
p.288.
[1871g]
[Question No.] 3370. The Educational Times, vol. 23, p.290.
[1871h]
[Question No.] 3342. The Educational Times, Vol. 24 (1871-1872),
(April 1871), p.19.
[1871i]
Solution to [Question No. 3385]. The Educational Times, Vol. 24
(1871-1872), (Mai 1871), p. 40.
[1871j]
[Question No.] 3292. The Educational Times, vol. 24 (1871-1872),
(June 1871), p. 64.
[1871k]
Probability Notation No. 2. The Educational Times, vol. 24 (1871-
1872), (August 1871), pp. 111-112.
[1871l]
Solution to [Question No.] 3440. The Educational Times, vol. 24
(1871-1872), (Aug 1871), p. 112.
[1871m]
[Question No.] 3342. The Educational Times, vol. 24 (1871-1872),
(October 1871), p. 163.
[1871n]
[Question No.] 3515. The Educational Times, vol. 24 (1871-1872),
(November 1871), p. 188.
[1871o]
[Question No.] 3433. The Educational Times, vol. 24 (1871-1872),
(November 1871), p. 189.
[1871p]
Solution to [Question No.] 3408. The Educational Times, vol. 24
(1871-1872), (December 1871), p.216.
[1871q]
Probability Notation. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 15,
pp. 20-22.
[1871r]
Solution to [Question No.] 3279. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 15, p.23.
[1871s]
Solution to [Question No.] 1100. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 15, pp. 35-36.
[1871t]
[Question No.] 3209. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 15,
p.36.
[1871u]
[Question No.] 3264. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 15,
p.40.
[1871v]
[Question No.] 3322. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 15,
p.55.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
587
[1871w]
Solution to [Question No.] 3322. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 15, pp. 55-56.
[1871x]
[Question No.] 3342. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 15,
p. 58.
[1871y]
Solution to [Question No.] 3385. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 15, pp. 83-85.
[1871z]
Solution to [Question No.] 3411. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 15, pp. 102-103.
[1871aa]
[Question No.] 3292. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 15,
p. 104.
[1871ab]
[Question No.] 3388. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 15,
p. 106.
[1871ac]
Probability Notation. No. 2. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 16, pp. 29-31.
[1871ad]
Solution to [Question No.] 3440. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 16, pp. 31-32.
[1871ae]
[Question No.] 3342. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 16,
p. 68.
[1871af]
Solution to [Question No.] 3342. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 16, pp. 68-69.
[1871ag]
[Question No.] 3515. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 16,
p. 93.
[1871ah]
Solution to [Question No.] 3515. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 16, p. 93.
[1871ai]
[Question No.] 3433. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 16,
p. 96.
[1871aj]
Solution to [Question No.] 3433. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 16, pp. 96-97.
[1871ak]
Solution to [Question No.] 3408. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 16, p. 103.
[1872a]
Solution to [Question No.] 3644. The Educational Times, vol. 24,
(February 1872), p.268.
[1872b]
Solution to [Question No.] 3561. The Educational Times, vol. 24,
(February 1872), p. 269.

588
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
[1872c]
[Question No.] 3646. The Educational Times, vol. 25, p. 244.
[1872d]
Solution to [Question No.] 3644. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 17, p.36.
[1872e]
Solution to [Question No.] 3561. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 17, p.41.
[1877a]
[Question No.] 5259. The Educational Times, vol. 30, p. 21.
[1877b]
[Question No.] 5291. The Educational Times, vol. 30, p. 44.
[1877c]
[Question No.] 5318. The Educational Times, vol. 30, p. 69.
[1877d]
Symbolical or abbreviated language, with an application to mathemat-
ical probability. The Educational Times, vol. 29, (July 1877), p.
91-92.
[1877e]
[Question No.] 5339. The Educational Times, vol. 30, p. 92.
[1877f]
[Question No.] 5373. The Educational Times, vol. 30, pp. 123-124.
[1877g]
[Question No.] 5402. The Educational Times, vol. 30, p. 147.
[1877h]
Symbolical language: No.
2.
The Educational Times, vol.
29,
(November 1877), p. 195.
[1877i]
[Question No.] 5450. The Educational Times, vol. 30, p. 173.
[1877j]
Solution to [Question No.] 5281. The Educational Times, vol. 29,
(April 1877), p. 171.
[1877k]
[Question No.] 5469. The Educational Times, vol. 30, p.196.
[1877l]
[Question No.] 5511. The Educational Times, vol. 30, p. 221.
[1877m]
Solution to [Question No.] 5155. The Educational Times, vol. 30,
p. 300.
[1877n]
[Question No.] 5231. The Educational Times, vol. 30, p. 302.
[1877o]
The Calculus of Equivalent Statements and Integration Limits. Pro-
ceedings of the London Mathematical Society, (1877-1878), vol.
9, pp. 9-20.
[1877p]
The Calculus of Equivalent Statements (II). Proceedings of the Lon-
don Mathematical Society, vol. 9, pp. 177-186.
[1877q]
Solution to [Question No.] 5155. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 27, p.66.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
589
[1877r]
Solution to [Question No.] 5213. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 27, p.84.
[1877s]
Solution to [Question No.] 5231. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 27, p.85.
[1878a]
[Question No.] 5584. The Educational Times, vol. 31, p. 89.
[1878b]
[Question No.] 5645. The Educational Times, vol. 31, p. 138.
[1878c]
[Question No.] 5808. The Educational Times, vol. 31, p. 294.
[1878d]
The Calculus of Equivalent Statements (III). Proceedings of the Lon-
don Mathematical Society, (1878-1879), vol. 10, pp. 16-28.
[1878e]
Symbolical or Abbreviated Language, with an Application to Mathe-
matical Probability. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 28,
pp. 20-23.
[1878f]
Symbolical Language:–No. 2. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 28, p.100.
[1878g]
[Question No.] 5339. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 29,
p.66.
[1878h]
Solution to [Question No.] 5339. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 29, pp. 66-68.
[1879a]
[Question No.] 5861. The Educational Times, vol. 32, p. 22.
[1879b]
[Question No.] 6107. The Educational Times, vol. 32, p. 292.
[1879c]
[Question No.] 6133. The Educational Times, vol. 32, p. 317.
[1879d]
[Question No.] 6173. The Educational Times, vol. 32, p. 341.
[1879e]
The Calculus of Equivalent Statements (IV). Proceedings of the Lon-
don Mathematical Society, vol. 11, pp. 113-21.
[1879f]
A note on Prof. C. S. Peirce’s probability notation of 1867. Proceed-
ings of the London Mathematical Society, vol. 12, p.102.
[1879g]
[Question No.] 5450. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 30,
p.50.
[1879h]
[Question No.] 5511. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 30,
p.78.
[1879i]
Solution to [Question No.] 5511. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 30, pp. 79-80.

590
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
[1879j]
[Question No.] 5861. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 31,
p.43.
[1879k]
Solution to [Question No.] 5861. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 31, pp. 43-44.
[1880a]
Letter to W. S. Jevons, 18. VIII. 1880.
[1880b]
[Question No.] 6133. The Educational Times, vol. 33, pp. 21-22.
[1880c]
Solution to [Question No.] 6133. The Educational Times, vol. 33,
pp. 21-22.
[1880d]
[Question No.] 6206. The Educational Times, vol. 33, p. 23.
[1880e]
[Question No.] 6235. The Educational Times, vol. 33, p. 68.
[1880f]
[Question No.] 6258. The Educational Times and Journal of the
College of Preceptors, vol. 33, p. 97.
[1880g]
Arithmetical Notation. To the Editor of the Educational Times. The
Educational Times and Journal of the College of Preceptors,
vol. 33, p. 111.
[1880h]
[Question No.] 6330. The Educational Times, vol. 33, p. 144.
[1880i]
[Question No.] 6173. The Educational Times, vol. 33, p. 214.
[1880j]
Solution to [Question No.] 6353. The Educational Times, vol. 33,
p. 237.
[1880k]
[Question No.] 6461. The Educational Times, vol. 33, p. 288.
[1880l]
Solution to [Question No.] 6235. The Educational Times, vol. 33,
p. 262.
[1880m]
[Question No.] 6525. The Educational Times, vol. 33, p. 289.
[1880n]
On the Diagrammatic and Mechanical Representation of Propositions
and Reasoning. The London, Edinburgh and Dublin philosophi-
cal Magazine and Journal of Science, vol. 10, pp. 168-171.
[1880o]
Implication and Equational Logic.
The London, Edinburgh and
Dublin philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, vol. 11,
pp. 40-43.
[1880p]
Symbolical Reasoning (I). Mind, vol. 5, pp. 45-60.
[1881a]
Letter to W. S. Jevons , 27. V. 1881.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
591
[1881b]
Solution to [Question No.] 6485. The Educational Times, vol. 34,
p.22.
[1881c]
Solution to [Question No.] 6560. The Educational Times, vol. 34,
p.22.
[1881d]
[Question No.] 6575. The Educational Times, vol. 34, p.24.
[1881e]
[Question No.] 6615. The Educational Times, vol. 34, p.75.
[1881f]
Solution to [Question No.] 6574. The Educational Times, vol. 34,
pp. 146-147.
[1881g]
On the growth and use of a symbolical language. Proceedings of the
Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, vol. 20, p. 103.
[1881h]
Solution to [Question No.] 6383. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 34, p. 36.
[1881i]
[Question No.] 6173. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 34,
p. 40.
[1881j]
Solution to [Question No.] 6353. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 34, p. 51.
[1881k]
[Question No.] 6235. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 34,
p. 69.
[1881l]
Solution to [Question No.] 6235. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 34, p. 69.
[1881m]
[Question No.] 6461. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 34,
p. 85.
[1882a]
On Probability and Listerism. The Educational Times, vol. 35, p.
103.
[1882b]
On Probability and Listerism. No. 2. The Educational Times, vol.
35, p. 127.
[1882c]
Solution to [Question No.] 5397. The Educational Times, vol. 35,
p. 128.
[1882d]
On the Growth and Use of a Symbolical Language. Memoirs of the
Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, vol. 7, pp. 225-
248.
[1883]
Letter to C. S. Peirce, 16. V. 1883.
[1884a]
To the Editor of the Educational Times. Memoirs of the Manch-
ester Literary and Philosophical Society, vol. 37, p. 201.

592
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
[1884b]
To the Editor of the Educational Times. Memoirs of the Manch-
ester Literary and Philosophical Society, vol. 37, pp. 231-32.
[1884c]
[Question No.] 7871. The Educational Times, vol. 37, p. 330.
[1884d]
[Question No.] 7897. The Educational Times, vol. 37, p. 356.
[1884e]
Solution to [Question No.] 7849. The Educational Times, vol. 37,
p. 385.
[1884f]
On the Limits of Multiple Integrals. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society, vol. 16, pp. 142-48.
[1885a]
[Question No.] 7983. The Educational Times, vol. 38, p. 30.
[1885b]
[Question No.] 8026. The Educational Times, vol. 38, p. 69.
[1885c]
[Question No.] 8093. The Educational Times, vol. 38, p. 160.
[1885d]
[Question No.] 8286. The Educational Times, vol. 38, p. 350.
[1885e]
[Question No.] 8387. The Educational Times, vol. 38, p. 412.
[1886]
Solution to [Question No.] 8387. The Educational Times, vol. 39,
p. 134.
[1887]
Letter to C. S. Peirce , 17. VIII. 1887.
[1888a]
[Question No.] 1898 & 4043. The Educational Times, vol. 41, p.
134.
[1888b]
A New Angular Trigonometrical Notation, with Applications. Proceed-
ings of the London Mathematical Society, vol. 20, read 14. 03.
1889, not printed, p. 180.
[1889a]
Mr. Stranger’s Sealed Packet, Chatto & Windus, London.
[1889b]
[Question No.] 10119. The Educational Times, vol. 42, p. 223.
[1889c]
[Question No.] 3646. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 51,
p.130.
[1889d]
[Question No.] 4043. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 51,
pp. 135-136.
[1890a]
[Question No.] 10619. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 268.
[1890b]
[Question No.] 10708. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 404.
[1890c]
[Question No.] 10750. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 446.
[1890d]
[Question No.] 10780. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 485.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
593
[1890e]
[Question No.] 10814. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 529.
[1890f]
[Question No.] 9996. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 52,
pp. 33-34.
[1890g]
[Question No.] 10119. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 52,
pp. 37-38.
[1890h]
Solution to [Question No.] 10274. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 52, pp. 103-104.
[1890i]
[Question No.] 4155. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 52,
pp. 133-34.
[1891a]
Ednor Whitlock, Chatto & Windus, London.
[1891b]
[Question No.] 10937. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 157.
[1891c]
[Question No.] 11017. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 239.
[1891d]
[Question No.] 11061. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 275.
[1891e]
[Question No.] 11104. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 307.
[1891f]
Solution to [Question No.] 11O61. The Educational Times, vol. 44,
p. 343.
[1891g]
[Question No.] 11186. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 345.
[1891h]
[Question No.] 11235. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 411.
[1891i]
[Question No.] 11104. The Educational Times, vol. 44, p. 527.
[1891j]
Solution to [Question No.] 11104. The Educational Times, vol. 44,
p. 527.
[1891k]
Solution to [Question No.] 5469. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 55, p. 136.
[1891l]
Solution to [Question No.] 10536. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 55, p. 180.
[1892a]
[Question No.] 11061. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 56,
pp. 51-54.
[1892b]
[Question No.] 10750. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 56,
pp. 89-90.
[1892c]
[Question No.] 11104. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 56,
pp. 115-116.

594
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
[1892d]
[Question No.] 6107. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 56,
p. 134.
[1892e]
[Question No.] 11186. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 57,
p. 38.
[1893a]
[Question No.] 7937a. The Educational Times, vol. 46, p. 303.
[1893b]
[Question No.] 7937b. The Educational Times, vol. 46, pp. 303-304.
[1894]
[Question No.] 3646. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 61,
pp. 68-69.
[1895a]
[Question No.] 3464. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 62,
p. 122.
[1895b]
[Question No.] 3552. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 62,
p. 125.
[1895c]
[Question No.] 3771. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 63,
p. 124.
[1896a]
[Question No.] 13234. The Educational Times, vol. 49, p. 396.
[1896b]
The Calculus of Equivalent Statements (V). Proceedings of the Lon-
don Mathematical Society, vol. 28, pp. 156-183.
[1896c]
The Calculus of Equivalent Statements (VI). Proceedings of the Lon-
don Mathematical Society, vol. 28, pp. 555-579.
[1897a]
Symbolic[al] Reasoning (II). Mind, Vol. 6, pp. 493-510.
[1897b]
The Calculus of Equivalent Statements (VII). Proceedings of the
London Mathematical Society, vol. 29, pp. 98-109.
[1897c]
The Calculus of Equivalent Statements (VIII). Proceedings of the
London Mathematical Society, vol. 29, (communicated in abstract
09.06.1898, not printed), p. 545.
[1897d]
[Question No.] 13234. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 66,
pp. 95-97.
[1897e]
[Question No.] 13288. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 66,
pp. 119-120.
[1897f]
[Question No.] 5318. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 67,
p. 125.
[1898a]
The Calculus of Equivalent Statements. Explanatory Note and Correction.
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, vol. 30, pp.
330-332.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
595
[1898b]
[Question No.] 13449. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 68,
pp. 30-31.
[1898c]
Solution to [Question No.] 13517. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 68, p. 68.
[1898d]
[Question No.] 13517. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 68,
p. 68.
[1898e]
[Question No.] 5584. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 68,
p. 123.
[1898f]
[Question No.] 5645. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 68,
p. 124.
[1899a]
Review of “A Treatise on Universal Algebra with Applications, Vol.
1. By Alfred North Whitehead, M. A., Fellow and Lecturer of Trinity
College, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1898. Mind,. Vol.
8, pp. 108-113.
[1899b]
[Question No.] 14030. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 71,
p. 31.
[1899c]
[Question No.] 5645. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 71,
pp. 118-119.
[1900a]
[Question No.] 14439. The Educational Times, vol. 53, p. 37.
[1900b]
Solution to [Question No.] 6330. The Educational Times, vol. 53,
p. 82.
[1900c]
[Question No.] 14469. The Educational Times, vol. 53, p. 83.
[1900d]
[Question No.] 14498. The Educational Times, vol. 53, p. 149.
[1900e]
[Question No.] 14557. The Educational Times, vol. 53, p. 225.
[1900f]
Solution to [Question No.] 14122. The Educational Times, vol. 53,
p. 258.
[1900g]
Solution to [Question No.] 14394. The Educational Times, vol. 53,
pp. 377-378.
[1900h]
[Question No.] 14665.The Educational Times, vol. 53, p. 380.
[1900i]
[Question No.] 14721. The Educational Times, vol. 53, p. 463.
[1900j]
[Question No.] 14751. The Educational Times, vol. 53, p. 503.
[1900k]
Symbolic[al] Reasoning (III). Mind, Vol. 9, pp. 75-84.

596
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
[1900l]
[Note:] ‘I should be glad to have the opinions of logicians ...’. Mind,
Vol. 9, p. 144.
[1901a]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 28. VI. 1901.
[1901b]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 19. VII. 1901.
[1901c]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 10. IX. 1901.
[1901d]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 11. IX. 1901.
[1901e]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 6. X. 1901.
[1901f]
La Logique Symbolique et ses Applications.
Biblioth`eque du 1˚
Congr`es International de Philosophie. Logique et Histoire des
Sciences,pp. 135-183.
[1901g]
[Question No.] 14781. The Educational Times, vol. 54, p. 36.
[1901h]
[Question No.] 14807. The Educational Times, vol. 54, p. 84.
[1901i]
[Question No.] 14828. The Educational Times, vol. 54, p. 154.
[1901j]
[Question No.] 14853. The Educational Times, vol. 54, p. 191.
[1901k]
Solution to [Question No.] 14375. The Educational Times, vol. 54,
p. 500.
[1901l]
[Question No.] 15024. The Educational Times, vol. 54, p. 502.
[1901m]
Limits of Logical Statements. Proceedings of the London Mathe-
matical Society, vol. 34, p. 132. (communicated 14. 11. 1901, not
printed).
[1902a]
Mathematical Questions and Solutions from the “Educational
Times” with Many Papers and Solutions in Addition to Those
Published in the ”Educational Times”.
New Series. Francis
Hodgson, London.
[1902b]
Solution to [Question No.] 14751. The Educational Times, vol. 55,
pp. 37-38.
[1902c]
[Question No.] 8093. The Educational Times, vol. 55, p. 40.
[1902d]
Solution to [Question No.] 14665. The Educational Times, vol. 55,
p.155.
[1902e]
[Question No.] 15064. The Educational Times, vol. 55, p. 157.
[1902f]
[Question No.] 15085. The Educational Times, vol. 55, p. 197.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
597
[1902g]
Erratum. The Educational Times, vol. 55, p. 198.
[1902h]
[Question No.] 15206. The Educational Times, vol. 55, p. 437.
[1902i]
Symbolic[al] Reasoning (IV). Mind, Vol. 11, pp. 352-368.
[1902j]
On the Validity of Certain Formulae. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society, vol. 35, p. 459. (Communicated from the
Chair 16. 04. 1903, not printed).
[1902k]
Logique tabulaire. Revue de M´etaphysique et de Morale, vol. 10,
pp. 213-217.
[1902l]
[Question No.] 14807. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 1,
p. 76.
[1902m]
[Question No.] 14781. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 1,
p. 81.
[1902n]
Solution to [Question No.] 14781. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 1, p. 81-82.
[1902o]
Solution to [Question No.] 14786. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 1, p. 88.
[1902p]
[Question No.] 14853. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 1,
p. 97.
[1902q]
Solution to [Question No.] 14853. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 1, pp. 97-98.
[1902r]
[Question No.] 14375. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 1,
p. 111.
[1902s]
Solution to [Question No.] 14375. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 1, pp. 111-113.
[1902t]
[Question No.] 14751. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 2,
p. 29.
[1902u]
Solution to [Question No.] 14751. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 1, p. 29-30.
[1903a]
Symbolic Logic. The Athenaeum, p. 137.
[1903b]
Symbolic Logic II. The Athenaeum, pp. 321-322.
[1903c]
Symbolic Logic III. The Athenaeum, pp. 354-355.
[1903d]
Symbolic Logic III. The Athenaeum, p. 385.

598
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
[1903e]
La logique symbolique. L’Enseignement math´ematique, vol. 5, pp.
415-430.
[1903f]
Solution to [Question No.] 15206. The Educational Times, vol. 56,
pp. 90-91.
[1903g]
[Question No.] 15299. The Educational Times, vol. 56, p. 157.
[1903h]
[Question No.] 15429. The Educational Times, vol. 56, p. 441.
[1903i]
Symbolic[al] Reasoning (V). Mind, Vol. 12, pp. 355-364.
[1903j]
Paradoxes in Symbolic Logic. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 4, pp. 34-36.
[1903k]
[Question No.] 15206. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 4,
pp. 47-48.
[1903l]
Solution to [Question No.] 15206. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 4, p. 48.
[1904a]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 26. VIII. 1904.
[1904b]
Symbolic Logic. A correction The Athenaeum.
[1904c]
Symbolic Logic. The Athenaeum, pp. 13-16.
[1904d]
Symbolic Logic VI. The Athenaeum, pp. 149-151.
[1904e]
Symbolic Logic VII. The Athenaeum, pp. 213-214.
[1904f]
Symbolic Logic IV. The Athenaeum, pp. 244-245.
[1904g]
Symbolic Logic V. The Athenaeum, pp. 468-469.
[1904h]
Symbolic Logic VIII. The Athenaeum, pp. 879-880.
[1904i]
Symbolic Logic IX. The Athenaeum, p. 911.
[1904j]
La logique symbolique (II). L’Enseignement math´ematique, vol. 6,
pp. 372-375.
[1904k]
Solution to [Question No.] 15429. The Educational Times, vol. 57,
pp. 159-160.
[1904l]
[Question No.] 15588. The Educational Times, vol. 57, p. 313.
[1904m]
[Question No.] 10050. The Educational Times, vol. 57, p. 450.
[Old Questions as Yet Unsolved].
[1904n]
The Calculus of Limits. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 5,
pp. 66-70.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
599
[1904o]
[Question No.] 15429. The Educational Times (Reprint), vol. 6,
p. 58.
[1904p]
Solution to [Question No.] 15429. The Educational Times (Reprint),
vol. 6, pp. 58-59.
[1905a]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 26. I. 1905.
[1905b]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 03. II. 1905.
[1905c]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 03. III. 1905.
[1905d]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 05. IV. 1905.
[1905e]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 03. V. 1905.
[1905f]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 10. V. 1905.
[1905g]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 15. V. 1905.
[1905h]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 16. V. 1905.
[1905i]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 17. V. 1905.
[1905j]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 28. V. 1905.
[1905k]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 29 VI. 1905.
[1905l]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 22. VII. 1905.
[1905m]
[Question No.] 7983. The Educational Times, vol. 58, p. 494. [Old
Questions as Yet Unsolved].
[1905n]
[Question No.] 10780. The Educational Times, vol. 58, p. 534.
[Old Questions as Yet Unsolved].
[1905o]
Symbolic[al] Reasoning (VI). Mind, Vol. 14, pp. 74-81.
[1905p]
Existential Import. Mind, Vol. 14, pp. 295-296.
[1905q]
Symbolic[al] Reasoning (VII). Mind, Vol. 14, pp. 390-397.
[1905r]
The Existential Import of Propositions [A Reply to Bertrand Russell].
Mind, Vol. 14, pp. 401-402.
[1905s]
The Existential Import of Propositions. Mind, Vol. 14, pp. 578-579.
[1906a]
Symbolic Logic and its Applications, Longmans, Green and Co.,
London.
[1906b]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 24. II. 1906.

600
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
[1906c]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 05. III. 1906.
[1906d]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 12. III. 1906.
[1906e]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 02. IV. 1906.
[1906f]
Solution to [Question No.] 15957. The Educational Times, vol. 59,
pp. 267-268.
[1906g]
[Question No.] 16059. The Educational Times, vol. 59, p. 413.
[1906h]
Solution to [Question No.] 16059. The Educational Times, vol. 59,
p .493.
[1906i]
[Question No.] 11285. The Educational Times, vol. 59, [Old Ques-
tions as Yet Unsolved], p. 540.
[1906j]
Chance or Purpose. The Hibbert Journal, vol. 5, pp. 384-396.
[1906k]
Symbolic Reasoning (VIII). Mind, Vol. 15, pp. 504-518.
[1907a]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 18. I. 1907.
[1907b]
[Question No.] 10708. The Educational Times, vol. 59, p. 82.
[1907c]
[Question No.] 16292. The Educational Times, vol. 59, p.458.
[1907d]
Solution to [Question No.] 16292. The Educational Times, vol. 59,
p.544.
[1907e]
What and Where is the Soul?
The Hibbert Journal, vol.
6, pp.
158-170.
[1907f]
Symbolic Logic. A reply. Mind, Vol. 16, pp. 470-473.
[1908a]
What and Where is the Soul?
The Hibbert Journal, vol.
6, pp.
673-674.
[1908b]
‘If’ and ‘Imply’. Mind, Vol. 17, pp. 151-152.
[1908c]
‘If’ and ‘Imply’. Mind, Vol. 17, pp. 453-455.
[1909a]
Man’s Origin, Destiny and Duty, Williams and Norgate, London.
[1909b]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 04. X. 1909.
[1909c]
Letter to Bertrand Russell, 18. XII. 1909.
[1909d]
[Question No.] 16734. The Educational Times, vol. 62, p.429.
[1909e]
Mathematics and Theology The Hibbert Journal, vol. 7, pp. 916-
918.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
601
[1909f]
Ptolemaic and Copernian Views of the Place of Mind in the Universe
(II) The Hibbert Journal, vol. 8, pp. 429-430.
[1910a]
Solution to [Question No.] 16751. The Educational Times, vol. 63,
p. 35.
[1910b]
[Question No.] 16788. The Educational Times, vol. 63, p. 37.
[1910c]
Linguistic Misunderstandings (I). Mind, Vol. 19, pp. 186-199.
[1910d]
Linguistic Misunderstandings (II). Mind, Vol. 19, pp. 337-355.
[1911]
[Question No.] 12359 [Old Questions as Yet Unsolved]. The Educa-
tional Times, vol. 64, p. 138.
[1973a]
Symbolic Reasoning (VI). Lackey, D. (ed.): Essays in Analysis,
George Allen and Unwin Ltd., London, pp. 308-316.
[1973b]
Existential Import. Lackey, D. (ed.): Essays in Analysis, George
Allen and Unwin Ltd., London, p.317.
[1973c]
The Existential Import of Propositions (A Reply to Chapter 4 above)
Lackey, D. (ed.): Essays in Analysis, George Allen and Unwin
Ltd., London, pp. 317-319.
[1973d]
The Existential Import of Propositions. Lackey, D. (ed.): Essays in
Analysis, George Allen and Unwin Ltd., London, pp. 319-322.
[2007a]
Marriage Certiﬁcate for Hortense Lina Marchal and Hugh MacColl:
17.08.1887.
[2007b]
Death Certiﬁcate for Hugh MacColl: 27.12.1909.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Angell, 1962] R. B. Angell. A Propositional Logic with Subjunctive Conditionals, Journal of
Symbolic Logic 27, pp. 327-343, 1962.
[Angell, 2002] R. B. Angell. A-Logic, Lanham: University Press of America, 2002.
[Aristotle, 1928] Aristotle. The Works of Aristotle Translated into English, vol. I, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1928.
[Astroh, 1993] M. Astroh. Der Begriﬀder Implikation in einigen fr¨uhen Schriften von Hugh
McColl, in W. Stelzner, S. W. Stelzner Philosophie und Logik, Frege-Kolloquien Jena
1989/1991, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, New York, 1993, pp. 128-144.
[Astroh, 1995] M. Astroh. Subjekt, Pr¨adikat und Modalit¨at. Ein Beitrag zur logischen Rekon-
struktion einer kategorischen Syllogistik, Saarbr¨ucken: Typoskript, 1995.
[Astroh, 1996] M. Astroh. Pr¨asupposition und Implikatur, in M. Dascal/D. Gerhardus/K.
Lorenz/G. Meggle, Sprachphilosophie, Philosophy of Language, La philosophie du lan-
gage, vol. II, 1996, pp. 1391-1407, 1996.
[Astroh, 1999a] M. Astroh. Connexive Logic, Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic, vol. 4,
pp. 31-71, 1999.
[Astroh, 1999b] M. Astroh. MacColl’s evolutionary design of language, in: Astroh, M., Read,
S. (eds.): pp. 141-173, 1999.

602
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
[Astroh and Read, 1999] M. Astroh and S. Read, eds. Proceedings of the Conference “Hugh
MacColl and the Tradition of Logic.” at Greifswald (1998), Nordic Journal of Philo-
sophical Logic, vol 3/1, 1999.
[Astroh et al., 2001] M. Astroh, I. Grattan-Guiness, and S. Read. A survey of the life of Hugh
MacColl (1837-1909), History and Philosophy of Logic. vol. 22, Num 2 (June), 2001.
[Boethius, 1969] A. M. T. S. Boethius. De hypotheticis syllogismis, Paideia, Brescia, 1969.
[Christie, 1986] A. Christie. Hugh MacColl in der wissenschaftlichen Literatur seit 1970: Zur
Methodik. Typoscript, 1-5, 1986.
[Christie, 1990] A. Christie. Nature as a source in the history of logic 1870-1910, History and
Philosophy of Logic, vol. 11, pp. 1-3, 1990.
[Couturat, 1899] L. Couturat. La Logique math´ematique de M. Peano, Revue de M´etaphysique
et de Morale, vol. 7, pp. 616-646, 1899.
[Cuypers, 1999] S. E. Cuypers. The Metaphysical foundations of Hugh MacColl’s religious
ethics, in: M. Astroh and S. Read, eds. pp. 175-196, 1999.
[Frege, 1882] G. Frege. ¨Uber den Zweck der Begriﬀsschrift. In: I. Angelelli (ed.)., Gott-
lob Frege, Begriﬀssschrift und andere Aufs¨atze. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchge-
sellschaft, 1964, pp. 97-105, 1882.
[Frege, 1884] G. Frege. Grundlagen der Arithmetik. Breslau: Keubner, 1884.
[Gabbay, 1987] D. M. Gabbay. Modal Provability Foundations for Negation by Failure,
ESPRIT, Technical Report TI 8, Project 393, ACORD, 1987.
[Gardner, 1996] M. Gardner. The Universe in a Handkerchief. Lewis Carroll’s Mathemat-
ical Recreations, Games, Puzzles and Word Plays, Copernicus (Springer-Verlag), New
York, 1996.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1999] I. Grattan-Guiness. Are other logics possible?
MacColl’s logic and
some English reactions, 1905-1912, in: M. Astroh and S. Read, eds, pp. 1-16, 1999.
[Grice, 1967] H. P. Grice. Conditionals. Privately Circulated Notes, University of California,
Berkeley, 1967.
[Grice, 1989] H. P. Grice. Studies in the Way of Words, MIT-Press, Cambridge, MA, 1989.
[Hailperin, 1996] T. Hailperin. Sentential Probability Logic, Lehigh UP/Associated UP, Beth-
lehem/London, 1996
[Hoepelman and van Hoof, 1988] J. P. Hoepelman and A. J. M. van Hoof. The Success of Fail-
ure, Proceedings of COLING, Budapest, pp. 250-254, 1988.
[Jevons, 1881] W. S. Jevons. Recent mathematico-logical memoirs, Nature 23, pp. 485-7, 1881
[Ladd-Franklin, 1889] C. Ladd-Franklin. On Some Characteristics of Symbolic Logic, American
Journal of Psychology, (Neudruck 1966), pp. 543-567, 1889.
[McCall, 1963] S. McCall. Aristotle’s Modal Syllogisms, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1963.
[McCall, 1964] S. McCall. A New Variety of Implication, Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 29,
pp. 151-152, 1964.
[McCall, 1966] S. McCall. Connexive conditional, Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 31, pp. 415-
432, 1966.
[McCall, 1967a] S. McCall. Connexive conditional and the Syllogism, Mind, vol. 76, pp. 346-
356, 1967.
[McCall, 1967b] S. McCall. MacColl, in P. Edwards (ed.): 1975, Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
Macmillan, London. vol. IV, pp. 545-546, 1967.
[McCall, 1990] S. McCall. Connexive conditional, in A. R. Anderson, and N. D. Belnap, En-
tailment I, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 432-441, 1990.
[McCall, 2007] S. McCall. Sequent calculus for Connexive Logic, Manuscript, 2007.
[Merridew, 1866] H. M. Merridew. Merridews illustrated Guide to Boulogne and Environs
with plan and map. Boulogne-sur-Mer: Merridew - English Booksellers, 1866.
[Olsen, 1999] S. H. Olsen. Hugh MacColl-Victorian, in: Astroh, M., Read, S. (eds.) [1999], pp.
197-229, 1999.
[Peckhaus, 1996] V. Peckhaus. Case studies towards the establishment of a social history of
logic. History and Philosophy of Logic, vol. 7, pp. 185-186, 1996.
[Peckhaus, 1999] V. Peckhaus. Hugh MacColl and the German Algebra of Logic, in: M. Astroh
and S. Read, eds., pp. 141-173, 1999.
[Pizzi, 1977] C. Pizzi. Boethius’ Thesis and Conditional Logic, Journal of Philosophical Logic,
6: pp. 283-302, 1977.

Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism
603
[Pizzi, 1991] C. Pizzi. Decision Procedures for Logics of Consequential Implication, Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, 32: pp. 618-636. 1991.
[Pizzi, 1993] C. Pizzi. Consequential Implication: A Correction, Notre Dame Journal of For-
mal Logic, 34: pp. 621-624, 1993.
[Pizzi, 1996] C. Pizzi. Weak vs. Strong Boethius’ Thesis: A Problem in the Analysis of Conse-
quential Implication, in: A. Ursini and P. Aglinan´o (eds.), Logic and Algebra, New York:
Marcel Dekker, pp. 647-654, 1996.
[Pizzi and Williamson, 1997] C. Pizzi and T. Williamson. Strong Boethius’ Thesis and Conse-
quential Implication, Journal of Philosophical Logic, 26: pp. 569-588, 1997.
[Poggendorﬀet al., 1863–1938] J. C. Poggendorﬀ, B. W. Feddersen and A. J. Von Oettingen,
eds. Biographisch-literarisches Handwo`Erterbuch zur Geschichte der exacten Wis-
senschaften enthaltend Nachweisungen ¨uber Lebensverha`Eltnisse und Leistungen von
Mathematikern, Astronomen, Physikern, Chemikern, Mineralogen, Geologen, Ge-
ographen u.s.w. aller Voelker und Zeiten, vol. 1-6. Leipzig: Verlag von Johann Ambrosius
Barth, 1863–1938.
[Priest, 1999] G. Priest. Negation as Cancellation and Connexive Logic, Topoi, vol. 18, pp.
141-148, 1999.
[Priest, 2005] G. Priest. Towards Non-Being. The logic and Metaphysics of Intentionality.
Oxford, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2005.
[Rahman, 1997a] S. Rahman. Die Logik der zusammenh¨angenden Behauptungen im fr¨uhen
Werk von Hugh MacColl, ‘Habilitationsschrift’, Universit¨at des Saarlandes, Saarbr¨ucken,
1997.
[Rahman, 1997b] S. Rahman. Hugh MacColl:
eine bibliographische Erschließung seiner
Hauptwerke und Notizen zu ihrer Rezeptionsgeschichte. History and Philosophy of Logic;
vol. 18, pp. 165-83, 1997.
[Rahman, 1998] S. Rahman. Redundanz und Wahrheitswertbestimmung bei Hugh MacColl,
FR 5.1 Philosophie, Universit¨at des Saarlandes, Memo Nr. 23, 1998.
[Rahman, 1999] S. Rahman. Ways of understanding Hugh MacColl’s concept of Symbolic Ex-
istence, in M. Astroh and S. Read, eds., pp. 35-58, 1999.
[Rahman, 2000] S. Rahman. Hugh MacColl’s criticism of Boole’s formalization of traditional
hypotheticals. In J. Gasser (ed.): A Boole Anthology. Recent and Classical Studies in
the Logic of George Boole. Dordrecht / Boston / London: Kluwer, Synthese Library, pp.
287-310, 2000.
[Rahman, 2001] S. Rahman. On Frege’s Nightmare, H. Wansing (ed.):
Essays on Non-
Classical Logic. London: World Scientiﬁc, pp. 61-85, 2001.
[Rahman and R¨uckert, 2001] S. Rahman and H. R¨uckert. Dialogical Connexive Logic, Syn-
these, vol 127, Nos 1-2, 2001, pp. 105-139, 2001.
[Rahman and Redmond, 2005] S. Rahman and J. Redmond. , Talk: Hugh MacColl: Reasoning
about No-Thing, in Workshop: ‘Que prouve la science ﬁction? Raison, machines, corps et
mondes’, organised by Universit´e Lille III, Maison de la recherche, Vendredi 1 et samedi 2
avril 2005.
[Read, 1994] S. Read. Thinking About Logic, Oxford University Press, Oxford, New York,
1994.
[Read, 1999] S. Read. Hugh MacColl and the Algebra of Strict Implication, in: M. Astroh
and S. Read, eds., pp. 59-83, 1999.
[Routley and Montgomery, 1968] R. Routley and H. Montgomery. On Systems Containing Aris-
totle’s Thesis, The Journal of Symbolic Logic 3, pp. 82-96, 1968.
[Russell, 1914] G. W. E. Russell, ed. M. MacColl, Memoirs and Correspondence, London: Smith
Elder & Co, 1914.
[Schr¨oder, 1890–95] E. Schr¨oder. Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik. Leipzig: B. G.
Teubner, 3 vol: vol. I (1890), vol. II (1891-1905), vol. III. (1895).
[Simons, 1999] P. Simons. MacColl and Many-Valued Logic: An Exclusive Conjunction, in: M.
Astroh and S. Read, eds., pp. 85-90, 1999.
[Stelzner, 1999] W. Stelzner. Context-Sensitivity and the Truth-Operator in Hugh MacColl’s
Modal Distinctions, in: M. Astroh and S. Read, eds., pp. 91-118, 1999.
[Sundholm, 1999] G. Sundholm. MacColl on Judgement and Inference, in: M. Astroh and S.
Read, eds., pp. 141-173, 1999.

604
Shahid Rahman and Juan Redmond
[Thiel, 1996] C. Thiel. Reasearch of the history of logic at Erlangen, in I. Angelelli and M. Cerzo
(eds.); Studies on the History of Logic, De Gruter, Berlin, N. York, pp. 397-401, 1996.
[Vailati, 1899] G. Vailati. La logique math´ematique et sa nouvelle phase de d´eveloppement dans
les ´ecrits de M. J. Peano, Revue de M´etaphysique et de Morale, vol. 7, pp. 86-102, 1899.
[Wansing, 2005] H. Wansing. Connexive Modal Logic, in: R. Schmidt et al. (eds.), Advances
in Modal Logic. Volume 5, London: College Publications, pp. 367-383, 2005.
[Wansing, 2006] H. Wansing. Connexive Logic, in: Online entry in the Stanford Encyclopaedia
of Philosophy, 2006. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-connexive/
[Wole´nski, 1999] J. Wole´nski. MacColl on Modalities, in: M. Astroh and S. Read, eds., pp.
133-141, 1999.

THE IDEALISTS
David Sullivan
1
BRITISH IDEALISM IN HISTORICAL CONTEXT
1.1
The ‘revolution’ in philosophy
“What might be called the ‘oﬃcial story’ of
recent British philosophy, largely written in the
1950s, refers to a ‘revolution’ which occurred at
the beginning of the century . . . in the 1950s the
idea of a revolution, a radical change in the style
of philosophizing, was in the air.”1
A discussion of the philosophical idealists, once prominent in the British context,
typically invokes a strikingly heterogeneous group of thinkers, all born exclusively
between 1834 and 1869, and nearly all dead before the conclusion of hostilities in
World War II. This group — with two distinct cohorts — is sometimes said to
include, inter alia:
E. Caird (1835–1908), T. H. Green (1836–1882), J. Ward (1843–1925),
W. Wallace (1844–1897), R. L. Nettleship (1846-1892), F. H. Bradley
(1846–1924), J. Watson (1847–1939), B. Bosanquet (1848–1923), H.
Jones (1852–1922), J. Bonar (1852–1941), D. G. Ritchie (1853–1903),
W. R. Sorley (1855–1935), J. H. Muirhead (1855–1940), R. B. Hal-
dane (1856–1928), A. Seth [Pringle-Pattison] (1856–1931), H. Rash-
dall (1858–1924), J. S. Mackenzie (1860–1935), G. F. Stout (1860–
1944), J. A. Smith (1863–1939), H. C. Sturt (1863–1946), J. M. E.
McTaggart (1866–1925), H. W. B. Joseph (1867–1943), H. H. Joachim
(1868–1938), and W. R. Boyce Gibson (1869–1935).
Of course this list — as in the case of any such list — is not exhaustive and some
of the individuals included therein might admit of certain important, descriptive
qualiﬁcations. Also, as British Idealism was a growing, evolving movement, an-
other potential concern is that as we move from the earliest cohort to the later one,
we correspondingly move from some variant of easily recognizable idealism to vari-
ous more specialized sects of neo-idealism. In all events, this list ends with, among
1Manser, [1983, p. 1].
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Nineteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

606
David Sullivan
other things, a ﬁgure remembered primarily as the commentator and translator of
Eucken and Husserl (i.e., Boyce Gibson).2
In any event, a laundry list of thinkers does not itself constitute a movement.
But just what the movement identiﬁed as ‘British Idealism’ was, however, is some-
thing neither its proponents nor its critics were in a position to come to any mean-
ingful agreement about.3 There is truth, of course, to Russell’s caricature, which
painted a portrait of a metaphysical theorist who aﬃrms that “[e]very apparently
separate piece of reality has, as it were, hooks which grapple it to the next piece;
the next piece, in turn, has fresh hooks, and so on until the whole universe is recon-
structed”4 and also in Moore’s riposte that in asserting the spiritual nature of the
universe, modern idealism asserts “(1) that the universe is very diﬀerent indeed
from what it seems, and (2) that it has quite a large number of properties which
it does not seem to have.”5 Such well-known quotations do indeed, neatly and
cruelly, highlight certain important and quite typical emphases. But, in point of
fact, British Idealism — as in the parallel situation of continental neo-Kantianism
— names less a coherent school, with an established and agreed-upon doctrine,
than a general movement, deﬁned often in the main more by its shared enemies.
British Idealism, which is typically viewed in Anglo-American circles as a pe-
culiar aberration, might appear less problematic if one came to see in it a fur-
ther permutation or ﬂowering within the larger program of post-Kantian idealism.
Here, by the label of ‘post-Kantian,’ one could thereby encompass not just the im-
mediate successors to Kant but all the various movements deriving in some sense
from Kant, in the post-Enlightenment until early Modernism. This was the view
ﬁrst given voice by Royce:
By the term post-Kantian idealism, we name a group of philosophi-
cal movements which grew out of the study of Kant’s doctrine, and
which are, therefore, closely related to it, but which are usually, in one
or another respect, opposed to certain of Kant’s most characteristic
tendencies. These movements form a varied collection, and cannot be
described as the work of any single school of mutually agreeing thinkers
... A list of those who, with more or less obvious justice, might be called
post-Kantian idealists, would include Cousin, Strauss, Fechner, Lotze,
von Hartmann, T. H. Green, Bradley, and even Martineau, despite his
pronounced hostility to Hegelianism. And, in a measure, most of our
own American pragmatists could be viewed as the outcome of the same
movement. Where such varieties of opinion are in question, there is no
longer any reason to speak of a school at all. Post-Kantian idealism,
2In addition, it should be noted that there are also a handful of academics following them —
e.g. R. F. A. Hoernl´e (1880–1943) R. G. Collingwood (1889–1943), G. R. G. Mure (1893–1979),
M. Oakeshott (1901–1990) — who form not so much a continuation of that movement but instead
a kind of “idealist epilogue,” one that runs right up to the end of the twentieth century.
3I will use ‘British Idealism’ in preference to ‘British Hegelianism’ or any other variant.
4Russell, [1964, p. 142].
5Moore, [1959, p. 1].

The Idealists
607
viewed in its whole range of manifestation, is not any one theory so
much as a tendency, a spirit, a disposition to interpret life and human
nature and the world in a certain general way — a tendency, meanwhile
so plastic, so manifold, so lively, as to be capable of appealing to ex-
tremely diﬀerent minds, and of expressing itself in numerous mutually
hostile teachings ... Post-Kantian idealism was prominent among the
motives that lead Europe into those revolutionary political activities
which centered about the year 1848 ... [and it] has so transformed both
the theology and the practical methods of the non-Roman portion of
Christendom .... [that] I think it fairly likely that future historians will
look back on the history of idealism as being that of the dissolution of
the classic Protestantism.6
While, at ﬁrst sight, this might be thought an unhelpful over-generalization, in this
brief excerpt Royce does advance several interesting points worth bearing in mind.
First, he emphasizes that philosophy in both the German- and English-speaking
world passed through a phase of active politicization and controversial religious
criticism before completely withdrawing from these areas of inquiry altogether.
Second, he suggests that these thinkers, although commonly grouped together,
can scarcely be seen to form a school in the orthodox sense.
And, third, he
speculates that these thinkers might more properly be addressed as a ’movement’
or a ‘tendency’, one with a special aﬃnity for (or connection to) certain theological
disputes peculiar to Protestant Europe. To discover which of these is true of British
Idealism will require further investigation.
Within this larger intellectual context, our special interest concerns the contri-
butions of the idealist thinkers to the historical development of logic. But, within
this narrower vein, we quickly encounter an unpleasant reality: these thinkers pro-
duced very little that today would readily be recognized as a contribution to logic.7
Furthermore, this is true is despite a penchant for composing works that promi-
nently feature the word ‘logic’ in their title — the most famous examples being
Bradley, Principles of Logic (1883) and Bosanquet, Logic; or the morphology of
knowledge (1st: 1888, 2nd: 1911).8 But this appearance of paradox is, in large
part, a result of their being considered only in retrospect, as the bulk of their pro-
ductions preceded the modernist divide in philosophy. Philosophical modernism
laid down a division that can be — on both the analytic and the continental
side of the equation — summed-up or crystallized in the word ‘revolution’. The
modernist thinkers of the twentieth century saw themselves as revolutionaries, a
6Royce, [1919, pp. 1–3].
7By the time that Mace wrote his logic, this sort of characterization was possible:
“No
serious discussion of logical problems is possible without raising philosophical and epistemological
issues, but writers in whose works these issues are prominent and explicit may be described as
philosophical logicians” Mace, [1933, p. 15].
8Only Bradley and Bosanquet receive (brief) treatment in the article entitled “History of
Logic” in the 1967 Encyclopedia of Philosophy (v. 4, pp. 549–550). The books published in the
twentieth century by Joseph and Joachim — that lie outside our proper purview — receive no
mention and these ﬁgures were also not accorded individual entries in the Encyclopedia.

608
David Sullivan
situation that climaxed in the high modernist works of the teens and twenties.9
Hence, it will be worthwhile to consider the somewhat amateurish attempts at
intellectual history inspired by the analytic movement.
The revolution that was meant to be eﬀected by the philosophical modernists
was that given voice in their radical new works.10 Although usually not accounted
the same monumental status as Wittgenstein’s Tractatus (1921/22), Carnap’s Der
Logische Aufbau der Welt (1928) is perhaps less idiosyncratic and, thus, more
representative of the programmatic impulses of this academic, philosophical mod-
ernism. Carnap’s larger agenda — his connections with modernism in art and
architecture and with progressivism in politics — have been widely documented.11
(Precisely the same sorts of connections can also be made with other prominent
ﬁgures associated with logical positivism, most notably, perhaps, Neurath.) The
logical positivists started new journals and issued polemical manifestos, all with
an eye to creating a radical new approach to the theory and practice of philosophy.
Of course, the seamless progress of the movement was sharply interrupted by the
rise of European fascism, which necessitated exile for a large number of these same
thinkers.
Later on, after the Second World War, the academic heirs of the positivist
movement sought consolidation, thereby making certain their account with world
history. In so doing, however, prominent individuals (and their younger promoters)
mis-remembered, distorting the signiﬁcance of the earlier work, by down playing
its connection with prior accomplishments. The end result was often a complete
mystiﬁcation of the previous century of thought in the minds of their contemporary
readers. A central symptom of this distortion is the almost omnipresent concept
of a ‘gap’ or ‘lull’ in philosophical development in the nineteenth century, one
that required a re-establishment of philosophy on a new and ﬁrmer foundation.
Consequently, when analytic philosophers inquired into the philosophical situation
after Kant, they typically saw nothing but an incomprehensible, gaping hole.12
Into this blank space, they projected a malaise that required nothing less than
a new and revolutionary methodology for doing philosophy, one that changed
the very self-conception of philosophers and their own enterprise. (Such seismic
shifts can be monitored by, among other things, the oﬃcial examinations set for
graduates; as Manser notes, in the case of Oxford: “in 1942–43 they were such
9In what follows, we shall restrict our discussion solely to the analytic side, although a similar
gap to that between Kant and Frege, is identiﬁable on the continental side, as well: “most
philosophers between Hegel and Heidegger . . . [are considered] either epigoni or precursors —
to the extent that they are not forgotten altogether” [Schn¨adelbach, 1984, p. 2].
10Schn¨adelbach enumerates Wittgenstein, Luk´acs, and Heidegger and their famous works from
the twenties (p. 1). It might be noted that these three are the most prominent students of Frege,
Simmel, and Husserl, who ﬂourished earlier, within the “neo-Kantian paradigm” (see [Sullivan,
2002]).
11See [Gallison, 1990], et al.
12And, in the English-speaking context, an even larger lacuna emerges, one that successfully
stiﬂed historical scholarship for decades: “Why bother to produce any evidence for what is
perfectly clear to everyone: that between Hume and Russell there is nothing whatever of interest
in British philosophy?” [Richter, 1964, p. 138].

The Idealists
609
as could have been answered by those trained in 1900. By 1946 a very diﬀerent
attitude was needed.”13)
Equally symptomatic is an associated tactic that tries to breach this gap by lo-
cating the “re-founding” of respectable philosophy in the works of philosophically-
oriented scientists and mathematicians, leaving the intervening academic philoso-
phers completely out of the picture. Accordingly, to authors such as Reichenbach,
the tale is thus a charmingly simple one: philosophy lost its way after Kant, sepa-
rating itself from science and pursuing unjustiﬁable metaphysical speculations (i.e.,
Hegel and the Hegelians). This unscientiﬁc philosophy perished, after coming to an
inevitable dead-end. Only the scientiﬁcally infused and inspired reﬂections of other
thinkers, unconnected with the deadening hand of academic philosophy, could cre-
ate the conditions for philosophy to be re-born.14 And their successors, the logical
positivists were thus the true heirs to this tradition of correct philosophizing, one
that was in close accord with the results of scientiﬁc research.
Furthermore, another signiﬁcant, but nonetheless mythic, portrayal central to
the self-conception of analytic philosophy, involves an even larger chasm, one seem-
ingly evident to everyone: in the case of logic, between Aristotle and Frege, not
one single step of progress had been made. (Of course, even Kant had aﬃrmed
this view, announcing that logic was a ﬁxed and closed science, akin to Euclidean
geometry.
Hence, from that perspective, everything that could be said on the
topic had been said.) In analytic mythology, until the revolutionary discoveries
of Frege, logic persisted in a long, historically determined lull.
Only Frege —
whose unique ideas sprang solely from his own cranium, as Athena arose from the
head of Zeus — provided the impulse to logic that made it relevant once more to
the new philosophy. It is thus these very mythic pictures, tainted with the mod-
ernist “revolutionaries” mis-rememberings of the past (in the course of justifying
their present and future), that have passed uncritically into the vast number of
unexamined, tacit beliefs of most working philosophers.
Such views were subsequently buttressed by the multiple accounts that appeared
after the war. These books formed part of the literature emerging to consolidate
academically the new movement now baptized “analysis”; they include the follow-
ing well-known titles, for instance:
Readings in Philosophical Analysis, ed. H. Feigl & W. Sellars, Appleton-
Century-Crofts (New York, NY: 1949)
Philosophical Analysis: A Collection of Essays, ed. M. Black, Cornell
UP (Ithaca, NY: 1950)
13Manser, [1983, p. 3]. See the examination papers reproduced in Manser, [1983, pp. 25–27].
14See [Reichenbach, 1961].
Reichenbach sermonizes:
“. . .
the philosophy of the systems
ends with Kant . . .
The history of philosophy, which up to the time of Kant manifested itself
in the form of philosophical systems, should be regarded as continued after Kant not by the
pseudosystems of the imitators of a great past, but by the new philosophy that grew out of the
science of the nineteenth century and was continued in the twentieth century” [Reichenbach,
1961, p. 122].

610
David Sullivan
Logic and Language, First Series, ed.
A. Flew, Blackwell (Oxford:
1950)
Logic and Language, Second Series, ed. A. Flew, Blackwell (Oxford:
1953)
Essays in Conceptual Analysis, ed. A. Flew, Blackwell (Oxford: 1956)
All of these volumes continued to serve as textbooks for several decades to come15
and to this list also must be added some of the ﬁrst retrospective or quasi-historical
volumes:
The Revolution in Philosophy, A. J. Ayer et al., Macmillan (London:
1956)
English Philosophy since 1900, G. J. Warnock, Oxford UP (London:
1958)
Just as the logical positivists repressed the academic philosophy (i.e., neo-Kantian-
ism) in which much of their learning and thinking had been formed, the English-
speaking analysts, for similar reasons, downplayed the interest (and vitality) of
the academic philosophy (British Idealism) that had ﬂourished just before the
rise of analysis. Part and parcel of this approach is nothing less than the casting
of nineteenth-century thinking as not really philosophy at all. But in this way,
once again, a clear view of the nineteenth century is occluded and it appears
only as an anomalous moment in the otherwise coherent story of the progress and
development of philosophy. Consequently, all this undigested (and undigestable)
material may safely be ignored, with attention focused solely on the dramatic
re-birth of the discipline post-Frege.16
Unfortunately, one stumbling block the post-war writers had to contend with
was just how long it took some philosophers to catch on to the new order of
things. Again, a paradoxical approach, combined with a sometime torturous re-
characterization of events, is the result. Take Warnock’s book, for example, and
consider the following short excerpts:
In 1924 and 1925 there appeared two bulky volumes with the general
title Contemporary British Philosophy.
They make strange reading
today. Their title itself, even then was doubtfully appropriate . . . it
should have been clear by 1925 that the scene had changed, was chang-
ing and continued to change.17
The dominant doctrine that these big men [appearing in the aforemen-
tioned volumes] represented . . . has been called Absolute Idealism . . .
It would be extremely diﬃcult to say what this species of philosophy
exactly was. Perhaps indeed it was nothing at all exactly.18
15As my own undergraduate education in the late 1970s conﬁrms.
16Or post-Helmholtz, post-Mach, post-Russell, or whatever.
17[Warnock, 1958, p. 3].
18[Warnock, 1958, p. 4].

The Idealists
611
. . .
the state of British philosophy in the early years of the present
century was itself highly unusual and full of novelty. It bred, no doubt,
its own revolutionary illusions. To see in it now a tradition is certainly
a mistake . . . It was in fact an exotic in the English scene, the product
of a quite recent revolution in ways of thought due primarily to German
inﬂuences . . . Hume and Berkeley would have been sadly puzzled by
the pages of Bradley, to say nothing of Hegel’s. But either might have
conversed quite naturally with Moore, and with Russell too, at least
in his less technical moments.19
While there are a number of pertinent observations that could be adduced here, it
is important to note at least one: namely, that British philosophy before analysis
thought of itself as contemporary and even revolutionary. But this self-conception
was, for the analysts, dead wrong: British Idealism was a foreign transplant,
a hothouse tropical ﬂower that could not ﬂourish in the native soil and clime.
Because, once again, this abstruse metaphysics had come to a dead end, only the
true revolutionaries that followed could both enliven and re-connect philosophy
with its living tradition.
In any event, it is undisputed that a clear dividing line is attained once we come
to that next generation, that of revolutionary modernists proper — or those ﬁgures
who were simultaneously to dominate much of the twentieth century and to occlude
and obscure our view of the nineteenth century; that is, B. Russell, 1872–1970 and
G. E. Moore, 1873–1958. Indeed, although we tend to think of the early part
of the twentieth-century as the heyday of analysis (as evidenced in the quote by
Warnock), this may yet be another artifact of being viewed from the perspective
of the present (in the rear view mirror, so to speak).
As already noted, the
volumes entitled Contemporary British Philosophy from the mid-twenties, while
including contributions from both Moore and Russell, is overwhelming dominated
by thinkers who could be included under the rubric of “British Idealist.”20
Given the circumstances embodying these prior assumptions, it is no surprise
that the British Idealists were mostly ignored by those who came after them. It
would be natural, hence, to assume that the only possible interest in the British
Idealism would be that of a perverse antiquarian kind, suitable only for intellectual
history. And so it remained for a goodly number of decades. But recently, this
intellectual opprobrium has shifted due to interest guided by concerns about the
very origins of analytic philosophy itself. Recent scholarship has revealed that, for
instance, in the case of Russell, the connection with the old-fashioned academic
thought may have been more important than previously acknowledged.21
19[Warnock, 1958, pp. 7–8].
20There are numerous anecdotes of the tenacious survival of British Idealism in some form or
other; of John Anderson, a student of Henry Jones at Glasgow, it is claimed: “Indeed, as late
as 1941, Anderson still lectured extensively on Green at Sydney University, exerting a strong
personal inﬂuence on a number of students . . . He expressed himself in the language and style
of Green, Bradley, Bosanquet, and Caird, although his basic sympathies owed more to Scottish
common-sense philosophy” [Vincent, 2006, p. 489].
21Cf. Idealism and the Emergence of Analytic Philosophy by P. Hylton [1990] and Russell’s

612
David Sullivan
For, although analytic philosophy was on the ascent after 1910, idealism was
nowhere near its end.
(This is easily documented by perusing pre-World War
II volumes of Mind or Proceedings of the Aristotelian Association.) Furthermore,
despite the blanket assumptions of many of the practitioners of analytic philosophy,
there is little philosophical work that can be pointed to as providing a deﬁnitive
refutation of idealism — pace Moore. For although the idealists may have been
guilty of various logical mistakes (although no more so than any other ﬁgures in
the history of philosophy), there is no single document or unique methodology
that ﬁnishes oﬀidealism as a philosophical program. Rather, interest gradually
shifted to new topics and approaches so that idealism was not so much refuted
as merely superseded.22 (Hence, the unconscious living-on of idealist tendencies,
even within its announced enemy, is perhaps less remarkable than at ﬁrst glance.)
The question may at the very least be raised: did modernist “revolutionaries”
build upon the earlier advances of the previous generation? The following is a
continuation of, and also a very small contribution to, that line of discussion.
1.2
Why logic mattered to British Idealism: the logic question
“. . . the fact remains that Bradley and Bosanquet . . .
turned direct to Germany for their inspiration, not
merely to Kant and Hegel but to Herbart, Lotze,
Sigwart, and Ueberweg. Bosanquet, indeed, did little
more than acclimatise German logic in England . . . .”23
For individuals with a reference point rooted ﬁrmly in the twentieth century, the
very phrase “the new logic” names, ﬁrst, the logistic or predicate calculus codiﬁed
by Principia Mathematica (1910-13) and, second, the critical historical develop-
ments that followed directly in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century (involving
the well-known names of G¨odel, Tarski, etc.). Strangely, however, even a superﬁ-
cial examination of the historical record reveals that the very phraseology of “the
new logic” ﬁrst appears in the middle of the nineteenth century, predating the
appearance of even that other founding document, the Begriﬀsschrift (1879). But
the existence of an active project devoted to the “renovation” of logic, undertaken
in the nineteenth century, expressly contradicts the perspective of the philosoph-
ical radicals of the twentieth century who tried to portray nothing but one big,
continuous (and empty) chasm between Aristotle and Frege.
Of course, even the great Kant himself had already declared that since Aristotle
not one step of progress had been achieved, nor would it. So what could motivate
the post-Kantian thinkers, obviously inspired by Kant, to second-guess him on this
issue? An answer, should it be formulable, would have to be located in the seminal
events in philosophy after Kant. Here, numerous intellectual historians have noted
Idealist Apprenticeship by N. Griﬃn [1991], for two pertinent examples.
22For more on this topic see [Baldwin, 1984].
23[Passmore, 1966, p. 159].

The Idealists
613
another fracture or line, centering around the year 1835. Indeed, after the deaths
of Hegel and Goethe, absolute idealism itself underwent a rapid transformation,
with the Hegelian movement fracturing into diﬀerent, competing sects; also other
oppositional views quickly came to the fore, including “late idealism” and “mate-
rialism” — both of which were sometimes presented as stark alternatives. It was
within this peculiar intellectual ferment — in this emerging Hegel-critique — that
an attempt to revamp the place and position of logic began.
This notion of a nineteenth-century project devoted to the reviviﬁcation of logic
might seem prima facie incredible unless the following phenomena are acknowl-
edged: ﬁrst, the mighty proliferation of works in logic after the death of Hegel;
and, second, the fact that the situation with regard to logic in post-1835 involved
new forays into a middle territory between what came to be perceived as two po-
larizing and untenable positions. Indeed, one of the most famous and inﬂuential
of the early works — Trendelenburg’s Logische Untersuchungen (1 840) — sought
to revivify Aristotelian logic precisely in this middle ground by standing ﬁrmly
against the two extremist positions, identiﬁed by the schools of Hegel and Herbart
respectively. This book thus deserves a prominent place amongst the German-
language volumes devoted to logic that saw the light in this time-period. Indeed,
in this circumstance, Trendelenburg’s inﬂuence can scarcely be over-estimated:
Trendenlenburg stimulated anew the debate on the question how must
logic be constituted in order to be able to lay claim to be a philo-
sophical discipline. It was precisely a matter of understanding logic
as philosophy and as science. The former appeared missing in formal
logic, the latter he denied to Hegelian logic . . .
His own answer to
this question was that logic must gradually stake out its entire domain
through continuing specialized research. It is a philosophical discipline
when it is oriented to the investigation of the philosophical assumptions
in the sciences.24
K¨ohnke begins his monumental work on neo-Kantianism with Trendelenburg – who
he dubs the “Great Unknown” — and asserts that, with the publication of the
Logische Untersuchungen, “the modern movement in epistemology and scientiﬁc
theory that was to attain its culminating point in neo-Kantianism” truly began.25
With Trendelenburg, logic was now to be recast as the basic science — a new
“philosophia fundamentalis”26 — for the following reason: although we may, licitly,
speak of methodologies peculiar to the special sciences, the factum brutum remains
that
. . . these various diﬀerent procedures are only an expression of a single
mode of thought which, assuming many shapes, clings and conforms to
its object in order to lay hold of and comprehend it. In the sciences all
24[Frank, 1991, p. 248].
25[K¨ohnke, 1991, p. 11]. Note too the striking modernity of the modest title: “Logical Inves-
tigations.”
26[K¨ohnke, 1991, p. 22].

614
David Sullivan
that happens is that this single mode of thought is given diﬀerent kinds
of stimulus to the invention of ever new skills and artiﬁces to which
the object has to submit as though captive . . . method is what makes
the science a science. And when the methods appear in the object of
interest of the sciences but are not given by it but have their universal
and common foundation in the thought that is working through the
object of interest, this leads us to the task of seeking out their origin
in the nature of thought.27
The individual sciences distinguish themselves by their individual objects of in-
vestigation and by their specialized methods of inquiry. But, as they all depend
upon thought simpliciter, the science of thought (or, logic) must underlie (and,
in a sense, underwrite) all of these aforementioned sciences. Hence the need to
investigate and re-vivify the doctrine and practice of logic appears paramount and
also the prospect for logicism, as a foundationalist program, revived.
The historical reality of this renewed interest in logic has recently come to
light in academic scholarship, most notably in a seminal article by Hartwig Frank
“Reform eﬀorts of logic at mid-nineteenth century in Germany” (1991); it has also
has received a book-length treatment in Risto Vilkko’s monograph, A Hundred
Years of Logical Investigations: Reform Eﬀorts of Logic in Germany 1781 —
1879 (2002). Vilkko’s assessment of our contemporary situation speaks to the
‘gap’ situation, emphasized above:
Many historians and philosophers of logic have claimed that during the
nineteenth century, before Gottlob Frege’s Begriﬀsschrift (1879), there
was a period of stagnation or even of decline in the ﬁeld of logic not only
in Germany but also elsewhere in the Western world . . . Statements
about the 19th century as a non-creative period in the history of logic
can be shaken by mere reference to a number of signiﬁcant ﬁrst editions
that were published in Germany in the ﬁeld of logic during the decades
of suggested decline.28
Now, of course, one important proviso must be inserted here is that these “log-
ics” typically included material that today we would parcel out to epistemology
and the philosophy of science. For instance, Lotze’s Logik (1871) provides, per-
haps, a paradigmatic case of this state of aﬀairs: “The ﬁrst part . . . deals with
pure logic; the second part . . .
with methodology or the philosophy of science;
and the third part . . . with scepticism and other epistemological issues.”29 Our
failure to acknowledge this crucial diﬀerence typically stems from the historically
27Cited in [K¨ohnke, 1991, pp. 20-21].
28Vilkko, 2002, pp. 11-13. Frank’s assessment is even sharper: “. . . I will argue that the work
on logic in Germany in the years between 1830 and 1880 may claim an absolutely independent
place in the history of logic, a place that may be brieﬂy termed ‘the generation of ideas by reform
projects.’ We cannot then avoid the assumption that such a Zeitgeist had some inﬂuence on the
great reformer in logic, Frege” [Frank, 1991, p. 247].
29[Vilkko, 2002, p. 14].

The Idealists
615
anachronistic assumption that “since there were . . . only a few logicians who took
the term ‘logic’ to mean roughly the same as we do know, then hardly anything
important happened in the ﬁeld of logic during that time.”30
While not an exhaustive catalog, by any means, the following gives a good
indication of the ﬂourishing of texts and important articles on “logic” during the
years 1835 to 1870 (with only some, not all, of the subsequent editions noted):
1835–1843
Drobisch, Neue Darstellung der Logik (Leipzig, 1st: 1836; 2nd: 1851;
3rd: 1863; 4th: 1875)
Schleiermacher, Dialektik (Berlin, 1839)
Trendelenburg, Logische Untersuchungen (Leipzig, 1st: 1840; 2nd: 1862;
3rd: 1870)
J.E. Erdmann, Grundriss der Logik und Metaphysik (Halle, 1st: 1841;
2nd: 1843; 4th: 1864)
Beneke, System der Logik als Kunstlehre des Denkens (Berlin, 1842)
Trendelenburg, Erl¨auterungen zu den Elementen der aristotelischen
Logik (Berlin, 1st: 1842; 2nd: 1861)31
Trendelenburg, Die logische Frage in Hegels System. Zwei Streitschriften
(Leipzig, 1843)
Lotze, Logik (Leipzig, 1843)
1844–1852
H. Grassmann, Die Ausdehnungslehre (Berlin, 1st: 1844, 2nd: 1862)
Harms, “Von der Reform der Logik und dem Kriticismus Kants, Ein
Entwurf” in Jahrb¨ucher empirischen Wissenschaften, 1/1846, pp. 128-
164
Rosenkranz, Die Modiﬁkationen der Logik, abgeleitet aus dem Begriﬀs
des Denkens (Leipzig, 1846)
Chalyb¨aus, Entwurf eines Systems der Wissenschaftslehre (Kiel, 1846)
Trendelenburg, “Geschichte der Kategorienlehre. Zwei Abhandlungen”
in Historische Beitr¨age zur Philosophie (Berlin, 1846-67)
Prantl, Die Bedeutung der Logik f¨ur den jetztigen Standpunkt der Philoso-
phie (Munich, 1849)
K. Fischer, Logik und Metaphysik, oder Wissenschaftslehre (Stuttgart,
1st: 1852; 2nd: 1865)
Ulrici, System der Logik (Leipzig, 1852)
1853–1861
Steinthal, Grammatik, Logik und Psychologie (Berlin, 1855)
Prantl, Geschichte der Logik in Abendlande (Leipzig, 1855-1870)
Ritter, System der Logik und der Metaphysik (G¨ottingen, 1856)
Prantl, Ueber die zwei ¨altesten Kompendium der Logik in deutscher
30[Vilkko, 2002, p. 14].
31This is edition that was suggested for student use at Oxford on the topic.

616
David Sullivan
Spracher (Munich, 1856)
Ueberweg, System der Logik und Geschichte der logischen Lehren (Bonn,
1st: 1857; 3rd: 1868, 5th: 1882)
Schmid, Entwicklungsgeschichte der Hegel’schen Logik (Regensburg,
1858)
Rosenkranz, Wissenschaft der logischen Idee (K¨onigsberg, 1858-1859)
Ulrici, Compendium der Logik (Leipzig, 1st: 1860; 2nd: 1872)
1862–1870
Jevons, Pure Logic (London, 1864)
Rabus, Logik und Metaphysik (Erlangen, 1868)
Biedermann, Kants Kritik der reinen Vermunft und die Hegelsche Logik
(Prague, 1869)
Trendelenburg, Kuno Fischer und seine Kant (Leipzig, 1869)
Fischer, Anti-Trendelenburg: eine Gegenschrift (Jena, 1870)
Rosenkranz, Erl¨auterungen zu Hegel’s Encyklop¨adie der philosophis-
chen wissenschaften (Berlin, 1870)
Ulrici, Zur logischen frage (Halle, 1870)
Bain, Logic (London, 1870)
Towards the end of this period, “the new logic” — and the associated slogans of
“die Reform der Logik” and “die logische Frage” — were so well established that
they began to become the subject of further reﬂection in various synoptic and
retrospective works, such as Rabus, Die neuesten Bestrebungen auf dem Gebiete
der Logik (1880) — a volume that was among the ﬁrst to include Frege within its
scope of review.
While the “new logic” does not name a single view, it does accurately describe
a kind of research program that agreed upon certain principles, while disagreeing
about others. For instance, the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica article, in the section
entitled “General Tendencies of Modern Logic,” expostulates the situation for “the
logic of our day” as follows:
In the ﬁrst place, it tends to take up an intermediate position between
the extremes of Kant and Hegel. It does not, with the former, regard
logic as purely formal in the sense of abstracting thought from being,
nor does it follow the latter in amalgamating metaphysics with logic
by identifying being with thought. Secondly, it does not content itself
with the mere formulae of thinking, but pushes forward to theories of
method, knowledge and science; and it is a hopeful sign to ﬁnd this
epistemological spirit, to which England was accustomed by Mill, an-
imating German logicians such as Lotze, Duhring, Schuppe, Sigwart
and Wundt. Thirdly, there is a determination to reveal the psycholog-
ical basis of logical processes, and not merely to describe them as they
are in adult reasoning, but to explain also how they arise from simpler

The Idealists
617
mental operations and primarily from sense.32
Accordingly, the new logic is (1) seemingly agnostic on the realistic division or the
idealistic identiﬁcation of mind and world; (2) fundamentally epistemologically-
oriented, concerned with both method and discovery; and (3) prone to psycho-
logical reductionism. The question that required immediate further discussion,
of course, was whether (2) demands (3): or, psychologism or anti-psychologism.
Indeed, this is where many practitioners of the new logic disagree, whether the
epistemological orientation of logic demands cashing-out by experimental results
in psychology or not.33
As a pertinent example of this new orientation, the Britannica article references
the preface to the second edition of Sigwart (1888). While noting that Sigwart’s
views have a psychologistic bent, as the quoted remarks make clear, the article’s
author also stresses the signiﬁcance of epistemology and methodology for a proper
system of logic:
“Important works have appeared by Lotze, Schuppe, Wundt and Bradley,
to name only the most eminent; and all start from the conception which
has guided this attempt. That is, logic is grounded by them, not upon an
eﬀete tradition but upon a new investigation of thought as it actually is
in its psychological foundations, in its signiﬁcance for knowledge, and
its actual operation in scientiﬁc methods.” How strange! The spirit
of every one of the three reforms above enumerated is an unconscious
return to Aristotle’s Organon. Aristotle’s was a logic which steered, as
Trendelenburg has shown, between Kantian formalism and Hegelian
metaphysics; it was a logic which in the Analytics investigated the
syllogism as a means to understanding knowledge and science: it was
a logic which, starting from the psychological foundations of sense,
memory and experience, built up the logical structure of induction
and deduction on the profoundly Aristotelian principle that there is
no process from universals without induction, and none by induction
without sense. Wundt’s comprehensive view that logic looks backwards
to psychology and forward to epistemology was hundreds of years ago
one of the many discoveries of Aristotle.34
Again, the principles of this peculiar orientation are very apparent: this new
movement is, on their own description, nothing but the rediscovery of the true
meaning of Aristotle: in steering between the Scylla of Kantian-Herbartian formal
logic, on the one hand, and the Charybdis of Hegelian metaphysical logic, on the
32[Case, 1911, p. 885] (my emphases).
33On the very emergence of a new issue, that of psychologism vs. anti-psychologism, cf. [Kusch,
1995].
34[Case, 1911, p, 885] (my emphases). The quotation is from the preface to the second edition
(SL: x). In the preface to the ﬁrst edition, Sigwart acknowledges his “obligation” to Trendelen-
burg, Ueberweg and Mill, all of whom “have died while the book was being planned and carried
out” (SL: ix).

618
David Sullivan
other, the intermediate position is that which approximates logic as an organon,
an instrument for “understanding knowledge and science.”35
Another important characteristic of the new logic, as highlighted by the Bri-
tannica article, concerns the priority of judgement over concept. For instance, the
article continues to remark that the new logic’s “healthy” emphasis on judgement
represents a “recovery from Hume’s confusion of beliefs with ideas and the asso-
ciation of ideas, and the distinction of the mental act of judging from its verbal
expression in a proposition.”36 As further evidence, it then goes on to cite several
representative theories of judgement under discussion, characterizes them in the
following summary fashion; judgement is such that
a. It expresses a relation between the content of two ideas, not a relation of
these ideas (Lotze).
b. It is consciousness concerning the objective validity of a subjective combina-
tion of ideas, i.e. whether between the corresponding objective elements an
analogous combination exists (Ueberweg).
c. It is the synthesis of ideas into unity and consciousness of their objective
validity, not in the sense of agreement with external reality but in the sense
of the logical necessity of their synthesis (Sigwart).
d. It is the analysis of an aggregate idea (Gesammtvorstellung) into subject and
predicate; based on a previous association of ideas, on relating and compar-
ing, and on the apperceptive synthesis of an aggregate idea in consequence;
but itself consisting in an apperceptive analysis of that aggregate idea; and
requiring will in the form of apperception or attention (Wundt).
e. It requires an idea, because every object is conceived as well as recognized
or denied; but it is itself an assertion of actual fact, every perception counts
for a judgment, and every categorical is changeable into an existential judg-
ment without change of sense (Brentano, who derives his theory from Mill
except that, he denies the necessity of a combination of ideas, and reduces
a categorical to an existential judgment).
f. It is a decision of the validity of an idea requiring will (Bergmann, following
Brentano).
g. Judgment (Urteil) expresses that two ideas belong together: by-judgment
(Beurtheilung) is the reaction of will expressing the validity or invalidity of
the combination of ideas (Windelband, following Bergmann, but distinguish-
ing the decision of validity from the judgment).
35[Case, 1911, p.
885].
According to K¨ohnke, “. . .
the Aristotelianism of the nineteenth
century can be understood as an aspect of the interest which . . .
led to the various attempts
made in the 1820s and 1830s to eﬀect an epistemological transformation of logic” (Kˆohnke, 1991,
p. 23).
36[Case, 1911, p. 885].

The Idealists
619
h. Judgment is consciousness of the identity or diﬀerence and of the causal
relations of the given; naming the actual combinations of the data, but also
requiring a priori categories of the understanding, the notions of identity,
diﬀerence and causality, as principles of thought or laws, to combine the
plurality of the given into a unity (Schuppe).
i. Judgment is the act which, refers an ideal content recognized as such to a
reality beyond the act, predicating an idea of a reality, a what of a that; so
that the subject is reality and the predicate the meaning of an idea, while
the judgment refers the idea to reality by an identity of content (Bradley
and Bosanquet).
k. Judgment is an assertion of reality, requiring comparison and ideas which ren-
der it directly expressible in words (Hobhouse, mainly following Bradley).37
Strangely, despite their apparent disunity, these approaches, which include Bradley
and Bosanquet, are all are characterized as similarly modern due to the fact that
they concern complete contents of thought (and not mere ideas) and to the fact that
the judgement itself is not conceived of as built-up out of more primitive, atomic
parts. Hence, another important aspect of the new logic is its clear opposition to
empiricist approaches, favoring instead a holistic view that distinguishes amongst
the component parts of judgement via a process of de-composition (or the very
view commonly associated with Frege).
The volumes by Lotze and Sigwart were, of course, translated by the British
Idealists (and their spouses).
And although Trendelenburg’s works were well-
known, they received no such treatment. However, the point of view espoused
by Trendelenburg could rely on another relevant mode of transmission via T. M.
Lindsay’s translation (1871) of the third edition (1869) of Ueberweg’s System of
Logic and History of Logical Doctrines.38 In the preface to the ﬁrst edition (1857),
Ueberweg also seeks to situate his volume within the diverging streams of existing
literature, identifying, ﬁrst, explicitly with the tradition initiated by Schliermacher,
namely that which “. . .
sought to explain the forms of thinking from science
. . .
[and to establish] their parallelism with the forms of real existence.” This
approach may, once again, be characterized as holding “a middle place between
the subjectively-formal and the metaphysical Logics,” a position that is
. . .
at one with the fundamental view of Logic [der logischen Grun-
dansicht] which Aristotle had. The subjectively-formal Logic — that
promulgated by the schools of Kant and Herbart — puts the forms
of thought out of all relation to the forms of existence. Metaphysical
Logic, on the other hand, as Hegel constructed it, identiﬁes the two
kinds of forms, and thinks that it can recognise in the self-development
of pure thought the self-production of existence. Aristotle, equally far
37[Case, 1911, p. 886] (There is no item j.)
38Passmore claims that Ueberweg’s book “was a widely-read text-book, both in Germany and
in England” [Passmore, 1966, p. 159n].

620
David Sullivan
from both extremes, sees thinking to be the picture of existence [das
Abbild des Seins], a picture which is diﬀerent from its real correlate
and yet related to it, which corresponds to it and yet is not identical
with it (USL: xi (s. iii)).
This telling soon neatly recapitulates the Trendelenburg line: the middle territory
in logic includes a swath of thinkers (more or less aligned with Schliermacher’s
view) including Ritter and Vorl¨ander, on the near side, and Trendelenburg and
Lotze, on the far one. Indeed, we may conclude that, excepting the already ac-
knowledged followers of Kant-Herbart or Hegel, ”. . .
the whole post-Hegelian
labours in the province of the doctrine of thought and knowledge [auf dem Gebiete
der Denk- und Erkenntnisslehre] . . . occupy a common middle place between the
opposites” (USL: 72 (s. 57)).
Ueberweg’s book, while maintaining a spirit of independence, also “proceeds in
the direction denoted by the labours of these men” (USL: xii (s. iv)). Accordingly,
Ueberweg deﬁnes logic as “the science of the regulative laws of human knowledge
[die Wissenschaft von den normativem Gesetzen der menschlichen Erkenntniss],”
where these laws denote “those universal conditions to which the activity of knowl-
edge must conform in order to attain to the end and aim of knowledge” (USL: 1
(s.
1)).
Logic is thereby fully coordinate with epistemological investigations.
Hence, logic as “the doctrine of knowledge [Erkenntnislehre],” constituting the
“middle position” and occuping “the mean between” the two extremist doctrines
mentioned above. In all events, the main point is clear: logic was being busily
re-conceptualized in the time period after the death of Hegel, and just leading
up to the British Idealists. Whether or not this theorization was subsequently
fruitful is not as important as the fact that logic was a matter of lively discussion
and debate in these intervening years.
1.3
Why logic mattered to British Idealism: the rehabilitation of phi-
losophy
“The study of philosophy was
becoming a serious aﬀair.”39
In the search for the closest thing to a group manifesto unique to British Idealism,
one could turn quite naturally to the 1883 volume dedicated to the memory of
Green, the Essays in Philosophical Criticism. (It should be observed ﬁrst that
the contributors had decided (implicitly) that the essay form was the appropriate
venue for philosophical thinking of the sort they favored.) One might also note
that the salient term in the title was ‘criticism’ (and, consequently, not any number
of other possible terms that come to mind.) Caird, in his introduction, insisted
however squarely upon emphasizing “a certain community of opinion . . .
[that]
may be described as an agreement as to the direction in which inquiry may most
fruitfully be prosecuted” (EPC: 1, my emphases):
39BCW, V: 200.

The Idealists
621
The writers of this volume agree in believing that the line of investi-
gation which philosophy must follow, or in which it may be expected
to make the most important contributions to the intellectual life of
man, is that which was opened up by Kant, and for the successful
prosecution of which no one has done so much as Hegel (EPC: 2).
To follow in the footsteps of Kant and Hegel, from Caird’s perspective, implicates
a singular purpose of vision but not an attachment that involved anything like
slavish discipleship:
The only important question now is, not whether we are disciples of
Hegel, – the days of discipleship are past, — but whether we recognize
the existence of a living development of philosophy, and especially of
that spiritual or idealistic view of things in which philosophy culminates
— a development which begins in the earliest dawn of speculation, and
in which Kant and Hegel are, not indeed the last names, but the last
names in the highest order of speculative genius, i Maestri di color che
sanno (H: 224).
For Caird, the British Idealist project entailed neither the importation of thought
from another time and place nor an imposition of scholastic slavishness to that
same thought. Instead, a living (and growing) relation to this thought is required
— much as Green himself had embodied — one showing “that it is possible to com-
bine a thorough appropriation of the results of past speculation with the freshness
and spontaneity of an original mind” (EPC: 3).
If, following this argument, there are no serious grounds for expecting a singu-
lar representative of British Idealism — because British Idealism represents more
tendency and an approach than any orthodoxy of scholastic doctrine — the most
famous British Idealist, F. H. Bradley, could scarcely be thought to provide an
apt example. For, although the very mention of the term ‘British Idealist’ typi-
cally brings to mind the pre-eminent personality of Bradley, this is rarely useful.
(In particular, one might note that Bradley, especially, is sui generis.) However,
even Ryle — in his programmatic introduction to the Revolution volume — was
forced to acknowledge, ﬁrst, the importance of Bradley as a thinker and, second,
the existence of certain central aﬃnities between Frege and Bradley: namely, anti-
psychologism, epistemological holism, logical form (as distinct from grammar), a
recognition of the truth-value as intrinsic, and a burgeoning insight into seman-
tics40 — i.e., some of the very issues arising ﬁrst in the discussion of the new
logic.
Without exploring here any of these areas of potential overlap now, a tangential
question now forces itself upon thoughtful observers: it asks for an explanation
of this state of aﬀairs, given the seeming radical diﬀerences in intellectual context
(despite the nearly overlapping births and deaths of these two thinkers).
The
answer — it will be suggested here but not established — is to be found in the
40See [Ayer, 1957].

622
David Sullivan
fact that both thinkers did indeed share the same intellectual backdrop, namely
the one provided to the generation of Green, Bosanquet, Frege, Bradley and Royce
by the previous generation of Trendelenburg, Mill, Lotze, Lange and Ulrici. This
earlier group included both German logicians — J. E. Erdmann, Prantl, Sigwart
— but also important ﬁgures on the English side, including Mansel, Jowett, and
J. H. Stirling. We may label these thinkers “the second generation after Kant” (b.
1795–1830), who functioned eﬀectively as the teachers of “the third generation”
(b. 1834–1869) that followed.
The postulation of a second generation naturally leads to speculation about
the philosophical agenda of that group. But part of the answer has already been
provided: for, ﬁrst and foremost, there is the approach centered on logic, one suﬃ-
ciently broadened to include questions of epistemology and scientiﬁc methodology.
But, of course, why else did ‘epistemo-logic’ suggest itself as the philosophia fun-
damentalis? The appeal of this view arose, it may be hypothesized, because of
the great advances in the special sciences at the same time that philosophy itself
seemed to be less and less relevant: “In the course of the nineteenth century, a
change of function occurred in philosophy and in its relations to other disciplines
that frequently found resonance externally as a sharp rejection of any philosophy
at all.”41 Various sciences began, one by one, to detach themselves from philosophy
altogether. Simultaneously, the formerly superior position occupied by philosophy
within the university system was also under attack:
Up until the 1850s, “lawyers and physicians had to hear philosophi-
cal seminars and undertake an examination in the so-called Tentamen
philosophicum in logic and psychology.” This kind of examination was
later abolished and replaced by a Tentamen physicum — in Prussia
through a ministerial command of February 19, 1861. Now “it was
only was only theologians, philologists, and mathematicians for whom
some philosophical disciplines (in particular history of philosophy) ex-
isted.”42
In the face of these pressures, philosophy underwent a kind of disciplinary crisis
that has been codiﬁed by some as ‘the rehabilitation of philosophy’:
The phrase ‘the rehabilitation of philosophy’ refers to the essential
features of the attempt to allot to philosophy, in a scientiﬁc age, a
domain of problems which would be independent of the special sciences
. . . The best known form of the rehabilitation of philosophy is a theory
of knowledge which ﬁrst appeared in the ﬁfties of the last century.43
The philosophers most famously implicated here are the neo-Kantians, the school
that “rehabilitated philosophy as a whole in the form of the theory of knowledge by
41[Pester, 1991, pp. 242-43].
42[Pester, 1991, p. 242].
43[Schn¨adelbach, 1984, p. 103].

The Idealists
623
attributing to this discipline the function of a basis for philosophy and science.”44
Here it is important to note that the work of many “Hegelian” thinkers also played
a role in this movement: “Karl Rosenkranz arranged an edition of Kant from
1838 onwards, and in 1860 there appeared the ﬁrst edition of the book on Kant
by Kuno Fischer, which went through many editions and inﬂuenced the general
interpretation of Kant until well into our own century.”45 And, of course, the lack
of any ﬁrm distinction between Kantianism and Hegelianism is characteristic of
the British Idealists.
The increasingly academic discipline of philosophy required rehabilitation be-
cause it had undergone a profound identity crisis in the intellectual furor in the
years after the deaths of Hegel and Goethe.46 This crisis arose in part because, af-
ter Hegel, there sprung forth a confusing panoply of diﬀering systems whose very
existence posed yet another dilemma: “the increasing incongruity between the
constantly rising number of philosophical systems on oﬀer, on the one hand, and
the claim to scientiﬁc character and validity which each of these systems made for
itself, on the other.”47 Hence, there existed a dazzling multiplication of competing
systems while, simultaneously, the sciences were producing unparalleled results
in complete isolation from philosophy. Subsequently, a series of questions were
posed, from within and without the philosophical profession, concerning the exact
relation of philosophy and the sciences:
How could philosophy assure its own scientiﬁc character in relation
to the spectacular technical and material achievements of the special
sciences? More fundamentally, what was, in the end, genuinely “scien-
tiﬁc” about philosophical discourse? Was it subject matter? Method?
A rigorous adherence to internal rules of scientiﬁc logic? In an era of
post-Hegelian crisis, one asked: What was the principal relationship
of philosophy to science (as a model) and to the sciences (as speciﬁc
forms of research)?48
The favored response to these questions, not unconnected with the ﬁguration of
logic as basic epistemology, was the “concept of philosophy as the science.” This
idea, it has been asserted,
. . . became increasingly dominant from the nineteenth century to the
present. This took place, not on the basis of the inner wealth and orig-
inal impulses of the philosophizing, but rather — as in neo-Kantianism
— out of perplexity over the proper task of philosophy. It appears to
44[Schn¨adelbach, 1984, p. 106].
45[Schn¨adelbach, 1984, p. 105].
46The notion of “pervasive transformations in the entire bourgeois culture after the deaths of
Hegel and Goethe” can be, of course, attributed to a variety of factors, including “the industrial
revolution, the ascent of the natural sciences and medicine, and the entry of the working class
into the arena of world history” [Pester, 1991, p. 239], just to name the most obvious.
47[Pester, 1991, p. 93].
48[Bambach, 1995, p. 23].

624
David Sullivan
have been deprived of this perplexity because the sciences have occu-
pied all ﬁelds of reality. Thus, nothing was left for philosophy except
to become the science of these sciences, a task taken up with increasing
conﬁdence, since it seemed to have the support of Kant, Descartes, and
even Plato.49
Of course, the crisis of philosophy did not occur in a vacuum: it stood out against
parallel developments in the sciences and in the productive capacity of society as
a whole. For after “a period of relative cultural uniformity spanning the decades
between 1770 and 1830” there came “the beginning of the age of science, of histor-
ical culture, of realism and ‘disillusionment’ . . . [that heralded] the beginning of
the crisis of European humanist civilization.”50 In this way, ’crisis’ itself came to
be identiﬁed with the very process of the movement from the post-Enlightenment
to Modernism and, thence, of Modernism itself.
In a diﬀerent way, some intellectual historians prefer to emphasize a correlative
“resurrection of philosophy” in the years after 1870.51 Of course, such labeling
does nothing to explain the underlying causes of these shifts (this discussion will
have to take place elsewhere). The point at hand is simply the widespread acknowl-
edgement that it was “a historical fact that at this time a profound transformation
had taken place in academic philosophy.”52 For our purposes, we need record that
it was the ﬁrst cohort of the third generation that were the “ﬁrst beneﬁciaries”
of the resurrection of philosophy.53 Numerous opportunities arose in the German
context because of a hiring crisis that demanded the ﬁlling of numerous vacancies
left open during the 1850s and also because of the “very rapid extension of the new
universities undertaken by the new German Reich,” including the establishment
of a new German university at Strasbourg.54
The “boom in academic positions of the 1870s” is evidenced in the statistic that
“between 1860 and 1880 the number of teachers in the philosophical faculties of
Germany almost doubled.”55 It was also exhibited in the changed behavior of the
younger academics
When, after securing his doctorate in 1871, Friedrich Paulsen rejected
his teacher Trendelenburg’s suggestion that he should consider taking
the senior teachers’ examination he was not only acting quite diﬀerently
from the way in which the preceding generation of those who had
studied in the 1850s and early 1860s had acted: though an impecunious
son of a peasant he could immediately afterwards venture to enter on
an academic career. As the decline in the number of Privatdozenten
49[Heidegger, 1988, p. 10]. This, perforce, cuts both ways: (1) philosophy as the supervisory
science; and (2) philosophy as the discipline freed from the constraints of any particular method.
50[Schn¨adelbach, 1984, p. 3].
51See [K¨ohnke, 1991, pp. 198ﬀ].
52[K¨ohnke, 1991, p. 198].
53[K¨ohnke, 1991, p. 201].
54[K¨ohnke, 1991, p. 202].
55[K¨ohnke, 1991, p. 203].

The Idealists
625
after 1870 shows, in the entire history of the German university there
has probably never been a time when conditions were for favourable
for achieving at least an assistant professorship so soon after receiving
a doctorate and license to lecture as they were in the ﬁrst years of the
new Reich.56
In the British context, the socio-economic situation was importantly diﬀerent.
Furthermore, the aforementioned questions about philosophy and science were
further complicated as a consequence of their being embedded within larger issues
of university reform — issues that themselves were further tinged by the politics
of the varying Anglican church parties (and, in particular, because of the rising
ascendance of the Broad Church party within certain university circles). In oppo-
sition to the pedagogical approach of the High Church party, two entirely diﬀerent
attitudes (embodied by Jowett and Pattison, repectively) began to emerge; these
new trends were clear by 1865, when Jowett observed that, at present
. . . there is a great change in education at the Universities, especially
at Oxford. When I was an undergraduate we were fed upon Bishop
Butler and Aristotle’s Ethics, and almost all teaching leaned to the
support of the doctrines of authority.
Now there are new subjects,
Modern History and Physical Science, and more important than these,
perhaps, is the real study of metaphysics in the Literae Humaniores
school — every man for the last ten years who goes in for honours has
read Bacon, and probably Locke, Mill’s Logic, Plato, Aristotle, and the
history of ancient philosophy. See how impossible this makes a return
to the old doctrines of authority.57
A corresponding shift in attitude amongst the students is found in the petition
presented to Green by his students, proposing his leadership of an “essay society.”
Signed by seven undergraduates (including both A. C. and F. H. Bradley), the
petition from 1872 began:
What some people feel the need of now in Oxford: (1) belief in prin-
ciples, instead of the present eclecticism; (2) earnest eﬀort to bring
speculation into relation with modern life instead of making it an in-
tellectual luxury, and to deal with various branches of science, physical,
social, political, metaphysical, theological, aesthetic, as part of a whole
instead of in abstract separation; (3) co-operation instead of the present
suspicious isolation; (4) fearlessness in expression of opinions amongst
men who really have opinions, instead of the present deadly reserve.58
The earnest tone of the petition is itself an indication of a number of things. But
clearest among its explicitly elaborated sentiments in the view that philosophy
56[K¨ohnke, 1991, p. 204].
57Cited in [Richter, 1964, p. 143]. For more information, see [den Otter, 1996, pp. 36-44].
58Known as MS 5 June 1872, cited in [Richter, 1964, p. 159].

626
David Sullivan
needs to be pursued both freely, soberly, and in a way which betokens professional
competence. Of course, in Green himself one encounters the ﬁrst modern exem-
plars of the professional (and professorial) philosopher: indeed, it is sometimes said
that Green was “certainly the ﬁrst Fellow of his College and possibly the ﬁrst of his
University to conceive of himself as a professional philosopher.”59 Now whatever
view Green actually held of himself, one critical fact remains: Green, unlike prior
academics, did not take orders. Thus, we come face to face with another structural
shift in the English universities away from the clerical and tutorial towards the
secular and professorial.60
Yet it is precisely in this context that the turn to Hegel by English academics
appeared to be wildly out of step, so to speak, with the present-day movements
and the directions of the times. This seemed so even to some contemporary ob-
servers. James, for example, worried aloud, the pages of Mind, in 1882, suggesting
that the revival (and further spread) of “Hegelism” was contraindicated by its
contemporaneous demise on German soil. If this were indeed the case, then the
British Idealists had done nothing but dig their own (historical) grave. But the
focus for the Idealists, I would suggest, was on Kant and Hegel as logical theorists
of the ﬁrst order: it was their transcendental approach that aﬀorded philosophers
the possibility of a rigorous methodology for their discipline, as sharpened and
strengthened in the “new logic” debate of the post-Hegel period.
Some have postulated that this ‘mis-step’ was made possible because of the
insularity of British thought, which remained “largely oblivious to the sustained
critique of his thought that had taken place in Germany (since Hegel’s death)”.
Only because of this myopia had “they found it possible to resurrect a form of
. . .
Hegelianism at just the time when this critique had made such a position
‘defunct’ on the Continent.”61 That such a commonplace will not stand, however,
is documented in both the lives and the writings of the earliest idealists. The
relevant parties were fully cognizant of the ins and outs of the Hegel debate in
the decades preceding them. Many of them made academic trips to the German
universities. Some Idealists provide abundant citations or reviews of contemporary
literature.62 And, ﬁnally, there are the translation projects, such as that of Lotze,
started by Green and ﬁnished by Bosanquet. Such factors should readily establish
that the British Idealists were not unawares of the contemporaneous Continental
debates.
Furthermore, as discussed in the next section, the British Idealists’ view of
Hegel was much more complex (and interesting) than the merely cartoon version
of Hegel as an apriorist bent upon oﬀering superﬂuous explanations of some reality
59[Richter, 1964, p. 140].
60Likewise, a complete historical accounting would have to take note of the contemporaneous
emergence of professional journals such as Mind (1876) in Britain — and, on the continent of the
Vierteljahrsschrift f¨ur wissenschaftliche Philosophie (1877) — that stand as another signpost of
important changes underway.
61[Stern, 1994, pp. 297-98].
62For instance, Caird reviewed Rosenkranz, Tredelenburg, Kuno Fischer, Emil Arnoldt and J.
B. Meyer in the years 1870-71.

The Idealists
627
and blithely ignoring other aspects of that same reality whenever it suited him.
Stern, in his article “British Hegelianism: A Non-Metaphysical View?” (1994),
takes pride of place as the ﬁrst to voice this possible approach.
But although
Stern is correct in emphasizing the positive eﬀects of the more traditional sources
of Hegel criticism (e.g., Schelling, Feuerbach, et al.), it is important to give at
least equal weight to the literature directly centering on the debates about the
new logic and about the methodology of philosophy (e.g., Trendelenburg, Lotze,
the Herbartians, etc.) as seminal sources for re-interpretation.63
Furthermore, in England, the earliest expositor of Hegel’s Logic, the second
generation’s J. H. Stirling (1820–1909) and his curious volume, The Secret of Hegel
(1st edition: 1865), may well be the inspiration of this new, non-metaphysical
orientation. For Stirling, Hegel’s Begriﬀe had their origins in Kant’s categories,
albeit now freed from the Kantian implication of transcendental subjectivity:
Stirling argued that Hegel’s development of Kant centers around the
notion, or Begriﬀ, and is an attempt to go beyond Kant by showing
that the categories of the understanding are not merely abstract uni-
versals awaiting content, but categories which are “reciprocated” or
“externalized” in nature . . . For Kant the categories are abstract uni-
versals, or pure concepts, which require the act of judgment in order to
subsume particulars under them. In Hegel, however, the categories are
neither abstract nor completely concrete, but are moments in the ac-
tivity of speculative reason whereby abstract understanding progresses
to concrete knowledge.64
Consequently, the type of thought that utilizes these entities outstrips the merely
theoretical understanding, one which is incapable of unifying its world. By con-
trast, philosophical inquiry demands the categories for its rightful development:
True philosophical thought, Hegel argued involves the employment of
speculative reason and is, according to Sterling, concrete because the
Begriﬀ, or notion, is the universal which particularizes itself. Or, to
put it another way, the Begriﬀis the active process by which thought
determines itself and gives itself content. By “concrete” Hegel means
thinking which deals only with universal types and is not restricted
to partial, dependent, or externally determined objects, or, indeed,
to anything sensuous. “The task before us,” Hegel wrote, “consists
not so much in getting the individual clear of the state of sensuous
63Bradley in 1907 and again in 1920 implicated this psycho-epistemo-logical ferment: “So far
as I remember, such writers as Bain & Lotze & again the Herbartians, such as Volkmann & again
Waitz (who is more or less Herbartian), helped me the most. The Hegelian psychology on desire
& will is also far from negligible & I think I learnt a good deal from that, especially as I came to
that before Lotze & the Herbartians” (BCW, V, p. 60) and “Certainly as to my psychological
views I owe the most to Hegel, and, next to Herbart, or rather to his followers Waitz, Drobisch
and Volkmann. I am however indebted to a considerable extent to Lotze” (BCW, V, p. 244).
64[Stormer, 1979, pp. 49-50].

628
David Sullivan
immediacy” as it is in “actualizing the universal and giving it spiritual
vitality, by the process of breaking down and superseding ﬁxed and
determinate thoughts” (Phenomenology, Baillie, trans., 94).65
So perhaps it was this sort of non-metaphysical viewpoint that allowed the
British Idealists to see and to characterize Hegel as the heir to and clearest expos-
itor of the Kantian legacy (which is way, among other things, they often spoke the
two names in the same breath): Hegel was simply the best and most up-to-date
version of the Kantian philosophy. Furthermore, as the Idealists turned primarily
to Hegel’s logic, for the historical reasons elaborated above, Hegelian philosophy,
for them, was not in the main religion, phenomenology, art, ethics but logic. Fi-
nally, some British Idealists were quite explicit that Hegel had “to be done over
again” and that parts of his theory were utterly dispensable — viz. the dialectic
(cf. EPC: 63).
To see this, we must next turn to the actual words of these Idealists themselves.
Consequently, in what follows, substantial quotation from the authors is required
so that they may speak in their own voice, given that these voices are not oft
heard or recognized (and the volumes from which these are taken rarely consulted
or made available). Only three idealists — prominent in the nineteenth century —
will be investigated and then only portions of their doctrines (of a logical nature)
will be discussed. An entire survey of their philosophies is not possible, nor even
an entire survey of their logical doctrines. Instead, an intensive deliberation of a
small subset of their views will, hopefully, prove to be more revealing. We will see
ﬁrst that the debate generated by the logic question and the pressures resulting
from the rehabilitation of philosophy, resulted in a Hegel conceived, by the British
Idealists, less as an arch-metaphysician and more as a comrade-in-arms of the
various thinkers critical to the gestation of the neo-Kantian paradigm.66
2
CASE STUDIES OF INDIVIDUAL IDEALISTS
2.1
The ‘non-metaphysical interpretation’ of Hegel
“. . . the great problem as to the relation of the
human to the divine . . . is the greatest
theme of modern philosophy.”67
While diﬃcult to assay now, the nineteenth century was a century obsessed with
religion and, in particular, with the relation of religion to philosophy and to science.
And although the basic circumstances characteristic of the nineteenth century
involved a continuation of the project initiated by the rise of modern science —
the demythologization of the human and natural world — the British Idealists
were, in the main, optimistic that, by means of the insights of German Idealism,
65[Stormer, 1979, pp. 44-45].
66For more on the neo-Kantian paradigm, see [Sullivan, 2002].
67ETGP II: 360.

The Idealists
629
“a way through the modern principles of subjective freedom . . . to a reconstruction
of the intellectual and moral order on which man’s life had been based in the past”
(H: 3) was possible. For if it were not, on the view of the Broad Church party,
the fruits of radical individualism could be nothing less than the inevitable rebirth
of either irrationalism or authoritarianism; for, as Edward Caird remarked, it is
precisely
. . . those men who have most deeply been imbued by the modern spirit
of subjectivity, which knows no authority but itself and opposes its own
inner light to all external teachings of experience, have not infrequently
been driven in the end to save themselves from the waywardness and
vacuity of mysticism by subjecting themselves to the outward rule of
an authoritative Church (H: 208).
The Idealists, as theological liberals, hoped instead that “emancipation from the
weight of the past,” rather than sweeping away everything of value, would only
more clearly reveal “the permanent basis of human faith and hope, the eternal
rock on which all human beliefs and institutions are built” (H: 1). Naturally, the
earlier attitude, from the childhood of man (myth and poetry), is forever gone:
the “ﬁrst immediate awe and reverence . . . has passed away from the world” (H:
112). But the “prosaic world” of “ﬁnite science” can be overcome by “neither
poetry nor religion” but only, instead, by the oﬃces of philosophical criticism, “by
awakening science to a new consciousness of its presuppositions” (H: 114-115).
As the earlier quote makes clear, a not-so-subterranean enemy in these polemics
is the High Church party, in general, and those who subsequently converted to
Catholicism (Newman et al.), in particular. Bosanquet, for example, accuses sub-
jective psychologism itself of giving rise to “the doctrine of the ‘Grammar of As-
sent’, which makes assent or aﬃrmation both absolute and irrational” (KR: 116).
Caird acerbically adds that Newman’s work “asserts the right — in the general
impossibility of ﬁnding suﬃcient evidence for any kind of religious truth — to treat
insuﬃcient evidence as if it were suﬃcient” (H: 17). This or any other attempt to
restore faith through a “sacriﬁce of reason,” Caird insists, will end only in perfect
“slavery” (H: 209). We must move instead through “negation” to “reaﬃrmation,”
from mere “emancipation from the weight of the past” to “the permanent basis of
human faith and hope” (H: 1). But in all events, we must acknowledge that the
“cure for the diseases of rationalism and skepticism” cannot be found in “implicit
faith” (H: 209).
For Caird, because the nineteenth century must be conceived as “a movement
through negation to reaﬃrmation, through destruction to reconstruction,” the
signiﬁcance of Hegel’s approach is sketched out along similar lines; Passmore com-
ments that
. . . his [Hegel’s] philosophical method, the dialectic, is, as Caird sees
it, a method of reconciliation. For him there are ‘no antagonisms which
cannot be reconciled’ — there must always be a higher unity within
which antagonistic tendencies will each ﬁnd a place. Thus if religion

630
David Sullivan
and science appear to be irreconcilably opposed, this can only be an
appearance; in reality they must form part of a higher unity.68
This helps make the general purport of such philosophical investigations clear; for
Caird speciﬁed, in his own words, that “the task of philosophy is to gain, or rather
to regain, such a view of things as shall reconcile us to the world and to ourselves.
The need for philosophy arises out of the broken harmony of . . . a spiritual life, in
which the diﬀerent elements or factors seen to be set in irreconcilable opposition
to each other . . . ” (ELP: 191).
Now while the topic of religious belief provides a readily apparent subtext, the
larger story of Caird’s Hegel includes placing him within the wider context of just
what Kant accomplished and, more importantly, how Kant’s work was successfully
corrected by the work of the post-Kantian idealists. (Ironically, the Kant that
emerges is much closer to that of the continental neo-Kantians than anything like
the historical Kant.)
As Caird neatly summarized it, the main advance made
possible by Kant can be glossed as follows: “. . . neither time nor space nor the
facts of experience conditioned by them exist for us, except as elements of an
experience which is organised according to the categories. This is the essential
truth which Kant had to express” (ELP: 405, my emphases). The central motif
of Kantianism is that there can be no experience without the priori existence of
that which lies outside of experience, the pure concepts of the understanding or
the categories.
Nevertheless, there are also several diﬃculties planted amongst the constructive
contributions of Kant’s philosophy and, indeed, on one construal, his key advance
also comprises his central defect; for about the Kantian philosophy, it could be
said that:
Its main merit is, that it shows that experience rests on something
which, in the ordinary sense, is beyond experience; or, what is the
same things in another point of view, that it brings out the relativity
of being to thought . . .
in so far as it shows that reality as known
is phenomenal . . .
Its weakness lies in this, that it does not carry
the demonstration to its legitimate result; it still retains the idea of a
“thing in itself” (H: 121).
Experience depends upon the existence of cognitive elements that are not found
in experience. But in retaining the uncognizable noumenon, such thinking em-
bodies, however, “an absolutely irreconcilable dualism” that cannot overleap the
structural divides between “[s]ense and understanding, necessity and freedom, the
phenomenal and the real self, nature and spirit, knowledge and faith” (H: 121-
122). Into this very breach steps Hegel. Hegel’s purposes, thereby, is nothing less
than “to show that the kingdoms of nature and spirit are one, in spite of all their
antagonisms . . . that this antagonism itself is a manifestation of their unity” (H:
68Passmore, 1966, p. 53.

The Idealists
631
128). But to attain this reconciliation involved, perforce, breaking “with all the
ideas of logical method that had hitherto ruled the school” (H: 129).
The ﬁrst step in this break with logical tradition is a crucial one: it was the
realization that thought itself had, from the time of Aristotle onwards, been pigeon-
holed as “always distinction, determination, the marking oﬀof one thing from
another” (H: 134). But thought is not just division for it also unites: “thought is
not only distinction, it is at the same time relation. If it marks oﬀone thing from
another, it, at the same time, connects one thing with another” (H: 134-35). Thus
Caird emphasizes the following epistemo-logical principle:
If, therefore, we say that everything — every intelligible object or
thought as such — must be diﬀerentiated from all others, yet we must
equally say that no object or thought can be absolutely diﬀerentiated;
in other words, diﬀerentiated so as to exclude any identity or unity
which transcends the diﬀerence. An absolute diﬀerence is something
which cannot exist within the intelligible world . . . (H: 135).
Hence, co-requisite with the “reform of logic” was “a new conception of knowledge”
(H: 148), for from the “old analytic logic” could issue only “such a theory of knowl-
edge [that] is, as it were broken in pieces against the idea of self-consciousness,
in which the true unity . . .
is seen to be essentially complex or concrete” (H:
148-149). The true understanding of self-consciousness presupposes and contains
“all the categories by which science and philosophy attempt to make the world
intelligible” (H: 150). And to exhibit these truths is the function of logic in Hegel’s
oeuvre.
As previously noted, while our Hegel is, most commonly, the Hegel of the Phe-
nomenology, the Hegel of the British Idealists is clearly the Hegel of the greater
(and lesser) Logic. And what Hegel’s singular contribution to logic was, according
to British Idealism, is a major component of Caird’s 1883 monograph. After some
long biographical re-countings, and a sketchy history of Kant and post-Kantian
thought, Caird takes pains to emphasize that the logical universal is not empty
and abstract — “[u]niversality is readily confused with emptiness” (H: 155; cf. H:
151-157). This is followed by a pr´ecis of the greater Logic appears on pp. 164-166,
as a forward to the extended discussion, which develops that argument, on pp.
167-183.
On Caird’s reading, the Logic possesses a triadic structure, one that ascends
via each of its three main sections. The ﬁrst division — that concerns “categories
like Being, Quality, Quantity” (H: 164) — is the level of ordinary or “common
sense” (or, perhaps, of unreﬂective, passive observation): here, reality is conceived
of being composed of individual things “standing each by itself, determined in
quality and quantity, but as having no necessary relations to each other” (H: 165).
The second division – which involves categories such as “Force . . . Substance . . .
and Eﬀect” — re-conceptualizes the world “as an endless aggregate of essentially
related and transitory existences, each of which exists only as it determines and is
determined by the others, according to universal laws” and moves us, subsequently,

632
David Sullivan
to the stage of scientiﬁc or reﬂective thought. But this too must be ultimately
superseded in a third standpoint, one that truly deserves the name “philosophical
thinking”; for it alone is dominated by certain special categories “such as those
of ﬁnal cause and organic unity” (H: 165). The division portrayed seems, hence,
to mirror that between common sense, scientiﬁc understanding, and speculative
reason.
In the ﬁnal, philosophical stage, the domain of multiplicitous objects is now
painted as one where “each and all of which exist only in so far as they exist for
intelligence, and so far as intelligence is revealed or realised in them” (Ibid.). For
Caird, from the “simplest and most unsophisticated consciousness of things” we
are lead, by way of “the scientiﬁc or reﬂective consciousness,” to “the categories
of Ideal Unity” (H: 166). Accordingly we must acknowledge that
Science is the truth of common-sense . . . and philosophy is the truth
of science . . . because it is science and something more. This some-
thing more . . . is not merely something externally added to what went
before; it is a vital growth from it, — a transformation which takes
place in it, by reason of latent forces that are already present. In this
way self-consciousness — the last category or point of view — is seen
to sum up and interpret all that went before (H: 166)
Of greatest interest in this Cairdian reading is both the peculiar centrality of the
Logic and, therein, the special insistence upon the notion of category. Kant, on
this view, had stopped short of the highest categories, resting instead with “the
categories of reﬂection — categories like causality and reciprocity — . . . [as] the
last scientiﬁc determination of nature” (H: 190). Kant had also left them subjec-
tivized by merely establishing “that the categories are only forms of expression for
the unity of self-consciousness in relation to the world of objects” (H: 184). But
these categories must be brought to truth in the highest categories in a way that
“involves a complete inversion of . . . [the scientiﬁc] way of thinking” (H: 192); we
come, thereby, to contemplate necessarily
. . . the world as an organism in which even what is termed by distinc-
tion the inorganic is a vital part or organ. The partial prevalence of
this mode of thought is shown by the tendency . . . to regard human
society as an organism, — a whole in which there is some kind of unity
or self which is present in every part, — and not as a mere collection
of units externally related to each other (H: 192).
This holistic and teleological conception is both reinforced and embodied in the
notion of the highest category, also describable as “the last category,” the one that
. . . contains and implies all the other categories; and, in another way,
it has been shown to be implied in each and all of them. For what
the whole ‘Logic’ has proved is, that if we take the categories seriously,
abstracting from all subjective associations, and ﬁxing our attention on

The Idealists
633
their objective dialectic, — or, in other words, if we leave the categories
to deﬁne themselves by the necessary movement of thought through
which they carry us, — they lead us in the end to this idea of self-
consciousness as their ultimate meaning or truth (H: 183).
The ﬁnal category is, thus, ‘self-consciousness’. But now if we have rejected Kant’s
deduction, by what means are the categories to be procured so that this path is
possible? According to Caird, Hegel insisted that this question too demanded an
holistic (and an historical) approach:
. . . the categories must be considered in themselves and in their rela-
tion to each other, — rather than in relation to the objects to which
they are applied or in which they are realised . . . Hegel, in short, is, in
his ‘Logic,’ simply seeking to prove that these diﬀerent categories are
not a collection of isolated ideas, which we ﬁnd in our minds and of
which we apply now one, now another, as we might try one after an-
other of a bunch of keys upon a number of isolated locks; he is seeking
to prove that the categories are not instruments which the mind uses,
but elements in a whole, or the stages in a complex process, which in
its unity the mind is (H: 157).
In this manner, Caird proposes to confute the spectre of Hegel as the apriorist
metaphysician par excellence: viz., as a thinker involved in nothing other than
“an a priori construction of the world” (H: 195), where his Logic was supremely
“the groundwork . . .
for an attempt to construct nature a priori, and without
reference to facts and experience” (H: 157). This bogey is defeated, however, once
we acknowledge the status of the categories as “the forms of thought implied in
all existence,” whose relations, one to the other, are of “an imminent relativity or
necessary connection with them, so that the other categories spring out of it the
moment we attempt to conﬁne it to itself” (H: 161).69
If these factors are not kept squarely in mind, it will be impossible to block
the alternative approach that seeks to comprehend “what a thing is, . . . in itself,
apart from all relation to other things or the mind” (H: 160). Such a seemingly
common-sense approach, when “logically worked out to its consequences”
. . . leads directly to the conclusion that the reality of things, — that
which things are in themselves, — is unknown and unknowable. For
all existence is but the manifestation, and all knowledge but the appre-
hension, of relations; and the attempt to strip a thing of its relations
must therefore end in reducing it to a caput mortuum of abstraction of
which nothing can be said (H: 160-61, my emphases).
The attempt to arrive at “bare particulars,” stripped of all relations, leads to a
philosophical impasse, an aporia that demands, ultimately, Hegel’s vision that
69Although he is gradually forced to admit that in many Hegelian utterances we ﬁnd expressions
that “seem to be breaking through the very limits of language” (H: 181).

634
David Sullivan
. . . there is not merely formal process of intelligence — no process of
intelligence which is not also a determination of its object by categories;
– and the advance from less to more perfect knowledge is a continual
transition from one category to another by which that determination
is changed, and made more complete and accurate. While, therefore,
knowledge is . . . a process in which the mind is continually bringing
the object more and more within the net of its categories, and changing
its aspect, till all its strangeness has disappeared, and it has been made
one with the thought that apprehends it. Thus the investigation of the
object turns out to be at the same time the evolution of the mind in
relation to it; and the highest category by which it is determined is at
the same time the discovery of its essential relativity to the mind for
which it is, and the recognition that in thus dealing with an object, the
mind is really dealing with itself — or, in other words, with something
that forms an essential element in its consciousness of self (H: 186-87).
The development of mind or intelligence is coeval with the construction of our
picture of external reality, for Hegel. But a few of the details of that process, in
its guise of “triadic” structure ﬁrst mentioned above, require further elaboration.
In the beginning, it seems, cognizers take objects as they are, “as they lie before
us in perception” (H: 167). This, unreﬂective, common sense, however, by access
to the Eleatic paradoxes, soon gives rise to a skepticism that casts doubt upon our
heretofore unperturbed sense of reality. This is where the “scientiﬁc or reﬂective
consciousness” enters the picture, beginning, as it were, “with the negation of
the immediate reality of ﬁnite things,” inspired to uncover “some deeper ground
or principle” (H: 168). But within this schema, such “explanation can never be
complete” because
[t]he categories used are such as substance and accident, force and
expression, inner and outer being, cause and eﬀect. In each of these
cases we have an essential relation of two terms of such a kind that,
though the explanation of the second term is always sought in the ﬁrst,
yet the ﬁrst term has no signiﬁcance except in relation to the second . . .
Thus we explain the accidents by referring them to the substance; but
the substance has no meaning apart from the accidents (H: 171-72).
This epistemological circle, which results from “unresolved dualism . . . left by the
application of the scientiﬁc categories,” reveals “the necessity of a reinterpretation
of the results of science by other higher categories” — and it is this very task that
“constitutes the peculiar work of philosophy” (H: 173) according to Hegel’s Logic.
Employing an organic example, Caird speculates aloud that:
The life of the body is not a principle that dominates over dead mem-
bers, and uses them as instruments to realise itself; it is in all the
members, so that each of them in turn may be regarded as means and

The Idealists
635
end to the others. There is, no doubt, a unity of the whole that sub-
ordinates all the parts, but it only subordinates them, so to speak, by
surrendering or imparting itself to them, and giving to them a certain
independent life, — a life which, though embraced in a wider circle, is
still centered in itself (H: 178-79).
Thus we may now underwrite our critical, aforementioned principle: “The reality
is the universal, which goes out of itself, particularises itself, opposes itself to
itself, that it may reach the deepest and most comprehensive unity with itself”
(H: 180-81). The universal as concretized in reality is simply an alternative way
of expressing the truth that “the world is an organic unity” (H: 181). It is the
concept of the universal that condenses together what we have identiﬁed as the
holistic and the historical.
But although this approach requires a view of “the world is an organic unity,”
this is not the same as claiming that the world ought “to be interpreted on the
analogy of the living body, or of a plant or animal” (H: 181). Rather, “the con-
ception of an ideal or self-determining principle, with which we begin this third
stage of the Logic . . .
will be seen to ﬁnd its further ﬁnal form and expression
only in self-consciousness” (H: 181-82). Self-consciousness is hence equivalent to
“the last category, [that] contains and implies all the other categories” (H: 183).
The conclusion?
. . . it follows that the objective world is and can be nothing but the
manifestation of intelligence, or the means whereby it attains the fullest
realisation of itself. Thus it is proved that there is a spiritual principle
of unity, — a principle of unity which is renewed in every conscious
self, — underlying all the antagonisms of the world, even its apparent
antagonism to spirit itself (H: 185).
Thus it should be clear now that there is an important aﬃnity here with the
contemporary non-metaphysical interpretation, or the view that “. . . reads Hegel’s
philosophy as a non-metaphysical theory of categories.”70 For the doctrine of Hegel
as a “category theorist” places him as the continuator of Kant’s transcendental
project (but without the background realist frame of reference) and philosophy is,
thereby, revealed to be nothing less than “reason’s own hermeneutic.” In studying
the world we discover ourselves and vice versa. Or, as Caird himself styled it, “. . .
the perfect revelation of what the object is, is also the return of intelligence to
itself, or rather the discovery that in all its travels, it has never really gone beyond
itself” (H: 187).
2.2
The logic of the British Idealists: Green on relations
“ . . . in the open scroll of the world, of the world,
70Bole, 1994, p. 103. The may be other important impulses as well. Seth’s opening essay in
the Essays on Philosophical Criticism is entitled “Philosophy as Criticism of Categories” (EPC:
8-40).

636
David Sullivan
however, as written within and without by a
self-conscious and self-determining spirit.”71
No discussion of idealism in Britain could ignore T. H. Green.72
But, as with
Caird, it is also the case that Green produced no “logic,” although lectures on the
subject appeared in his posthumous, collected works (GCW II: 157-306). These
were, in fact, notes of lectures delivered at Balliol in 1874-75 and divide into two
sections: ﬁrst, a consideration of a formal logician (Mansel) and, then, of “another”
view (as exempliﬁed by Mill). One might imagine that, given Green’s abhorrence
for empiricism, he sides squarely with the former. But this is not the case: in
opposition to the formal logic of Hamilton and Mansel, Green stands with what he
conceives to be the majority view of “Mill, Kuno Fischer, Sigwart, Ueberweg” that
we have already encountered: “logic is the science of the method of knowledge”
(GCW II: 158). On this point, all modern logicians, including Green, are united
although “their views of what the method of knowledge is vary according to the
diﬀerence in their notions of what the object of knowledge is” (Ibid.).73 Yet, in
all events, by logic we explicitly do not mean merely an empty account of “those
‘forms of thought’ in conforming to which we think correctly” (GCW II: 160).
Instead of attacking Mill directly, Green attempted to parry the distortions in-
evitably caused by Mill’s epistemological foundation: accordingly, he sometimes
discredited Mill only when he had fallen into certain misconceptions imposed by
empiricism — primarily, abstractionism. As an example, in Green’s discussion of
the “categories” in Mill (GCW II: 207ﬀ), Green states that the categories are,
in truth, “ . . .
the relations or formal conceptions (which comes to the same,
since conception constitutes relation), without which there would be no knowl-
edge and no objective world to be known. They are not the end but the beginning
of knowledge . . . ” (GCW II: 207). Their very existence contrasts with the illu-
sory impression according with “the false notion that the essential of thought is
abstraction”: on this account, “they are things” and “are really apart from the
objects of ordinary knowledge and experience, and are known by abstraction from
these” (GCW II: 207). But on the wrong-headed approach, the categories are
merely a higher-level abstraction: the “summa genera’ of things” (GCW II: 207).
But, unlike Caird, rather than emphasize categories (or even concepts), Green’s
preferred term of art is ‘relation.’74 Accordingly, for Green, the standard proposi-
tion is generally describable as one that ”expresses . . . ‘the thought of an object
under relations’” (GCW II: 216). His argument in nuce is that it is impossible to
71GCW, III: 119.
72Despite this fact, Green is surely among the most maligned of the idealist thinkers: it is
often said that his arguments are faulty or fail to establish what he wants them to establish. C.
D. Broad famously labeled him “thoroughly second rate.”
73The adoption of Mill on logic by the British Idealists is also made evident in some opening
remarks of Bosanquet: “the reform of Logic in this country dates from the work of Stuart Mill,
whose genius placed him, in spite of all philosophical short-comings, on the right side as against
the degenerate representatives of Aristotle” (LMK, I, p. vii).
74Most likely to reinforce its active (and verbal) connection to Kant’s synthetic unity of ap-
perception: see PE: 35 and also [Hylton, 1990, p. 32].

The Idealists
637
conceive of the object without multitudinous relations and just as impossible to
think of reality as a system of relations without real objects as the given relata:
“We cannot reduce the world of experience to a web of relations in which nothing
is related” (PE: 45). For, ultimately, “It will be through it [the understanding
or our capacity for relating things] that there is for us an objective world” (PE:
17).75
Furthermore, the terminology of ‘relations’ names not merely perceived diﬀer-
ences in sensation but rather always involve a conscious awareness of the self and
of the various objects of that self’s thought. A consciousness devoid of thought
and composed instead of ‘mere feeling’ would not “present its feelings to itself
as permanent felt objects, — does not retain its feelings as objects still there for
thought when they have ceased to be felt, and for the same reason is not conscious
of a relation of unlikeness as a relation” (GCW II: 217n). Mere diﬀerences in
sensation are not suﬃcient for the apprehension of relations or of the objects of
those relations: these are products of thought that presuppose some permanence
and coherence in the stream of our perceptions such that they might be considered
experience, in the Kantian sense.
Green initiates his most detailed discussion of relations with the claim that if
we have objective knowledge of even the simplest natural phenomena, then we
must admit that our cognitions of these simple, material objects “consist in, or
are determined by, relations between the objects of that connected consciousness
which we call experience” (PE: 13):
If we take any deﬁnition of matter, any account of its ‘necessary qual-
ities,’ and abstract from it all that consists in a statement of relations
between facts in the way of feeling, or between objects that we present
to ourselves as sources of feeling, we shall ﬁnd that there is nothing left.
Motion, in like manner, has no meaning except such as is derived from
a synthesis of the diﬀerent positions successively held by one and the
same body; and we shall try in vain to render an account to ourselves
of position or succession, of a body or its identity, except as expressing
relations of what is contained in experience, through which alone that
content possesses a deﬁnite character and becomes a connected whole
(PE: 13-14).
To Green, concepts such as the ‘motion’ of a material object would be meaningless
without multiple, successive positions or places occupied by said object: thus
relations can always be said to subsist between the object and itself, between
the object and other objects, and between the object and the comprehending
consciousness. Call this feature of reality the ubiquity of relations.
Given the ubiquity of relations, the next question for Green becomes: “What
then is the source of these relations, as relations . . . of that which exists for con-
sciousness?” (PE: 14). This question may in turn, he insists, only be answered
75The failures of Kantian dualism, as Green sees it, follows, in large measure, the discussion
in the previous section by Caird. See also [Hylton, 1990, pp. 36ﬀ].

638
David Sullivan
“through analysis of the conditions which render this [very] experience possible”
(PE: 18). This does not, however, pose a psychological, a genetic or a historical
question (PE: 20ﬀ), nor does it admit either of any obvious naturalistic explana-
tion:
It seems necessary, then, to admit that experience, in the sense of a
consciousness of events as a related series — and in no other sense can
it help to account for the knowledge of an order of nature — cannot be
explained by any natural history, properly so called. It is not a product
of a series of events. It is not developed by a natural process out of
other forms of natural existence . . . Nature, with all that belongs to
it, is a process of change: change on a uniform method, no doubt, but
change still. All the relations under which we know it are relations in
the way of change or by which change is determined (PE: 22).
This very irreducibility of relations entails “that a form of consciousness, which
we cannot explain as of natural origin, is necessary to our conceiving an order
of nature, an objective world of fact from which illusion may be distinguished”
(Ibid.).
For while on a broadly construed “Kantian” view, reality is “already
determined by thought, and existing only in relation to thought” (PE: 38), without
further elaboration, such a view faces with a number of philosophical challenges.
“But,” Green contends, “the idealism which interprets facts as relations, and can
only understand relations as constituted by a single spiritual principle, is charged
with no such outrage on common-sense. On the contrary, its very basis is the
consciousness of objectivity” (PE: 39). All this is, of course, leading to Green’s
ultimate conclusion that “. . . nature in its reality . . . implies a principle that is
not natural” (PE: 56).
Now, to some extent, such arguments presuppose an earlier reductio, from the
critical introduction to the edition of Hume (cf.
GCW I, pp.
89ﬀ).
As with
Descartes, we start, in our thought experiment, from the basic case of our unim-
peded perception of simple material bodies and their phenomenal properties; but,
Green insists, the primary qualities, such as ‘place’ and ’position’, reveal too that
the “body is thus a complex of relations” although for the empiricist “all [are], ac-
cording to Locke’s doctrine of relation, inventions of the mind” (GCW I, p. 90).76
But thereby empiricism is rendered swiftly self-refuting, as the requirements of
empirical knowledge are either unreal or cannot be accounted for on empiricist
principles.77 But Green is insistent upon this point: “a consistent sensationalism
must be speechless” (GCW I: 36). An empiricist might object here, complaining
that “mere individuality, exclusive of all relation” is readily apparent in “[t]he
simple ‘this’ and ‘that’” (GCW I: 35), querying
. . .
surely it is possible to pick out things as real without bringing
in their relational context? At the very least can we not just point
76Hume’s more logical account only ramiﬁes the diﬃculties for empiricism (GCW I, pp. 189ﬀ).
77See [Brink, 2003; Hylton, 1990], for diﬀerent reconstructions.

The Idealists
639
them out using simple demonstratives, ‘this,’ ‘that,’ ‘here,’ and ‘now’?
Green thinks not. Even here, he argues, our attempt to locate a given
thing is implicitly relational; “if we say that it is the mere ‘this’ or ‘that’
— the simple ‘here’ and ‘now’ — the very ‘this’ in being mentioned or
judged of, becomes related to other things which we have called ‘this,’
and the ‘now’ to other ‘nows.’78
Or, more simply, even a ‘this’ must contrast with a ‘that’ and a ‘now’ with a ‘then.’
Hence, although relations are, as Locke feared, the work of the mind, “the work
of the mind is real” (PE: 27). The alternative is a form of empiricistic skepticism:
if a body is a complex of relations and relations are a work of the mind, then a
material body is only the work of the mind.
In arguing that experience itself depends upon relations, Green far outstrips
Kant’s more moderate idealism. We cannot inquire into the nature of the real (cf.
PE: 27-29). Instead, we may only acknowledge “that there is an unalterable order
of relations . . .
is the presupposition of all our enquiry into the real nature of
appearances; and such unalterableness implies their inclusion in one system” (PE:
29-30). Hence, on Green’s construal, “[t]he real thing, then, is individual because
universal: i.e. its individuality lies in its relation to all other things, which is a
one in all, the common element in all, a universal; it lies in this relation, this mere
diﬀerence from all other things, as particularised” (GCW II: 189): what is really
real — what lays claim to the greatest degree of reality — is hence neither an
‘abstract universal’ (GCW II: 188) nor a mere individual:
I have the conception of a ﬂower, and upon the occurrence of a sensa-
tion, which I interpret by means of this conception, I judge ‘there is a
real ﬂower’; but the ﬂower is really much more than the relations which
I had previously conceived plus the present relation to sense. But this
‘more’ still lies in relations which can only exist in a conceiving mind,
and which my mind is in the process of appropriating. The great mis-
take lies in regarding a conception as a ﬁxed quantity, a ‘bundle of
attributes.’ In truth a conception, as the thought of an object under
relations, is from its very nature in constant expansion (GCW II: 190).
To this Green adds that “. . . [t]he ordinary deﬁnition of an object is available only
for rhetorical purposes” (GCW II: 190), which is to imply that it is only available
as a mere act of arbitrary stipulation.
Such remarks must not be considered dispensable: for as the object and its
properties are in constant ﬂux, so to is the mind in the modes of apprehension.
What remains secure through all these acts of perception are relations: call this the
mystery of relations.79 And acknowledging this necessity, the mystery of relations,
will assist us in moving from our ordinary but false views (GCW III: 56-7) to the
78[Mander, 2001, p. 57]. The quotation is from Green (GCW I: 36) and the missing single
quotes have been restored.
79Mander introduces this manner of speaking [Mander, 2001, p. 59].

640
David Sullivan
true, namely that the very individual itself is “not merely individual” (GCW III:
70):
The individual has thus transformed itself into the universal in virtue of
its particularity or deﬁnite relations . . . But it is not merely individual
. . .
As known, it is in implicit relation to all things . . .
It is an
individual universalised through its particular relations or qualities . . .
It [the universal] must be that which is the negation of all particular
relations so as to be determined by the sum of them. In virtue of this
negative relation, as identical with itself in exclusion of all things, it
is individual. It is a universal individualised through its particularity
(GCW III: 70, my emphases).
There are a number of connected epistemological doctrines that characterize this
Hegelian view, that also connect it with a number of neo-Kantian (and hence
non-Kantian) positions. First and foremost, the denial of the noumenon or thing-
in-itself. Second, the lack of any real distinction between intuition and thought:
“the opposition between intuition and thought, as between presentative and rep-
resentative, is fallacious” (GCW II: 192). But this discussion is designed to swiftly
bring the main enemy into range: “the false doctrine of abstraction” (GCW II:
192).
Understood correctly, then, thought is (really) “a process from the more abstract
to the more concrete” (GCW II: 193). The false perspective is, by contrast, rooted
in the enlargement of a true distinction between mere sensation and thought proper
into an erroneous divergence “between the sensible thing (feeling as determined
by its conditions) and the work of thought” (GCW II: 192): “All thought must
be conscious” and in human knowers “the preliminary or ‘unreﬂective’ stage of
knowledge is indeﬁnitely abridged by language” (GCW II: 194). There can be
no such thing as an abstract universal — but only “a universal individualised
through its particularity” (GCW III: 70) — because, as we have already seen,
each individual may be universalised and each universal may be individualized.
Green’s Hegelian perspective is only reinforced in the acknowledgement that
“What Hegel had to teach was, not that thought is the prius of things, but that
thought is things and things are thought” (GCW III: 144-45).
On this basis,
we may embrace the conclusion that the real world is essentially a spiritual world,
which forms one inter-related whole because related throughout to a single subject.
Rather than rendering the world irreal, Greenian idealism emphasizes that
. . . the world, which alone we know or can know, consists in relations
to consciousness and in relations of those relations. Space, time, mat-
ter, motion, force, are not indeed modes of consciousness, but apart
from consciousness they would not be. We use words without meaning
when we talk of a time when as yet consciousness was not, of an endless
space without a mind, for time and space alike are abstractions from
relations between phenomena. They are creatures of reﬂection upon
related presentations to consciousness which can be related to each

The Idealists
641
other only in virtue of their equal relation to a single subject of the
presentation. Neither the relations of succession and externality, nor
the empty forms which we construct by abstraction and substantiation
of them, are possible except as resulting from the unity of a thinking
consciousness (GCW III: 228-29, my emphases).80
This last quotation reveals a number of things, not least of all just how far Green’s
account has moved from anything like orthodox Kantianism. But then what is the
source of this new emphasis on relations, such that the world itself may be said
to consist in them? Kant is not known for the doctrine that to be consists in
relations. Neither indeed is Hegel although the opening sections of the System of
Logic contains much relation talk and despite the fact that the Zusatz to section
135 of the Encyclopedia Logic does state that:
Essential correlation is the speciﬁc and completely universal phase
in which things appear.
Everything that exists stands in correla-
tion, and this correlation is the veritable nature of every existence
[Das wesentliche Verh¨altnis ist die bestimmte, ganz allgemeine Weise
des Erscheinens.
Alles, was existiert, steht im Verh¨altnis, und dies
Verh¨altnis ist das Wahrhafte jeder Existenz] (HEL: 191)
This seems to say only that relations merely name the mode of appearance for
beings. But Green’s claim is seemingly stronger and removed from any pretence
of phenomenalism: to exist is to stand in relations. And this means that the world
of objects consists in relations.
The source of the new emphasis on relations may very well be found elsewhere,
namely in the thinker who most developed this notion in the nineteenth century,
Lotze. Lotze famously attacks Kantian-Herbartian thesis that “being” is equiv-
alent to “position without relation” and asserts instead that being is relation:
“Real Being . . . can never be arrived at by this bare act of Setzung, but only by
the addition in thought of those relations, to be placed in which forms just the
prerogative which reality has over cognitability” (MP: 44). Lotze is indeed the
only nineteenth-century thinker who placed great (and novel) importance upon
relations and Lotze consistently espoused an idealism — not a realism — about
relations. This emphasis on relations is caught up in his polemic against Herbart’s
conception of the world as composed on self-subsistent elements called “Reals”:
the concept of a thing utterly outside of relations, subsisting on its own, is, Lotze
believes, philosophical nonsense — a bit of nonsense that is clearly not evidenced
by our ordinary experience. Hence, no terms without relations; but these relations
are, nevertheless, thought-things and not realities — for if they were real, with
things dependent upon them, then they, in turn, would depend, for their reality,
on some third thing, thus producing a vicious inﬁnite regress (MC, II: 620).
Some interpreters, following earlier readers, decline to attribute any such con-
nection, e.g.: “My own — tentative — view is essentially that of J. T. Merz.
80Although this uniﬁed, thinking consciousness is ultimately revealed, on Green’s account, to
be that of the absolute or God.

642
David Sullivan
Green owed no deep, formative inﬂuence to Lotze.”81 Merz himself hypothesizes
that Green’s thinking emerged in parallel but otherwise divergent tracks with
Lotze’s. But he oﬀers no evidence for this view and, furthermore, it ﬂies in the
face of Green’s keen interest in Lotze. As we know that Green himself had pro-
vided the translation of “[t]he whole of Book I (Ontology) and the chapter ‘Of
Time’ (Book II, chapter iii)” (Bosanquet’s introduction to the Metaphysics, MP:
v), Green must have had an intimate knowledge of precisely these portions. In-
deed, Green told Bosanquet directly: “The time that one spent on such a book as
that (the ‘Metaphysic’) would not be wasted as regards one’s own work” (Bosan-
quet’s introduction to the Logic, L: v). However, while it may remain a disputed
question — about the exact nature and extent of Lotze’s inﬂuence upon Green —
the possible connections are nevertheless unavoidable and striking.
Lotze was well-known for espousing, among other things, a strong idealism
about relations, including, most particularly, spatial relations: space was to be
identiﬁed with spatial relations. Yet in his version of spatial idealism, space is
objective but nonetheless utterly irreal. Two separate quotations from the Meta-
physics make this clear. First, Lotze insists we refrain from ascribing to space any
substantial existence separate from the objective nature of the spatial relations
in which things appear to us (MP: 246-47, § 108).82 Yet, despite this fact, Lotze
‘objectivity’ is not equivalent to ‘reality’ (or, better, ‘actuality’): hence space can
be objective without being materially actual (although perceptually eﬀective) and
is not, consequently, a mere ‘nothing’ (MP: 258, § 113).83 With regard to space,
Lotze suggests that any attempt to buttress its undeniable centrality for our cog-
nition, by lending to it a special metaphysical character, is attempt that is simply
doomed to failure. But nothing in this discussion can undermine the reality of
relations.
Nevertheless, although objective, relations are creations of mind; the relevant
statement from the Metaphysics reads:
. . . concerning the nature of all ‘relations’ [die Natur aller Beziehun-
gen] . . . they only exist either as ideas in a consciousness that imposes
them [als Vortellungen in einem beziehenden Bewusstsein], or as inner
states, within the real elements of existence [als innere Zust¨ande in
81[Thomas, 1987, p. 62].
82“. . . we are inclined to supply to space, which at ﬁrst we took for a mere tissue of relations
[nur ein Gewebe von Relationen schein], some substratum of properties, indeﬁnable of course,
but still such as to serve for a substantive support to these relations. We gain nothing by doing
so . . . Therefore we must abide by this; there is simply nothing behind that tissue of relations
[es ist gar Nichts hinter jenem Gewebe von Relationen] which at starting we represented to
ourselves as space . . . .”
83“Men will go on repeating the retort; that it is impossible to doubt the reality of space [die
Wirklichkeit des Raumes] . . . But are we denying this reality? . . . space would lose nothing of
its convincing reality [Wirklichkeit] for our perception if we admitted that it possesses it only
in our perception. We long ago rejected the careless exaggeration which attaches to this idea;
space is not a mere semblance [blosse Erscheinung] in us, to which nothing in the real world [im
Reelen] corresponds . . . .”

The Idealists
643
der realen Elementen], which according to our ordinary phrase stand
in the relations [in ihnen stehen] (MP: 247, § 109).
Indeed, one of the later chapters in the Metaphysics is entitled “On the Mental Act
of ‘Relation’,” which is the Englished version of “Von dem beziehenden Vorstellen”
or “the relating capacity/activity of ideation.” Of course, there must be something
in the real world to which these relations correspond: but whatever these things
are, they are not relations!
Green himself encapsulates the dilemma in his observation that “That ‘all reality
lies in relations’ will more readily be admitted than that ‘only for a thinking
consciousness do relations exist’” (GCW, II, p.
179).
That reality consists in
relations is to assert the reality of relations, while to claim that relations exist
only for a thinking consciousness is to assert the ideality of relations. Here Green
stands with Lotze. But in his further insistence upon the irreducibility, ubiquity
and mystery of relations, Green creates an epistemological and logical framework
upon which to root his seemingly outlandish metaphysical pronouncements. And
this impulse far outstrips the more modest program of Lotzean metaphysics that,
by mediating between Hegel and Herbart, seeks to discuss metaphysical problems
individually in order to remove the semblance of contradiction apparent in those
discussions, traditionally conceived. But metaphysics has no unique method by
whose application these apparent tensions can be swiftly dissolved.
Rather a
patient and sober consideration of both sides is required in any attempt to reach
resolution. And, to the degree that it is applicable, this perspective is much more
descriptive of Bradley than of Green.
2.3
The logic of the British Idealists: Bosanquet on universals
“. . . it is the strict fundamental truth
that love is the mainspring of logic.”84
Bosanquet — as in the case of Bradley — overlaps both in chronological years and
philosophical emphases with Frege. Often Bosanquet is portrayed as a mere camp
follower of Bradley. But the intellectual dependence of Bosanquet upon Bradley
has been overworked. After all, it is important to recall that Bosanquet began
his own publishing career with an attack on Bradley’s reliance upon the, as he
deemed it, “reactionary logic” of Sigwart and Lotze (KR: vii); in this fashion,
Bosanquet hoped to bring Bradley back to the Hegelian party proper. In reality,
Bosanquet stood in a much closer relation to Green than Bradley (it was, after
all, Bosanquet who completed Green’s project of translating Lotze). And, most
importantly, for our present purposes, Bosanquet — unlike either Caird or Green
— has the acknowledged status of a writer who returned to the question of the
nature and status of logic on multiple occasions, in diﬀering venues.
He thus
claimed, in sympathy with Greenian idealism, that by the very term ‘logic’ “we
84PIV: 341.

644
David Sullivan
understand with Plato and Hegel . . .
the impulse towards unity and coherence
. . . by which every fragment yearns toward the whole to which it belongs” (PIV:
340).
Yet before publishing any volume devoted speciﬁcally to logic, Bosanquet ﬁrst
addressed the topic in his contribution to the Green Festschrift: “Logic as the
Science of Knowledge” (EPC, pp. 67 — 101). The title and the very ﬁrst sentence
are most telling: “The Science of Knowledge’ is a title which everyone concedes to
logic” (p. 67). And he reminds us, in a footnote, that Mill is to be numbered among
the everyone who actually matter: for although Mill’s philosophical positions are
“fundamentally untenable,” “his services to logic” are commendable as their eﬀects
have produced “a more healthy inﬂuence than any other logician since Hegel”
(EPC, p. 67n)! (Although, included, as well, in this company are Lotze, Sigwart
and Jevons.) For Bosanquet, the status of logic is clear, as the science of those
thoughts that are knowledge (= Erkenntnistheorie). And this orientation carries
over to what we may call the ‘greater’ (1888) and the ‘lesser’ (1895) logics.
Passmore provides the following introduction to Bosanquet’s larger logic (which
is, on Passmore’s account, much more Hegelian and much less Lotzean than
Bradley’s):
His Logic (1888) bears the subtitle The Morphology of Knowledge.
That summarizes its contents. The Logic is an attempt, in the manner
of Hegel and of Lotze — even though in opposition to Lotze’s meta-
physics — to depict the stages through which thought passes from the
simplest form of judgment (’this is red’) to that complex disjunctive
in which is exhibited the concrete universal, the universal which is a
systematic interrelation of its constituent parts.85
Now by ‘morphology’ it seems that Bosanquet hoped to establish a connection
between Hegel and Darwin, both of whom provide epigraphs to the volume. But,
more to the point, Passmore’s synopsis forces us to encounter a concept, already
implicitly discussed by both Caird and Green although not explicitly developed by
them: that curious hybrid, the concrete universal. To explore this concept more
fully requires a very short return to the history of Hegel-reception in Britain.
It is often suggested that Hegel was, after all, introduced to Britain via Stir-
ling’s aforementioned volume, The Secret of Hegel. Since many wags and wits had
observed, slyly, that “the secret has been well kept,”86 by the time of the second
edition, Stirling felt compelled to state things just a bit more succinctly:
The secret of Hegel may be indicated at shortest thus: As Aristotle —
with considerable assistance from Plato — made explicit the abstract
Universal that was implicit in Socrates, so Hegel — with less consider-
able assistance from Fichte and Schelling — made explicit the concrete
Universal that was implicit in Kant (SH2: xxii).
85[Passmore, 1966, p. 167].
86See [Passmore, 1966, p. 49].

The Idealists
645
So, the secret of Hegel was nothing but the very uncovering of the concrete uni-
versal implicit in the Kantian synthetic a priori. There is little evidence, as yet
however, that this verbiage names a truly technical term. This might lead one
to assume that the “concrete universal” was a kind of portmanteau concept, so
to speak, denoting only a possible sublation of well-known dualistic oppositions:
abstract vs. concrete, unity vs. plurality, identity vs. diﬀerence, thought vs. intu-
ition, universal vs. particular, thought vs. reality/being, part vs. whole, and one
vs. many, for instance.
Unfortunately, Bosanquet never gives anything like a suﬃcient deﬁnition of
the term although he does approach it, on several occasions, by varying methods
of approximation; the beginning of the second volume of the greater Logic, he
cryptically divulges that
Logic is little more than an account of the forms and modes in which
a universal does or does not aﬀect the diﬀerences through which it
persists. I can only point out that all turns on the distinction between
the abstract or powerless and the concrete or dominant universal. To
interpret the latter by the former, to reduce all universals to marks . . .
is a fatal tendency of popular logic. A very elementary example of a
relatively concrete universal may be found in the nature of a geomet-
rical ﬁgure, say of a circle or a triangle. The given arc is not simply
repeated, it is continued according to a universal nature which controls
its parts, and with a result which though involved in the given arc is
yet outwardly and as an actual content distinct from it. This is clearer
if instead of a circle we take an ellipse, in which the given fragment of
the curve cannot in any sense be said to be simply repeated without
change in constructing the remainder. There is something in the curve
as given which is capable of dictating a continuation and completion of
its outline distinguishable from the given arc or fragment itself. Just
so with a triangle — given two sides and an angle, we can ﬁnd the
third side and remaining two angles . . . [and, as such] is then the basis
of mediate judgment or inference (LMK, II: 2-3, my emphases).
Accordingly, the concrete universal can be neither a universal composed of dis-
crete marks, garnered by abstraction, nor a merely abstract deﬁnition or criterion.
It is, however, accurately characterized as, ﬁrst, an identity pervading manifold
diﬀerences and, second, as the basis for further inference.
The example employed by Bosanquet seems to have been chosen in order to
connect the concrete universal more with mathematical construction in pure in-
tuition than with “bloodless concepts” and also illustrative of the fact that there
can be many, manifestly diﬀerent kinds of, say, triangles that, nevertheless, have
something in common. Ultimately, however, the idea rests upon the proper con-
strual of the role of the characteristic marks in composing (the deﬁnition of) the
concept. A “mere mark,” Bosanquet complains, “conveys nothing” (LMK, II: 3).
What we require instead is a mechanism by which “we could infer all sort of . . .

646
David Sullivan
consequences . . . and these consequences would not be the same for all the objects,
but would be modiﬁed by their nature.” Only then, Bosanquet exclaims, would
“the universal . . .
be an identity pervading diﬀerent manifestations” (LMK, II:
3).
The concrete universal must be a unity or an identity made possible only by
means of diﬀerence and, as such, comprehend both the individual in-itself and
the particular reﬂective identiﬁcations of that individual (made possible by going
out-of-itself); and it must do so concretely and not via any mechanism describable
as abstraction. Furthermore, the point may also be to suggest that a “mere mark”
may name an accidental or inessential property that in no way determines the
nature or essence of those things, whereas “being an arc of the circle” both names
an abstract property that without which a thing would not be what it is and
instantiates that very same property.
Therefore, a concrete universal, such as
“humanity,” is and includes these things as fully actualized in a unity made possible
only by diﬀerence.87
However, Bosanquet then proposes that proper names (which are “designative
and not deﬁnatory”) — or rather their referents — seem to aﬀord the simplest
example of the concrete universal. He then observes that
. . . the reference of a proper name is a good example of what we called
a universal or an identity. That which is referred to by such a name
is a person or thing whose existence is extended in time and its parts
bound together by some continuous quality — an individual person or
thing and the whole of this individuality is referred to in whatever is
aﬃrmed about it. Thus the reference of such a name is universal, not as
including more than one individual, but as including in the identity of
the individual numberless diﬀerences — the acts, events, and relations
that make up its history and situation (BEL: 65).
So, if a coherent referent is implicated in our use of a proper name, then it is
possible to see, Bosanquet believes, that and how “individuals may be universal
in a sense which does not depend upon abstraction” (LMK, I: 68).
To further illustrate this point, consider the singular sentence employed by both
Bosanquet and Lotze (and Hegel, HEL: 233, § 167), “Caesar crossed the Rubicon”:
If I say ‘Caesar crossed the Rubicon,’ I start with an individual Caesar,
whose continued identity extended through a certain space of time
and revealed itself in a variety of acts, and I exhibit his identity in
one of the acts and moments — its diﬀerences — through which it
persisted. What I mean by the aﬃrmation is that he, the Caesar who
had before conquered Gaul, and who was afterwards murdered on the
Ides of March, displayed his character and enacted part of his history
87Mure complains “We cannot join the empiricists in endeavouring so completely to absorb
and exhaust the universal in its instances [such] that only singular individuals emerge as real.
Our universal takes its nature from the universe” [Mure, 1978, p. 71].

The Idealists
647
by crossing the Rubicon. This is a clear case of exhibiting an identity
in diﬀerence (LMK, I: 99, note to Lotze, Logik, § 58).
Although the man who crossed the Rubicon was not yet the man murdered on
the Ides of March, in utilizing the proper name ‘Caesar’, I implicitly include all
of these events and relations in making reference to (the historical) Caesar: the
Caesar (the actual referent of the term ‘Caesar’) is an identity encompassing dif-
ferences. (This sharply contrasts with Lotze’s view. In the note to the Logik, Lotze
asserted the exact opposite, namely that the predicate “crossing the Rubicon” char-
acterises only that-Caesar-who-is-crossing-the-Rubicon and “not the Caesar who
lay in the cradle, or was asleep, or was undecided what to do.” Consequently, “in
no subsequent moment of his life either can he be the subject intended by this
judgment” (L: 85, § 57).) Surely then, in this peculiar construal of self-identity,
as Mander observes, “the strangeness (we might even say, the perversity) of the
doctrine stands out sharply.”88
It is in the context of a discussion of traditional doctrines of intension and exten-
sion in Book I (LMK, I: 46-71) that the Hegelian notions of individual, particular
and universal are brought into play.
After recapitulating the Lotzean account
concerning naming and objectiﬁcation (LMK, I: 8-46),89 Bosanquet begins an ex-
tended attack on the traditional doctrine of the “inverse ratio” of intension and
extension, claiming that his prior examples of proper and collective names (LMK,
I: 46-58) “are enough to show that not every variation of intension involves a cor-
responding variation of extension, or vice versa” (LMK, I: 58). Furthermore, he
insists that
If we look at a real individual into which other individuals enter as
constituent parts, are we prepared to say that the containing whole
(e.g., the state as compared with the citizen) has the less meaning
or intension of the two?
The old logic would retort here that the
extension of ‘state’ is made up of particular ‘states,’ not persons, or that
that of ‘nation’ or ‘army,’ consists in the several nations and armies,
not in individual men and soldiers . . . But this would only meet the
objection at the cost of narrowing the idea of universality to that of
mere abstraction, in contrast with the sense — synthesis of diﬀerences
— in which we have taken it throughout. Moreover, even the aggregate
of men, nations, or animals which is indicated by the abstract universal
name has in virtue of that universal a common nature which is a germ
of concreteness. A crowd is not an army, but it has in it always the
elements of a mob. As we saw above, collective names mark a mere half-
way house from aggregation to individuality and it is a purely arbitrary
procedure when examining the nature of universals, to restrict our
notice to such as have attained to no higher embodiment than as an
aggregate of particulars. But in fact our prejudices would cause us to
88[Mander, 2000, p. 295].
89For a fuller discussion of Lotze’s approach to naming and objectiﬁcation see [Sullivan, 1991].

648
David Sullivan
neglect a concrete nature if any such were apparent in the aggregate
(LMK, I: 65, my emphases).
Here he ﬁrst emphasizes that, under the traditional doctrine (“the old logic”),
extensions are, after all, not composed of the individuals falling under those at-
tributes but, rather, are made up of further, narrower extensions: e.g., “armies”
is made up of “the French army” and “the German army” and not individual
soldiers.
But, further, “collective names” (as opposed to “proper names”) — or “[a] name
or idea which, while involving a number of identical parts, is not truly predicated
of each part singly” (LMK, I: 57) — are typically excluded from consideration
as merely compromise formations, locatable somewhere between individuals and
mere aggregations; e.g., as “regiment” is certainly made up of soldiers, but the
term cannot be predicated of (applied to) any individual soldier, then varying
the extension should have no eﬀect on the intension. To believe otherwise stems
from an acceptance of “the Aristotelian deﬁnition by genus and species, . . . [where]
the generic attributes were contained together with others in the deﬁnition of the
species” (LMK, I: 58).)
The only way out of this impasse Bosanquet can envision is to abandon the
traditional instinct “to conceive of all universality as arising by way of abstraction”
(LMK, I: 66) — where abstraction means “mere neglect or omission of attributes”
(LMK, I: 65). Bosanquet then complains that:
It is easy to say that animality is common to men and beasts, while
rationality belongs to men only, and in place of it animals have either
instinct or nothing, and that animality is the intension of the class
that includes beasts and men, which each of these subclasses has a
separate and additional intension. But in fact the animality of men is
quite diﬀerent from the animality of beasts, and is not an attribute
common to both in the sense in which a tree-trunk is the common
support of two of its branches. While on the other hand the thorough
modiﬁcations which distinguish the intelligence of man from that of
animals do not suﬃce to dissociate them beyond identiﬁcation; and
the class-conception which simply omits all reference to intelligence is
an inadequate class-conception for men and animals.
Therefore the
notion or abstraction which is to include both men and animals must
on the one hand provide for a variable animality; must be considered,
that is, not in light of a ﬁxed mark but as a scheme of modiﬁable
relations; and must, on the other hand, ﬁnd room for some reference
to intelligence, and not simply strike it out as a mark in which the
kinds to be classiﬁed are not the same. Prima facie then the content
of the superior class-conception is made up of the very same elements
as those of the conception nearer to individual reality, only that it must
represent each attribute schematically, by limits of variation, instead
of embodying a ﬁxed system of amounts or values (LMK, I: 66-67, my

The Idealists
649
emphases).
To unpack this last, lengthy excerpt is now the task at hand.
First, as Mander has already identiﬁed,90 a gloss of Bosanquet’s remark that
“the work of abstraction should be represented not as selective omission but as
constructive analysis” (p. 69), may be found already in Lotze’s Logik:
. . . we do not get the universal image of animal by comparison, if we
leave out of our minds entirely the facts of reproduction, self-movement,
and respiration, on the ground that some animals produce their young
alive, others lay eggs, others multiply by division, that some again
breathe through lungs, others through gills, others through the skin,
and that lastly many move on legs, others ﬂy, while some are incapable
of any locomotion. On the contrary, the most essential thing of all, that
which makes every animal an animal, is that it has some mode or other
of reproduction, of motion, and of respiration. In all these cases, then,
the universal [das Allgemeine] is produced not by simply leaving out
the diﬀerent marks [Merkmale] p1and p2, q1 and q2, which occur in the
individuals [Einzelf¨alllen] compared, but by substituting for those left
out the universal marks P and Q, of which p1p2 and q1q2 are particular
kinds (L: 41-42, § 23).
The Lotzean recipe for the formation of universals — “that of determining the
element which maintains itself in the same instance under changed conditions”
— contrasts with the typical logical approach, “that of bringing out the common
element in diﬀerent instances when at rest” (L: 40-41, § 22):
Of the true universal . . . which contains the rules for the entire for-
mation of its species, it may rather be said that its content is always
precisely as rich, the sum of its marks precisely as great, as that of the
species themselves; only that the universal concept, the genus, contains
a number of marks in a merely indeﬁnite and even universal form; these
are represented in the species by deﬁnite values or particular character-
isations, and ﬁnally in the singular concept all indeﬁniteness vanishes,
and each universal mark of the genus is replaced by one fully deter-
mined in quantity, individuality and relation to others” (L: 52, § 31).
Lotze introduces this discussion on the heels of his distinction between, not the
abstract and the concrete universal but, what he calls the ‘ﬁrst’ and the ‘second’
universal. The ‘ﬁrst universal’ arises “in the comparison of simple ideas” (L: 30,
§ 14): “This ﬁrst universal, therefore, is no product of thought, but something
which thought ﬁnds already in existence” (L: 31, § 14). The various instances of
the ﬁrst universal “is a more or a less of a common sensible element [eines f¨uhlbaren
Gemeinsamen], which in itself, undetermined by any degree, is no object of per-
ception [nicht anschaubar ist]” (L: 32, § 16). When our consciousness presents “to
90[Mander, 2000, p. 300].

650
David Sullivan
itself and compare[s] the ideas [vorstellbaren . . . vorzustellen]” this is only “an act
of so comparing them to grasp the common element which our sensation testiﬁes
them to contain” and not something detachable, to be made “the material of a
new and equally perceptible idea [dem Inhalt einer gleich anschaulichen neuen
Vorstellung]” (L: 32, § 15).
The second or true universal, by contrast, must be a product of thought “that is
giving aﬃrmative position to the object-matter, that of distinguishing it negatively
from all others, and that of estimating by quantitative comparison its diﬀerences
and resemblances” is itself “a new logical operation” (L: 35, § 19). By contrast,
“[t]he ﬁrst universal, as we saw, can only be experienced in immediate sensation
[unmittelbarer Empﬁndung]” (L: 36, § 19). But the second operation of thought
proper “separate[s] the merely coincident amongst the various ideas which are
given to us, and . . .
combine[s] the coherent afresh by the accessory notion of
a ground for their coherence [durch den Nebengedanken des Rechtsgrundes seiner
Zussamengeh¨origkeit]” (L: 37, § 20). The necessity of this added thought, in Lotze,
seems to speak to the requirements laid down by Bosanquet for the universal: it
must possess explanatory force and provide the basis for further, valid inference.
Without, as in the case of Green, asserting a direct borrowing, we should note
that the idea of such an intellectual connection was already suggested by J. S.
Mackenzie, who claims that the “technicalities” of Hegel’s presentation are im-
proved in Lotze’s ‘simpler language.”91 Despite this diﬀerence, “the Hegelian doc-
trine of the concreteness of the true universal” receives “a deﬁnite account” in
Lotze’s work.92
If correct, we now know why the Hegelian ‘concrete universal’
shares an important connection the Lotzean ‘second universal.’ As Mander has
expressed it: “Mere diﬀerences, mere conglomerations of distinct and unconnected
elements, do not then correspond to genuine universals . . . To qualify as a uni-
versal, a group must possesses some unifying explanation, some account of why
they all belong together.”93 Accordingly, the Lotzean warning is validated: “We
may class cherries and ﬂesh under the group ikl of red, juicy, edible bodies, but we
shall not suppose ourselves thereby to have arrived at a generic concept” (L: 52, §
31). As the proper concept of the universal demands something more, the Lotzean
‘second universal’ and the idealist ‘concrete universal’ is intended to addess these
deﬁciencies.
3
CODA
3.1
Vagaries of the post-Enlightenment
“Just point in these days to the picture of some huge baboon,
and — suddenly — before such enlightenment — superstition
is disarmed, priests confess their imposture, and the Church
91UO: 189.
92UO: 189, 190.
93[Mander, 2000, p. 305].

The Idealists
651
sinks — beneath the Hippocampus of a Gorilla!”94
Whatever the ultimate provenance of the concept of a ‘concrete universal’, one
can see that it is another attempt, somewhat analogous to ‘relations’ for Green,
to think through certain logico-metaphysical diﬃculties. Universals, relations and
categories are logical entities, characteristic of mind or reason. Furthermore, each
of these concepts — the “higher categories,” the “relational whole,” and the “con-
crete universal” — possesses one importantly shared sense: they are all (or they
directly imply) “unions of diﬀerences.”95 As Mander elaborates it, in the case of
the concrete universal:
Or rather we might say that they are unions of qualitative diversity
as well as quantitative diversity. This ambiguity explains Bosanquet’s
rather ambivalent attitude to abstract universals, as varyingly either
inferior or impossible. For he thinks that true universals need to bring
together diversity. If you count numerical diversity as a real, if lesser,
sort of diversity, then abstract universals are inferior universals. If on
the other hand you count it no diversity at all, then unions of abstract
sameness do not even deserve the title of universals.96
Because true universality in this sense (the encompassing of diversity) outstrips
mere generality, we have implicitly returned to the other shared motif: a consis-
tent attack on any construal of thought (or its operations) as abstract.97 It is no
surprise then that the idealist perspective marks the death knell of numerous tra-
ditional logical doctrines, for example: “it is clear that immense deduction must be
made from the traditional doctrine that Intension and Extension vary inversely”
(LMK, I: 68). This rejection follows because “individuals may be universal in a
sense which does not depend upon abstraction” (LMK, I: 68) and, furthermore,
“the work of abstraction should be represented not as selective omission but as
constructive analysis” (LMK, I: 69). In this way, Bosanquet envisions, “the ad-
vance from abstractness to concrete individuality would have grounds in historical
fact” (LMK, I: 71).
This logical doctrine of the British Idealists thus appears as a somewhat heady
m´elange of Hegelian and Lotzean beliefs, as further developed out of the wider
context of the reform of logic debate.
First and foremost, as we have seen, a
leitmotiv of the British Idealists is that the universal or conceptual is not merely
empty and abstract but always meaningful and composed of cognitive content.
This ramiﬁes their rejection of traditional “formal” logic although they use slightly
diﬀerent terminology and emphasize slightly diﬀerent aspects.
They focus on
correlative notions of systematicity or holism, while at the same time exposing the
inadequacies of the traditional logic. This, alongside the distinction between the
94[Sterling, SH2: xxxv].
95[Mander, 2000, p. 302].
96[Mander, 2002, p. 302n], (my emphases).
97Bosanquet later writes: “The true oﬃce of thought . . .
is to build up, to inspire with
meaning, to intensify, to ‘vivify’” (PIV: 58).

652
David Sullivan
ﬁrst and the second universal, is Lotzean. But it is retranslated into the language
of Hegel, and the terminology of the individual, particular, and universal, on the
one hand, and the abstract and the concrete, on the other.98
A further detail that might merit discussion here returns us to the aﬃnities
listed earlier between Frege and Bradley. (As noted above, no explanation for
these correspondences was proﬀered by Ryle.) Strikingly, however, few have no-
ticed the strong aﬃnities between Frege and Bosanquet. Although their two works
— The Foundations of Arithmetic (1884) and Logic (1888) — are only separated
by a few years, cross-pollination is unlikely. But the perceivable parallelisms are
comprehensible against the shared backdrop and inﬂuence of such texts as Lotze’s
Logic in the context of the wider reform of logic discussion. While it is neither nec-
essary nor practicable to give a complete catalogue, within their proto-semantical
reﬂections, one might safely emphasize a ﬁrm distinction between logical and gram-
matical form and an insistence upon the priority of judgement over concept that
issues in something like a “context principle.” Bosanquet’s commitment to holist
doctrines is readily apparent in his theory of judgement: for him, the essence of
98It may also be that other Hegelian reﬂections were inﬂuential here. For Hegel, ‘abstract’ and
‘concrete’ themselves can be seen as quasi-technical terms, ones that are somewhat disconnected
from their common-sense application in which they might stand in for, respectively, ‘world or
reality’ and ‘mind or mentality’: instead, their proper analogues might better be stated as ’one-
sided’, on the one hand, and ‘multi-faceted’, on the other.
Wallace illustrates this point by
quoting directly from Hegel’s essay “Wer denkt abstrakt?”:
A murderer is, we may suppose, led to the scaﬀold. In the eyes of the multitude
he is a murderer and nothing more. The ladies perhaps may make the remark that
he is a strong, handsome, and interesting man. At such a remark the populace is
horriﬁed. “What! a murderer handsome? Can anybody’s mind be so low as to
call a murderer handsome?
You must be little better yourselves.” And perhaps
a priest who sees into the heart, and knows the reasons of things, will point to
this remark as evidence of the corruption of morals prevailing among the upper
classes. A student of character, again, inquires into the antecedents [den Gang]
of the criminal’s education [Bildung]: (omitted in the translation: “he ﬁnds bad
instruction in his history,” [ﬁndet in seiner Geschichte schlechte Erziehung,]) he
ﬁnds a wrong set of relations between father and mother; or he ﬁnds out that this
man has suﬀered severely for some triﬂing oﬀence, and that under the bitter feelings
thus produced he has spurned the order of society [die b¨urgerliche Ordnung], and
cannot support himself otherwise than by crime. No doubt there will be people who
when they hear this explanation will say “Does this person then mean to excuse
the murderer?” . . .
By abstract thinking, then, is meant that in the murderer
we see nothing but the simple fact [dies einfache Qualit¨at] that he is a murderer,
and by this single quality annihilate all the human nature which is in him” (HEL:
lxxix-lxxx).
Wallace glosses this, which is found in his early translation (1874) of the Encyclopedia Logic,
as follows: “A concrete notion is a notion in its totality, looking before and after, connected
indissolubly with others. An abstract notion is one withdrawn from everything that naturally
goes along with it, and enters into its constitution” (HEL: lxxix).
Consequently, as already
noted, in the case of universals, “[t]he thesis is not really that some universals are abstract,
others concrete, but rather that the idea of abstract universals belongs to an inadequate view
of the world better replaced by that of concrete universals” [Sprigge, 1994, pp. 439-440]. The
earlier question is thereby rendered none at all: there are not abstract universals and concrete
universals; rather, there are only the falsely construed universals and the correctly attained ones.

The Idealists
653
judgement is to connect a present sensation with “a deﬁnite organised system” or
“real world” (LMK, I: 77). Hence, “[t]he ultimate subject of the perceptive judge-
ment is the real world as a whole” (LMK, I: 78). Or, as phrased more pithily: “
‘Judgment’ as the consciousness of a world” (BEL: 21).
Along similar lines, Bosanquet ﬁrst cautions that the “formative elements of
language are signiﬁcant” (LMK, I: 40) yet not so qua logical. Bosanquet insists
on the freedom of logical thought from language:
I can see no ground for restricting the logical conception of language
to written or spoken words. We must not argue from the possibility
of educating the deaf and dumb (cp. Lotze, Logik, sect. 6) that ‘the
logical operation in the mind is independent of the possibility of lin-
guistic expression.’ It is unfortunate that the German “Sprache’ and
‘sprachlich’ make this inference appear a truism (LMK, I: 16).
Nevertheless, “[a] name has meaning only in a sentence or by suggesting a sen-
tence. The sentence is the signiﬁcant unit of language” (LMK, I: 40). Bosanquet
hypothesizes that “to isolate a single word from the sentence” (LMK, I: 10) or
“the isolation of the signiﬁcant name from its context” (LMK, I: 11) must have
been unusual (if not impossible) in primitive speech. But rather than thinking of
judgements as composed of concepts, “I think of the concept as existing only in
the act of judgment” (LMK, I: 34). Subsequently, we can identify knowledge with
judgement: “Knowledge is a judgment, an aﬃrmation” (BEL: 23). But, more im-
portantly, “Knowledge is the medium in which our world, as an interrelated whole,
exists for us” (BEL: 22). But this is possible only because “the world of objective
reference and the world of reality are the same world” (LMK, I: 5).
Subjective idealism, or solipsism, is encapsulated in the Schopenhauerian ut-
terance: “the world is my idea.” That is to say, insofar as anything can become
an object of my perception, it becomes so only as an idea belonging solely to me.
Objective idealism turns subjective idealism on its head. While the stage of sub-
jective idealism may be useful in the advance of the philosophical dialectic, one
must insist as well that the contrapositive is true, that: “My idea is (of) a world.”
Hence, my ‘idea’ properly understood is not the product of a random stream of
presentations or a haphazard chaos; it is, rather, of an organized, regular whole
or system — what Kant denominated as experience.99 Mind makes the world and
“From the standpoint of a theory of knowledge . . . we may talk indiﬀerently of
the one or the other [mind and world]” (EPC: 13-14).
From the perspective of objective idealism, on some readings, the British Ide-
alists were neo-Hegelians because they were neo-Kantians. Of course, we have
already seen that the British Idealists were prone to speak of Kant and Hegel in
the same breath and to counterpoise both to the representative names of British
empiricism; as Green had expressed it:
. . .
the true result of Hume’s philosophy was the demonstration of
the bankruptcy implicit in the empiricistic principles of Locke and
99See BEL: 4ﬀfor a fuller discussion of these points.

654
David Sullivan
Berkeley, that Kant and Hegel had pointed the way to an acceptable
alternative account of experience and knowledge, and that nineteenth-
century British philosophy . . . was consequently anachronistic, since
it sought to continue along the bankrupt lines laid down by Hume,
ignoring the work of Kant and Hegel (PE: v).
But although most stop there, assuming that the idealistic impulse was to be
explained primarily as the proper medicine to an existing ailment — and that was
the robust position of British empiricism, one which could write and act as though
Kant had never even existed and which had both positivist and psychologistic
characteristics — this may not be (genetically) accurate. Bradley later reﬂected
that:
In the latter half of the sixties what authority Mill had had at Oxford
was much impaired. The study of philosophy was becoming a serious
aﬀair. There were lectures &c. on German philosophy, and also by
Green on Hume. I don’t think that any of the younger teachers (who
made any mark) followed Mill. In the early seventies this movement
advanced rapidly. I don’t think that by the middle of the seventies
Mill counted as anything (BCW, V, p. 200).
If the inﬂuence of the second generation is acknowledged and investigated, then
despite the numerous and important diﬀerences between British Idealists and the
neo-Kantians, it might be concluded that “[n]evertheless, it is most true and note-
worthy that British Hegelianism is, in a sense of its own, Neo-Kantian.”100 (There
are numerous other references to the British Idealists as neo-Kantians, including
the 1883 review in Mind of Essays in Philosophical Criticism, which stated that
“this volume is no unworthy witness to the presence of the ‘Neo-Kantian’ school
as a party and a power.”101)
Whether it is indeed proper to characterize the British Idealists as analogues
of the continental neo-Kantians cannot be explored here. But if the hypothesis
advanced here about the shared formative inﬂuence of the second generation is
accepted, then although these two movements were not blood siblings, one might
concluded that they were indeed ﬁrst cousins. (Hence, if the suggestion by Royce
were to be adopted, we would subsume both movements under the broader tent of
post-Kantian idealism.) But both movements shared similar concerns and faced re-
lated problems. And, as alluded to above, one looming diﬃculty coalesced around
the term ‘science’. These issues included not just the debate on materialism but
also the caustic sting of Darwin’s The Origin of Species (1859). Unfortunately,
this was soon followed by a plethora of disturbing publications, beginning with
Essays and Reviews (1860), and including Colenso’s The Pentateuch and the Book
of Joshua Critically Examined (1862), Huxley’s Man’s Place in Nature (1863),
Renan’s Vie de J´esus (1863), and Strauss’s revised Das Leben Jesu (1864).
100[Mackintosh, 1903, p. 87].
101[Hodgson, 1883, p. 580].

The Idealists
655
For although the impact course between science and religion had already been
charted in the very emergence of modern philosophy, even by the time of the
Enlightenment there were a number of mitigating factors that prevented a head-
on collision. First, science was still too weak as a social force to make any serious
challenge to religion as a guide to living, as a way of life. Second, there existed
a serious current of Enlightenment thinking, one proposing that the basic truths
of religion (if not all of its trappings) — in particular, its morality — could be
recouped by and for reason. These thinkers had assumed that religion could be
eventually subsumed under science or reason in such a way that the basic truths
of religion would be shown to be reasonable (e.g., Kant and Christian morality).
But despite the eﬀorts of Feuerbach and others, in the post-Enlightenment, not
only did the projected uniﬁcation not occur but rather the split, and the looming
contradictions, worsened.
Although such concerns might seem remote from the British Idealists — and
their logic — they were given polemical voice by Stirling in his introduction to
Hegel’s Logic. There one discovers that the Enlightenment, for Stirling, may be
summed up as “that general movement which has been named Aufkl¨arung, Free-
thinking, the principle of which we acknowledge to be the Right of Private Judg-
ment” (SH2: li). Although Kant was a full-ﬂedged participant in this movement,
“he saw the necessity of a positive complement to the peculiar negative industry
to which, up to his day, both movement and principle had alone seemed adequate”
(SH2: li). In other words, the destructive character of the Enlightenment needed
to be supplemented with a positive program unless the prospect of “universal scep-
ticism” were to be accepted. From Sterling’s perspective, the baby (humanity) had
been stripped of the last vestiges of the old order; but something must nevertheless
take its place:
Now, Kant, saw a great deal of this — Kant saw that the naked baby
would not do; that, if it were even necessary to strip oﬀevery rag of the
old, still a new would have to be procured, or life would be impossible.
So it was that, though unconsciously to himself, he was led to seek his
Principles. These, Kant came to see, were the one want; and surely,
if they were the one want in his day, they are no less the want now.
Self-will, individual commodity, this has been made the principle, and
accordingly we have turned to it, that we might enjoy ourselves alone,
that we might live to ourselves alone, that the I might be wholly the I
unmixed and unobstructed; and, for result, the I in each of us is dying
of inanition — even though we make (it is even because we make) the
seclusion to self complete — even though we drive oﬀfrom us our very
children, and leave them to corrupt at Boarding-schools into the one
common model that is stock there. We all live now, in fact, divorced
from Substance, forlorn each of us, isolated to himself — an absolute
abstract unit in a universal, unsympathising, unparticpant Atomism.
Hence the universal rush at present, as of maddened animals, to ma-
terial possession; and, this obtained, to material ostentation, with the

656
David Sullivan
hope of at least buying sympathy and bribing respect. Sympathy! Oh
no! it is the hate of envy. Respect! say rather the sneer of malice
that disparages and makes light. Till even in the midst of material
possession and material ostentation, the heart within us has sunk into
weary, weary, hopeless, hopeless ashes. And of this the Aufkl¨arung
is the cause. The Aufkl¨arung has left us nothing but our animality,
nothing but our relationship to the monkey! It has emptied us of all
essential humanity — of Philosophy, Morality, Religion. So it is that
we are divorced from Substance. But the animality that is left in the
midst of such immense material appliance becomes disease; while the
Spirit that has been emptied feels, knows that it has been only robbed,
and, by very necessity of nature, is a craving, craving, ever-restless void
(SH2: lii-liii).
So, there is one thing wanting: objective principles that might redeem the subjec-
tive alienation that each individual was now disposed to live. And this is precisely
what both Kant and Hegel sought, “for Hegel is but the continuator, and, perhaps,
in a sort the completer, of the whole business inaugurated by Kant” (SH2: liv).
And so in the very phraseology of ‘private judgement’ the emphasis cannot be
upon ‘private’ but upon ‘judgement’:
The subject, then, must not remain Formal — he must obtain Filling,
the Filling of the Object. This subject is not my true Me; my true Me
is the Object — Reason — the Universal Thought, Will, Purpose of
Man as Man. So it is that Private Judgment is not enough: what is
enough is Judgment . . . Self-will shall work out, shall realise Self-will
— that is, eﬀect a true will of any kind — by following the Universal
Will (SH2: lv).
Obviously, in Stirling’s hysterical reference to the “monkey” we can locate an
angry response, among other things, to Darwin and to the challenges to Biblical
chronology from the geological and biological record. In this social ferment, in
England, the church parties formulated responses.
In England, both the High
and the Broad Church movements responded.102 On the Broad Church side, one
discovers the beginnings of the de-mythologisation project in Green’s ambition to
102While the High Church party advocated nothing less, in the minds of its Broad Church
opponents, than the unthinking (and unthinkable) return to authority, these seemingly sectarian
issues had epistemological consequences; for, as Pattison remarked
The controversy on “private judgment” involved, if it did not elucidate, the question
of reason v. authority. The dispute as to the merits of the Reformation was no a
mere theological quarrel, it inevitably carried the thoughts of the disputants to the
ultimate criterion of belief (Pattison, 1876, p. 86, my emphases).
In Bosanquet’s ﬁnal diagnosis, the separation of the act of assertion from the content asserted
therein could only be motivated by a subjectivism that construed “judgment as an irrational and
arbitrary activity”(LMK, I: 378). He adds: “It is not surprising that in the ‘Grammar of Assent’
ecclesiastical interest should have thrown itself zealously on the side of such a conception” (LMK,
I: 378).

The Idealists
657
preach a sermon in which the essential truths of Christianity were presented in
non-theological (philosophical) language. Jowett noted this prospect, hesitantly,
in his diary:
G[reen] wants to write a sermon in which the language of theology is
omitted – a Christian discourse meaning the same thing in other words.
The attempt is worth making, but it requires great genius to execute it.
The words will seem thin, moral, unitarian . . . Yet something like this
is what the better mind of the age is seeking — a religion independent
of the accidents of time and place.103
Some of these attempts remain recorded in Green’s lay sermons. But these linger
as mere words on a page, devoid of “the speaker himself . . . addressing himself to
the practical needs of his hearers”104 — a point not lacking in signiﬁcance once it
is acknowledged that “God is not to be sought in nature . . . but in man himself”
(GCW III: 265), a further conclusion that Green did not shrink from:
To say then that God is the ﬁnal cause of moral life, the ideal self which
no one, as a moral agent, is, but which everyone, as such an agent,
is, however blindly, seeking to become, is not to make him unreal.
It is, however, (and this may seem at once more presumptuous and
less reasonable) in a certain sense to identify him with man; and that
not with an abstract or collective humanity but with the individual
man. Let us consider in what sense. An assertion of identity, it must
be remembered, not only admits of but implies diﬀerence or change
. . .
Whatever unity of principle or law runs through any process of
change, there the diﬀerent objects which result from the process at
its several stages have a real identity with each other, though they
may be as diﬀerent as the oak from the acorn or the complete animal
from the embryo; and on the recognition of the diﬀerence depends the
signiﬁcance of the assertion of identity. We need not be frightened then
from the doctrine that man is identical with God on the ground that it
makes God ‘no more than’ man . . . The whole force of the doctrine lies
in the interpretation of the identity claimed for man with God as an
identity of self with self . . . in the process constituting the moral life
according to our interpretation of it, the germ and the development,
the possibility and its actualisation, are one and the same consciousness
of self. That in virtue of which I am I, and can in consequence so set
before myself the realisation of my own possibilities as to be a moral
agent, is that in virtue of which I am one with God (GCW III: 225-226).
This passage, which mixes logic and theology in a way congenial to the British
Idealists, perhaps ﬁnally drives home the fact that these concerns are not our
103As quoted in [Richter, 1964, p. 99].
104[Ward, 1967, p. 59].

658
David Sullivan
concerns: likewise, the logic of the British Idealists is not our logic. Of course,
from the Idealist perspective logic and theology were not disjoint, as evidenced
in the long passage ascribed to Mr. Grey in his response to Robert Elsmere’s
spiritual crisis:
‘I know it, I have gone through it . . .
I know very well . . .
to him
who has once been a Christian of the old sort, the parting with the
Christian mythology is the rending asunder of bones and marrow. It
means parting with half the conﬁdence, half the joy, of life! But take
heart,’ and the tone grew still more solemn, still more penetrating. ‘It
is the education of God! Do not imagine it will put you farther from
Him! He is in criticism, in science, in doubt, so long as the doubt is
pure and honest doubt, as yours is. He is in all life, in all thought. The
thought of man, as it has shaped itself in institutions, in philosophies,
in science, in patient critical work, or in the life of charity, is the one
continuous revelation of God! Look for Him in it all . . .
All things
change, — creeds and philosophies and outward systems, — but God
remains!’
“ ‘Life, that in me has rest,
As I, undying Life, have power in Thee!’ ”105
God is in logic for He is the “wide-embracing Love” that, as ‘the mainspring
of logic,’ “[c]hanges, sustains, dissolves, creates, and rears.”106 Strange, strange
indeed. But to do justice to these reﬂections — irrespective of their value or utility
— demands taking them on their own terms. But to do that, likewise, requires
(minimally) that they be situated in the philosophical context, one with both
a ‘before’ and an ‘after’.107 The thought of the British Idealists still awaits just
such a comprehensive re-consideration, if the common assumption of a meaningless
interregnum is to be refuted.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This chapter should have been much better than it is. By way of excuses, that do
not touch upon the numerous inadequacies of the author, one could emphasize that
there is little reliable literature on the British Idealists, even less on their logical
doctrines directly, and most of the better part of that on Bradley. Nevertheless,
105[Ward, 1967, pp. 355-356].
106The lines quoted by Mr.
Grey (previous quotation) and here come from Emily Bront¨e’s
poem “No Coward Soul is Mine” (1848).
107Among the further questions that remain, one concerns whether the British Idealists (and
the continental neo-Kantians), should be construed as either the precursors or as the ﬁrst wave
of philosophical modernism, and indelibly colored, nevertheless, by the previous generation of
post-enlightenment thinkers. To full answer this, one would need to know in what ways they
advanced or hindered the revolutionary approaches of “high modernism.”

The Idealists
659
there has been an emerging literature, since the 1984/85 “turning point,” without
which this essay, impoverished as it is, could not have been written. Special thanks
are due to Alan Richardson for his advice and encouragement. Naturally all errors
and misrepresentations remain mine and mine alone.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Primary Sources
BCW = Bradley, F. H. (1999), Collected Works of F. H. Bradley (in 12 volumes), eds. C. A.
Keene and W. Mander, Bristol: Thoemmes Press.
BEL = Bosanquet, Bernard (1895), The Essentials of Logic, London: Macmillan & Co.
CCW = Caird, Edward (1999), Collected Works of Edward Caird (in 12 volumes), ed. C.
Tyler, Bristol: Thoemmes Press.
ELP = Caird, Edward (1892), Essays on Literature and Philosophy (2 vols.), Glasgow:
MacLehose & Sons (reprinted as Volume 2 of CCW).
ETGP = Caird, Edward (1904), The Evolution of Theology in the Greek Philosophers (2
vols.), Glasgow: MacLehose & Sons (reprinted as Volumes 9 and 10 of CCW).
GCW = Green, T. H. (1997), Collected Works of T. H. Green (in 5 volumes), ed. P. Nichol-
son, Bristol: Thoemmes Press (which contains, as Volumes One through Three, a reprint of:
Nettleship, R. L. (ed.) (1885), Works of Thomas Hill Green (3 vols.), London: Longmans,
Green, & Co.)
H = Caird, Edward (1883), Hegel, Edinburgh and London: Blackwood & Sons (Volume 2 of
CCW).
HEL = Wallace, William (1874), The Logic of Hegel, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
KR = Bosanquet, Bernard (1885), Knowledge and Reality, London: Swan Sonnenschein &
Co.
L = Lotze, Hermann (1st: 1884, 2nd: 1887), Logic, in three books: of Thought, of Investiga-
tion, and of Knowledge (1874), ed. and trans. B. Bosanquet, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
LMK = Bosanquet, Bernard (1st: 1888, 2nd: 1911), Logic, or the Morphology of Knowledge,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
MP = Lotze, Hermann (1st: 1884, 2nd: 1887), Metaphysics, in three books: Ontology, Cos-
mology, and Psychology (1879), ed. and trans. B. Bosanquet, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
MC = Lotze, Hermann (1885), Microcosmus: An Essay Concerning Man and His Relation
to the World (1856-58, 1858-64), trans. E. Hamilton and E. E. C. Jones, Edinburgh: T. & T.
Clark.
PE = Green, T. H. (1969), Prolegomena to Ethics, ed. A. C. Bradley, New York, NY: Thomas
Y. Crowell & Co (reprinted as Volume 4 of GCW).
PIV = Bosanquet, Bernard (1912), The Principle of Individuality and Value, London:
Macmillan & Co.
SH2 = Stirling, James Hutchinson (1898), The Secret of Hegel, Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd
(1st edition: 1865).
SL = Sigwart, Christoph (1895), Logic (2 vols.), trans. H. Dendy, London: Swan Sonnenschein

660
David Sullivan
& Co.
UO = Mackenzie, J. S. (1922), “Universals and Orders,” in Mind N. S. 31: 189-194.
USL = Ueberweg, Friedrich (1871), System of Logic and History of Logical Doctrines, trans.
T. M. Lindsay, London: Longmans, Green, & Co.
Secondary Sources
[Ayer et al., 1957] A. J. Ayer et al. The Revolution in Philosophy, London: Macmillan & Co,
1957.
[Baldwin, 1984] T. Baldwin. Moore’s Rejection of Idealism in Philosophy in History, eds. R.
Rorty, J. B. Schneewind and Q. Skinner, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
[Bambach, 1995] C. R. Bambach. Heidegger, Dilthey, and the Crisis of Historicism, Ithaca, NY
and London: Cornell University Press, 1995.
[Bole, 1994] T. J. Bole. The Cogency of the Logic’s Argumentation: Securing the Dialectic’s
Claim to Justify Categories, in Hegel Reconsidered: Beyond Metaphysics and the Authori-
tarian State, eds. H. T. Engelhardt and T. Pinkard, Dordrecht, Boston, MA, and London:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994.
[Brink, 2003] D. O. Brink. Perfectionism and the Common Good: Themes in the Philosophy of
T. H. Green, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2003.
[Case, 1911] T. Case. Logic, in The Encyclopaedia Britannica (11th edition), Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1911.
[den Otter, 1996] S. den Otter. British Idealism and Social Explanation, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1996.
[Frank, 1991] H. Frank. Reform Eﬀorts of Logic at Mid-Nineteenth Century in Germany, in
World Views and Scientiﬁc Discipline Formation, eds. R. Cohen and W. R. Woodward,
Dordrecht, Boston, MA, and London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991.
[Gallison, 1990] P. Gallison. Aufbau/Bauhaus:
Logical Positivism and Architectural Mod-
ernism, in Critical Inquiry 16: 709-752, 1990.
[Griﬃn, 1991] N. Griﬃn. Russell’s Idealist Apprenticeship, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991.
[Heidegger, 1988] M. Heidegger. Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit, Bloomington & Indianapolis,
IN: Indiana University Press, 1988.
[Hodgson, 1883] R. Hodgson. Critical notice of Essays in Philosophical Criticism, in Mind 8:
580-594, 1883.
[Hylton, 1984] P. Hylton .The Nature of the Proposition and the Revolt against Idealism in Phi-
losophy in History, eds. R. Rorty, J. B. Schneewind and Q. Skinner, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1984.
[Hylton, 1990] P. Hylton. Russell, Idealism, and the Emergence of Analytic Philosophy, Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1990.
[K¨ohnke, 1991] K. C. K¨ohnke. The Rise of Neo-Kantianism: German Academic Philosophy
between Idealism and Positivism, trans. R. J. Hollingdale, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1991.
[Kusch, 1995] M. Kusch. Psychologism: A Case Study in the Sociology of Philosophical Knowl-
edge, London: Routledge, 1995.
[Mace, 1933] C. A. Mace. The Principles of Logic, London, New York, NY & Toronto: Long-
mans, Green and Co, 1993.
[Mackintosh, 1903] R. Mackintosh. Hegel and Hegelianism, Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1903.
[Mander, 1994] W. J. Mander. An Introduction to Bradley’s Metaphysics, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1994.
[Mander, 2000] W. J. Mander. Bosanquet and the Concrete Universal, in The Modern School-
man 77: 293-308, 2000.
[Mander, 2001] W. J. Mander. Bradley and Green on Relations, in Idealism, Metaphysics and
Community, ed. W. Sweet, Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001.
[Manser, 1983] A. Manser. Bradley’s Logic, Totowa, NJ: Barnes & Noble, 1983.
[Merz, 1896–1914] J. T. Merz. A History of European Thought in the Nineteenth Century (4
vols.) Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood & Sons, 1896–1914. Reprinted in 1965,
New York: Dover.

The Idealists
661
[Moore, 1959] G. E. Moore. Philosophical Studies, Paterson, NJ: Littleﬁeld, Adams & Company
(reprint of 1922 Routledge & Kegan Paul edition). 1959.
[Mure, 1978] G. R. G. Mure. Idealist Epilogue, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978.
[Passmore, 1966] J. Passmore. A Hundred Years of Philosophy, New York, NY: Basic Books,
1966.
[Pattison, 1876] M. Pattison. Philosophy at Oxford, in Mind 1: 82–97, 1876.
[Pester, 1991] R. Pester. The Transformation of German Philosophy in the Context of Scientiﬁc
Research in the Nineteenth Century, in World Views and Scientiﬁc Discipline Formation,
eds. R. Cohen and W. R. Woodward, Dordrecht, Boston, MA, and London: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1991.
[Reichenbach, 1961] H. Reichenbach. The Rise of Scientiﬁc Philosophy, Los Angeles, CA: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1961.
[Richter, 1964] M. Richter. The Politics of Conscience: T. H. Green and his Age, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1964.
[Royce, 1919] J. Royce. Lectures on Modern Idealism, New Haven & London: Yale UP, 1919
[Russell, 1964] B. Russell. The Problems of Philosophy, London, New York, NY, and Toronto:
Oxford University Press, 1964.
[Schn¨adelbach, 1984] H. Schn¨adelbach. Philosophy in Germany, 1831 — 1933, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1984.
[Sprigge, 1994] T. L. S. Sprigge. Bradley, in The Nineteenth Century, ed. C. L. Ten, London
and New York, NY: Routledge, 1994.
[Stormer, 1979] G. D. Stormer. Hegel and the Secret of James Hutchinson Sterling, in Idealistic
Studies 9: 33-54, 1979.
[Stern, 1994] R. Stern. British Hegelianism: A Non-Metaphysical View, in European Journal of
Philosophy 2: 293-321, 1994.
[Stern, forthcoming] R. Stern. Hegel, British Idealism, and the Curious Case of the Concrete
Universal, in British Journal for the History of Philosophy, forthcoming.
[Sullivan, 1991] D. Sullivan. Frege on the Cognition of Objects, Philosophical Topics 19: 245–
268, 1991.
[Sullivan, 2002] D. Sullivan. The Further Question:
Frege, Husserl and the neo-Kantian
Paradigm. Philosophiegeschichte und Logische Analyse 5: 77–95, 2002.
[Thomas, 1987] G. Thomas. The Moral Philosophy of T. H. Green, Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1987.
[Vilkko, 2002] R. Vilkko. A Hundred Years of Logical Investigations: Reform Eﬀorts of Logic
in Germany 1781 — 1879, Paderborn: Mentis Verlag, 2002.
[Vincent, 2006] A. Vincent. Becoming Green in Victorian Studies 48: 488-504, 2006.
[Ward, 1967] Mrs Humphrey Ward. Robert Elsmere, Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press,
1967; (text is a facsimile of the 1888 one-volume edition published by Macmillan & Co.).
[Warnock, 1958] G. J. Warnock. English Philosophy since 1900, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1958.

This page intentionally left blank 

BRADLEY’S LOGIC
William J. Mander
1
INTRODUCTION
The history of logical thought in Britain contains few texts more central than
The Principles of Logic by F.H.Bradley. The date of its ﬁrst appearance (1883)
heralds a sharp and profound turn in logical thinking in Britain as, almost single-
handedly, it shifted the main patterns of thought — which prior to that had been
either empiricist in the fashion of John Stuart Mill or deriving from the Scottish
common-sense philosophy of Sir William Hamilton — in an idealist direction, one
inspired by Kant and Hegel yet quite transcending them. That some twenty years
later the work of Russell, Whitehead and Frege precipitated another equally radical
and widespread shift, one of whose marks was a near-complete neglect of what had
gone before, has served to hide this fact. Yet the vast majority of philosophical
work dating from this turn of the century period is written in an idealist style for
which Bradley’s Principles is the pre-requisite starting point.
However, it is not only with respect to the history of logic that Bradley’s thought
deserves our attention, for his logical contributions retain great interest and value
in their own right. Running through his ideas modern logicians are able to ﬁnd
many speciﬁc insights and analyses of value and illumination to their own eﬀorts,
but perhaps the greatest lesson which his logic has to teach us lies in the profound
diﬀerence of his approach to our own. Studying his logic reminds us how many
diﬀerent types of thinking have borne — and still could with equal right claim
— the name of logic other than simply that narrow and speciﬁc discipline with
which we are familiar today. Yet for all that it can teach us, the distance between
Bradley’s approach to logic and that with which we are familiar make him hard
reading today. The following essay aims to ease that burden and to explain his
basic logical ideas.
1.1
Bradley’s conception of Logic
A helpful place to begin is with Bradley’s conception of the purpose of logic. The
objective of logic, claims Bradley, is
“to set out the general essence and the main types of inference and
judgment, and, with regard to each of these, to explain its nature and
special merits and defects. . . . The degree in which the various types
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 4: British Logic in the Ninteenth Century.
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

664
William J. Mander
each succeed and fail in reaching their common end, gives to each of
them its respective place and its rank in the whole body.
Such an
exposition is in my view the main purpose of Logic.” (PL 620)1
The thought that it is the business of logic to classify and analyse types of
thinking is familiar, less so that it should be given such an evaluative role, that it
should rank forms of thought for their eﬀectiveness in reaching their aim. For what
is that aim? And where does it come from? And how is success to be measured?
The key to answering these questions is to understand that for Bradley logic is
the science of knowledge; it is concerned with determining how adequate forms of
thought are to express and convey truth. The relevant rules here are partly internal
to the practice of thinking itself — thought in its very nature sets its own goals
and critical standards — but they stem also in part from deeper metaphysical
questions about the nature of thought and reality, which raises complex questions
regarding the relation between logic and metaphysics.
To Bradley there is no
absolute distinction between logic and metaphysics — as he himself says, “I am not
sure where Logic begins or ends.” (PL ix) — but to the degree that metaphysical
questions may be kept at bay room may be made for a discipline designated Logic.
For Aristotle, who founded the logical system which dominated throughout
most of philosophical history, logic was something static. It was a ﬁxed catego-
rization of the forms of thinking and reasoning. The idealists had a very diﬀerent
understanding of logic. On their view, the various forms of thought form a scale;
an ascendance of forms, one succeeding the other from the lowest up to the high-
est. The limits of the scale were measured in truth and individuality, from the
barest and least true to the fullest and most true. This scale was moreover some-
thing teleological, a fundamentally dynamic structure, with each form leading to
and even bringing about the next.
For thought was understood as itself seek-
ing something, even as possessing its own inner drive towards truth, consistency,
and completeness, a drive that leads it onwards from unsatisfactory expressions
to more satisfactory ones. The extent to which this developmental structure was
a notional one, or a real historical process in the psychological history, either of
the individual or of the species, was generally left unclear, but its centrality in the
idealists’ overall conception of logic is paramount.
Although, by its means our diﬀerent patterns of thinking can be arranged in
some sort of hierarchy, Bradley holds that logic as a subject has no unique start-
ing point — no privileged set of concepts or axioms — nor any one correct route
through its matter. (PL 597) There is no foundation upon which is gradually built
in stages the whole ediﬁce, rather we should think of logic as a connected whole,
such that wherever we start we in some way bring in everything else. Indeed, in
a sense it is circular in that everything supports and is supported by everything
else, in the end turning back on itself, while nothing can be supported by anything
1All references to Bradley’s works are given in the text by the following abbreviations: AR
= Appearance and Reality (2nd edition), PL = The Principles of Logic (2nd edition) , ETR =
Essays on Truth and Reality, CE = Collected Essays.

Bradley’s Logic
665
outside the system as a whole. In this way, although Bradley starts the Princi-
ples by discussing the notion of judgment, he is not thereby claiming that this is
somehow a more basic notion for logic than any other (PL 1) for, he admits,
“any one of the three, judgment, inference, and ideas, can be plausibly
shown as preceding the others. But really, here as elsewhere, what
in every sense comes ﬁrst is the concrete whole, and no mere aspect,
abstracted from the whole, can in the end exist by itself.” (PL 640)
Such a coherentist attitude is one that might not seem so strange today, given
a general suspicion of foundationalism and a widespread recognition of the arbi-
trariness of alternative axiomatisations, but one big diﬀerence between Bradley’s
approach to logic and that of contemporary thinkers is that he had no interest in
merely formal logic. In contrast to the modern discipline, which virtually deﬁnes
logic as a concern with the formal properties of thoughts, Bradley regards it as
impossible to model logic on mathematics, and his use of symbols is as sparing as
it is lacking in system. Bradley devotes an entire chapter of his book to exposing
the inadequacies of purely formal logic (Book III, Part II, Chapter I) urging that
It is not possible to draw anything except a relative distinction between form and
content (PL 524, 532), that the possibilities of thought and reason exhaust any
ﬁxed list of schemata (PL 521), and that little of logical interest depends on solely
on form — for the ultimate test is always one of the adequacy of our scientiﬁc
or philosophical thinking to fact or reality itself. This general attitude is further
visible in his attack on what was, perhaps, the most highly developed purely for-
mal logic of his day, William Stanley Jevons’ equational logic.2 He devotes an
entire chapter to refuting Jevons (Book II, Part II, Chapter IV) but rather than
consider the formal adequacy if the system — indeed he concedes that it is well
able to model much of our reasoning (PL 370, 377) — he focuses in on the meta-
physical question of whether propositions really assert identity as Jevons suggests.
Bradley’s lack of interest in this side of matters is, of course, the one respect in
which his logic most rapidly dated, for the great advances in logical thinking in
the years after his time have been precisely in its formal aspects.
1.2
Inﬂuences
Bradley’s logic did not simply emerge in a vacuum and it is useful to consider some
of the inﬂuences, both positive and negative, which shaped his thinking. We can
begin with Hegel. There has been much debate concerning the extent and nature
of Hegel’s inﬂuence on Bradley, but whether or not one wants to mark Bradley as
merely an ‘Hegelian’ (as some have done) or to suggest a more complex relation,
there can be no dispute that Hegel exercised an absolutely central inﬂuence on
Bradley’s thought about logic. This can be seen in his advocacy of such things
as the notion of identity-in-diﬀerence, the concept of concrete universal, the view
2Jevons [1874]. For a more detailed discussion of Bradley’s treatment of Jevons see Griﬃn
[1996, pp. 217–230].

666
William J. Mander
that association involves universals, his distinction between the genuine and the
spurious inﬁnite, the view that thought begins in the unity of experience, and
the use of holistic coherentism as a standard. On the other hand, however, The
Principles of Logic is certainly not in any obvious sense an ‘Hegelian’ logic; it is
no a priori attempt to determine a hierarchical scheme of categories for thought,
nor does it contain explicitly dialectical triads of reasoning. Indeed in anticipation
of the charge Bradley says in his Preface to the book
“Assuredly I think him a great philosopher; but I never could have
called myself an Hegelian, partly because I cannot say that I have
mastered his system, and partly because I could not accept what seems
his main principle, or at least part of that principle. I have no wish
to conceal how much I owe to his writings; but I will leave it to those
who can judge better than myself, to ﬁx the limits within which I have
followed him. As for the ‘Hegelian School’ which exists in our reviews,
I know no one who has met with it anywhere else.” (PL x)
The ‘main principle’ here is Hegel’s panlogisism, the rejection of which placed
Bradley at some distance from his fellow British idealists, many of whom certainly
were deserving of the term ‘Hegelian’ (Richard Burdon Haldane, for example.)
Here it is appropriate to discuss another key inﬂuence on Bradley’s logic, Her-
mann Lotze to whom Bradley admits, of recent writers, he owes the most (PL ix).
Though also an idealist (of a sort) and not without debts to Hegel, Lotze rejected
Hegel’s key identiﬁcation of thought and reality, and here Bradley found a point
of connection, for he too thinks it necessary in the end to draw a clear distinction
between these two.3 Further crucial points of inﬂuence are to be found in Lotze’s
worries about relations and his strong emphasises on organic unity, both picked up
by Bradley. Even if the worry about relations only becomes explicit in Bradley’s
Appearance and Reality published ten years after the Principles, there can be no
doubt that both function as constant underlying themes in the Principles also.
Another key inﬂuence on Bradley’s thought was Johan Friedrich Herbart, Lotze’s
predecessor at Gottingen and Kant’s successor at Konigsburg. Herbart rejected
not only Hegel, but idealism too, nonetheless Bradley was much inﬂuenced by
him. We shall see below, for example, how one of Bradley’s key arguments for the
hypothetical nature of judgment, its inability to refer directly to reality, originates
from Herbart.
I have mentioned something of the positive inﬂuences, but just as important on
Bradley’s thought were the negative ones, those thinkers he reacted against. In
particular Bradley sets himself against the whole empirical psychological tradition
3It is worth noting that Bradley’s interest in Lotze was not unusual. Now largely forgotten,
Lotze was very inﬂuential in the 1880’s in Britain. Even more eﬀort was put into the translation
of his work as into that of Hegel — all his main writings were translated during this period. The
fact that he was taken so seriously by all the British idealists shows that they fully understood
the problematic nature of the Hegelian identity, and thus that the diﬀerence between them and
Bradley was not perhaps so great as all that. For more on Lotze and British Idealism see Devaux
[1932] and Kuntz [1971, pp. 48–68].

Bradley’s Logic
667
in Logic, ﬁrst clearly formulated in Britain by Hume, but developed by Hartley,
Bentham, James and John Stuart Mill, and Alexander Bain.4 According to this
view, ideas are atomistic psychical states whose intentionality is a matter of their
resemblance to the objects which they are supposed to represent. The ways in
which they follow one another in our thinking history is to be explained in terms of
habits — ‘psychical bonds’ or ‘associations’ — set up in us by repeated experience.
Against this widespread view, Bradley insists (as we shall see below) that thoughts
are ﬁrst and foremost logical entities, and the connections between them logical
ones, not psychological. In so far as this shapes his entire view, we must regard
his logic as in a very real sense born out of opposition to psychological empiricism.
Opposition to psychologism constitutes another point where we can trace the
inﬂuence of Lotze. For he too, was also strongly anti-psychologistic in his under-
standing of concepts and logical processes. Concept formation is a function of
thought proper not the psychological processes of abstraction or synthesis, while
justiﬁcation derives from the logical rather than the psychological basis for our
thinking.
In this connection it is worth noting, too, the inﬂuence of Lotze on
Frege, one of the other great modern critics of psychologism. Not least through
its also being a hallmark of Fregean thought, anti-psychologism is the one area of
Bradley’s logic that has won him greatest praise among modern logicians.
But a word of warning should be sounded least we overestimate Bradley’s op-
position to psychologism. For while certainly he opposes those empirically minded
thinkers who conﬂate logic and psychology, he nonetheless is not to be found
among the class of those who regard logic as a merely formal science unconnected
with human thought. His general conception of logic is not that it is the study
of pure abstract timeless forms, but rather that it is the study of mental acts
and functions; it is judgments and inference which we study, not propositions and
entailment. But both judgments and inferences are things which occur in the con-
scious mind. Bradley makes the point forcibly with regard to truth, the ultimate
concern of logic. He insists, “truth in the end is not truth unless it is thought, and
so is actually thought by this or that mind, and therefore is thought at some one
time.” (PL 704n)
1.3
The Principles of Logic
Speaking as I have done so far of Bradley’s ‘logical views,’ there is one further
point that needs to be made before we examine the Principles of Logic itself.
This concerns the evolution of Bradley’s logical thought. The Principles of Logic
was ﬁrst published in 1888. But Bradley’s opinions did not remain unchanged.
There were many developments which found their way into subsequent books and
articles. Of particular signiﬁcance in this regard was Bernard Bosanquet’s book
Knowledge and Reality, a detailed criticism of the Principles, published just two
4It should not be thought, of course, that the assimilation of logic to psychology is a uniquely
British phenomenon. Another important proponent of the view was Christoph Sigwart, a ﬁgure
to whom Bradley regards himself as both indebted and disagreeing.

668
William J. Mander
years later in 1885. While broadly sympathetic to Bradley’s approach, Bosanquet
nonetheless found much also to criticise in it.
In the end, but not until 1922,
there appeared a second edition of the Principles incorporating Bradley’s various
changes of mind. This second edition leaves the basic text unchanged, but has
a great many footnotes and twelve terminal essays, vastly expanding the whole.
Many of the changes are minor, but many too are substantial, for by that time,
and in no small part as the result of Bosanquet’s criticisms (PL viii), Bradley had
come to feel that there were numerous places in the ﬁrst edition where he had gone
badly wrong. Inevitably this must complicate any presentation of his views, and
the most important of the second edition changes will be noted as our discussion
progresses.
2
JUDGMENT
2.1
General comments
The Principles of Logic deals with two broad subjects — judgement (Book I) and
inference (Books II and III, each themselves divided into a ﬁrst and second part.)
Following Bradley’s order we may begin our account with a consideration of the
ﬁrst chapter of Book I in which Bradley sets out his general conception of the
nature of judgment.
Bradley’s choice of unit, the judgment, is unfamiliar today, but quite deliberate.
It is chosen in contrast to the sentence, because Bradley holds that sentences
— which are essentially grammatical units — often fail radically to capture the
underlying logical structure of the thoughts behind them. (We shall encounter
numerous examples of this failure as our discussion proceeds.) That such failure
can occur is a commonplace in modern logic, with credit for ﬁrst seeing it clearly
often given to Frege and Russell, however Bradley has as much claim as they to
be included in this list.5 Notwithstanding this agreement, Bradley’s selection of
unit remains at variance with theirs, for he also chooses judgment in contrast to
the proposition. Propositions, while admittedly logical rather than psychological
creatures, are rejected by Bradley as illegitimate abstractions; too far removed
from the realities of belief and knowledge to which they are supposed to contribute.
For it is a key element of Bradley’s view that judgment can not be understood
in isolation from the actual context in which it is made. Unlike a proposition, a
judgement is an act, speciﬁcally a mental one.
Bradley describes judgment in the following way: “Judgment proper is the
act which refers an ideal content. . . to a reality beyond the act.” (PL 10) 6 His
thought is that in judgment we abstract out some aspect or feature of the world
5Indeed with respect to certain analyses (such as the treatment of universal statements as
conditionals) a case can be made out for Bradley’s inﬂuence on Russell.
6“[A]ﬃrmation, or judgment, consists in saying, This idea is no mere idea, but is a quality
of the real. The act attaches the ﬂoating adjective to the nature of the world, and, at the same
time, tells me it was there already” (PL 11).

Bradley’s Logic
669
we encounter and assign it objective reference to some part or parts of reality; we
characterise some object or other by predicating our ideas of it. This statement
needs some unpacking.
The word ‘ideal’ in the phrase ‘ideal content’ is simply the adjective of idea,7
so what Bradley is claiming in his deﬁnition here is that judgment involves the
manipulation of ideas. But what are ideas? It is crucial to understand Bradley
correctly on this matter. He distinguishes between two senses of ‘idea’; between,
as we might variously put it, the symbol and the symbolised, the image and its
meaning, the psychological and the logical idea. (PL 6)
As individual psychical occurrences, ideas “are facts unique with deﬁnite qual-
ities. . . the same in all points with none other in the world” (PL 4). They are
particular existences which occur at speciﬁc times, determinate yet ﬂeeting events
in the ceaseless ﬂux that is our inner mental history.
But, Bradley goes on, these private mental events can have a meaning as well
as a nature, the psychological ideas can come to be logical ideas also. This occurs
when they are treated as symbols, as signs of an existence other than themselves.
Indeed, he insists that, in the logical sense, “Ideas are not ideas until they are
symbols.” (PL 2) Ideas for logic have meaning, they refer beyond themselves. They
do not properly ‘exist,’ in the manner of some event having a location in space and
time, they are facts no more inside our heads than outside them, (PL 7) rather
they are universals such that more than one mind may without contradiction think
one and the same thought. Making the point in a slightly diﬀerent way Bradley
distinguishes within any psychological idea between its nature or content and its
actual existence — its ‘what’ and its ‘that’ as he calls them. In becoming an idea
for logic the content is separated notionally from its existence and referred to some
other reality. In this way an idea, considered in its logical aspect, is, he thinks, a
kind of “parasite cut loose.” (PL 8) It does not exist in its own right.
Bradley’s purpose in drawing this distinction is to insist that logic is interested
in ideas only as meanings and not as mental events, and in so claiming he is setting
himself sharply against the British empiricist tradition. For that tradition, from
Locke, Berkeley and Hume through to Hartley and John Stuart Mill regards ideas
— the subject matter of logic and philosophy — precisely as those things which
psychological introspection reveals to us, the dated mental events which make up
our private stream of consciousness.
Yet Bradley sets himself against all this,
urging that “In England at all events we have lived too long in the psychological
attitude.” (PL 2) This is a radical attack, and the resultant conception of ideas
one of the most characteristic features of his logic. But immediately, we can draw
at least two corollaries distancing him from his psychologistic predecessors.
First of all, it follows that an idea is not, as traditional empiricism has often
thought, some sort of a copy or image of what it represents. Ideas do not posses
meaning by copying the objects or impressions which they signify, for they do
not possess meaning in their own right at all. Rather they are given meaning
by being made to stand for something else. Yet this relation of representation is
7[Stock, 1984].

670
William J. Mander
one of artiﬁcial custom, as can clearly be seen from one of the examples which
Bradley uses to illustrate it, viz. the signiﬁcation of ﬂowers. (PL 3) That some
ﬂowers stand for love and others for hope is clearly a matter of convention, not
resemblance.
Of course, images may come before the mind when we think or
understand, and they may even resemble the object of our thought, but that is
not what gives them their meaning.
A second corollary concerns our ideas of universals. For the traditional em-
piricist, who believes that our ideas copy our impressions, and that all of our
impressions are of particular existences, our acquisition of universal concepts is a
puzzle. The struggles of Locke and Berkeley on this issue are familiar. Bradley,
however, insists that it is simply a “false assertion, that merely individual ideas
are the early furniture of the primitive mind” (PL 35) and so for him the problem
is non-existent. Unlike mental images, logical ideas are not particular, either in
their being or in their signiﬁcation, but rather universal from the start. We may
use a particular word or image, but insofar as we or others could use an identical
word or image on another occasion to refer to the same thing, the idea we use is
a universal. And what we pick out too is something inherently universal. (This
second point will be argued in more detail below.)
Given that judgments are made up of ideas referred away to reality it might
be wondered why Bradley’s logic has only two main divisions, instead of the tra-
ditional three: terms, propositions, inferences. But this is quite deliberate and,
in fact, even to speak of ideas in this way as the ‘components’ of a judgment is
potentially misleading. For on Bradley’s view judgments are prior to ideas. As
logical entities, as things possessing truth or falsity rather than just psychological
existence, there can be ideas only in so far as they are signs, but ideas can be signs
only in so far as actually used to refer to things, that is to say, in so far as they
ﬁgure in the context of judgment. Thus although we may consider their nature,
ideas have no independent reality, and there exists only a conceptual diﬀerence
between them and the judgments in which they occur. In this way Bradley an-
ticipates another axiom of modern logic, the ‘context principle’ — the doctrine
that a word has meaning only in the context of a proposition. Often attributed to
Frege, this principle has in fact been held by many before him, including many of
the British idealists.8
To say that ideas occur only in judgments does not, of course, imply that it
is impossible to say something by means of a single word or idea — for surely
we may usefully cry out such warnings as ‘Wolf!’
or ‘Fire!’
etc.
The correct
conclusion to draw is rather that such interjections may in fact be, contrary to
their appearance, complete assertions or judgments. Since they can readily be the
“vehicle of truth and falsehood,” (PL 57) they are to be understood as shorthands
for such assertions as ‘Here is a wolf’ or ‘There is a ﬁre.’
They are implicit
judgments whose subject is the unspeciﬁed present environment, which they then
qualify by the attribute in question.
8It can, for example be found in both T.H.Green and Bernard Bosanquet. See Manser [1983,
pp. 60–4].

Bradley’s Logic
671
If ideas are universals, it must be asked how we ever come to connect them
with reality itself for that, to Bradley’s mind, is something quite individual and
particular. The answer to this question is: through sense perception. Bradley
is insistent that it is in present, waking awareness, and in that alone, that we
encounter reality. It our sole point of cognitive connection with reality. He says
“we seem to ﬁnd contact with reality and to touch the ground nowhere, so to speak,
outside the presented.” (PL72) In consequence, our judgments, to be judgments
of reality, must all of them be judgments of perception. Bradley insists that “All
judgements predicate their ideal content as an attribute of the real which appears
in presentation.” (PL 50) 9
Sometimes this occurs directly, and we simply describe what is perceptually
given to us. But of course Reality vastly exceeds our limited perception of it;
it is never fully given, and often hardly given at all.
And thus in most cases
our judgments refer only indirectly to perceptually given reality. The qualitative
content of our judgment “is not attributed to the given as such; but by establishing
its connection with what is presented; it is attributed to the real which appears
in that given.” (PL 72) Though a continuity with what is given, we attach it to
one and the same world as that we encounter in perception. (We will encounter
several examples of this indirect attachment below.)
This link between judgment and conscious perceptual awareness is crucial for
Bradley, and it should be noted that it goes both ways. Not only does judgment
essentially involve perceptual awareness, but all perceptual awareness essentially
involves judgment. There can no more be data without interpretation, than inter-
pretation without data. (ETR 204) There is no pure sensuous given about which
we then theorise or judge. Rather, from the ﬁrst, perception involves judgment;
so that, notwithstanding the possibility of our also considering them separately in
thought, these are in reality but two sides of a single phenomenon.
Perception plays two roles in Bradley’s theory of judgment. Not only does it
provide us (as we have just seen) with reality to which our ideas are referred, but
it serves too as the source from which those ideas are drawn. For all his insis-
tence on their logical character, it is signiﬁcant that Bradley never uses the term
‘concept’ to characterise the tools of our thinking. (Just as at the next level up
he rejects ‘propositions’ in favour of actual judgments) his ideas are not abstract
platonic entities, but retain a residual tie to the psychological. A logical idea or
sign, he says, consists of a part or aspect of the content of some mental state “cut
oﬀ, ﬁxed by the mind and considered apart from the existence” of that state. (PL
4) But the contents we abstract and refer away are precisely those given to us in
actual perception. Here once again we see that it would not do to overestimate
Bradley’s anti-pschologism. Though not themselves psychological entities, ideas,
on Bradley’s conception, retain an essential connection with psychological phe-
nomena. Insofar as the logical idea is an abstraction from the psychological idea,
it continues in at least that sense to depend upon it.
9“We escape from ideas, and from mere universals, by a reference to the real which appears
in perception” (PL 69).

672
William J. Mander
While noting the basic point that Bradley does not distance himself wholly from
the ‘psychological attitude’ is easy enough, settling the precise sense in which our
ideas depend upon the psychological (or psychical, as Bradley calls it) is much
harder. In holding perception as the source of our ideas, it is tempting to think
of them as abstractions from mental images, but that would seem to imply that
in judgment there must always be present a mental image (even if the idea itself
is not to be identiﬁed with the image.) But if that ever was a requirement of
the theory, it was certainly one that Bradley found himself wanting to draw back
from in the second edition. For he argues there that in his original presentation
he had too much exaggerated the role of images. (PL 38n8) Yet if not involving
an image, the sense in which an idea is nonetheless something abstracted or cut
oﬀfrom what is given in psychical life remains both unspeciﬁed and unclear.
Because it typically involves numerous ideas, judgment is usually thought to
possess a structure, and prior to the twentieth century this was always thought to
be subject-predicate in form. That is to say, all judgments were held to attribute
some predicate to some subject. Bradley rejects this account of the structure of
judgment. He has two points of diﬀerence with it.
First of all he argues that it is better to regard the whole judgment as single
ideal content attributed to the subject of the judgment. For a single judgment like
‘The wolf eats the lamb’ can be divided up in many diﬀerent ways and, depending
on the ﬁneness of the divisions, be thought to contain any number of diﬀerent ideas.
(PL 11) It makes more sense thinks Bradley to hold that “Any content whatever
which the mind takes as a whole, however large or however small, however simple or
however complex, is one idea, and its manifold relations are embraced in an unity.”
(PL 12) The notion of ‘one idea’ here is, unlike the ‘simple idea’ of empiricism,
the notion of something which, though uniﬁed, may be possessed also of internal
complexity. Bradley’s thought here also undermines any distinction we might be
tempted to make between simple and complex propositions. There are no atomic
or elementary thoughts. We can, thinks Bradley, divide up thoughts how we like.
All that is objectionable “is our then proceeding to deny that the whole before
our mind is a single idea.” (PL 11)
Particularly criticised is the received view that all judgments resolve into the
single uniform scheme; the subject predicate form: ‘S is P’. It is says Bradley
a mere “superstition” (PL 13, 21, 50) to hold that in judgment we use one idea
(a copula) to connect two others (a subject and a predicate). We do not. One
strategy which he employs to make this point is simply to list types of propositions
which it is very hard to analyse in this way, such as ‘A and B are equal’ or ‘The
soul exists.’ (PL 13) But he has a deeper, more theoretical, argument as well.
Thinking about links, such as conjunction or the copula, which, it might seem, we
use to combine our ideas, it needs to be remembered that these
“relations between the ideas are themselves ideal. They are not the
psychical relations of mental facts.
They do not exist between the
symbols, but hold in the symbolized. They are part of the meaning
and not of the existence” (PL 11).

Bradley’s Logic
673
In the judgment ‘The wolf is eating the lamb,’ the idea of ‘eating’ does not
simply connect the two ideas, ‘wolf’ and ‘lamb.’ It is rather a third idea which
along with them we refer to the situation itself. And the same holds with such
words as ‘and’ and ‘is.’ They are not ancillary to our thoughts, but part of what
we are thinking.
Bradley’s second point of diﬀerence with the subject-predicate form of judgment
follows from the ﬁrst; it concerns the subject of our judgments. Subject-predicate
judgments can be regarded as attributing some idea or predicate to their subject.
But if, as Bradley thinks, the whole judgment forms one single idea, of what
subject is this idea being predicated? Instead of each picking out diﬀerent subjects,
Bradley suggests that all judgments should be read as having the same subject —
reality as a whole, to which they attribute their entire content. Thus the judgment
‘S is P’, instead of picking out S and saying that it is P, we say of reality as a
whole that it is ‘S-P ish,’ or as he later puts it “Reality is such that S is P.” (PL
630) In this sense all judgments have denotation and all are existential (ETR 426n)
for all refer to something that cannot fail to be present, namely, reality itself.
It might be thought that, if not the element indicated by the subject term,
the subject of judgment ought to be, not reality as a whole, but just reality as
it appears to us.
Bradley, however, would disagree with that.
Although the
real is something which appears in perception, it is not identical with the merely
momentary appearance (PL 50, PL 70–2). “The real, which appears in perception,
does not appear in one single moment” (PL 54) he says. Momentary presentation
is an unreal abstraction, which transcends itself; it is but a fragment of a much
wider reality.
The real appears in, but is not identical with, such momentary
presentation. It gives us knowledge that things are, but not what they are.
Understood in this way, the subject, we might say, does not belong to or fall
within the content of our judgment at all. It is “never an idea” but “always reality”
itself (PL 81), that to which all of our ideas are referred. This way of putting
the matter, however, is not entirely happy in so far as it suggests that we can
regard the subject of the judgment (reality as a whole) as something completely
separate from our ideas of it. Yet this cannot be completely right for it amounts, in
eﬀect, to a kind of dualism which in the ultimate (metaphysical) analysis Bradley
would reject. And in the second edition his statement is more nuanced; thought is
always continuous with, and never ultimately opposed to, the underlying reality
from which it emerges.10
His distinctive position with respect to the subject of judgment was one which
Bradley felt called for modiﬁcation in the second edition of the Principles. With-
out denying that it is reality as a whole that is always the ‘ultimate subject’ of
our judgments, Bradley came to feel that this common referent is not quite the
undiﬀerentiated whole it ﬁrst seems. Rather judgments have also what he vari-
10See Ferreira [1999, p. 45]. For example in the ﬁrst edition he says, “[I]n every judgment
there is a subject of which the ideal content is asserted. But this subject of course can not belong
top the content or fall within it” (PL 13) But this statement is withdrawn, “We have not here a
case of mere Yes or No” he says. (PL39 n17).

674
William J. Mander
ously calls a ‘special’ or ‘limited’ or ‘selected’ subject — the point at which reality
as a whole presents itself to us in perception, the point at which we feel ourselves
called upon to qualify it as we do.11 “In judgment the Reality to which in fact
we refer is always something distinguished. . . . It is a limited aspect and portion
of the Universe. . . some special and emphasised feature in the total mass” he says,
yet because “[what] we have distinguished remains also inseparably in one with
our whole Universe,” they also qualify that wider whole. (PL 629, cf. 662)
To say that the mind abstracts from what is given it in perception some universal
content which it then applies to Reality makes it seem as though there were two
tasks which we must carry out in order to judge, as though the mind’s coming to
have ideas and its subsequent use of them were distinct and separable functions.
In the ﬁrst edition of the Principles Bradley certainly talks in this way as though
one and the same content could be aﬃrmed, hoped, questioned, etc, even that an
idea might be “held before the mind without any judgment.” (PL 76–7) But soon
after the book appeared 12 he changed his position and argued that abstraction
and reference were indistinguishable aspects of a single process, and that nowhere
can we ﬁnd any such ‘ﬂoating ideas’.
“Now a thought only ‘in my head’, or a bare idea separated from all
relation to the real world, is a false abstraction. For we have seen that
to hold a thought is, more or less vaguely, to refer it to Reality. And
hence an idea, wholly un-referred, would be a self-contradiction.” (AR
350)
“There is no and there can not be any such thing as a mere idea, an
idea outside any judgment and standing or ﬂoating by itself. We have
here again not an actual fact but an unreal abstraction. The essence
of an idea consists always in the loosening of ‘what’ from ‘that’. But,
apart from some transference, some reference elsewhere of the ‘what’,
no such loosening is possible.” (PL 640) (cf AR 324, ETR 28–64)
Bradley’s retraction here could be viewed as simply his coming to a fuller recog-
nition of his basic thesis that ideas are signs or symbols. For as such it is their
essence to refer beyond themselves; assertion is built into them from the start. To
put the point in another way, ideas can only be ideas in the context of a judgment,
but all judgments in their nature make a claim.
But there is more to the point that just this. Ideas do not simply try to refer,
thinks Bradley, they succeed in doing so. But an idea can only refer if there is
something in the world to which it does refer, and so in a sense it must be conceded
that all ideas are true. A comparison is helpful here. Frege, since he holds that a
name could have sense but no reference, would allow a singular thought even where
there existed no corresponding object. Bradley, in rejecting all such ﬂoating ideas,
11See Sprigge [1993, p. 301]; Ferreira [1999, p. 26].
12The change is clear by the time of Appearance and Reality, ten years later, but seems to
have occurred even earlier.

Bradley’s Logic
675
ideas un-referred to any object, holds that singular thought requires the presence
of the actual object.
Reality itself enters into the judgement.
The objects of
our thinking are not intentional objects, but reality itself; in modern parlance
‘meanings ain’t in the head.’
“A judgment, we assume naturally, says something about some fact
or reality. If we asserted or denied about anything else, our judgment
would seem to be a frivolous pretence. We must not only say some-
thing, but it must also be about something actual that we say it.” (PL
41)
But ﬂoating ideas were rejected not simply because they ran counter to his
theory of reference and judgment. Bradley came to see that, introducing a kind
of dualism between pure thought and reality, they were incompatible with the
kind of idealism he wished to develop. As Bradley sees it, both thought and its
object originate in a single experience and however distinct they may appear to
become, there remains a continuity between thought and its perceptual ground or
context. Floating ideas were rejected also because they were incompatible with
Bradley’s coherentism. For if we may start from ideas ﬂoating free of any reference
to reality, we might construct around them systems as extensive and coherent as
those we currently endorse, yet these would not thereby be true.13
This was
Russell’s famous objection to the coherence theory of truth.14 An insistence that
all ideas ﬁrst be anchored in or referred to reality eﬀectively blocks this objection
to coherentism.
Of course, the thought that ideas may be simply held before the mind without
judging is itself plausible, so if Bradley is to reject it, he will have some explaining
to do. In this regard, he adopts a two-fold strategy.
In the ﬁrst place he holds that surface grammar often misleads us as to the true
logical form of a judgment. Although the thought must be referred to reality, “[the]
ideal content may be applied subject to more or less transformation; its struggling
and conditional character may escape our notice, or may again be realised with
more or less transformation.” (AR 324) We saw above how a single word — ‘Wolf!’
‘Fire!’ etc. — might really be an implicit judgment. And in a similar way, though
I might take myself simply to imagine, say, a unicorn or a tree in winter, there
will always be involved some judgment or other, perhaps, that unicorns are white
or that trees in winter look sad.
Bare entertaining is not possible; thought is
always for some purpose, which involves judgment and, with analysis, that may
be uncovered.
A central role here is given to the notion of what Bradley calls ‘my real world,’
the universe of things continuous in space with my body, and in time with the
states and actions of that body. (ETR 460) This notion provides him with a tool
whereby many thoughts, which seem at ﬁrst to ﬂoat are, on analysis found to
13[Holdcroft, 1998, p. 171 ﬀ].
14[Russell, 1906–7, p. 33].

676
William J. Mander
refer implicitly to my real world. For example, a question seeks a truth which we
take to be already there (ETR 36), while something is called ‘imaginary’ only by
exclusion from this real world. (ETR 47)
The second part of the response to the apparent possibility of ﬂoating ideas is
to expand the realm of possible reference. My real world is not the only one. In
addition to this narrow sphere, he says, there are the worlds of duty, of religion, of
hope and desire, of dreams, madness and drunkenness, of politics or commerce, of
art and imagination, “all counting as elements in the total of reality.” (ETR 31)
Reality is the sum total of all these diﬀerent realities. Ideas which seem to ﬂoat
may be true of some other reality. “Because there are many worlds, the idea which
ﬂoats suspended above one of them is attached to another.” (ETR 32) Though it
comes into its own here as a device to assist in his rejection of ﬂoating ideas, this
(it should be noted) was not a new idea but something Bradley had already used
in the ﬁrst edition of the Principles. For considering there how best to analyse the
claim that ‘The wrath of the Homeric Gods is fearful’ in view of his thesis that
judgment must aﬃrm something of some reality, he responds that “In Homer it
is so; and surely a poem, surely any imagination, surely dreams and delusions,
and surely much more our words and our names are all of them facts of a certain
kind.” (PL 42)
In general, it can be said that the doctrine of ﬂoating ideas was an unfortunate
intrusion into the system, whose removal improved consistency. But it did necessi-
tate one or two changes elsewhere in the system, for example, as will be discussed
below, in his view of Negation.
2.2
The dialectic between categorical and hypothetical judgments
It is natural to make a distinction between categorical and hypothetical judgments,
between those which assert something unconditionally and those which make a
claim subject to other factors. Bradley argues that at a deeper level, however, this
distinction breaks down. Rather than mutually exclusive classes, all judgments
are seen to be somehow both conditional and categorical. The phrase here ‘at
a deeper level,’ is interesting and worth stopping to note.
It reﬂects, in part,
Bradley’s sense that the surface grammar of what we say may mask the true logical
grammar. But it is an indication also of his belief in a distinction — or perhaps
rather a continuum — between what we might term pragmatic and metaphysical
levels of discourse. Thought aims at ultimate truth and in the end this must take
it into deep metaphysical waters, but at a more pragmatic level many of these
complication may be relatively disregarded.
Bradley maintains both that all judgments are conditional and that all are
categorical. We can take each of these theses in turn. We can begin with the
ﬁrst. Although at one level it makes sense to think of categorical judgements,
Bradley admits, in the end this breaks down, and we must regard all judgments as
hypothetical.15 In order to appreciate this it is best to take the cases of universal
15Following Bradley in the Principles, I use here the terms categorical and hypothetical. But

Bradley’s Logic
677
and singular judgments separately.
Universal categorical judgments are conditionals because they have same truth
conditions as conditionals. For example, in asserting that ‘All animals are mortal’
it is not simply animals now that we are talking about but future animals too,
indeed, all possible animals. “We mean, ‘Whatever is an animal will die,’ but that
is the same as If anything is an animal then it is mortal. The assertion really is
about a mere hypothesis: it is not about fact.” (PL 47) Similarly Bradley suggests
that the assertion ‘Equilaterial triangles are equiangular’ simply aﬃrms that with
one quality you inevitably get the other; it says nothing about where, when or if
such things are to be found. (PL 82) Rather than a categorical assertion about
a determinate set of referents, what the assertion oﬀers is simply a connection
between ideas.
This analysis of universal judgments will of course seem both
familiar and natural to any one acquainted with modern logic. Indeed a case could
made that Russell, who is the principal source for this analysis in modern times,
derived it from Bradley.
It should be noted, however, that Bradley’s position
is not exactly the same as that adopted today. For (as we shall see below) he
draws a sharp distinction between true universal statements and mere collective
statements, restricting the hypothetical analysis to the former. Modern logic by
contrast makes no such restriction, but uses this analysis for all types of universal
statement.
Turning to singular categorical judgments, Bradley oﬀers two main arguments
for the conclusion that singular judgments are conditional. His ﬁrst argument is
one from what we might call the distorting incompleteness of perceptual selection.
In this argument Bradley takes what might be considered the paradigm example
of a singular categorical judgement, one in which we ascribe some character to
presently given sensation, and argues that it is quite unable to sustain its claim to
be truly categorical. Such judgments Bradley terms Analytic judgments of sense;
‘analytic’ not in any Kantian sense here, but because “in these we simply analyse
the given” (PL 49)
The problem with such analytic judgments of sense is that they take up only
a fragment of the reality given in ordinary experience; they latch upon one part
of what we perceive and characterise that ignoring the rest. Because of this they
suﬀer from the twin defects of incompleteness and distortion. It is incomplete
because it leaves out the context, but nothing can exist without context, and so
the judgment
“must always presuppose a further content which falls outside the frac-
tion it oﬀers. What it says is true, if true at all, because of something
else. The fact it states is really fact only in relation to the rest of the
context. It is not true except under that condition.” (PL 97)
But worse than this, by selecting something out of its context we distort it. Just
following the distinction that Bosanquet [1888] makes between them in his Logic (Bk.I, ch.VI.
p.234) Bradley changed his mind: “It is. . . better, I am now persuaded, not to say that every
judgment is hypothetical.” (AR 320).

678
William J. Mander
as a colour considered on its own in isolation can look quite diﬀerent from how it
does in context.
“It was in the fact and we have taken it out. It was of the fact and
we have given it independence. We have separated, divided, abridged,
dissected, we have mutilated the given. And we have done this arbi-
trarily; we have selected what we choose. But if this is so, and if every
analytic judgment must inevitably so alter the fact, how can it any
longer lay claim to truth?” (PL 94)
Clearly what lies behind both of these arguments is a committed holism, such
that everything is connected to everything else and everything depends on ev-
erything else. We assume the context is unimportant and can be pushed to the
back without cost, but that is wrong.
Generally the Principles tries to avoid
metaphysics, and it was not until afterwards, in Appearance and Reality, that he
went on to really demonstrate this. But his reasoning here, and elsewhere, can
leave us in no doubt that his basic holism was already in place at this stage.16
Bradley concludes that “analytic judgments of sense are all false” (PL 93) What
he means is that taken as they stand they are false, but that properly they are to
be read as subject to conditions, and thus really hypothetical. Treating singular
judgments in this way transforms them into universal conditionals; rather than
picking out individuals, they state entirely general relationships between grounds
and consequents.
Even if what Bradley has said here is correct, it might be objected that he has
hardly shown that all categorical judgments are hypothetical, for not all categorical
judgments are direct reports of sensory experience. Bradley is sensitive to this
charge and considers two further candidates, but neither he ﬁnds any more able
to defend their claim.
Synthetic judgments of sense state facts of time or space which go beyond what
is here and now directly perceived; they extend what is given in sensation. For
example, ‘This road goes to London,’ or ‘There is a garden on the other side of that
wall.’ (PL 49, 62). In this they are doubly hypothetical. In the ﬁrst place, in going
beyond the given, they explicitly involve inference. (PL 49, 55, 62, 73, 75) Finding
a link or point of identity between what is presented or given (“This road. . . ”
“. . . that wall”) and its ideal extension (“. . . goes to London” “There is a garden
on the other side of. . . ”)
they synthetically extend our knowledge.
However,
for Bradley inference is something essentially universal and hypothetical, so the
synthetic judgment can be no more categorical than the analytic upon which it is
based. (93). But these, of course, we have already seen to be conditional, and so
it is doubly so.
Another class of putative singular categorical judgments which Bradley consider
are non-sensory judgements, e.g. ‘God is a spirit,’ ‘the soul is a substance.’ (PL 49)
Despite himself mentioning them, Bradley says very little about such judgments.
16See, for example, PL 71.

Bradley’s Logic
679
(79, 107, 113n66) His ﬁnal view is that they cannot, but he is not explicit about
the reasons. But certainly the argument that we are next to consider would have
that result.
Bradley’s second main argument for the conclusion that singular judgments are
conditional is quite diﬀerent and works from the alleged impossibility of singular
reference. The argument, in fact, is one which he derives from Herbart,17 and
can be set out as follows: If all ideas are universal, and judgment consists in the
union of ideas, then all judgment is hypothetical. “A sentence like ‘All mules are
sterile’ links universals, and can only mean ‘anything with the property of being a
mule has the property of being sterile’, making no reference to anything speciﬁc.
It gives no information about the actual world unless we assume at the same time
that these general properties are in fact instantiated, and so in itself it would be
better read as saying, ‘If anything has the property of being a mules then it will
also have the property of being sterile.’ In other words, it gives us, not speciﬁc
details about how things are, but merely generalized information about how things
would be if certain other things were the case. A mere union of universals cannot
be true or correspond to individual reality itself.
But this contradicts our intuition that judgment is about reality. As such it is
not something Bradley can simply take on board. So his response to this argument
is somewhat equivocal. At the deepest level he rejects it by denying that judgment
is the union of ideas.
It thus forms part of his case against subject-predicate
structure of judgment. But at a lower level he ﬁnds it irresistible. At that level it
tells us that in so far as we take judgments to be composed of many ideas, it must
be regarded as merely hypothetical.
The engine that drives Herbart’s argument, and that so impresses Bradley, is
the notion that there is a gap between ideas and facts, that facts are singular and
ideas universal. Bradley spends a lot of time establishing this. To take the ﬁrst
half of this dichotomy, it is an axiomatic intuition for him that reality is singular.
“The fact given us is singular, it is quite unique; but our terms are all general, and
state a fact which may apply as well to many other cases” e.g. I have toothache
(PL 49–50) Again, “A fact is individual,” (PL 43) “The real is what is individual”
(PL 45)
That facts are singular is not perhaps so controversial. Nor is it usually felt to
be so worrying. Because most people have held that we have the power of singular
thought. But this is something Bradley denies. For him all ideas are universal.
“Nothing in the world that you can do to ideas, no possible torture will get out
of them an assertion that is not universal” (PL 63) Of course, no one, would deny
that many ideas are general, but it would be thought that some are particular.
Bradley considers four classes of putatively singular expression, none of which
are able to secure genuinely singular reference. Deﬁnite descriptions, such as ‘the
man wearing a pork-pie hat,’ or ‘the third turning on the left’, might seem to pick
out unique individuals. But on reﬂection we see that they always could apply to
other possible individuals as well. “The event you describe is a single occurrence,
17[Herbart, 1850, pp. 91–4].

680
William J. Mander
but what you say of it will do just as well for any number of events, imaginary or
real.” (PL 63)
We might think that time and space could come to our aid here. If ‘the man in
the hat’ could pick out more than one such individual, surely a further speciﬁcation
of the form, ‘at place x and time t’ can make good this gap. Bradley disagrees.
He says “We must get rid of the erroneous notion . . . that space and time are
‘principles of individuation,’ in the sense that a temporal or spatial exclusion will
confer uniqueness on any content.” (PL 63) For in themselves points of space
and time are utterly indistinguishable. It is only when “the series is taken as one
continuous whole, and the relations between its members are. . . ﬁxed by the unity
of the series” (PL 63–4) that exclusion makes its appearance. A given item may
be located in or by its context but cannot be picked out from its context.
Mill, along with many others thought that proper names were mere marks, that
they had denotation but no connotation. By contrast Bradley thinks proper names
are universals (PL 59–63) A person would not get a name unless he were recognised
as distinct, continuing though change, but this is a matter of his attributes. (PL
61)
But can we not at least pick out unique individuals using demonstratives, like
‘this’ or ‘that’?
Bradley disagrees.
Rather than being speciﬁc demonstratives
such as ‘this’ or ‘that’ are really the most general words there are, for anything
whatever may be called ‘this’ or ‘that.’ He draws a distinction between what he
calls ‘This’ and ‘thisness.’ The former is the felt unique encounter with reality —
“unique, not because it has a certain character, but because it is given” (PL 64) —
the latter what we get when we try to think or express this, the generic property
of being a unique individual which applies to everything. A thing’s “stamp of
uniqueness and singularity comes to it from the former and not from the latter”
(PL 65) but all we can think is the latter.
These two main arguments, then, from the conditioned nature of perceptual
abstraction and the impossibility of singular reference, together with his preferred
analysis of general statements, Bradley takes to establish that all judgment is really
hypothetical. What this means for him is that all judgment is limited and false,
that all is inadequate to what is given in feeling. For if judgment is conditional
reality most certainly is not.
We have spent quite some time showing how and why, for Bradley, all judgments
are hypothetical. However it would be wrong to suppose that that represents the
whole story for him, for he insists too that there is an important sense in which
all are categorical. “All judgments are categorical, for they do all aﬃrm about the
reality, and assert the existence of a quality in that” (PL 106) Each takes reality
as a whole as its subject and asserts a quality of it. Even hypothetical judgments
are in a sense categorical. They assert a quality of reality which makes us link
ideas in a certain way. (PL 86–9)

Bradley’s Logic
681
2.3
The dialectic between identity and diﬀerence
In addition to that between the hypothetical and the categorical, there is a second
dialectic at work in Bradley’s theory of judgment. He argues that every judgement
expresses a union of identity and diﬀerence. ‘A union of identity and diﬀerence
between what?’ it will be asked and immediately we turn to consider the doctrine
it must be confessed that he is somewhat equivocal in identifying the terms of
these relationships. Sometimes he seems to be talking about the relation between
special subject and the predicate we attribute to it, other times he seems to be
talking about a relation between the judgment as a whole and the reality to which
it is referred. But while confusing, this ambiguity is of little moment here, for
in truth he believes that the superﬁcial and the ultimate form of judgment must
display the relationship which, along with many other British Idealists, comes to
call identity-in-diﬀerence. Bradley arrives at the doctrine that every judgment
expresses an identity-in-diﬀerence via the rejection of two extremes. It is the only
possible middle ground between the two poles that judgments may not occupy:
complete identity and complete diﬀerence. We may look at these two prohibitions
in turn.
Bradley rejects as impossible the notion that there might be no diﬀerence what-
soever between the terms of a given judgment, a relation which he variously calls
‘simple identity,’ (PL374) ‘abstract identity’ (PL146) or ‘mere identity’ (PL373)
and symbolises with an equals sign. (PL 25) The idea here comes from Hegel, and
Bradley is quite explicit in acknowledging the debt, 18 but it is probably more
familiar to us today from Wittgenstein. In his Tractatus Wittgenstein says that a
perfect language would have no use for the sign of identity, for an identity state-
ment does not tell us anything either about the world or about our language. It
could be debated to what extent this understanding of a judgment is one actu-
ally adopted by philosophers or just a theoretical extreme to be exploited for the
purpose of debate, but it is not without its real advocates. And certainly this is
how Bradley understood the equational logic of his philosophical contemporary
Jevons.19
The comparisons with Wittgenstein and Jevons should not mislead us into
thinking that Bradley’s claim is simply one about the sign of identity. Rather
it is a point about the diﬀerence and/or identity between the elements of a judg-
18See Hegel [1812–16, Vol. II, pp. 37–43] and Hegel [1817, pp. 165–8]. “It is no judgement
at all. As Hegel tells us, it sins against the very form of judgement; for, while professing to say
something, it really says nothing” (PL 141). “Thought most certainly does not demand mere
sameness, which to it would be nothing. A bare tautology (Hegel has taught us this, and I wish
we could all learn it) is not even so much as a poor truth or a thin truth. It is not a truth in any
way, in any sense, or at all” (AR 501 also 508).
19According to Jevons [1874] all propositions should be read as asserting an identity between
their subject and their predicate. Bradley takes issue with this. (PL 370–88, 644ﬀ) He does
not deny that judgments involve an identity, but he can not agree that that is all they assert.
Another target in Bradley’s sights is Henry Mansel. It can be argued that both Mansel and
Jevons derive this idea that Subject-predicate statements could be thought of as one of identity
from a common source, William Hamilton.

682
William J. Mander
ment, however the judgment itself may choose to join them. For if ‘A = A’ is
vacuous, the same holds of such judgments as ‘A and A,’ ‘A or A’, ‘If A then A.’
‘A only if A’, or ‘A is a-ish.’
At times Bradley seems to imply that such abstract identities are false, and this
is how Wollheim takes him.20 But his deeper meaning seems to be that they are
simply nonsense. A = A, he says, “sins against the very form of judgment.” (PL
141) In any judgment there must be a movement of thought or else nothing is said.
Bare identity, he think, could never satisfy the intellect’s demand that something
at least must be asserted.21
The most common response to the suggestion that statements of identity have
no place in logic is, of course, that taken by Frege in his distinction between the
sense and reference of a term: a common reference does not make identity trivial
if there exists a diﬀerence in sense. At one level Bradley’s response would be to
agree with Frege, for it is Frege’s point precisely that identity makes no sense
except where there is also diﬀerence. But at a deeper level he would take issue
with Frege’s analysis, for that analysis implies that read in intension or read in
extension a judgement may be found to be saying quite diﬀerent things. Read
in extension (reference) it asserts identity, read in intension (sense) it asserts dif-
ference.
However, for Bradley, whether we read it in intension or extension a
judgment always says the same; it always combines identity and diversity. He ad-
mits that our mode of reading it aﬀects the face which it shows to — in extension
the judgment seems to assert the identity of a subject via an indirect reference
to its diﬀerent attributes, while in intension it seems to assert a connection be-
tween distinct attributes via an indirect reference to an identical subject — but in
substantial content it remains unaﬀected. (PL 174) He disagrees with Frege’s al-
ternative analysis because he does not believe that in the end it makes any sense to
speak of ‘mere extension’ or ‘mere intension,’ either without the other (PL 642–3)
But not only does Bradley reject judgments of abstract identity, he equally —
and much more controversially — rejects any judgment of what he calls ‘mere
diﬀerence’ (PL 373). Any attempt to combine in thought elements with nothing
in common is ruled out as impossible. Why? This doctrine might be thought to
come from Hegel also, for certainly Hegel says something very much like it (as the
antithesis for which his discussion of identity forms the thesis).22 But unlike the
case of abstract identity, Bradley never acknowledges such a debt nor, I suggest,
is it especially helpful to see Hegel as his source. Instead I think we can isolate a
number of diﬀerent lines of argument that lead Bradley to make this stipulation.
20[Wollheim, 1959, pp. 81–5].
21“Thought most certainly does not demand mere sameness, which to it would be nothing. . . if
the law of contradiction forbade diversity, it would forbid thinking altogether.” (PL 501) “That
abstract identity should satisfy the intellect... is wholly impossible” (AR 508, cf. PL 25, 371–2).
“what then do we assert by AB = AB? It seems we must own that we do not assert anything.
The judgement has been gutted and ﬁnally vanishes... In removing the diﬀerence of subject and
predicate we have removed the whole judgement” (PL 26). “whenever we write ‘=’ there must
be a diﬀerence, or we should be unable to distinguish the terms we deal with.” (PL 27).
22See [Hegel, 1812–16, Vol. II, pp. 43–58] and [Hegel, 1817, pp. 168–75].

Bradley’s Logic
683
One crucial element for this view revolves around his theory of negative judg-
ment (which will be considered below) but there seem to be others as well. For
example, he oﬀers a rather diﬀerent line of argument about what it is to think a
conjunction. 23 The argument is not fully clear, but I reconstruct as follows
As T. H. Green argued that a succession of perceptions is not a perception of
succession,24 so it is true that conjoined thoughts of diﬀerent things are not a
thought of those diﬀerent things conjoined. Thinking of ‘A’ and (then) thinking
of ‘B’ is not the same as thinking of ‘A and B’. Simply to think them both is not
to actually combine them in thought, for I can do that with ‘square’ and ‘circle’
but I do not thereby manage to think their union, to imagine a square circle. The
point is that when we think ‘A and B’ the ‘and’ gets predicated of reality as well,
25 but in that case it is necessary to give an account of what this means, to assert
how in reality they are conjoined.
Sometimes Bradley puts this point in terms of the powers of thought. Thought
itself (he says) does not make the conjunction — it has not the resources to do so
— rather it describes the conjunction it ﬁnds. Matters would be ﬁne, he suggests,
“[if] thought in its own nature possessed a ‘together,’ a ‘between,’ and an ‘all at
once.”’ (AR 504) but “Thought can of itself supply no internal bond by which
to hold them together,” (AR 504) “The intellect has in its nature no principle of
mere togetherness.” (AR 511).
But where we are faced with a mere conjunction of complete diﬀerences, a purely
external connection there seems no scope in reality to think such a union. All we
have is a brute combination. The problem with a wholly external link is that there
is no explanation. An external ‘and’ says Bradley “in the end does but conjoin
aliens inexplicably. . . there is in the end neither self-evidence nor any ‘because’
except that brutally thing come so.” (502) He compares it to the mechanical view
of the world. He objects that such a union is “groundless” or “without reason”
(501) “I understand by an external relation to mean a mere conjunction for which
in the quality there exists no reason whatever.” 26
At times this looks like some sort of appeal to suﬃcient reason, and certainly
the accusation has been made, 27 but Bradley also presents it as some sort of
law of thought. Unless there is some ground or point of union, he seems to be
saying, thought can not bring them together. Thought cannot be satisﬁed. That,
he seems to be saying, is just how thought works. “you are left in short with brute
conjunctions where you seek for connexions, and where this need for connexions
seems part of your nature” (ETR 115) “Thought demands to go proprio motu,
or, what is the same thing with a ground and reason.” (501) “to be satisﬁed my
intellect must understand. . . my intellect can not simply unite a diversity, nor has
23See especially a 1897 paper, ‘Contradiction and the Contrary’ (included in the second edition
of AR, pp. 500–11)
24[Green, 1883, Chapter I].
25“Upon the view which I advocate when you say R is a, and R is b, and R is c’, the ‘and’
qualiﬁes a higher reality with includes RaRbRc together with ‘and’.” (ETR 230).
26[Bradley, 1999, p. 216].
27For example by Russell [1910, p. 374].

684
William J. Mander
it in itself any form or way of togetherness, and you gain nothing if beside A and B
you oﬀer me their conjunction in fact.” (509) Bradley seems to be saying that the
only way we can signiﬁcantly think ‘and,’ the only way we can give that thought
any content, is to ﬁnd a point in common and that this is why “An identity must
underlie every judgment” (PL 28)
It might be objected that we can think it because we can experience it, for is
not bare conjunction something we are given in experience? But that is something
which Bradley denies. He rejects the notion that bare conjunction ever is given.
What is given, he argues, is given always against a background context. And this
background Bradley insists we cannot simply discount as unnecessary. (AR 503)
A quite separate line of argument against judgments which attempt to combine
mere diﬀerences that we ﬁnd in Bradley’s thinking revolves around his puzzles
about predication.
28
We could represent his thought as follows. Conjunctive
judgements may be reduced to or are at least equivalent with predicative ones,
but with predication the unacceptable choice between identity and diﬀerence is
more clear. We can take these in reverse order.
Taking a basic subject-predicate statement ‘R is a’ we can not hold that R and
a are literally identical, for that would automatically exclude the possibility of our
also holding that ‘R is b’. But neither can we say that R is something wholly other
than a, for what then would be left of the claim that R is qualiﬁed by a? The
only possible way out, thinks Bradley, is read the judgment as saying that they
are diﬀerent in some sense, or that under certain conditions they are identical. In
this sense predication must be a middle-ground, a matter of identity-in-diﬀerence.
‘But predication is not identity’ it will be objected. No indeed. However, that is
not our point. The question we ask here is, whatever it’s nature, does predication
connect identical or diﬀerent things. And neither answer, unless qualiﬁed by the
other, seems acceptable.
It is relatively easy to see how this works for predication, but why does it follow
from this that two predicates, or even a simple conjunction need a point of union?
But if these cases can (in substance at least) be reduced to subject-predicate
judgements, then they are not really so diﬀerent. And is this not possible? We
may say ‘R is a and b’ (it is red and square) but this can be converted into ‘Ra
is b’ (the red thing is square) and again we can ask if the predicate is something
diﬀerent from the subject or not. Even ‘A and B’ (it is raining and it is cold) can
with paraphrase be rendered ‘R is a and b’ (the conditions are rainy and cold) or
even ‘Ra is b’ (the cold conditions are rainy ones) facing us with the old dilemma.
Combining, then, the impossibility of abstract identity with the impossibility of
mere diﬀerence, Bradley takes himself to have shown that all judgment must be
an identity-in-diﬀerence. But what does it really mean to say that all judgments
must occupy a middle ground between identity and diversity, that all must assert
a point of identity between diﬀerences? It is possible to distinguish between a
28This is perhaps best seen in a 1909 paper ‘Coherence and contradiction’ (reprinted in ETR
pp. 226–9) which repeats a case broadly similar to that he had made earlier in ch..II of Appearance
and Reality.

Bradley’s Logic
685
number of diﬀerent senses in which this thesis might be taken.
1. It can be read as the harmless enough point that a thing cannot be self-
identical without being diﬀerent from other things; being oneself and being
distinct from others are but two sides of the same thing.
2. Another way to read Bradley’s thesis here is to see it as one about the unity
of a judgment. There must exist something which binds many ideas into one
thought. There can be no thought without parts or multiple contents, but
they only function as contents at all in the space of one judgment
3. Much of what Bradley says seems best understood in a third sense: the
coming together of things into union or association with each other. (e.g.
the union that is the United Kingdom.) Thus he says, “Every judgement
makes a double aﬃrmation, or a single aﬃrmation which has two sides. It
asserts a connection of diﬀerent attributes, with an indirect reference to an
identical subject; or it directly asserts the identity of the subject, with an
implication of the diﬀerence of its attributes” (PL 174). For example the
statement ‘Dogs are mammals’ he thinks should be read as saying that any
subject which has the property of being a dog has also the property of being
a mammal (PL178)
4. Another reading would distinguish between qualitative and numerical iden-
tity. The thesis tells us that qualitative identity is compatible with numerical
diversity (i.e. many diﬀerent things can all be red) or numerical identity is
compatible with qualitative diversity, (i.e.
one and the same thing with
diﬀerent attributes).
5. These four interpretations Bradley’s pronouncements of identity-in-diversity
each break down the point somehow into an ambiguity — identical in one
respect, but diﬀerent in another.
However, it is unclear in the end that
this is correct.
For we can identify a ﬁfth sense — things which are in
the same respect at the same time, both identical and diverse — which
however puzzling and seemingly contradictory, has textual support.
For
in his Collected Essays Bradley insists that “Identity and diﬀerence. . . are
inseparable aspects of one complex whole. They are not even ‘discernible’.
If this means you can separate them in idea, so as to treat one as remaining
itself when the other is excluded.
And the whole is emphatically not a
‘synthesis’, if that means it can be mentally divided.” (CE 295–6) Statement
such as this or the puzzling claim that “It takes two to make the same”
(PL 141), it is tempting to understand in this ﬁfth sense. Indeed, it might
be argued that this is the essence of the doctrine of immediate experience.
Bradley thinks that we have immediate experience, but thought breaks this
up. Thought’s fault is precisely its exclusive ‘either-or.’ The only way it
can combine identity and diﬀerence between things is to break them up into

686
William J. Mander
separate aspects, such that they are the same in one respect, but diﬀerent
in another respect.
If the doctrine of identity-in-diﬀerence is hard to interpret precisely, it is hard
also to locate in proper sphere of application. For although we have considered
it in connection with judgment, in Bradley’s mind the doctrine of identity-in-
diﬀerence can be easily be extended to other ﬁelds. For example, the result can
be extended outwards to inference, for Bradley sees no sharp distinction between
judgment and inference. Inference requires a point of identity, but also a genuine
diﬀerence. (PL 288, 460) It can also be contracted inwards to units smaller than
whole judgments, viz. individual ideas. Ideas too can be identity-in-diﬀerence.
As we saw, there is no simple answer to question whether ‘wolf-eating-lamb’ is
one idea or several. Thirdly the doctrine spreads into the issue of universals. A
true universal — what Bradley calls a ‘concrete universal’ — is also, he argues, a
species of identity-in-diﬀerence. This I consider in the next section.
2.4
Extension and Intension
It is common to distinguish between intension and extension. And in his chapter
on Quantity in judgment Bradley makes two points about this. He argues that
any judgment may be taken either extensionally or intensionally (§§11–29). This
is obscure point, to an extent withdrawn in Terminal Essay III. But far more
signiﬁcantly, we are introduced to the crucial notion of the concrete universal.
This is done via a consideration of the traditional doctrine of the inverse variance
of extension and intension of terms. According to this doctrine, the wider the
extension the narrower the extension.
For example, as we move from dog to
mammal to animal we pick out larger and larger classes, but say something less
and less speciﬁc. Bradley is wholly opposed to this view. He describes it as either
“false or frivolous” (PL 170)
It is frivolous in so far as it describes merely a psychological accident about how
we may visualise things. As a matter of psychological fact about human mental
images, it may be that the more universal they become the more detail we ﬁnd
that we have to drop from them, or, as he puts it elsewhere, the more ‘schematic’
they become.29 But this paucity, belonging as it does to psychology, does not make
them logically any the thinner. Really this is beside the point, for our concern is
not with images, but with logical function
The doctrine is frivolous too, in so far as it reports the uninteresting fact that
if you arrange ideas pyramidically, subtracting from each layer below to form
the layer above, then they will have those properties.
(PL 172–4).
The more
important question is whether our ideas really are arranged in this way.
And
Bradley is quite certain they are not. The traditional pyramid system treats each
level of classiﬁcation as separate, but real qualities can’t come apart in that fashion;
29Indeed Bradley admits that “There are psychological diﬃculties as to abstract ideas.” (PL
7note).

Bradley’s Logic
687
they determine one another. Each quality is what it is only in its context, not just
horizontally, but vertically also; not just in relation to the qualities that surround
it, but in relation to the higher level genus they belong to. The sub-classiﬁcations
of the species are chosen precisely because of their unique and special relation to
the character of the genus; they are ways of realizing that genus. For example,
humans are rational animals. But this distinctive feature of human animals, their
rationality, means that they are animals in a diﬀerent way to the that in which,
say, lions or tigers are animals. Their animality is of a modiﬁed type. Similarly
isosceles, scalene and equilateral are all diﬀerent ways of being a triangle; blue, red
and green diﬀerent ways of being coloured; loud and soft diﬀerent ways of being a
noise. Were universals formed by mere subtraction, the inverse relation would be
correct. But in fact true universals are concrete; for content increases rather than
decreases the more universal our ideas become.
Bradley’s paradigm example of a concrete universal is the individual. “A par-
ticular object, and especially a living individual, is universal, thinks Bradley, in
the sense that it is spread out in the world, that it brings together under one
label a host of elements that from another point of view seem to be diﬀerent or
distinct. The contrast is that rather than, as with the traditional view, bringing
together many instances of the same property, we are thinking here of a union of
many diﬀerent properties. The union could be either of diversity at a time (what
unites all an individual’s properties together as his or hers) or of diversity over a
time (the reason why properties held or acts performed at diﬀerent times are still
properties or acts of the very same person), but either way it is a bringing of many
diverse elements together into one uniﬁed whole. Bradley argued that,
“[What] exists must be individual, and the individual is no atom. It
has an internal diversity of content. It has a change of appearance in
time, and this change brings with it a plurality of attributes. But amid
its manyness it still remains one. It is the identity of diﬀerences, and
therefore universal . . . So far as it is the same throughout its diversity,
it is universal . . . [a man] is universal because he is one throughout all
his diﬀerent attributes”. (PL 187–8)
Such a union of diverse predicates is to be contrasted with one formed by ab-
straction. For in the latter case we pull out what is held in common by many
diﬀerent individuals, bringing these shared features under one label. We end up
with a union of similar predications rather than of diﬀering ones.
The idea that universals are abstract, no doubt gains much of its support from
contrasting them with particulars. And so Bradley is keen to attack these also. Ex-
perience is not, as the empiricists think, an encounter with bare particulars which
we then overlay with concepts. Atomic particulars are an unreal abstraction from
surrounding context as are universal — that without what is as impossible as what
without that. On Bradley’s account both particulars and universals arises simul-
taneously through the process of thought on immediate experience, an inevitable
pair neither ultimate true not capable of working alone.

688
William J. Mander
2.5
Other Types of Judgment
All that has been said thus far concerns judgment in general, but there are a great
many points that can be made about speciﬁc varieties of judgment; and after
his initial more general discussion Bradley turns, in the remainder of Book I, to
consider various diﬀerent types of judgment.
2.5.1
Negative judgment
One of the most important types (important in the sense that that what he says
here aﬀects many other issues) is that which he begins, namely negative judg-
ment.30 There are two main components to his view.
First of all he argues that negative judgments stand “at a diﬀerent level of
reﬂection” (PL 114) from aﬃrmative ones. In aﬃrmative judgment we attribute
content to reality directly, but for negation there must ﬁrst be “the suggestion of
an aﬃrmative relation” (PL114) which we go on to deny. If I maintain that the
tree is not yellow, this must be understood as rejecting the suggestion that it is.
What is repelled is “the suggested synthesis, not the real judgment” (PL116) so
Bradley is not maintaining that there must be or have been some actual belief
which is then denied; his point is a logical rather than a psychological or historical
one.31 In this thesis Bradley is quite at odds with most modern logicians who see
positive and negative propositions as standing at the same level. A negation sign
reverses the truth value of any proposition, but since not-not-P is equivalent to
P, any negative may be rewritten as positive or any positive as a negative.
Secondly, he argues that negative judgment presuppose a positive ground. (PL
114) For there exist no negative facts and, in consequence, there can be no ‘mere’
or ‘bare’ denial.
“If not-A were solely the negation of A, it would be an assertion without
a quality, and would be a denial without anything positive to serve as
its ground. A something that is only not something else, is a relation
that terminates in an impalpable void, a reﬂection thrown upon empty
space. It is a mere nonentity which cannot be real” (PL 123)
Instead negation must be understood as working on the basis of something
positive. If a negative judgement is true of some reality it must be because that
reality has some positive feature incompatible with whatever it is that is being
denied. The tree is not yellow because it is green instead. Although this ground is
not made explicit — it is “undetermined” (PL 110), “unknown” to us (PL 117),
even “occult” (PL 120) — negation makes sense only if we think of it as in this
way grounded in the assertion of some such positive contrary. In this way Bradley
reconciles negative judgment with his overall conception of judgment in general
as always referring some content to reality. The thought that there could be no
30For an excellent discussion of Bradley’s view of negation see Stock [1985].
31A.J.Ayer [1952, p. 39] misinterprets Bradley in precisely this way.

Bradley’s Logic
689
negative facts has met with wider approval in modern logical thinking, though
fewer have followed precisely Bradley’s way of securing this.
It might be thought here that Bradley has simply confused the contradictory
and the contrary. But that would be unfair. The distinction remains. Insofar
as logic needs to distinguish between the contrary and the contradictory, Bradley
describes the contradictory as “the general idea of the contrary. Not-A for example
is any and every possible contrary of A.” (PL 146) Not-A “is a general name for
any quality which, when you make it a predicate of A, or joint predicate with
A, removes A from existence. The contradictory idea is the universal idea of the
discrepant or contrary.” (PL 123) But although possible in this way to distinguish
them for the most part Bradley does not bother to do so, ﬁnding the contrast of
little moment. (AR 500)
The reduction of negation to positive contrariety is of great signiﬁcance in
Bradley’s thinking. It is, for example, a crucial plank in explaining the rejection of
bare conjunction that we encountered above. For Bradley urges that the bringing
together in judgment of mere diﬀerence is something that may be dismissed as
contradictory. Indeed, it is not simply as a species or example of contradiction
but, Bradley suggests, the very essence of contradiction itself. As Bradley sees it,
contradiction is precisely the attempt to bring together two things with nothing
in common. 32
The suggestion that diﬀerence just is contradiction is a strange one — for prima
facie they do not seem to be the same at all — and in order to properly understand
it is necessary to understand that Bradley is exploiting a distinction between
appearance and reality.
For Bradley, at the level of ultimate reality there are no genuinely contradictory,
that is, genuinely diﬀerent, predicates. Contradiction is a theoretically limiting
case that never in fact happens. 33 This might seem obvious, something we could
all agree on, nothing more than the principle of non-contradiction. But we need
to see that Bradley’s understanding of the matter is more radical than our own.
Our view would be that while there are many predicates which might contradict,
nowhere are they instantiated in any way such that they do so. In other words there
exist contradictory predicates, but nowhere are they co-instantiated. Bradley’s
view by contrast is that there simply are no contradictory predicates. Nowhere,
even in possibility, can we ﬁnd two utterly diﬀerent, or contrary, predicates. This
then is a far more radical reading of the principle on non-contradiction: faced with
apparent opposites, rather than take the milder course of denying that they really
32“If you merely conjoin it with something outside that is diﬀerent and not itself, this in
principle is contradiction.” (ETR 227 note) “The ‘And’, if you take it simply as mere ‘And’, is
itself contradiction.” (ETR 228 note). “Things are self-contrary when, and just so far as, they
appear as bare conjunctions, when in order to think them you would have to predicate diﬀerences
without an internal ground of connection and distinction, when, in other words, you would have
to unite diversities simply, and that means in the same point. This is what contradiction means,
or I at least have been able to ﬁnd no other meaning.” (AR 505).
33“Nothing in itself is opposite and refuses to unite. . . There are no native contraries.” (AR
510–11) “In the end nothing is contrary nor is there any insoluble contradiction” (505).

690
William J. Mander
are united, Bradley pursues the more radical option of denying that they really
are opposite. 34
But. of course, there certainly seem to be such predicates, a fact which Bradley
must explain. He suggests that the appearance of contradiction arises where we
take an incomplete or insuﬃciently developed view of the predicates or the subject
in which they are supposed to be united. We take an unduly narrow view of the
subject, or exclude from it all internal diversity. In general, predicates merely
seem to be contrary when “we have abstracted from them and from the subject
every condition of union.” (ETR 271)
We seem faced with an insoluble contradiction because the things seem inca-
pable of further analysis. (AR 505) But in fact, suggests Bradley, on spelling out
the conditions, apparent contraries or discrepants may turn out to be only diﬀer-
ences. “[If] one arrangement has made them opposite, a wider arrangement may
perhaps unmake their opposition, and may include them all at once and harmo-
niously.” AR 500–1) The so-called ‘opposites’ turn out not to be really opposite
at all, but simply diﬀerent.35, 36
Some examples may help us here. Bradley himself observes that if we narrow
the existence of a thing down to one moment in time then it cannot be in two
places, or that if we regard the soul as some sort of indivisible unity then it cannot
aﬃrm and deny at the same time.
But why insist on such limitations?
(AR
506) Alternatively we might consider the fact that a painting can be beautiful (in
daylight) and ugly (in artiﬁcial light), or the fact that dynamite is combustible
(when dry) and non-combustible (when wet).37 Similarly on a simple (timeless)
conception of a thing colour predicates are incompatible, but once we widen our
perspective to include duration they become compatible.38
Apparent contrariety is thus resolved into diﬀerence, but this should not be
thought the end of the matter. For (to Bradley) complete diﬀerence is no more
acceptable, indeed no diﬀerent from, contradiction. And so Bradley argues that
where predicates seem to be quite diﬀerent — whether they strike as explicitly
contradictory or not — this too must be regarded as but an appearance; something
which occurs only because we have ignored some wider context or point of union
and which on closer examination can be removed. Bradley insists that wherever
things seem completely diﬀerent there will always be in fact a point in common.
34“’Opposites will not unite, and their apparent union is mere appearance.’
But the mere
appearance really perhaps only lies in their intrinsic opposition.” (AR 5001).
35They are “moments which would be incompatible if they really were separate, but, conjoined
together, have been subdued into something within the character of the whole.” (PL 149) .
36Bosanquet’s view on this matter is identical to Bradley’s. He says “no predicates are intrin-
sically contrary to one another. They only become so by the conditions under which they are
drawn together” [Bosanquet, 1912, p. 223] “There are places for all predicates; and when all
predicates are in their places, none of them is contrary to any other. It is the bringing them
together on an inadequate basis of distinction, which is the essence of contradiction and contra-
riety. . . Contradiction. . . is not a dead fact about certain predicates; it is an imperfection in the
organisation of systems.” [Bosanquet, 1912, p. 225].
37[Ferreira, 1999, pp. 102–4].
38[Wollheim, 1959, p. 147].

Bradley’s Logic
691
Again, an example may help: black and cold are diﬀerent, but it may well be that
a thing’s blackness and coldness are found to come from a common source.
It is in the merely apparent nature of contrariety and diﬀerence that we ﬁnd
the key to understanding Bradley’s view of Hegel’s dialectic. Dialectic is not in
Bradley’s understanding,39 as some have taken it to be, some sort of denial of the
law of contradiction, it is rather an exploitation of the point that elements which
seem at ﬁrst irreconcilable may in a wider perspective in fact be combined. (PL
149, 410)
Thus armed with this understanding of the distinction between appearance
and reality, Bradley is able to hold that while, at the level of ultimate reality,
contradiction is the same as complete diﬀerence, at the level of appearance, we may
yet distinguish between apparent contradiction and apparent diﬀerence. Which of
these they appear to us as is a function of the kind and degree of abstraction we
make. It is at this level of appearance that Bradley insists that “diﬀerents and
discrepants should never be confused.” (PL 146) Roughly, the narrower our view
of the subject the more pairs will seem contrary, but as we widen our view the
more they will seem to be diﬀerent. At the level of ultimate reality, however, these
two relations coincide.
But why, it will be asked, even if it can be reconciled with appearances, would
anyone want to identify contradiction and diﬀerence in the ﬁrst place? The move
needs to be understood in terms of Bradley’s view of negation. As we have seen
Bradley understands negation — the contradictory — in terms of what is dis-
crepant or contrary. Negative judgments stand “at a diﬀerent level of reﬂection”
(PL 114) from aﬃrmative ones; when we deny something we always do so on the
basis of something positive, for there can be no ‘mere’ or ‘bare’ denial, no negative
facts.
This understanding of negation renders much clearer his denial of genuinely
contrary predicates. For in a world were all properties are aﬃrmative, where all
reality is positive, there is no intrinsic opposition.40 It also helps us understand
why he wishes to hold that mere diﬀerence is the same as contradiction. If the
negation of A is taken as not-A, something inherently negative in its being, then
its opposition to A seems obvious. But if we remember that it is in reality just
some other positive quality B that excludes A, then its discrepant nature becomes
much less obvious. It is something diﬀerent from A which has the further capacity
to exclude A. But why, we can not see. (We should note here Bradley’s claim
that “There is no logical principle which will tell us what qualities are really dis-
crepant.” (PL 146) Indeed thinking further on the matter we would seem to be in
a strange situation. For holding on to the traditional thought that contradiction
and diﬀerence are to be distinguished, there would seem to be diﬀerences which
exclude one another and diﬀerences which can be united. But insofar as both
were simple diﬀerences there would be nothing more that could be said on the
39I leave open the issue of how Hegel understood it.
40In a similar way Leibniz argues that the concept of God can contain no contradictions because
God’s nature contains only positiove properties.

692
William J. Mander
point. ‘Some diﬀerences can be united and others can’t and that’s all you can
say.’ Yet this is completely unacceptable. There surely needs to be some basis
for this contrast, for otherwise there would be no rational basis for the contrast
between diﬀerence and contrariety, just an arbitrary ﬁat stating which things may
and which may not be combined. Once we have got rid of pure negation, once there
is no longer anything intrinsically negative, the contrast between diﬀerences that
exclude one another and those that may be combined is totally ungrounded. They
are just brute relations, and the diﬀerence between them equally brute. Bradley’s
view of negation leaves him with no way of distinguishing between diﬀerence and
contrariety. His response is two-fold. At the level of appearance a relative distinc-
tion may be drawn. But in the last analysis no distinction can be drawn. So he
equates them. He takes his theory of negation at face value and concludes that in
the end there is no diﬀerence between exclusion and diﬀerence. He lumps these
together as one class.
Bradley’s account of negative judgment was one of the aspects of his logic that
came under the most sustained attack by Bernard Bosanquet, in Chapter V of
his Logic and Knowledge, and later on for the second edition of the Principles,
Bradley modiﬁed his views accepting many of Bosanquet’s criticisms (PL p.125
note 1; Terminal Essay VI)
First of all the rejection of ﬂoating ideas necessitates a slight change. For in
the ﬁrst edition Bradley describes negation is something ‘subjective’ in so far as
what is rejected is merely a ‘suggestion’. He says that “[the] process takes place
in the unsubstantial region of ideal experiment. And the steps of that experiment
are not even asserted to exist in the world outside our heads.” (PL120) However,
if there are no ﬂoating ideas, ideas can not be simply ‘suggested’ or ‘entertained,’
all we can do with them is to aﬃrm them.
Negation is, perhaps, more ‘reﬂective,’ in the sense that we tend to make asser-
tions before we make denials but such prior awareness is (Bradley acknowledges)
irrelevant to the logical point at issue. (PL 665) Instead he seeks to solve the
problem by appeal to the distinction which his further reﬂections on judgment in
general had already encouraged him to draw (see above) between reality in general
and the ‘special subject’ of a judgment. He suggests that negation does involve a
rejection or denial, but “[the] content which it denies is never excluded absolutely.
Far from falling nowhere, that content qualiﬁes elsewhere the Universe.” (PL 665)
What he had earlier called the ‘suggested synthesis’ does in fact apply to some
reality, and hence does not ﬂoat, but nothing is actually asserted of the special
subject.
Another problem with Bradley’s ﬁrst edition account comes out of his treat-
ment of double negation. It is a generally accepted axiom that double negation is
equivalent to aﬃrmation, that, not-not-A is equivalent to A. However, it might be
objected that Bradley’s understanding of negation precludes him from this prin-
ciple for the contrary of a contrary need not be the original. (Think of colours: a
contrary of red might be green, but a contrary of green might be yellow.)
In the ﬁrst edition of the Principles Bradley attempts to preserve the axiom of

Bradley’s Logic
693
double negation by insisting that, although we might use any positive ground, y,
to deny that A is b, if we then choose to deny our denial the choice of ground is
limited to b itself, since any other ground, z, might be just as exclusive of b as y,
leaving us no further on. (PL 159)
However, in the second edition he withdraws this solution deferring to Bosan-
quet’s alternative response. (PL 167 n.25) He now suggests that introducing a
special subject into the judgment in the manner just considered above in eﬀect
implies a dichotomy — a ‘this’ as opposed to a ‘that’ — and thus he urges, “disjunc-
tion within a whole is the one way in and by which in the end negation becomes
intelligible.” (PL 662)41 The negation is under-laid by an exclusive disjunction
(The tree is either x or yellow), such that when we implicitly assert the positive
ground (The tree is x) we can then conclude our negative assertion (The tree is
not yellow). Viewed in this way negation (like many other forms of judgment) is
seen to involve an aspect of inference.
This seems a retraction of his earlier view that negative judgment has a wholly
positive basis, for while something that is merely contrary to yellow (green) can
be positive, the exclusive disjunction of yellow (not yellow) has a negativity about
it. For even if we read it as itself a disjunction of positive options (blue or red or
orange, etc.) the assumption of completeness (not anything else) seems negative.
Bradley’s view is more nuanced. He suggests that perhaps it is better to say that
all judgments are both positive and negative at the same time; that there is no
sharp line between positive and negative. “Negation everywhere has a ground, not
on one side merely but on both sides.” (PL 664)
2.5.2
Conditional judgment
Some judgments are openly conditional in form, But further than this Bradley
also thinks that some (e.g. the universal categorical) although not openly so are
best analysed as conditional, and that there is a sense in which, or a degree to
which, all judgments are conditional. But just what is a conditional? How is it to
be analysed?
For Bradley a conditional or hypothetical judgment is an ideal experiment. “A
supposal is in short, an ideal experiment. It is the application of a content to
the real, with a view to see what the consequence is, and with a tacit reservation
that no actual judgment has taken place.” (PL 86) The judgment says that if you
entertain one thought you must go on and entertain a second, it asserts a relation
between two possible judgments without in fact making either of them. It is in this
sense “a subjective operation” (PL 86) something taking place in thought only.
But how can this be squared with the claim that Bradley has already made
so much of, that all judgement asserts something of reality? The answer to this
is that conditionals assert that reality has a certain ‘latent’ or ‘occult’ quality in
virtue of which antecedent and consequent are connected. (PL 87, 88) We imply
that the world is so arranged, the laws and conditions so set up, that if the one
41“Negation. . . implies at its base a disjunction which is real.” (PL 666).

694
William J. Mander
were to happen the second would follow. This is not stated explicitly — “The fact
that is aﬃrmed as an adjective of the real, and on which depends the truth and
falsehood, does not explicitly appear in the [hypothetical] judgment.” (PL 87) —
but it is what grounds our assertion.
Understood in this way hypothetical judgments also may be regarded as involv-
ing inference, as in eﬀect condensed arguments. Indeed, thinks Bradley, it is in
hypothetical judgment that inference ﬁrst deﬁnitely emerges. Supposition of the
truth of the antecedent, together with all the relevant circumstances and laws of
nature, is supposed to entail the truth of the consequent. A conditional is true if
the argument which it abbreviates is sound.42
2.5.3
Disjunctive judgment
Turning from hypothetical to disjunctive judgment, to which he does not give a
very great prominence, the ﬁrst point to note is that, unlike modern logicians,
Bradley insists on taking ‘or’ exclusively. A disjunctive judgment is true if and
only if one of its disjuncts is true and all the others are false. He says “I confess I
should despair of human language, if such distinctions as separate ‘and’ from ‘or’
could be broken down.” (PL 134) 43
Disjunctive judgment presents something of a dilemma for Bradley, for neither
of the most obvious ways of taking it will work. It is thinks Bradley intuitively
obvious that there are no such things as disjunctive facts; nothing can exist in
reality in the form b or c. He says, “[This] mode of speech can not possibly answer
to real fact. No real fact can be ‘either — or.’ It is both or one, and between
the two there is nothing actual” (PL 129; cf. 46–7) But, if not straightforwardly
categorical, neither thinks Bradley can disjunctive judgments be understood as
straightforwardly hypothetical. They cannot simply be reduced to a combination
of four conditionals — if b then not-c, if not-b then c, if c then not-b, and if not-c
then b — for that leaves out of account on what basis they are thus combined;
why they are thought together to exhaust the ﬁeld. (PL 128–9)
Disjunction says Bradley “if not quite categorical, is certainly not quite hypo-
thetical. It involves both these elements.” (PL 137) The way this works is as
follows. The judgment ‘A is b or c’ asserts that A has a quality x shared by both
b and c and not by anything else. (PL 130) This is the ‘ground’ of the disjunction.
Asserting quality x assumes a sort of omniscience (PL 137). For quality x tells us
that each excludes the other, and that these are the only possibilities, allowing us
to erect hypotheticals on its basis On its basis the judgment can then be read as
asserting two pairs of hypotheticals: (i) if A is b it is not c, and if A is c it is not
b, (ii) if A is not b it is c, and if A is not c it is b. (PL 136) Disjunction is thus
“the union of hypotheticals on a categoric basis.” (PL 131). It is worth noting
the similarity with between this account of disjunction and Bradley analysis of
42[Allard, 2005, p. 87–8]; [Griﬃn, 1996, p. 198].
43Bosanquet makes the same assumption. For detailed discussions of this point see [Allard,
2005, pp. 114–9]; [Crossley, 1878, pp. 115–23].

Bradley’s Logic
695
conditionals considered above. Both types of judgment are read as asserting a
hidden or latent quality on the basis of which a hypothetical judgment is erected.
2.5.4
Collective judgment
Unlike modern logicians, Bradley distinguishes what he calls collective judgments
(such as ‘Everyone in this room is wearing shoes’ or ‘All of the sheep have been
dosed’) from universal categorical judgments (such as ‘All animals are mortal’ or
‘Equilaterial triangles are equiangular.’) Where the latter uses ‘all’ in a wholly
unrestricted sense, in the former case ‘all’ refers to “a real collection of actual
cases” (PL 82, cf.355–7) He analyses them as conjunctions: ‘This sheep has been
dosed,’ ‘This sheep has been dosed’ and so on.
By the time of the second edition, Bradley had become unhappy with this
account and withdrew it, deferring to Bosanquet.44 The problem he says is “that
all counting presupposes and depends on a qualitative Whole, and that Collective
Judgment asserts a generic connection within its group. Hence no mere particulars
can be counted” (368 note 2) For example, we never count just people, books, or
cars, but rather people in the boat, book in the pile, or cars in the queue, but in
doing so we make them all instances of a type or kind. However since universal
judgments also pick out members of a type or kind (e.g. all members of the type:
animal) this is to blur the diﬀerence between collective and universal judgment.
2.5.5
Modal judgment
In Chapter VII of the Principles Bradley turns to discuss the modality of judg-
ments, using the terminology ‘assertoric,’ ‘apodictic,’ and ‘problematic’ to refer
respectively to judgments of actuality, necessity and possibility judgments. For
Bradley, possibility and necessity as such have no existence in the real world. All
that exists is the actual. “Reality in itself is neither necessary, nor possible, nor
again impossible. These predicates (we must suppose in logic) are not found as
such outside our reﬂection.” (PL 212)
Such a view is not uncommon in modern times, and many have concluded from
it that necessity is matter solely to do with words and deﬁnitions. This is the
view of necessity as analytic (in the Kantian sense.)
And in saying that they
“are not found as such outside our reﬂection” Bradley might seem to be endorsing
that line. But in fact he rejects this account on the grounds that meanings vary
between people and over times. Speciﬁcally, as knowledge grows, our meanings
become enlarged and what was synthetic becomes analytic — “[what] is added
today is implied tomorrow.”
(PL 185).
Analyticity is an inadequate basis to
explain modality.
So how, then, are modal judgments to be analysed? He begins by rejecting the
idea that modality aﬀects only the mode of an assertion and not its content, for
44PL 110 note 37, 368 note 2 referring to Bosanquet [1885, p. 76ﬀ] and Bosanquet [1888, 152ﬀ,
209ﬀ].

696
William J. Mander
on his scheme there is only one way of asserting and that is the assertoric. (PL
197) So instead of one content S — P declared in three diﬀerent ways, we assert of
reality itself (‘It is true that. . . ’) one or other of three slightly diﬀerent contents,
‘actual S — P’, ‘possible S — P’ or ‘necessary S — P.’ (PL 198).
As a class modal judgments present nothing fundamentally new. Bradley argues
that assertoric judgements are just categorical ones, while both apodictic and
problematic judgments are species of conditionals. (PL 198) “What may be and
what must be involve a supposition.” (PL 199) he says.
To begin with necessity, Bradley suggests that a thing is necessary when it is,
or is said to be, because of something else. “Necessity carries with it the idea of
mediation, of dependency, of inadequacy to maintain an isolated position.” (PL
199) “Where the necessary [judgment] asserts strongly, it borrows its strength
from a concealed assertorical.” (PL 202) For Bradley necessity is a relation of
consequence between judgments, not a feature of judgments taken singly. The
judgment of necessity is to be read as asserting or implying a relation of logical
consequence between the facts which it states and some further unstated conditions
on which they depend.
So ‘S must be P’ really says something like ‘because
R is Q then S must be P.’ One diﬀerence which may be admitted between a
more usual conditional judgment and one of necessity is that we say not simply
that if something holds then something else must, but we further imply that
those conditions do in fact hold. However, thinks Bradley, this is a diﬀerence of
knowledge and the necessity in each case remains the same. (PL 201)
Judgments of possibility are a sub-species of judgments of necessity, like them
they say that something would exist if certain other things were the case. But
where judgments of necessity imply that all of their conditions are met, judgments
of possibility imply only that some of them are. (PL 202) We are stating that
under certain conditions a things must occur and that at least some of those
conditions obtain, but we can not say that they all do.
As stated, there are no modal facts and so, with respect to both possibility and
necessity, the implied relations are ideal rather than factual, ones holding between
ideas rather than facts. As proof of this Bradley draws attention to the point that
there exist hypotheticals with impossible antecedents and consequents. ‘If two
were three then four must be six’ is the example he gives (PL 201). Nevertheless,
he is keen to demonstrate that both have “a basis in fact and depend[s] upon
experience” (PL 207) and thus that they are in accordance with his general theory
of judgment. “All necessity aﬃrms a real ground explicit or implicit” (PL 207)
he insists.
Likewise, he thinks, possibility must always be ‘real’ possibility —
“possibility apart from or antecedent to the real world is utter nonsense.” (PL
203)
In the last analysis, as we move from logic to metaphysics, in so far as necessity
is a matter of one thing holding because of another, Bradley’s view that everything
is connected to everything else, that there are no mere conjunctions, amounts in
eﬀect to the view that ultimately everything is necessary. No judgment is, at the
end of the day, ultimately or irreducibly contingent; these are rather indicators of

Bradley’s Logic
697
a still incomplete analysis
2.5.6
Probabilistic judgment
In the ﬁnal section of chapter VII Bradley deals brieﬂy with judgments of proba-
bility. As with modality, these can not be taken as directly descriptive of reality
— “[no] statement that we make about probabilities can, as such, be true of the
actual facts.” (PL 217) — nevertheless they do make an aﬃrmation about re-
ality. He is able to maintain this because he bases statements of probability on
disjunction for which, as we have already see, he believes it is possible to ﬁnd a
categorical basis.
For instance, in considering the throw of a dice, we make a number of categorical
assumptions about the world (about the dice and how it will fall) to the eﬀect that
there must occur one of only six possible outcomes: ‘Reality is such that there will
occur 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6.’ From this point Bradley follows the classical
theory of probability and, assuming each outcome to be equally likely (PL 218),
shows how we may calculate chances as the ratio of favourable cases to the total
number of outcomes.
3
INFERENCE
3.1
Context-setting
We have now seen how Bradley deals with judgment, both in general and in its
various diﬀerent species. Moving on from this topic, which occupies Book I of
the Principles, Bradley proceeds, in Books II and III, to consider the question of
inference.
However it must be noted from the start that Bradley ﬁnds no great gulf be-
tween judgment and inference. For judgment itself is an inferential process. Within
every judgment there are deeper levels of meaning and implication which are in-
ferential in structure. Sometimes (as we have already seen in the cases of synthetic
judgments of sense, hypothetical judgments or negative judgments) the analyses
which Bradley oﬀers make this latent structure quite explicit, but it is something
that holds true, in some measure, for all judgments; since all judgments are made
subject to conditions.
Bradley locates two activities, analysis and synthesis, both of which he holds
take place simultaneously in both judgments and inferences.
This observation
might lead us to wonder if he is not simply removing the distinction between judg-
ment and inference; reducing them to a single class. But in truth his position is
more subtle than that. In their explicit forms Bradley is clear that there remains
a distinction between judgment and inference. In a judgment of perception there
is no datum, its starting point is for the intellect nothing. (PL 479) But it belongs
to the essence of inference to get or draw its product from some cognitive premise

698
William J. Mander
or datum (PL 437). In this sense “[explicit] judgment comes before explicit infer-
ence.” But if we consider their earlier stages, he continues, they “emerge together”
as “two sides of one act,” process and product together. “The earliest judgment
will imply an operation, which, though it is not inference is something like it; and
the earliest reasoning will begin with a datum, which though kin to judgment, is
not intellectual” he says. (PL 481)
This understanding of the relationship between judgment and inference might
seem to raise as many questions as it answers. For what is meant by ‘earlier’ or
‘develops into’ here? At times Bradley appears to suggest that the diﬀerence is
just a question of psychological history, but more fundamentally his point is a
logical one. To think is to employ or assert ideas. But there are only two ways
to use ideas, either directly (judgment) or indirectly (inference). These modes
are diﬀerent, but neither is possible without the other, and if one appears to take
priority over the other this is just a matter of their diﬀering degrees of logical
articulation.
Perhaps nowhere more than in his discussion of inference does it become man-
ifest that Bradley is not a formal logician. It is common to distinguish between
formal and material inferences — between inferences which do not depend on the
particular subject matter of what their propositions describe and those which do
— and to hold that logic considers only the former; or at least that a separate
branch of the subject, inductive logic, is needed for the latter. However, Bradley
places no such restriction on himself. He includes under the heading of inference
any extension beyond what is simply given to us in perception, whether formal or
material in character. Inferences such as ‘Charles I was a king, he was beheaded,
so a king may be beheaded’ or ‘Today is Monday so tomorrow is Tuesday’ or sci-
entiﬁc inferences cannot in any straightforward way be rendered formal but are
not for that reason excluded from consideration; for the subject matter of logic is
simply true thought
and therefore includes any systematic movement in thought
from one truth to another. Of course we may not go outside of our premises to
establish any conclusion, for the activity then would simply not be inference —
which is essentially the derivation of a result from a source. (PL 521) But inference
is a matter of developing connections and relations to ideas beyond that source.
And these, though internal to our initial content, may lie hidden or implicit within
it; outside our explicit cognitive apprehension. For this reason valid inferences can
not be captured in merely formal structures.
This is not to exclude absolutely considerations of form. Bradley freely admits
that inferences fall into types; we cannot reason from mere particulars, and so
any inference must in principle be applicable in other imaginable cases. (PL 522)
But no distinction which we might draw between form and matter could ever be
anything other than relative, such that on a diﬀerent framework what was material
could be presented as formal. (PL 532) Moreover, thinks Bradley, such distinctions
are in the end rather useless for, even if we were to make and stick with them,
they can never provide us with a ﬁxed set of forms or models adequate to cover
all valid inferences.

Bradley’s Logic
699
“It is impossible that there should be ﬁxed models for reasoning; you
can not draw out exhaustive schemata of valid inference” (PL 268)
“. . . no possible logic can supply us with schemes of inference. You
may have classes and kinds and examples of reasoning, but you can
not have a set of exhaustive types. The conclusion refuses simply to
ﬁll up the blanks you have supplied. . . the attempt to provide for these
endless varieties is. . . irrational and hopeless.” (PL 521)
That there could be such a ﬁxed schedule is, he says, simply not possible because
in the end we must always be defeated by “the endlessness of the ﬁeld.” (PL 268)
Taking a general conception of inference as the bringing together of various data
such that some special relationship is observed between them which we then draw
as a conclusion, Bradley points out that “the number of special relations has no
end,” (PL 268) and hence that there would be need for an inﬁnite number of
inference schemes to parallel them. In other words, no collection of models could
ever be complete. Bradley does admit that we may ﬁnd some “principles which are
tests of the general possibility of making a construction,” (PL 268) but these only
ever hold within certain limited categories of inference and only give us general
guidance — they can not, for example, identify speciﬁc new relations. The way in
which an inference develops has a ﬂuidity which deﬁes regimentation. On the one
hand it leaves room for individual judgment, inspiration and insight. (PL 268; 273
n.8) To notice connections we need a good eye. Inference is an art, not a science.
And on the other hand there is also the capriciousness of the world itself. Bradley
makes this point by comparing real and ideal experiments.
“It is clear, I think, that when trying experiments in the actual world
by combining and dividing things, or by drawing upon paper, we may
be surprised by qualities which we did not anticipate. And the same
must be true of ideal experiment.” (PL 397)
At bottom, the truth and reality of our reasoning stems not from classifying it
under some general authorised pattern, but rather consists “in the development
of an unbroken individual identity to a result which is its own and which meets
its particular requirement.” (PL 618) In other words, although inference is always
general because it deals with ideas, what it aims to capture and what drives its
inner working is the concrete particularity of the world itself.
Rather than distinguish diﬀerent types of inference, or separate out correct from
incorrect inferences, as many logicians have sought to do, Bradley’s real concern
in the Principles is to establish the general nature of inference.
With the scene thus set, as we turn to look at Bradley’s discussion of inference
itself, perhaps the ﬁrst thing to strike us is its length. Bradley devotes at least
twice the amount of space to inference as he did to judgment. It has been suggested
that it is because he ﬁnds inference more common than do other logicians that he

700
William J. Mander
devotes so much space to it,45 but the length of his discussion is also a function of
the way in which he proceeds. Bradley’s discussion covers two Books, each itself
with two parts. First he outlines a basic theory, then he attacks rival theories.
Next, identifying weaknesses in the initial account, he moves on to a better version
of the theory, before ﬁnally considering the question of the validity of inference.
For clarity of presentation, however, it is perhaps easier to the ﬁrst and third parts
of his discussion together.
3.2
The basic account of inference
Bradley begins his discussion of inference with three adequacy conditions on any
acceptable theory, although perhaps rather than three distinct points thee may
better be regarded as three aspects of a single idea. First of all he notes that there is
a diﬀerence between reasoning and mere observation; reasoning is something active
that we do, not something passive that happen to us. If a truth is inferred, it is
more than simply seen. (PL 245) Inference is more than one thought prompted or
followed by another, with the conclusion coming to us irresistibly from without, as
associationism or Platonism (in their diﬀerent ways) would have it. But although
we make inferences, neither is this some arbitrary or capricious act on our part,
rather we are lead or constrained in doing so by reality itself; we discover rather
than invent the result of our inference. Secondly, he notes that in inference we pass
from one truth already possessed to a further truth. The conclusion is thus not
self-existent but in an important sense dependent on its premise or premises. (PL
245) Thirdly, inference must convey some new piece of information. (PL 246) It
must do more than repeat a part or the whole of the premises. Thus ‘A therefore
A’ or ‘A and B therefore A’ do not count as inferences. In making this requirement
Bradley diﬀers from modern logic which would regard patterns such as these as
valid inferences, albeit dull and pointless ones.
Bradley then gives eight examples of inferences which any adequate theory must
accommodate. (PL 246) Both here (and again as he later develops the theory)
Bradley uses such intuitions about what counts as an inference to act as a litmus
test for the adequacy of any theory since, he argues, we are more certain that
these are indeed inferences than we could ever be of any theory that might say
otherwise.
On the basis of these conditions and examples, Bradley then proposes a general
model of inference.
“Every inference combines two elements; it is in the ﬁrst place a pro-
cess, and in the second a result. The process is an operation of synthe-
sis; it takes its data and by ideal construction combines them into a
whole. The result is a perception of a new relation within that unity.”
(PL 256)
45[Manser, 1983, p. 152].

Bradley’s Logic
701
By way of illustration Bradley shows how a number of typical inferences may be
placed under this scheme. For example, we may infer ‘This man is a logician, this
man is a fool, therefore a logician may be a fool.’ (PL 265). Here two attributes
are brought together in a single individual, and a new relation observed to hold
between them. Again we infer, ‘A is to the north of B and B west of C, therefore
C south-east of A’ (PL 266). Here the inference consists in bringing together two
spatial relations and thereby allowing us to uncover a third. The examples are
listed under ﬁve general types (PL 264) but that taxonomy does not pretend to
completeness for, as we have already seen he thinks such exhaustive enumeration
impossible. (PL 266)
Although there can be produced no list that would exhaust every possible in-
ference, there are, Bradley holds, two general conditions which may be laid down
to hold on them all. First there is the necessity of an identical point. He says,
“It is impossible to reason except on the basis of an identity.” (PL 285) Bradley’s
idea here is that premises can only be combined where there is a ‘common point”
(PL 285) or ‘centre of identity’ (PL 389) between them. And he means here an
actual identity, not merely some similarity or likeness. (PL 286) There must, of
course, exist also diﬀerence between them — mere repetition would be pointless
— but were they wholly diﬀerent it would simply not be possible to think them
together in one construction. (PL 288) In large part Bradley is repeating here
thoughts we considered above when we looked at the impossibility of judgments of
bare conjunction; what holds of two elements in a judgment holds equally of two
premises in an inference.
Bradley’s second condition — the necessity of at least one universal premise (PL
285) is, when one reﬂects upon its basis, really not much more than a reapplication
of the ﬁrst. For he defends it on the grounds that if there must be a term common
to the premises, a single content in multiple diﬀerent context, that is universal,
and thus so will be at least one of the premises. (PL 294) Taking the premises
‘A precedes B’ and ‘B precedes C’ we might doubt that this is so, but we should
note that Bradley is using the term ‘universal’ in a rather unusual way here, a
use already encountered in his notion of the concrete universal. He holds that
a “universal judgment is one that holds of any subject which is a synthesis of
diﬀerences. It is a proposition the truth of which is not conﬁned to any single
this.” (PL 295)
Bradley ﬁrst attempt provides him with a good initial account of inference, but
when he returns to the subject in Book III of the Logic he ﬁnds a number of
deﬁciencies with this basic model. He notes that inference does not always result
in a new relation, that sometimes what we perceive as the conclusion is instead a
new quality. In this connection he uses the example of sailing around some land
and, realising that one has arrived back at one’s starting point, concluding that the
land is in fact an island. (PL 396) He worries too about mathematical inferences.
Arithmetical operation “produce new results; they are ideal operations which give
conclusions, and justify what they give”. So “they are palpable inferences.” (PL
401) But a sum like 5 + 5 = 10 “establishes no relation between the terms of

702
William J. Mander
the premises. On the contrary the relation, which appears in the conclusion, has
one terminal point which never appeared in the data at all.” (PL 404) A third
type of inference to slip the net is, he suggests, inference with only one premise.
(PL 407) For example, we may infer ‘If A then C.’
This might be shorthand
for ‘if anything is B it is C, but here A is B, and therefore it is C,’ but no
such premises need ever come before the mind. Dialectical inference too seems
to escape the model.
(PL 408f) This he describes as a passage of thought in
which one idea is felt insuﬃcient and supplemented by a contrary one. In allowing
both sides of dialectical scheme here to be positive, Bradley disagrees with more
standard interpretations of dialectic, which emphasise negation and call for a unity
of opposites.
(PL 410) But, however one takes it, it is a pattern of inference
that cannot be accommodated on the original model. Last of all Bradley also
rethinks the crucial role of identity in the operation of inference. Where before
he had insisted there must always be a common centre, his account is modiﬁed to
accommodate inferences with no explicit centre. He continues to hold that a centre
can be found for every inference, but he now allows that instead of being explicitly
stated the centre of identity may be implicit, something we have to extract by a
process of analysis or synthesis. For example, in comparison we can only say that
A is like B by extracting from A and B some property x which they both share.
(PL 461)
Reﬂecting on these deﬁciencies in his ﬁrst account Bradley proposes both a
new criterion for inference and a new model of how it works. The criterion is
necessity. He suggests that “wherever we have necessary truth there is reasoning
and inference” (PL 394) 46 The thought behind this criterion is that in inference
we are always given some ‘because’ to our why, some reason why what is the case
must be the case. And that, as we saw above in his discussion of modal judgments,
is precisely the underlying signiﬁcance of necessity.
Bradley explains his new model of what happens in inference in terms of what
he calls ideal experiment. He loosens his initial speciﬁcation suggesting that in
inference,
“[no] matter what the operation may be, there is always some oper-
ation. This operation is an ideal experiment upon something which
is given, and the result of this process is invariably ascribed to the
original datum.” (PL 431)
The term ‘ideal experiment’ conjures up the more modern term ‘thought ex-
periment,’ with which it has indeed much in common. It is a mental operation
in which we take thoughts or ideas and let them evolve under their own logic. It
diﬀers from mere imagination in that the result determined not by us but by the
way things are. It is even somewhat unpredictable. Yet unlike a concrete exper-
iment in the world that involves particular things, “This process is ideal, in the
46“Every inference is necessary, and the necessity of the process can be formulated as an
universal truth” (PL531)

Bradley’s Logic
703
sense that it advances on the strength of a connection between universals.” (PL
441)
Bosanquet much objected to the notion of ‘ideal experiment’47 and it has to be
admitted that the term is perhaps too vague really to tell us anything. Pretty much
any sort of operation could count as one. A little more light is shed when in Book
III/Part I/Chapter VI — ‘The ﬁnal essence of inference’ — Bradley suggests that
the operations of such ideal experiment in the end come down to either analysis and
synthesis, or some combination of the two. (PL 455) In some inferences synthesis
dominates (for example, in construction around an identical centre resulting in our
perception of a new relation or quality (PL 451) in some analysis dominates (for
example, when we abstract from being burned to the conclusion that it was the
ﬁre that burned (PL 452) while in others we ﬁnd both operations (for example, in
the standard inference pattern where we go from A – B and B – C, to A – B – C,
and then to A – C, we see ﬁrst synthesis and then analysis. (PL 450) Although
it is useful to draw a distinction between them, Bradley holds that there is no
ultimate diﬀerence between analysis and synthesis; they are but two sides of a
single coin. (PL 470) We cannot break a whole into elements without at the same
time relating the elements together, nor yet can we bring things together without
recognising their distinctness as elements of one whole; and this fact, he says,
explains the apparent paradox that knowledge advances from the abstract to the
concrete. (PL 474) The more we leave behind perception’s partial and distorted
initial encounter with reality, allowing our thought to bring in the its surrounding
mass of contextual detail, the more concrete our product becomes.
As with the theory of judgment, so it was with inference that there were certain
changes of view between the ﬁrst and the second editions of the Principles. As
well as the numerous footnote comments, Bradley wrote a complete new essay on
inference for the second edition. Here a new way of describing inference (which
had occurred in the ﬁrst edition (e.g. 393–4) but in a more minor role) comes to
the fore. “Every inference” Bradley says “is the ideal self-development of a given
object taken as real.” (PL 598) The term ‘object’ here is used in a very loose
sense to cover any set of facts or conditions, expressible as premises, which the
mind takes together as one object of thought. This presents itself to us in ideal
form — that is to say, it comes before the mind — as something real, as one part
of the actual universe. But always reality is more than it seems to be; “what in
any particular case this object is, and how its limits really are deﬁned, cannot
be taken as appearing in those forms of language which serve as its expression.”
(PL 598) Below its surface it carries with it traces of the wider whole to which it
belongs and with which it is continuous. In inference, we penetrate to these deeper
levels, or the object reveals its hidden depths to us. (Bradley sees no fundamental
diﬀerence between these two for, driven by an inner logic which needs must lay
bare the structure lying below what is explicitly presented to us, the process is
one of ‘discovery’ rather than ‘creation.’) But because the object only is what it
is insofar as it is an element in a wider connected whole, in thus revealing itself,
47[Bosanquet, 1885, p. 288ﬀ].

704
William J. Mander
it takes us beyond our original and explicit starting point to a new insight which
forms the conclusion of our inference; even if, in another sense, all the time, it has
done no more than develop itself.
3.3
Mistaken views of inference
If in its positive presentation Bradley’s theory of inference can begin to seem a bit
vague, more teeth are found if we consider those elements in what other writers
have said about inference which he opposes.
Bradley begins this critique with
traditional syllogistic logic. He strongly rejects the claim that all valid arguments
can be put in syllogistic form, together with the related notion that in all inference
we ﬁnd a major and a minor premise.
Bradley has a twofold strategy. In the ﬁrst place he simply points out that
there exist valid inferences falling outside this scheme. (PL 248) Indeed only one
of the eight examples oﬀered is, he thinks, really syllogistic. (PL 247) But he has
deeper worries too. He complains that the principle of class inclusion (upon which
syllogism is based) contains a petitio. For the statement ‘All men are mortal,’
read as a collection, already contains the conclusion we go on to draw from it,
that ‘John is mortal.’ It therefore yields no new knowledge, violating the third
criterion on the adequacy of inference. (PL 248) The problem is avoided if we
read the statement as a connection of attributes. (PL 249) But if this preserves
the validity of the inference, it can no longer be regarded as syllogistic in form.
Later on Bradley takes the case further. He admits that it is, with some con-
trivance possible to force, or as he puts it to “torture,” most inferences into some
sort of syllogistic pattern. (PL 526) But to oblige them to lie in such a “a bed of
Procrustes” (PL 267) can only distort how they work producing the most unnatu-
ral results. For example, you can try to turn the general principle of any inference,
the basic type to which it belongs, into a premise and proceed to run the argu-
ment from that point. But this is not really what is going on when we make that
inference; for such a major premise will be nothing but an abstracted repetition of
the inference itself. (PL 525-6) The rule according to which an inference proceeds
is not itself required as a further premise of the inference. (Bradley’s point here
is similar to that made by Lewis Carroll in his famous paper, ‘What the Tortoise
said to Achilles.’)48
Not all of Bradley’s readers were wholly impressed by his critique of syllogism
and, whatever defects he may have shown it to have, Bosanquet objected that
Bradley had not really found a satisfactory alternative theory.49 But turning from
traditional ‘deductive’ logic to the logic of ‘induction’ Bradley’s arguments became
considerably stronger and more inﬂuential. Indeed, he himself regarded his diﬀer-
ences with the syllogism are minor compared next to those he has with empiricist
logicians, such as John Stuart Mill. The Principles devotes three chapters to at-
tacking diﬀerent aspects of Mill’s logic: the association of ideas, Mill’s method
48[Carroll, 1895].
49[Bosanquet, 1885, p. 314].

Bradley’s Logic
705
of argument from particulars to particulars, and his inductive cannons. We will
consider each of these in turn.
The doctrine of the association of ideas (pioneered by Locke and developed into
something of sophisticated orthodoxy by subsequent ﬁgures such as Hume, Hartley
and Mill) is an empiricist attempt to explain the principles that cause one idea
to follow upon another.50According to the doctrine all human thought, however
complex, may be derived from conditioned connections between simple sensory
elements, based on similarity and/or repeated juxtaposition in space and time.
Where things A and B, similar or continguous with one another, are repeatedly
experienced together this creates in the mind a habit or tendency such that when-
ever we next experience or think of A, even without B, B nonetheless is recalled in
our mind. Perhaps the best known example of this way of thinking is Hume’s use
of ‘constant conjunction’ to explain our idea of causation or necessary connection,
but for the associationists theirs was an entirely general theory, able to account
for all of our thinking, even inference. Mill for instance argues that in syllogism,
“the minor premise always aﬃrms a resemblance between a new case and some
cases previously known; while the major premise asserts something which, having
been found true of those known cases, we consider ourselves warranted in holding
true of any other case resembling the former in certain given particulars.”51
Bradley does not attempt to deny that association occurs (PL299) — for whether
or not it does is a matter of empirical fact — what he disputes is the empiricists’
explanation of it.
The fundamental problem is that the images or ideas of which the theory speaks
are all particulars, individual dateable private psychological events.
But such
items can never be associated, for by their nature they are ﬂeeting and can never
recur. “There is no Hades where they wait in disconsolate exile, till Associationism
announces resurrection and recall.” (PL 306) Talk of recalling a connected idea is
only plausible to the degree that we forget this, for any new occurrence will always
be in fact a diﬀerent idea. Bradley’s point is that where such associative chains of
thought occur the connections must be, not between particular ideas, but between
universals. Far from explaining the origin of our general ideas association would
not even be possible unless we ﬁrst had them. “I maintain that all association is
between universals” he insists “and that no other association exists.” (PL 307)
At least the classical logic recognised this fact, although the debt he explicitly
acknowledges for this view is to Hegel. 52
This general worry is worked in detail for each of the two associationist princi-
ples. The principle of contiguity, in the end, amounts to no more than the thesis
that where ideas have been contiguous, ideas which are like them tend to excite
one another, (PL 316) in other words to reduce to an instance of the principle of
50[Ferreira, 1999, pp. 236–9]; [Ferreira, 1996, pp. 298–84].
51[Mill, 1843, Book II, Chapter IV].
52“Association holds only between universals.
This doctrine. . . I owe to Hegel.”
(346; an
attribution repeated at PL 515 n.1)

706
William J. Mander
resemblance. But that principle itself is unable to stand. It claims that current
ideas have the power to call up past ones with which resemble them. But re-
semblance must be perceived and how can something present resemble something
absent? “If the relation does not exist until the idea is called up, how can the idea
be called up by the relation?” asks Bradley. (PL 321)
Bradley’s general opposition to the association of ideas is, of course, but one
further application of his general anti-psychologism. In his view inference depends
on logical relations, not causal or psychological one, but these are something which
associationism can never capture. In the end it reduces conceptual connections
to the arbitrary frequencies of experience, something which wholly bypasses the
content of the ideas themselves. Such a view ﬁnds its most graphic presentation
in Hume’s psychological atomism, where all of our ideas are distinct existences
between which the mind never perceives any real connection. Ideas are conjoined
“by the agency of chance or fate” rather than any real bond. (PL 302)
It might be asked whether Bradley’s rejection of psychologism as he ﬁnds it in
Mill is really compatible with his own view of inference as a process of ideal self-
development, for does not that amount to saying that there are ‘laws of thought’;
laws according to which ideas evolve? But this objection misses its mark for his
aim is not to deny that there are discoverable rules determining the way in which
our ideas succeed one another; his point is rather to insist that they thus evolve
on the basis of their content, not on the basis of arbitrary external connections,
as the associationists would have it.
That Bradley follows these objections to associationism with an extensive cri-
tique of Mill’s account of inductive inference shows that his conception of inference
was not one of simple formal deductive inference. But unlike Mill, who saw induc-
tion as the only legitimate type in contradistinction to deduction, Bradley does
not draw a sharp distinction between the two modes.
There are two aspects of Mill’s theory of inference to which he takes exception.
First, there is Mill’s belief that inference is properly the passage in thought from
particulars to particulars. Bradley spends but little time on this idea, for its incor-
rectness follows immediately from what has just been said about the association
of ideas. If a universal is always needed to connect our ideas then, “[to] reason
directly from particulars to particulars is wholly impossible.” (348) Bradley sug-
gests that the factors that lead Mill into this error were two-fold.
In the ﬁrst
place he was mislead by his general conception of inference into making a false
dichotomy. He regarded himself as faced with a choice between treating inferences
either as question-begging syllogisms which already contain their conclusions, or
as movements from one particular idea to another. For reasons we shall consider
below, Bradley regards this dichotomy as a false one. But there is a second source
to error, in so far as Bradley freely admits that there are some inferences which
might look as they go from particular to particular. He considers the child who
falsely infers from the fact that his dog wags its tail when he is happy, that the cat
which swishes its tail is happy also. However, rather than take this at face value
suggests that it may be given an alternative analysis, as an argument based on

Bradley’s Logic
707
analogy. For what is really happening here is that the child is generalising; taking
from the dog certain qualities which he transfers to the cat on the basis that they
are analogous — in the case, of course, a false analogy. (PL 351)
Leaving alleged inferences from particulars to particulars, Bradley attacks a
second “cognate superstition,” (PL 355) the notion that inference may go from
particulars to universal truths; that is to say, the principle of induction, as most fa-
mously formalised in Mill’s canons of inductive inference. Bradley has no sympathy
at all with these formulations and insists that their methods, although professing
to start from mere particulars, in fact imply universals. (PL 359) He further ar-
gues that, rather than properly inductive they can all be seen as examples of a
single quite diﬀerent pattern of reasoning, inference by elimination; “they ﬁx a
relation between certain wholes, and then, by removal of parts of each, establish
this relation between the remaining elements.” (PL 363) Running through each
of the ﬁve cannons in turn in order diagnose their individual faults, Bradley does
admit that there is a sense in which all of them work if, that is, you add to them
some proviso of the sort, ‘in this particular case,’ but thus to rescue them is he
complains utterly to destroy their generalising power as types of inference.
3.4
The validity of inference
In the ﬁnal chapter of the Principles Bradley addresses the question of the validity
of inference. That he should even ask about this shows how diﬀerent his conception
is from that of the modern logician who, for all his eﬀorts to deﬁne formally in just
what it consists, takes the validity of inference in general as unproblematic. As
Bradley sees it, the question can be asked at two levels, logical and metaphysical.
(PL 551) We can take these in turn.
At a logical level we ask whether premises really do prove their conclusions.
The problem — which he later refers to as “the essential puzzle of inference” (PL
599) — is that inference must yield new knowledge. But in that case it seems,
through the mind’s operation on its starting material, that we have altered it. If
we make the conclusion we can not also claim to have found it. And so we face a
dilemma: “If nothing was altered, then there was no inference; but if we altered
aught then the inference is vicious.” (PL 554) In other words, inference must yield
new knowledge but the requirement of validity seems to prevent that.
Now, this was not a new problem. It had, as already noted above, attracted
the attention of John Stuart Mill. Mill argued that syllogistic inference can not go
beyond its premises. Its legitimacy derives entirely from the fact that it already
asserts its conclusion in its premises. For this reason, he felt all that was left was
the direct inference of one particular fact from another. But Bradley was unable
to accept this answer, and sought instead to ﬁnd a way in which inference could
indeed yield new knowledge without sacriﬁcing its validity.
He suggests that, in part, the solution we need is “to regard our reasoning as
simply a change in our way of knowing.” The change is not in the object, but
in ourselves. “If, by altering myself, I am so able to perceive a connection which

708
William J. Mander
before was not visible, then my act conditions, not the consequence itself, but
my knowledge of that consequence.” (PL 554) Every inference modiﬁes its own
starting point. But I play no part in that. “My vision is aﬀected, but the object
is left to its own development.” (PL 555)
Yet such a breach between the psychological process of inference and the objec-
tive validity of the inference can be only half the answer. For the mere correction in
our vision, a mere shift in attention, hardly amount to an inference — as Bradley
notes in the second edition. (PL 573n7) Even if we play no part it in, and are thus
freed from blame, the fact that the premises themselves evolve under an internal
logic challenges our belief in the validity of the inference. For the conclusion be-
comes diﬀerent from the premises. It is this second aspect of the puzzle which
comes to the fore in the extended discussion of inference which Bradley added to
the second edition of the Principles. He suggests there that the basic solution
to our puzzle lies in “the double nature of the object.” (PL 599) The inference
starts with a special object, but that object is more than itself. An element in
a wider whole, it has an identity that points beyond itself, and which develops
along its own natural lines through the process of inference. What we uncover in
the inference is not something new smuggled in from outside our starting point;
it is “nothing beyond the intrinsic development of its proper being.” (PL 600).
In other words, the conclusion is not asserted in the premises (as Mill had said),
but it is thinks Bradley implicit in them. If conclusions are contained in premise
it is, to use a phrase from Frege, “as plants are contained in their seeds, not as
beams are contained in a house”53 This is what Bradley means by the term ‘self-
development’. There must be development or else there is no new knowledge, but
it must be self -development or else the inference would be invalid.
In this way the key to the validity of inference lies in coherence. As the premises
unpack their latent connect, they connect themselves with the rest our beliefs
and thus inferences (like judgments, as we shall see below) are judged by the
overall coherence and comprehensiveness they are able to generate in our system
of beliefs. The ideal standard here is that of perfected or complete knowledge,
where everything connects to everything else. In Bradley’s own words, “Our actual
criterion is the body of our knowledge, made both as wide and as coherent as is
possible. . . And the measure of the truth and importance of any one judgment or
conclusion lies in its contribution to, and its place in, our intelligible system.” (PL
620, cf.489) Although this allows us to give an aﬃrmative reply to our ﬁrst question
of the validity of inference, it is a reply that must be qualiﬁed. In the second
edition, he insists that every inference is fallible (PL 619-21). The reason for this
is that each inference is individual and if, from on perspective one given inference
may seem to increase coherence and comprehensiveness more than another, from
an even wider perspective our judgment may be reversed.
In the second part of the chapter Bradley turns from this concern with the
logical validity of inference, to the more metaphysical question of whether what
takes place in the ideal realms of inference in fact corresponds to how things are
53Quoted by Sievers [1996, p. 248].

Bradley’s Logic
709
in reality. Do our thought processes correspond to actual processes in the world?
If there is evolution in our datum, is there a corresponding development in rerum
natura? (PL 580)
Even as he began his account of inference, stating the requirement for a basis
of an identity in all inference, Bradley noted already that the validity of inference
depends on the “enormous” metaphysical assumption “[that] what is the same
ideally is really the same.” (292) So this is a question that has lain in the back-
ground throughout the discussion. But now that he comes to address it directly,
the implications of an aﬃrmative answer are ones which Bradley ﬁnds it hard to
accept. He is struck by the overwhelming diﬀerence between thought and sensuous
reality. Their natures and modes of connection are so fundamentally unlike one
another that can we really be sure so that what happens in one is matched by
the other. Were we to say, with Hegel, that the Real just is the rational, matters
would be easy. But can we really say this? Bradley’s doubts come to the fore, and
the Principles ends, with a famous passage worth quoting in full.
“Unless thought stands for something that falls beyond mere intelli-
gence, if ‘thinking’ is not used with some strange implication that never
was part of the meaning of the word, a lingering scruple still forbids us
to believe that reality can ever be purely rational. It may come from a
failure in my metaphysics, or from a weakness of the ﬂesh which con-
tinues to blind me, but the notion that existence could be the same as
understanding strikes as cold and ghost-like as the dreariest material-
ism. That the glory of this world in the end is appearance leaves the
world more glorious, if we feel it is a show of some fuller splendour;
but the sensuous curtain is a deception and a cheat, if it hides some
colourless movement of atoms, some spectral woof of impalpable ab-
stractions, or unearthly ballet of bloodless categories. Though dragged
to such conclusions, we can not embrace them. . . They no more make
that Whole which commands our devotion, than some shredded dis-
section of human tatters is that warm and breathing beauty of ﬂesh
which our hearts found delightful.” (PL 590–1)
The anti-Hegelian sentiments of these lines and their commitment to the in-
escapability of some form or other of realism, separated Bradley from a great
many of his idealist companions. But rather than recant, what is here but hinted
at he went on, in his subject book Appearance and Reality (1893), to develop
into a full blown metaphysics. Thought, he argues there, is not wholly separate
from the real which is given in experience — he is no dualist — but neither is it
simply identical with it. Rather it must be regarded as unreal abstraction from
presentation pointing, though its own deﬁciencies, beyond itself to a deeper reality.

710
William J. Mander
4
TRUTH
In so far as the theory of truth is a metaphysical question, concerning the relation-
ship between thought and reality, it perhaps has no place in a discussion of logic.
That was certainly Bradley’s own attitude in writing the Principles, throughout
which he tries as far as possible to avoid metaphysical problems. But since for
Bradley the very aim and purpose of logic is to assess the truth-bearing character
of our thought such questions of metaphysics can never altogether excluded. And,
indeed, as we have just seen, in his ﬁnal discussions of the ultimate validity of
inference he ﬁnds himself in squarely metaphysical territory. For this reason it
seems appropriate to conclude this consideration of Bradley’s logical views with a
discussion of his conception of truth. In doing so I draw largely on material that
came after Principles, that is from Appearance and Reality and from Essays on
Truth and Reality. Questions could perhaps be asked about the extent to which
these later works are fully compatible with the earlier logical work, but in so far as
that was revised in the second edition of 1922 there are, I think, no serious points
of discrepancy.
The correspondence theory of truth
Bradley ﬁnds himself unable to endorse any of the three traditional theories of the
nature of truth, and it is helpful to examine his objections to them. We can begin
with the most common theory of truth, the correspondence theory, according to
which a judgment is said to be true if it copies, mirrors, or corresponds to the
facts.
At time in the Principles it might seem as thought Bradley held a correspon-
dence theory of truth. We might take, for example the following statement: “A
judgement, we assume naturally, says something about some fact or reality . . . For
consider; a judgement must be true or false, and its truth or falsehood can not
lie in itself. They involve a reference to a something beyond. And this, about
which or of which we judge, if it is not a fact, what else can it be?” (PL 41). And
there many other references in that work to copying or corresponding or ﬁtting
the facts. 54
However, it is quite clear that correspondence theory was not in fact one which
he endorsed, and in the second edition of the Principles, he explains that he
employed it there as a simplifying assumption only.
“The attempt, made at times in this work for the sake of convenience...
to identify reality with the series of facts, and truth with copying —
was, I think, misjudged. It arose from my wish to limit the subject,
and to avoid metaphysics, since, as is stated in the Preface, I was not
prepared there to give a ﬁnal answer” (PL 591 note).
54PL 41–2, 579–80, 583, cf. ETR 109 note.

Bradley’s Logic
711
But, in truth, only the most cursory of readings could ever have suggested
that this was his view.
For even in the ﬁrst edition, he strongly attacks the
theory. “The common-sense view of facts outside us passing over into the form
of truth within us, or copying themselves into a faithful mirror, is shaken and
perplexed by the simplest enquiries” (PL 46) he complains. His objections to the
theory are twofold. In the ﬁrst place, he believes that thought and reality are so
fundamentally diﬀerent, that any talk of correspondence between them is quite
ridiculous.
Thought is abstract and general, an “unearthly ballet of bloodless
categories” (PL 591), where reality concrete and particular, the felt here and now
of sensuous reality. But how can something essentially general and hypothetical
ever correspond to something essentially individual and categorical?
How can
what is thought ever mirror what is felt?
Secondly, Bradley attacks the idea
of bare unconceptualized facts to which truths are supposed on the account to
correspond. For as we saw, perception and judgment emerge together and there
can be no intelligible encounter with reality that is not at the same time thought or
conceptualised. If we have focused on what is given in perception enough to pick it
out and describe it we have already categorised and interpreted it. Nowhere do we
encounter bare reality against which to measure our beliefs as the correspondence
theory calls upon us to do.
“The merely given facts are” Bradley says, “the
imaginary creatures of false theory.
They are manufactured by a mind which
abstracts one aspect of the concrete known whole, and sets this abstracted aspect
out by itself as a real thing” (ETR 108).
The pragmatic theory of truth
There are several respects in which Bradley found himself close to the newly de-
veloping pragmatic theory of truth. Fellow critics of correspondence, he was able
to agree with their insistence that truth be not separated utterly from our pro-
cedures for determining it. “Truth indeed must not become transcendent” (ETR
128) he admits. Rather, he says, truth is what satisﬁes the intellect. In truth, the
intellect ﬁnds a rest and contentment that is its own good or end. Meaningless-
ness, contradiction and falsehood, on the other hand, all produce in the intellect a
sense of uneasiness or dissatisfaction, in which state it cannot remain. They leave
us with a “certain felt need” (ETR 311), that must be meet, and so we search
for a state in which the intellect can rest contented (AR 509, ETR 1, 2, 242). Of
course, full satisfaction is impossible, and so Bradley admits that in the real world
our criteria certainly are pragmatic. For natural science, what this means is that
although its theories can never attain ultimate accuracy, they may nonetheless be
instrumentally or practically true. This thinks Bradley is their sole aim. “The
question is not whether the principles of physical science possess an absolute truth
to which they make no claim. The question is whether the abstraction employed
by that science, is legitimate and useful” (AR 251) Although ultimately unreal
abstractions, the concepts of science are to be thought of as “working ideas” (AR
251), and as such, legitimate in so far as and only in so far as they do work. “I

712
William J. Mander
do not object to anything that is oﬀered, so long as and so far as it works, and so
long as it is oﬀered merely as something which works” (CE 373).
In all of these ways it might be easy to mistake Bradley for a pragmatist. But
despite the calls of ﬁgures such as F.C.S.Schiller and William James to join their
camp, he never felt able to call himself a pragmatist. Part of his problem was
that of ﬁnding a single clear doctrine to sign up to. And here we must sympathise
with his doubts that there every really existed a single pragmatic theory of truth.
But he has as well a more fundamental diﬃculty. For however unattainable it
may be to us, Bradley believes in absolute truth.
Even if not one which we
often enter, or one in which any of us could defend ourselves, there remains a
‘supreme court’ of metaphysics in which are judgments are assessed for absolute
truth, such that however widespread or inevitable it may the use of the pragmatic
is always a kind of ‘second best.’ Elevated to a dogma Bradley sees pragmatism
as a threat to objectivity, a slide into relativism. Knowledge aims to reproduce
the way things really are, and practical reasoning for all its inevitability remains
something diﬀerent from inquiry into how things really are. And if it is indeed the
case that truth satisﬁes the intellect, this is down to the fundamental nature of
reality (of which we are, of course, a continuous part) not the fundamental nature
of truth; it is a practical criterion of truth not its deﬁning essence.55
The coherence theory of truth
According to the coherence theory of truth, truth consist in the coherence and
comprehensiveness of propositions among each other. By far the greatest number
of people have thought that Bradley held a coherence theory of truth. The origin
of this belief may be traced to Russell, who attacked the theory severely in a paper
which, although explicitly directed against Joachim (who did hold such a view),
made it clear that he believed this to be Bradley’s view also. 56 This is still the
popular opinion. It is supported by the fact that a careless reading might well give
this impression. But the real situation is quite otherwise. The fact of the matter
is that nowhere does he say that truth consists in coherence. For Bradley this is
the criterion, not the nature, of truth. He clearly states that coherence is a test
of truth. (ETR 202) On the other hand, it must be admitted that statements to
the eﬀect that the more coherent something is, the more true it is, are ambiguous
and not hard to misinterpret.
The identity theory of truth
Bradley’s actual theory of truth is unusual and rather perplexing. But notwith-
standing these facts, there is no excuse for misinterpreting him, for there can be
no doubt as to what he actually says.57 Although it is repeated in numerous other
55Candlish (1984) section II.
56Russell [1906–7]. The ostensible target was Joachim [1906].
57Correct accounts of his theory of truth may be found in [Candlish, 1989] and [Baldwin, 1991].

Bradley’s Logic
713
places, the theory is most clearly expressed in his Essays on Truth and Reality,
where he says,
“The division of reality from knowledge and of knowledge from truth
must in any form be abandoned. And the only way of exit from the
maze is to accept the remaining alternative. Our one hope lies in taking
courage to embrace the result that reality is not outside truth. The
identity of truth knowledge and reality, whatever diﬃculty that may
bring, must be taken as necessary and fundamental.” (ETR 112–3)
The position has been identiﬁed as what we might call an identity theory of
truth. For a judgment to be true, we must remove all diﬀerence between it an
its subject, such that in the end it does not simply correspond to reality. But is
identical with it. To understand this, more needs to be said about Bradley’s under-
standing of the relationship between thought, feeling and reality. As Bradley sees
it, reality comes ﬁrst in feeling, undiﬀerentiated by thought. From this emerges
thought.
But though distorts reality, for it treats as hard and fast distinction
what is really a ﬂuid identity in diversity. This is the source of all its errors. The
process of removing distortion, repairing the damage, is one that in the end must
take us beyond thought itself, as Bradley puts it to thought’s suicide. Its must be
transcended into a higher experience that is Reality itself. The goal of our thinking
is an identity with reality that would take us beyond thought itself. We see here
how we have transcended logic for metaphysics, for this strictly metaphysical view
is of no use for logic; for truth on this understanding is not even a property of
judgments.58
Degrees of truth
We may return from such far-oﬀmetaphysical regions to consider one further
important implication of Bradley general conception of judgment for his theory
of truth. All judgment is made subject to conditions, facts outside its explicit
statement which nonetheless bare upon it. So long as these conditions are ignored
the judgment must be regarded as strictly false. Were they all to be included
within the body of the judgment it would express a truth. But it is clear that,
between these two extremes, there exist a myriad of degrees as more or less of
these conditioning factors are explicitly acknowledge in the judgment itself. One
of the most notable aspects of Bradley’s theory of judgment is his exploitation of
this possibility in the form of a doctrine of degrees of truth. 59 Bradley accepts,
of course, that for the most part we act as though truth and falsity were absolute
but none the less he thinks, when we assess judgments in anything more than a
pragmatic way degrees of truth force themselves on us. We see, argues Bradley,
58[Walker, 1998, p. 97].
59While there can be no doubt that this is his view in Appearance and Reality, it is to be noted
that he denied it in the ﬁrst edition of the Principles (PL 197). Allard [1996, p. 141] reads this
as saying simply that something can not be more or less aﬃrmed.

714
William J. Mander
that no judgment is wholly true and no judgment wholly false, but rather that all
lie somewhere in between.
No judgment is wholly true because any judgment is always subject to unstated
conditions, which as long as they are left out vitiate the judgment. But in the
end thinks Bradley it would be impossible to wholly correct this, for the presence
of these conditions is a consequence of the very action of thought to abstract,
separate and divide what is given in experience as a single sensuous whole. So long
as we think, we must divide and abstract and our thought must of consequence
be incomplete and distorted, but partial truth.
And yet on the other hand, it must always remain partially true, for because
there are no ﬂoating ideas and because whatever we say is referred to reality as a
whole, our judgments can never fail to contain some measure of truth. They may
so distort and abstract that putting right their failing would change them almost
beyond recognition, but it cannot be that nothing in what they say, not even
when “redistributed and dissolved” (AR 323) is able to ﬁnd a point of reference
in reality. For this reason. Says Bradley, “Error is truth, it is partial truth, that
is false only because partial and incomplete” (AR 169) We abstract a content and
attempt to refer it to a reality with which it seems discrepant, but reality owns
both of these elements and in a wider view “this jarring character is swallowed up
and is dissolved in fuller harmony.” (AR 170)
But what, it will be demanded, are degrees of truth? The idea is such an alien
one to those brought up to believe in only two truth values. Bradley suggests that
they may be understood as a measure of transformation that would be required
to turn something into a complete truth. To add in those factors that have been
ignored is to modify the judgment and “the amount of survival in each case” he
suggests “gives the degree of reality and truth” of the original judgment. (AR
323) While it is unclear how this could result in any sort of measure, the idea is
intuitive.
In an objection addressed to one of Bradley’s followers, H. H. Joachim, but
aimed as much against Bradley, Bertrand Russell famously argued that the whole
doctrine of degrees of truth was just self-contradictory.
“[If] no partial truth is quite true, it cannot be quite true that no partial
truth is quite true; unless indeed the whole of truth is contained in the
proposition ‘no partial truth is quite true’, which is too sceptical a
view for the philosophy we are considering. Connected with this is
the diﬃculty that human beings can never know anything quite true,
because their knowledge is not the whole truth. Thus the philosophy
with which the view in question is bound up cannot quite be true,
since, if it were, it could not be known to idealists” 60
Like many statements of Russell’s this is perhaps more memorable than valid.
No doubt he wishes us to infer that since the doctrine of partial truth is not itself
60[Russell, 1906–7, p. 33].

Bradley’s Logic
715
‘quite true’ it is false, and thus that if it is true it is false, i.e. it is self-refuting.
But not quite true is diﬀerent from false, and there is no contradiction in regarding
the theory that all statements are incomplete as itself incomplete.
But nonetheless there is a puzzle here. For how can we know that it is not
incomplete in a way that would radically change it? However, Bradley has within
his resources a way to solve this problem. He makes a relative distinction between
absolute and ﬁnite truth. Both are conditioned and depend for their truth upon
factors not included within the judgement, but the former, which include the
truths of metaphysics, are as general as judgements can possibly be, and thus
unconditioned by anything which it would be possible for us to recognise and add.
He says, “Absolute truth is corrected only by passing outside the intellect.
It
is modiﬁed only by taking in the remaining aspects of experience. But in this
passage the proper nature of truth is, of course, transformed and perishes.” (AR
483) In this way they are as true as any judgements could ever be. If corrigible,
they are not intellectually corrigible. “There is no intellectual alteration which
could possibly, as general truth, bring it nearer ultimate Reality.” (AR 483). And
so while it might be worrying to think that the doctrine that there is no absolute
truth were incomplete if that meant that it might later be completed and modiﬁed
(perhaps into something very diﬀerent) if it is as complete as any judgment could
be, we need have no such worry.
5
CONCLUSION
Bradley’s logic was immensely inﬂuential in its day; it became a kind of bible for
a generation of subsequent philosophers. And because of his view of the centrality
of logic and its relation to other areas of philosophy, this allegiance inﬂuenced not
just their logical views but their other positions also. However, rapid success of the
new logic championed by Frege, Russell, Whitehead and Wittgenstein which made
its appearance at the beginning of the twentieth century almost entirely eclipsed
its idealist predecessor, rather as it had eclipsed the empiricist logic that came
before it. Since that time Bradley’s logic has been either derided or ignored. As a
result Bradley’s logic is still not widely known, which is a great shame. Although
it is true the majority of his logical views are ones which modern logicians would
still want to reject, the strength of the rejection has led his successors to overlook
even those things which he said that are of value. For as we have seen Bradley’s
system of logic is complex and subtle and there is much in it that rewards careful
attention. Fortunately, over the last twenty years or so, this has increasingly come
to be recognised as his work has begun once again to attract scholarly attention.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Allard, 1996] James Allard. Degrees of Truth in F.H.Bradley. In W.J.Mander (ed) Perspectives
on the Logic and Metaphysics of F.H.Bradley, Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1996.

716
William J. Mander
[Allard, 2005] J. Allard. Logic, Judgment and Truth; the Foundations of Bradley’s Metaphysics,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[Ayer, 1952] A. J. Ayer. ‘Negation. Journal of Philosophy, 49, pp.797–815, 1952.
[Baldwin, 1991] T. Baldwin. The Identity Theory of Truth, Mind, 100, pp.35–52, 1991.
[Bosanquet, 1885] B. Bosanquet. Knowledge and Reality, London: Kegan Paul, Trench and
Trubner, 1885
[Bosanquet, 1888] B. Bosanquet. Logic, or the Morphology of Knowledge, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1888; (second edition 1911).
[Bosanquet, 1912] B. Bosanquet. The Principle of Individuality and Value, London: Macmillan,
1912.
[Bradley, 1883] F. H. Bradley. The Principles of Logic, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1883; (second
edition 1922).
[Bradley, 1893] F. H. Bradley. Appearance and Reality, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1893; (second
edition 1897).
[Bradley, 1914] F. H. Bradley. Essays on Truth and Reality, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1914.
[Bradley, 1935] F. H. Bradley. Collected Essays, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1935.
[Bradley, 1999] F. H. Bradley. Selected Correspondence 1872–1904, Volume 4 of his Collected
Works, Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1999.
[Candlish, 1989] S. Candlish. The Truth about F. H. Bradley. Mind, 98, pp. 331–48, 1989.
[Carroll, 1895] L. Carroll. What the Tortoise said to Achilles. Mind, 4, pp.278–80, 1895
[Crossley, 1878] D. J. Crossley. The British Idealists on Disjunction. Idealistic Studies, 8,
pp.115–123, 1978
[Devaux, 1932] P. Devaux. Lotze et son Inﬂuence sur la Philosophie Anglosaxonne, Bruxelles:
M.Lamertin, 1932.
[Ferreira, 1996] P. Ferreira. Bradley’s Attack on Associationism. In James Bradley (ed) Philos-
ophy After F.H.Bradley, Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1996.
[Ferreira, 1999] P. Ferreira. Bradley and the Structure of Knowledge, Albany: SUNY Press,
1999.
[Green, 1883] T. H. Green. Prolegomena to Ethics, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1883
[Griﬃn, 1996] N. Griﬃn. Bradley’s Contribution to the Development of Logic. In James Bradley
(ed) Philosophy After F.H.Bradley, Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1996.
[Hegel, 1812–16] G. W. Hegel. Wissenschaft der Logik, 1812–16. (Translated as The Science of
Logic by W.H.Johnson and L.G.Struthers, London: George Allen and Unwin, 1929.
[Hegel, 1817] G. W. Hegel. Encylopedia of the Philosophical Sciences: Logic, 1817. (Translated
as Hegel’s Logic by William Wallace, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975)
[Herbart, 1850] J. F. Herbart. Lehrbuch zur Einleitung in die Philosophie, in his Sammtliche
Werke, Vol.I, Leipzig, 1850
[Holdcroft, 1998] D. Holdcroft. Bradley and Floating Ideas. In in G.Stock (ed) Appearance ver-
sus Reality; New Essays on the Philosophy of F.H.Bradley, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1998
[Jevons, 1874] W. S. Jevons. The Principles of Science, London: Macmillan, 1874.
[Joachim, 1906] H. H. Joachim. The Nature of Truth, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1906
[Kuntz, 1971] P. K. Kuntz. ‘Introduction’ to George Santayana’s Lotze’s System of Philosophy,
edited by P.K.Kuntz, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1971.
[Mander, 1994] W. J. Mander. An Introduction to Bradley’s Metaphysics, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1994
[Manser, 1983] A. Manser. Bradley’s Logic, Oxford: Blackwell, 1983
[Mill, 1843] J. S. Mill. A System of Logic, London, 1843
[Russell, 1906–7] B. Russell. On the Nature of Truth, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
7, pp. 28–49, 1906–7.
[Russell, 1910] Russell, B. (1910) ‘Some Explanations in Reply to Mr. Bradley,’ Mind, 19,
pp.373–8, 1910.
[Sievers, 1996] K. Sievers. Inference and the Criterion of System. In W.J.Mander (ed) Perspec-
tives on the Logic and Metaphysics of F.H.Bradley, Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1996.
[Sprigge, 1993] T. L. S. Sprigge. James and Bradley; American Truth and British Reality,
Chicago and La Salle, Illinois: Open Court, 1993.
[Stock, 1985] G. Stock. Negation: Bradley and Wittgenstein, Philosophy, 60, pp. 465–76, 1985
[Stock, 1984] G. Stock. Bradley’s Theory of Judgment. In A.Manser & G.Stock (eds) The Phi-
losophy of F.H.Bradley, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984

Bradley’s Logic
717
[Walker, 1998] R. C. S. Walker. Bradley’s Theory of Truth. In G.Stock (ed) Appearance versus
Reality; New Essays on the Philosophy of F.H.Bradley, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998.
[Wollheim, 1959] R. Wollheim. F.H.Bradley, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1959; (second
edition 1969)

This page intentionally left blank 

INDEX
a priori, 167, 168, 176, 202
abductive reasoning, 219
abductivism, 219
Abeles, F., 486
absolute, 247, 276
abstract generic law, 270
abstract terms, 519
abstraction, see De Morgan, A.
Achilles and Tortoise problem, 493
adjunct, 466
aﬃrmative universal propositions, 472
aggregation and composition, see De
Morgan, A.
Airy’s Tracts, 423
Airy, G. B., 174, 185, 217, 407
Aldrich, H., 79, 80, 83, 84, 89
Aldrich, R., 230, 245, 278
Alexander, P., 459, 465
Alexander, S., 490
algebra, 242, 284–286, 291, 331–335,
337, 339–344, 346, 348–353,
355, 357, 359, 362, 364, 369,
371, 374, 375, 419, see De
Morgan, A.
Frend on, 285–286, 288
Peacock on, 288–289
algebra and logic as basic components,
430
algebra of classes, 336
algebraic, 350, 368, 373
analysis, 333
and symbolical methods, 439
logic, 2, 343, 356, 364, 366
operations, 365
operators, 339
algorithms, 374
ampliative inference, 210, 211
analogical, 220
inference, 197, 221
reasoning, 183, 198
analytic, 426, 695
judgement, 203
judgments of sense, 677
truth, 204
Analytical Society, 164, 401, 509
anti-psychologism, 667, 669, 671–672,
705–706
antithetical, 168
epistemology, 167, 176, 178, 183,
196, 198, 200, 201, 212
nature of knowledge, 170
applied mathematics, 402
appropriate concept, 178, 179, 181–
283, 197, 213
Arbogast, L. F., 403
archetypes, 206
argumentation, 237
Aristotle, 14, 20, 22, 79, 81, 105, 125,
130–133, 153, 160, 179, 230,
233, 235, 243, 278, 283, 291–
293, 300, 307, 311–312, 323–
324, 329, 331, 347, 349, 350,
490, 517, see proposition, syl-
logism
Aristotelian, 332, 338, 348
logic, 166, 233, 334, 341, 344,
353, 393, 422, 442
square of opposition, 307–308, 317,
346
syllogism, 339
syllogistic logic, 331, 334, 335,
347, 364
arithmetic, 250, 253, 279, 288–289,
328, see De Morgan, A.
paradigmatic ﬁeld, 415
Arnauld, A., 80, 82, 331

720
artiﬁcial intelligence, 375
Ashworth, J., 75, 79
association, 667
of ideas, 705–706
Astronomy, 407
atomic facts, 249
attributes, 463, 464–469, 474, 477,
487
Augustus Pyrasmus de Candolle, 5
axioms, 256, 344
of containment, 115–117, 130–131
of classical mechanics, 266
of sciences, 250
Ayer, A. J., 459
Babbage, C., 165, 396
Bacon, F., 81, 82, 90, 106, 163, 165,
167, 168, 181, 196–201, 213,
214, 216, 217, 219, 220, 235,
257, 259, 260, 278, 279
Baden Powell, 444
barbershop problem, 490
Barﬁeld, O., 59, 72
Bartley, W. W. III, 464–466, 470, 489,
490, 493–494, 496
Bell, J., 339, 344
Bentham, G., 105, 398
Bentham, J., 3, 5–7, 11, 12, 14–17,
19–21, 23, 26, 29, 79, 87–89,
229, 230, 279
Berkeley, G., 235
best explanation, 188
Beth, E. W., 488
bifurcation, 21, 22, 23–25
big bang, 362
biliteral diagram, 463, 471–473, 478,
479, 482
binary semantics, 360
biological species, 21, 24
Black, D., 458
Blackburn, S., 494
Blakey, R., 89
Bochenski, I., 89
Bolzano, 75
Boole, G., 75, 77, 84, 86, 89, 99, 231,
240, 242, 245, 246, 280, 291–
293, 332–339, 341–351, 353–
366, 368, 370, 371, 373, 375,
396, 457, 462, 463, 466, 467,
472, 480, 484, 497, 498, 507,
509, 510, 521
Boole’s
algebra, 344, 345, 363, 373, 374
logic, 368
Mathematical Analysis of logic,
435
mature Laws of thought, 435
probability theory, 366, 369
universe of discourse, 306–307
Boolean, 337
algebra, 342–344, 358, 373
class operators, 339
classes, 344
logic, 355, 373, 457
operator, 334–339, 344, 373
Bosanquet, B., 247, 267–272, 274, 275,
498, 667–668, 692, 693, 695,
702, 704
botany, 5–7, 18, 22, 24
Bourdon, L. P. M., 288
Bradley, F. H., 247, 267, 275, 490,
498, 663–715
Brahe, T., 178, 182
Braithwaite, R. B., 489
Brentano, F. C., 469
Brewster, D., 182, 193, 220
Broad, C. D., 259, 459
Brody, B., 89
Brown, D. G., 494
Brown, R., 216
Brownian Motion, 515
Buchdahl, G., 173, 179
Burks, A. W., 492, 496
Butts, R., 173
calculus, 296, 324, see De Morgan, A.
of functions, 439
propositional, 291, 329
Index

721
Cambridge
Analytical Society, 285–286
curriculum revisited,, 423
heritage, 400
moderators, 436
University, 428, 442
liberal education, 434
–Oxford debate on political econ-
omy, 442
Campbell, G., 84
Carlyle, T., 104
Carroll, L., 457–505, 704
Carroll diagrams, 471, 474, 475, 479–
481
categorical and hypothetical judgment,
676–681, 694
categorical propositions, 345, 347, 351,
355
categorical syllogism, 345
causal
explanation, 237
implication, 492, 497
law, 188, 189
uniﬁcation, 187, 189, 190, 192,
194
cause, 237, 257
channel between Oxford, Cambridge
and De Morgan, 444
Chrestomathia, 5, 6, 11, 14, 16, 18
Christianity, 38, 57, 67
Clairaut’s method based upon histor-
ical discovery, 414
clariﬁcation, 183
classes, 240, 253, 337, 339–341, 343,
345, 349–351, 354, 355, 357,
358, 363, 466–472, 474–477,
480, 481, 496
classiﬁcation, 20, 25, 466
of the forms of propositions, 27
clear and appropriate conception, 178
COF, 430
cognitive psychological processes, 375
coherence, 184, 188, 189, 194, 664–
665, 675, 708
theory of truth, 675, 712
coherentism, 675
Cole, S., 68
Coleridge, S. T., 171, 174–176
Coleridge, works by
Aids to Reﬂection, 44, 56, 61, 62,
66
Biographia Literaria, 38, 41, 46,
48, 54
Essay on Faith, 68
Lectures 1808–1819 on Literature,
43, 45
Lectures 1818–1819 on the His-
tory of Philosophy, 36, 42,
44
Logic, 35, 45, 48–50, 52, 53, 55,
59
On the Constitution of the Church
and State, 65, 69
On the Construction of the Church
and State, 57
Opus Maximum, 50, 56, 61, 62
Outlines of the History of Logic,
36
Table Talk, 55
The Friend, 37, 51, 55, 58
The Statesman’s Manual, 58, 64,
67
collective judgment, 695
colligate, 177, 178, 179, 181, 182, 186,
188, 194, 197, 198, 209, 210,
213, 213, 220, 260
Collingwood, S. D., 458, 461
commutation, 342
comparative study, 419, 442
between mathematical and logi-
cal reasoning, 434
of Oxford and Cambridge, 428
complementation, 335, 336, 339, 342,
343, 349, 351, 353, 363, 368
compossible, 150
Compte, A., 181
computer, 374, 375
applications, 373
Index

722
modelling, 375
Comte, A., 214
Comtet, L., 344
conception, 169, 171, 175, 177, 178,
181–183, 190, 198, 200, 205,
211, 213, 220
concepts
clearness and distinctness of, 123
conceputal structure, 256
concrete proposition, 469
concrete universal, 665, 686, 687
Condillac, A. de, 386, 391, 414, 427
conditional, 337, 355, 361
judgment, 693–694
proposition, 356
Condorcet, 389
conﬁrmation, 184, 264
conjecture, 273
conjunction, 245, 249, 250, 335–337,
339, 342, 363
conjunction/disjunction, see De Mor-
gan, A.; aggregation and com-
position
connective, 244
connotation, 239, 240
conscience/consciousness, 68
consilience, 184, 186, 187, 189–194,
260, 263–265
contingent, 250
contradiction, 689
law of, in Coleridge, 58, 59, 64
contradictories, 346
contradictory universe, 357
contrapositive proposition, 522
contraries, 346
contraries (complements) and contra-
dictories, see De Morgan, A.
controversy
relational forms, 422
convention, 240, 241
converse of a proposition, 420
conversion, 141, 355
Hamilton on, 138–139
techniques, 355
Copi, I. M., 492
Copleston, E., 76, 166
copula, 468, 496, see De Morgan, A.
correspondence theory of truth, 710
Corsi, P., 166, 174
Crakanthorpe, R., 79
Craven, T. L., 375
Curjel, H. W., 491
D´egerando, J. M., 391
Darwin, C., 1, 181, 191–194, 216, 221,
268–270
Davidson, D., 240
De Morgan’s
biographers, 443
Cambridge heritage, 412
educational contributions, 445
De Morgan, A., 2, 75, 77, 86, 89, 98,
99, 106, 137, 145–148, 158,
163, 172, 173, 176, 183, 193,
220, 231, 240, 242, 248, 254,
331, 347, 348, 363, 364, 381,
400, 430, 442, 448, 457, 466,
498, 507, 515
abstraction, 295–296, 307, 318,
320–323, 327
aggregation and composition, 323,
325–329
algebra and logic, 289, 292–296,
299, 302–303, 305–306, 308,
311–312, 319–321, 323–324
arithmetic, 294–296, 320, 324
calculus, 295–296
of opposite relations, 312, 314
canon of inference, 300, 303–305
canon of validity, 303–305, 312
contraries (complements) and con-
tradictories, 293, 302–304, 306–
317, 320, 325
copula, 318–323
De Morgan’s laws, 283, 329
erasure rule, 300–302, 304–305,
316
Index

723
existence, existential import, 310–
312, 317–318, 328
form and matter
in logic, 293–296, 299, 306, 318,
321–324, 328
in mathematics, 294–296
Formal Logic, 290, 296–298, 306,
309, 315, 319, 321, 322
formal and material in logic, 306
geometry, 305–306, 308
logic of relations, 283, 292, 293,
318–329
machinery
logical, 293–296, 199, 302, 306,
311, 318, 320–322, 324, 326–
328
metaphor of, 293–296, 199, 318,
320, 324–327, 328
nutcracker, 293–294, 296, 318,
328
notation, 293, 296–297, 299, see
De Morgan, A., symbols, sym-
bology
spicular, 298–300, 303, 304, 306,
312, 315–316, 318, 327
“On the Syllogism”, 290n
probability, 314–315
propositions
subject and predicate, 298–299,
302, 311, 315, 318–320, 325
symbolized, 302–306, 315–317
universal and particular, 302–
305, 311–318
quantity, quantiﬁcation
logical, 298–299, 311–316, 326
On Mathematical Instruction, 412
On the Study and Diﬃculties of Math-
ematics, 412
probability, 313–315
Study of Mathematics, 308, 319
“Syllabus of a Proposed System
of Logic”, 300
syllogism, syllogistic, 290, 292,
297, 300–302, 304, 306, 308,
311–312, 315–319, 321–325,
327–328
bi-copular, 321–322
natural, 328
numerically deﬁnite, 299, 312–
313
strengthened, 293, 305, 311–
318
symbolized, 297, 300, 304–305,
324, 327–328
symbols, symbology, 283, 289, 292–
294, 296–299, 306, 319, 321,
325–327, see De Morgan, A.,
notation
name symbols, 300, 302, 307
spicular, spica, 299–300, 302–
303, 305–306, 312
transformation rule, 300–303, 304,
305, 316
universe
of the proposition, 305, 313–
315
of the syllogism, 300, 302, 305,
318, 328
of the term, 306
under consideration, 302, 306–
318, 328
De Morgan, S., 443
De Quincey, T., 33
decomposed facts, 178
deductive logic, 239, 271, 279
deductive reasoning, 166
deﬁnite descriptions, 679
deﬁnition, 2, 13, 16, 22, 23
of a number, 253
of logic, 10–12, 231
degrees of truth, 713–715
demonstration, 10, 16
demonstratives, 680
denotation, 239, 240
Descartes, R., 80, 82, 167, 189
description, 212, 213
description vs. induction, 210, 212
determinants, 458
Index

724
diagram, 471–474, 476–480, 482, 483,
497, 507, 512
diagrammatic method, 482
diagrammatic representation of propo-
sitions, 471
dialectic, 691, 702
dichotomous division, 22
dichotomy, 466, 467, 473, 475, 480
Dickens, C., 462
dictum de omni et nullo, 243, 254
Diderot, D., 82, 389
diﬀerentia, 466, 467
direct inference, 520
discoverers’ induction, 163, 176, 177,
196–198, 209, 219
discovery, 273
discovery machine, 214
disjunction, 245, 267, 335–337, 339,
342, 363
judgment, 694–695
propositions, 471, 481, 521
syllogism, 244, 258, 267
distribution, 342
diversity, 19, 26, 27
divine idea, 180, 206, 208,
divine mind, 180, 200, 206
division, 466, 467, 475, 480
Dodgson, Charles L., see Carroll, Lewis
double negation, 692
Du calcul des d´erivations, 403
Du Trieu, P., 230
duality, 370
Dudman, V. H., 364
Duncan, W., 82
Dynamics, 407, 425
Ecole Normale, 412, 436, 443
Ecole Polytechnique, 438, 436, 442
econometrics, 528
educational
import of logic, 442, 443
institutions, 428
reform, 2, 5, 6, 8, 10
eﬀect, 237
Einstein, A., 103, 190, 253
elective, 353, 356
operator, 339, 345
symbol, 341, 349
Elements of Logic, 2, 386
eliminand, 481–484, 487
elimination, 266, 482, 484, 486
problem, 481
form of reasoning, 221
induction, 197, 258
ellipse, 178, 182, 211
empirical, 167, 168, 176, 198
approach, 436
faculty, 199
psychological tradition in logic,
666
truth, 207
empiricism, 168, 170, 213
empiricist, 247, 250, 414
critique, 239
epistemology, 200
logic, 270
Encyclop´edie, 389
Engel, P., 494
Enthymeme, 153–154
entity, 483, 484, 486
enumerative
induction, 168, 197, 211
inference, 183
reasoning, 221
epicycles, 178
error, 278, 714
philosophy of, 278
Essais sur l’enseignement, 386, 388
essence, 20, 29
nominal, 20
real, 20
essential truth, 250
ethics, 279
Euclid, 312–313, 319, 458, 460, 469,
493
Euclid’s Elements, 393, 416
Euclidean geometry, 422
Euler, L., 471, 475
Index

725
Euler diagram, 471, 474
exact science, 381
existence, existential import, see De
Morgan, A.
existential import, 144, 469, 473
existential quantiﬁcation, 350
experientia literata, 197, 200, 201
experiential truth, 202, 206, 207, 208
experimental test, 262
explanation, 236
explanatory argument, 238
explication, 179, 181, 203
of conceptions, 178, 181, 200, 206
extension, 124
and intension, 115–125, 129–135,
143, 155, 159, 686–687
of a predicate, 341, 368
of syllogistic logic, 442
external negation, 336
fact, 169, 176–178, 198, 207
fallacy, 278, 420, 437
fallacy of confusion, 279
existential, 312, 316
fallacies of observation, 279
fallacy of simple inspection, 278,
279
undistributed middle, 316
falsﬁcation of hypotheses, 260
Faraday, M., 221
Farquharson, A. S. L., 490
Ferrier, J. F., 103
Feys, R., 363
ﬁctitious entities, 12, 14, 15, 23
First Notions of Logic, 446, 447
ﬁrst principles, 427
ﬁrst-order propositional logic, 331
Fisch, M., 76, 77, 173, 196
ﬂoating ideas, 674–676, 692, 714
Fogelin, R. J., 99, 134, 144–150, 157–
158
Forbes, J. D., 198
form, 234, 235, 238, 417
and matter, 417, 448, see De Mor-
gan, A.
of geometry, 418
Formal Logic, 444, 446, 447
formal laws of probability, 369, 371
formal logic, 231, 233, 239, 268, 381,
497, 498
foundationalism, in Coleridge, 72
Fowler, T., 457, 490, 498
Fran¸cais, F. J., 403
free variable, 261
Frege, G., 239, 280, 331, 350, 498,
512, 667, 668, 670, 682, 708
Frege, L., 525
French Enlightenment, 388, 428
French semiotic philosophy, 428
Frend, W., 284–286, 288–289
function, 240
functional calculus, 331
fundamental antithesis, 168, 171, 175,
177, 219
fundamental idea, 170–174, 178, 179,
181, 205, 205, 206, 312
Galileo’s law of falling bodies, 211,
261, 262
Galileo’s law of projectile motion, 261
Gatt´egno, J., 493
Geach, P. T., 76, 459, 464, 465, 481
genera, 1, 2
general facts, 249
general happiness, 229
general law, 236
general propositions, 240
generalization, 187, 196, 249, 250
generic hypothesis, 266
generic theories, 273
genius, 181, 183
genus, 234, 261, 263, 264, 466, 468,
481
geometrical or analytical procedures,
442
geometry, 205, 208, 252, 279, 284,
286, 340, 418, 419, 458, 460,
Index

726
461, 465, 490, 493, see De
Morgan, A.
and logic, 419
George, R., 82, 89
German Idealists, 170
German school in mineraology, 167
God, 247, 256
Goodstein, R. L., 338, 339
gradualism, 196
Graham, T., 515
grammatical form, 333
Grattan-Guinness, I., 346, 373, 465,
493
Gray, A., 192
Green, T. H., 683
ground, 274
guessing, 182, 196, 208, 211, 219, 220,
260
Hailperin, T., 343, 364, 373
Halsted, G. B., 364, 497
Hamilton’s
deﬁnition of logic, 107–108
doctrine of concepts, 109–111
doctrine of judgments, 131–137
inverse ratio relationship between
extension and intension, 118–
122, 126, 152 128
principle of explicitness, 109–110,
131, 135, 140, 154
relativism, 129, 158
theory of language, 123, 128–129
Hamilton, P., 39
Hamilton, W., 2, 83, 88, 89, 204, 206,
230, 231, 238, 241, 242, 229,
312, 323, 347, 348, 398, 432
Hammer, P. L., 373
Harding, A. J., 68
Hare, J. C., 164, 171, 174
Hartley, D., 40
Hawley, T. D., 475
Hegel, G. W. F., 154, 277, 665–666,
681, 682, 691, 705, 709
method of, compared to Coleridge,
61, 66
Hempel, C. G., 525
Henslow, J., 164, 167
Herbart, J. F., 666, 679
Herschel, J., 164, 165, 168, 171, 174,
177, 179, 181, 183, 189–191,
192, 194, 196, 198, 201, 214,
216, 218, 404
hierarchy, 26
history of science, 196, 214–216, 218,
219, 221
Hobbes, T., 230, 235, 240
Humboldt, A. von, 5, 172
Hume, D., 76, 235, 236, 257, 259
Huxley, T. E., 102
Huygen’s law of the pendulum, 261
hypothesis, 212, 275
formation, 260
hypothetical, 357, 464, 488–490, 492–
497
judgement, 245, 274, 697
method, 196, 212
necessity, 205
proposition, 337, 355
syllogism, 337, 345
truth, 206
-deductive, 182, 208, 219–221
idea(s), 170, 177, 178, 182, 205
as symbols, 669, 674
as universal, 670, 679
ideal
content, 668
experiment, 693, 669, 702–703
order of instruction, 418
idealist, 247, 250, 277
critique, 267, 276
logic, 276
idealization of facts, 202, 206, 207
idempotence, 343
identity, 19, 26, 27–29, 517, 665
theory of truth, 712
principle of, in Coleridge, 60
Index

727
-in-diﬀerence, 665, 681–686
idols of the theatre, 278
implication, 469, 494–496
impossible quantities, 288, 294, 309,
329, see negative and imag-
inary numbers
inaugural lecture at London Univer-
sity, 427
indeﬁnite propositions
Hamilton on, 133, 135
Index law, 343
indirect inference, 522
individual fact, 249, 250
induction, 163, 165, 166, 168, 169,
179, 186, 208, 209, 221, 232,
364, 524
Hamilton on, 125–126, 153
by simple enumeration, 257
inductive, 167, 176, 181, 183, 221,
256
discoverers, 399
fallacy, 279
generalization, 197, 255
inference, 237, 250, 257, 706, 707
logic, 163, 165, 257, 277, 279,
704
method, 215
reasoning, 188, 189, 373, 421
science, 424
tables, 197
inductivism, 196
Bacon’s, 167, 196, 198
inference, 188, 231, 232, 665, 678
as ‘ideal self-development’, 703,
706, 708
extends knowledge, 700
is something active, 700
inﬁnite regress, 494
informal logic, 231
innate, 179, 181
insensibility to moral evidence, 426
instructors’ misconception, 416
intent, 518
intermediary between Whewell’s ele-
mentary treatises and MC,
423
internal
negation, 336
structure, 235
intuitionism, 209, 278
intuition, 231
involution, 125–130
Ivory, J., 406
Jackson, H., 43
Jacobi, F. H., 69
Jacquette, D., 373
James, W., 248
Jevons, R., 231
Jevons, S., 287, 306, 329
Jevons, W. S., 2, 343, 457, 467, 484,
498, 507, 509, 515, 665, 681
Johnson, W. E., 259, 457, 491, 495
Jones, E. C. C., 457, 491, 495
Jones, R., 164–168, 173, 177, 181,
209, 214–216, 398, 424
Jongsma, C., 75, 89
Jourdain, P. E. B., 459
judgment, 665
general nature of, 668
judgments as prior to ideas, 670
jurisprudence, 13, 17, 19
Kant, I., 101, 170–174, 203, 204, 253,
331, 418
inﬂuence on Coleridge, 46, 52,
54, 55, 57, 68
on logic, 283
Karnaugh, M., 475
Kepler, J., 178, 182, 196, 209–213,
220, 399
Keynes, J. M., 259
Keynes, J. N., 457, 485, 490, 498
Kirwan, R., 395, 432, 433
Kneale, W., 349, 350
Kneale, W. and M., 89
Kuhn, T., 90
La logique, ou l’art de penser, 388
Index

728
La Palma Reyes, M., 347
Lacroix, S. F., 386, 427, 442
Lacroix’s Essais, 412, 436
Lagrange, J. L., 164, 399, 440
Laita, L. M., 347
Lamarck, J.-B., 5, 6, 22
language
and desynonymy, 44, 57, 65
Coleridge’s changing view of, 40
Laplace’s lectures in 1795, 391
Laplace, P.-S., 217, 364, 371, 399,
401, 408, 427, 430, 436, 440,
442
Laplacian probabuility principle, 366
Laplacian law
of conservation of energy, 262,
263
of contradiction, 517
of duality, 517
of identity, 517
of inertia, 262
of nature, 243
of thought, 516
of universal causation, 236, 260,
264, 267, 270
Le Verrier, U. J. J., 185
Leach, K., 458
legal and education reform, 2, 4, 12,
17 see education, reform
Leibniz, G. W. von, 107, 123–124,
150, 164, 247, 280
Lewis, C. I., 496
Liard, L., 89
liberal education, 284, 287, 430, 436
liberty, 229
links
between logic and algebra, 386
between logic and geometry, 386
Linnaeus, C., 17–22, 24
Locke, J., 10, 13, 14, 15, 20, 79, 81,
82, 84, 106, 170, 173, 230,
235, 239, 247, 284, 291, 414
on mathematics, 284–286
logic, 231, 442
abuse of, 445
purpose of, 663–664
‘natural’ and ‘verbal’, 59
and etymology, 39–45
and grammar, 50, 59
and mathematics, 448
as a science, 10
as an art, 10
canonic, 48–51
Coleridge’s ambivalence over, 34,
45, 62
dialectic, 51–56
dichotomic/trichotomic, 63–65
division of, in Coleridge, 48
educational import, 433
of classes, 240
of consistency, 250, 271
of discovery, 183
of induction, 260
of poetry, 38
logic of quantiﬁers, 265
of relations, 254, 255, see De Mor-
gan, A.
of truth, 250, 271
organic, 56–61
polar, 62–66
politics of, 35–39
renovation of, 443
logical
abacus, 522
addition, 335–337, 339, 343, 344,
365, 369
algebra, 336, 338, 339, 344, 345,
353, 358, 368
alphabet, 522
diversity, 26
division, 16, 25
fallacies, 231
genus, 20, 26
identity, 26
multiplication, 335–337, 339, 341,
352, 365
necessity, 206
relations, 370
Index

729
slate, 522
species, 20, 25, 26
spectrum, 474
structure, 234, 236
subtraction, 358
logically necessary, 206
Logique, 391
Logos, 41, 42, 45, 49, 55, 59, 60, 65,
67
London University (later University
College, London), 286–287
Lotze, R. H., 500, 666–667
Lubbock, J. W., 217, 426
	Lukasiewicz, J., 363
luminiferous ether, 189, 213
Lyell, C., 183
MacColl, H., 455, 461, 489, 493
MacFarlane, A., 441, 472, 473, 475
MacHale, D., 343
machinery, machine metaphor, see De
Morgan, A.
Macnamara, P., 347
Macula, A. J., 479
Mansel, H. L., 102, 172, 173, 208,
321–324, 498
Marquand, A., 476, 477, 479, 482
Mars, 187, 210, 212, 220
martian, 182
material
conditional, 246
implication, 492, 495
Mathematical tracts, 407
mathematical
logic, 231
modelling, 373
reasoning, 422, 442
talents, 399
truth, 204, 208
mathematics, 204–206, 284–286, 290–
291, 294, 319, 329, 524, see
algebra, arithmetic, calculus,
geometry
of logic, 442
mixed, 402, 424, 427, 439
matter, 417, 418
matter and form, see form and mat-
ter
Maurice, F. D., 174
Maxwell, J. C., 103, 221
McFarland, T., 57, 71
McKusick,J., 33
McMullin, E., 220
McMullin, I., 187
M´ecanique C´eleste, 401, 406, 431
Mechanical Euclid, 426
Mechanical Philosophy, 407, 426
mechanical method of discovery, 183,
201
mechanics, 167
radically diﬀerent styles of, 406
teaching of, at Cambridge, 427
Memoirs, 404, 409
mentors, 408, 442
metaphysics, 181, 359
method
Coleridge’s theory of, 55
of agreement, 257
of barred premises, 486
of diﬀerence, 214, 257
of eliminative induction, 257
of experimental inquiry, 214
of hypothesis, 182, 220
of separate syllogism, 484
of trees, 465, 486
of underscoring, 485
of experimental inquiry, 214, 221
of observation, 178
middle course, 415
middle term, 352
Mill, J. S., 7, 81, 87–90, 95, 163, 190,
196, 198, 208–215, 218, 219,
221, 229, 459, 498, 667, 680,
704, 706–707
mineralogy, 167
modal
judgment, 695–696
propositions, 137
Index

730
modality, 496
moderators, 400, 439
modus ponens, 421
Mohs, F., 167
Monge, 404
mononomial diagram, 471
Montaigne, M. de, 235
Moore, G. E., 250, 276, 277, 459
Muirhead, J., 60, 70
multiplication, 492
Murphy, R., 427
Murphy’s Electricity, 427
my real world, 675–676
natural
dualism, 113, 157
natural history, 1, 4, 6, 18, 21, 22, 24,
29, 30
natural kind, 187, 189–191, 264, 265,
nature
of algebraic principles, 433
of geometry, 419
necessary / necessity, 171, 173, 696
axioms, 265
and inference, 702
conditions, 257
truth, 201–208, 250, 275, 276
negation, 336, 337, 345, 347, 363, 467,
469, 473, 691
negative, 467, 468
and imaginary numbers, 285–286,
288–289, 294, see impossi-
ble quantities
instance, 267
judgment, 688–693, 697
Neptune, 184, 186
Neurath, O., 525
new evidence, 185
Newlin, W. J., 475
Newton, I., 164, 176, 182, 184–191,
196, 211, 399, 408, 436, 442
Newton’s
law of universal gravitation, 186,
194
theory of Universal Gravitation,
185
Principia, 406
Nicole, P., 80
no ﬁxed models for inference, 698
nominal deﬁnition, 251, 252
nominalist, 241, 243
non-Euclidean geometries, 253
non-formal nature of logic, 665, 667,
698
non-sensory judgements, 678
non-identically, 346
notation, 284–285, 199, 319, 329, 429,
see De Morgan, A.
Notions, 447
nullity, 469, 483, 484, 486–488
number, 524
numerically deﬁnite syllogism, 447
O’Canainn, T., 375
observation, 177, 182, 213, 231
old evidence, 185
one universal premise, 701
Oppenheim, P., 525
Oriel Noetics, 397
oscillation
between Newton and Laplace, 443
between tradition and progress,
408
Owen, R., 179, 180
Owen’s archetype theory, 181
Oxford, 76, 82
noetics, 166
University, 429, 442
–Cambridge debate on political
economy, 425, 444
pantheism, 62, 69
paraphrases, 14–16
paralogism, seduction of, 420
Parsons, J., 411
particle theory, 189
particular proposition, 468, 469
Peacock, G., 174, 285, 286, 288, 405,
509
Index

731
Peacock’s Algebra, 428, 430, 431, 440
principle of the permanence of
equivalent forms, 288–291,
294–295, 303, 312
Peano, G., 524
pedagogical virtues of geometry, 426,
427
Peirce, C. S., 75–77, 173, 219, 220,
240, 254, 280, 331, 343, 471,
475, 486, 198, 508, 510
pentad
noetic, 65, 66
perception, 200, 671, 673, 677, 697,
698, 703
Perkins, M. A., 41, 66
personality/personicity, 68
petitio principii, 248, 279
phlogiston theory, 188
Plato, 235
Platonism, 254
Playfair, J., 166, 406
Poisson, S. D., 364
political
economy, 445
theory, 458
poor instruction of algebra, 416
positive ground of negation, 688
possibility, 696
post hoc, ergo propter hoc, 279
potential mathematicians, 430
pragmatic theory of truth, 711
Pratt, J. H., 407, 426
predesignate and preindesignate
Hamilton on, 135
predicate, 468
complementarity, 366
quantiﬁcation of, 2, 331, 346, 466,
468
prediction, 184, 212, 263
in Coleridge, 58, 59
predictive argument, 238
prerogative instances, 197
Price, B., 490
Prickett, S., 39
primary proposition, 338, 344
Principia, 426
principle
of determinism, 258, 259, 261,
262, 269
of limited variety, 259, 261, 262,
264, 269
Prior, A. N., 89, 334
Prior, M., 76, 89
priority of geometry versus logic, 392
probabilistic judgment, 697
probability, 364–366, 368, 370, 371,
373, 529
theory, 366, 368, 369, 371, 373,
374
value, 370
process
algorithmic, 488
deduction, 425
mental, 466
proof, 273
proper names, 680
property, 240
proposition, 473
Hamilton’s deﬁnition of, 131
propositional
conjunction, 361
disjunction, 361
logic, 243, 336–338
negation, 346, 349, 363
propositions, 463–472, 475, 482, 483,
486–488, 492, 495, 519
A, E, I, O, 297–198, 307–308, 317
of existence, 468, 469
of relation, 468, 484
subject and predicate of, see De
Morgan, A.
symbolized, see De Morgan, A.
traditional classiﬁcation of, 132–
133
universal and particular, see De
Morgan, A.
psychologism, 373
psychology, 373, 375
Index

732
Ptolemy, 176
pure mathematics, 402
subordinate to applied, 424
or applied mathematics, 442
Pythagoras’ theorem, 422, 442
quantiﬁcation of the predicate, 25–
29, 102, 106, 131–133, 140,
136–144, 147, 151, 156–158,
241, 519 see predicate, quan-
tiﬁcation
quantiﬁer ‘some’
Hamilton on, 134, 145
quantity, quantiﬁcation, see De Mor-
gan, A.
Quetelet, A., 529
Quine, W. V. O., 240, 459, 470
Ramus, P., 78
ratiocination, 232, 239, 244
rational
faulty, 219
intuition, 235
process, 182
rationalism, 170
real
deﬁnition, 237, 250–252
entities, 14–16, 21
realism, 179, 213
reality, 664, 665, 671, 673, 675, 676,
679, 691, 708, 709, 713–715
reason
and will, 67–69
distinct from understanding in Co-
leridge, 57, 58
intuitive, 64, 65
reasoning, 422
bad, 231
correct, 231
rectangular diagram, 475
reductio ad absurdum, 423
Rees, W. J., 494
reform, 12, 166, 404
induction, 165
inductive philosophy, 165
reformers, 3
regularities, 237, 265
Reid, N., 71
Reid, T., 81, 94, 174, 230
relation, 246, 247, 666
between judgment and inference,
686, 697–698
between religion and science, 194
relativity of concepts, 102, 118–124
Hamilton on, 110, 110–111
religion, 461
morality and the philosophy of
science, 424
Remarks on elementary education, 412
retinend, 481–484, 486, 487
retroduction, 219, 220
review of Peacock’s Algebra in 1835,
411
Reyes, G., 347
Richards, M. R., 486, 490
Robertson, G. C., 521
Robinson, H. C., 52
role of identity in inference, 701–702
Rose, H. J., 164, 168, 171, 174, 175,
424
Rudeanu, S., 339, 373
Ruse, M., 187
Russell, B., 231, 240, 248, 250, 253–
255, 251, 276, 280, 331, 350,
457, 459, 460, 463, 488, 491,
492, 494, 497, 498, 524, 668,
675, 677, 712, 714
Ryle, G., 459, 494
Sanderson, R., 8, 15, 23, 79
Schelling, F. W. J. von, 66
Scholastic, 347
Aristotelians, 166, 167
scientiﬁc
explanation, 236
syllogism, 234, 235
theories, 255
syllogism, 237
second order logic, 265
Index

733
secondary proposition, 338, 344, 346,
355, 358, 359
Sedgwick, A., 167, 174, 193
Sellars, W., 240
semantic domain, 357, 358
semiotic philosophy, 386
Sensationalist School, 170
sensations, 170
separate syllogism, 486
separating syllogisms method, 486
separation of the scale of operation,
403
Servois, F. J., 403
Shakespeare, 45
Sidgwick, A., 481, 491
Sidgwick, H., 490
sign of quantity, 467, 468
Sikorski, R., 339
simple enumeration, 266, 267
simple induction, 262
Simpson, D., 37
singular categorical judgments, 677
Sloan, P., 180
social sciences, 279
Solly, H., 435
Solly’s Syllabus of logic, 447
sorites, 153, 463, 484–486
Sparrow, J., 490
Spencer, H., 516
special or limited subject of judgment,
674
species, 1, 2, 234, 261, 263, 264, 466,
468, 481
square of opposition, 349
statics, 410, 443
statistics, 373, 528
Sterling, J., 174
Stewart, D., 6, 10, 94, 166, 174, 204,
206, 220, 459
Stewart, J. A., 490
Stoics, 244
Stone, M. H., 344
Stout, G. F., 493, 494
strict implication, 496
Stroud, B., 494
subalternation, 26, 346
subcontraries, 346
subject, 466, 468, 469
and predicate, see propositions
of judgment, 673
-predicate judgment, 672, 679, 684
substance, 234, 235, 238
substantial
form, 235, 241, 243, 245
terms, 519
Substitution of Similars, 517
suﬃcient conditions, 257
superinduced, 169, 177, 198
Syllabus of logic, 435
syllogism, syllogistic, 9, 10–11, 28, 166,
167, 232, 233, 235, 237, 243,
297, 300, 311–312, 315–318,
329, 338, 339, 341, 351–356,
463, 473, 475, 476, 481–484,
497, 704, 707 see De Mor-
gan, A.
Aristotle, Aristotelian, 291–293,
300, 311–312, 315–318
Hamilton on, 152–158
Hamilton’s general canon, 156–
158
Hamilton’s rejection of the 4th
ﬁgure, 152, 153 see De Mor-
gan, A.
syllogistic, 233, 457
logic, 332, 333, 335, 338, 341,
342, 344, 345, 347–349, 352–
354, 442
reasoning, 332
symbolic
calculus, 242
logic, 242, 457, 463, 466, 467,
484, 497, 498
representation of propositions, 469,
470
symbolism, 460, 469, 470, 498
symbols, symbology, 284, 288–290, 329,
419, see notation and De Mor-
Index

734
gan, A.
algebraic, 284–285, 287–289, 296
logical, 283, 290, 292, 294, 297–
300
syntactical operations, 350
synthetic
a priori, 204
judgments of sense, 678, 697
mathematics, 402
system of logic, 229, 231
teleological nature of logic, 664
teleology, 273
of scinece, 260
term, 518
logic, 333
the purpose of logic, 698
theory, 169, 207
of probability, 373
of the earth’s shape, 423
Thirwall, C., 164, 174
Thomas, I., 78, 80
Thomson, J. F., 489, 494
thought’s suicide, 713
Thoughts on the study of mathemat-
ics as a part of a liberal ed-
ucation, 384
Thoughts, 426
three-body problem, 407, 426
time and space, 680
Todhunter, I., 171
Tooke, J. H., 39, 41
Coleridge’s criticism of, 43
Toulmin, S., 494
traditional
fallacies, 279
syllogistic, 242
transcendental argument, 46, 48, 54–
56, 60, 61, 67
tree, 486–488
tricks, 279
triliteral diagram, 463, 473, 475, 476,
478, 482
Tripos, 405, 423
true, truth, 240, 664, 667, 674
Coleridge’s etymology of, 43
deﬁned by Coleridge, 53
functional calculus, 349
functional connectives, 356
functional propositional negation,
360
of arithmetic, 250, 253
of geometry, 250
table, 493
thought, 698
value, 359
Tycho, B., 210
underscoring, 485, 486
undulatory theory of light, 192
unity of plan, 180
universal
aﬃrmative proposition, 468, 469
algebra, 371
and individual propositions
Hamilton on convertibility of,
136
categorical judgment, 677
language movement, 290
negative proposition, 468
quantiﬁcation, 350
symbolic algebra, 373
universe, see De Morgan, A., 469, 474,
475, 478, 480, 481, 483, 485
of discourse, 358, 466, 468, 471,
474
university’s curriculum, 436
unobservable, 198, 213, 221
part, 198
entities, 266
Uranus, 185
validity of inference, 707–709
values, 331, 333
Van Evra, J., 363
variables, 331
Venn diagram, 471, 474, 476, 480,
481, 507
Index

735
Venn, J., 124, 231, 343, 457, 461, 467,
471, 474, 475, 477–480, 483,
490, 497, 498
vera causa, 187, 190, 194
verb substantive, in Coleridge, 50, 72
vertebrate archetype, 180
Victoria (Queen), 458
Wakeling, E., 461, 490
Wallace, K. M., 61
Wallis, J., 79, 350
Watts, I., 82
wave theory, 189, 192, 194
of light, 194
Welton, J., 490, 498
Wesley, J., 77, 80
what is the best instrument for edu-
cating men, 438
Whately, R., 2, 8, 10, 11, 15, 23, 26,
28, 29, 96, 105, 107, 137,
152, 165, 166, 179, 209, 230,
231, 237, 239, 243, 245, 249,
251, 278, 291, 386, 433, 489
Whately’s Elements, 436
Whewell, W., 231, 237, 250, 252, 253,
255, 256, 262–266, 273, 275,
277, 386, 424, 425, 430, 434,
442
Whewell’s
educational views, 430
plan to deliver lectures on induc-
tion, 444
Thoughts, 434
a ﬁerce opponent of formal logic,
446
–Hamilton debate over the epis-
temological and educational
status of mathematics and
logic, 435, 448
Whitehead, A. N., 331, 350, 509
Wilbraham, H., 373
Williamson, A. W., 515
Wilson, J. C., 457, 490, 491, 498
Wisdom, W. A., 494
Wittgenstein, L., 240, 249, 459, 681
Woodhouse, R., 285, 396, 407
Woods, J., 494
Yates, E., 457
Yeo, R., 196
Zeno, 493
Zolfaghari, H., 347
Index

This page intentionally left blank 

