
Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 5 
Logic from Russell to Church 
Edited by 
Dov M. Gabbay 
Department of Computer Science 
King’s College London 
Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK 
and 
John Woods 
Philosophy Department 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, BC Canada, V6T 1Z1
and 
Department of Computer Science 
King’s College London 
Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK 
and 
Department of Philosophy
University of Lethbridge
Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada, T1K 3M4
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier

North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier
Radarweg 29, PO Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK 
First edition 2009 
Copyright © 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher 
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights 
Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333; 
email: permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively you can submit your request online by 
visiting the Elsevier web site at http://elsevier.com/locate/permissions, and selecting 
Obtaining permission to use Elsevier material 
Notice 
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons 
or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use 
or operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas contained in the material 
herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent 
verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN:
978-0-444-51620-6
For information on all North-Holland publications
visit our website at elsevierdirect.com 
Printed in Hungary 
08 09 10 11  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1





PREFACE
In designing the Handbook of the History of Logic, we have been guided by two
quite general principles of organization. In some cases a volume would show to
advantage if organized around schools of thought or theoretical types. Logic and
the Modalities in the Twentieth Century and The Many Valued and Nonmonotonic
Turn in Logic are examples of this principle at work.
In other cases we have
found it more natural to assemble volumes around the names of practitioners.
The subtitle of The Rise of Mathematical Logic: From Leibniz to Frege, reﬂects
this principle, as does the present volume, Logic From Russell to Church. To a
considerable extent, the two organizing principles are a loose convenience, between
which the lines of demarcation are somewhat arbitrary. Even so, the developments
tracked in this present volume are, by and large, at least as well known by the
names of their authors as by their own names.
We have been asked for our rationale in ending volume 3 with Frege and opening
volume 5 with Russell. Were not Frege and Russell virtual collaborators in giving
to logic the momentum that would drive its mathematical turn?
Why, then,
would this pair be treated separately in the Handbook? Part of the answer to this
question is unapologetically utilitarian. Volumes can only be so big, and chapters
can be published only when they are ready. But the answer also has a further
part, concerning which a word or two of explanation would be in order. It is well
known that Frege and Russell shared a philosophical motivation for producing a
new logic. The motivation is logicism, which asserts the reducibility of arithmetic
to pure logic.
Notwithstanding this commonality, Frege and Russell had quite
diﬀerent positions about the epistemic status of logic.
Frege thought that the
axioms of logic were known with certainty. Russell’s view was that in some cases
an axiom — reducibility, for example - could be justiﬁed only inductively (or,
as we would say, abductively) or pragmatically. It would not be too much to say
that this diﬀerence about mathematical epistemology presages the instrumentalism
that seeks to mediate the rivalrous pluralisms that would be exhibited by logic in
the years ahead. A further diﬀerence between the two logicists pertains to the
background context of their work. Frege did most of his work on mathematical
logic before he knew of the paradox communicated to him by Russell in that fateful
letter of 1902. Frege’s adjustment to it was an afterthought published at the page-
proof stage as an appendix to volume two of the Grundgesetze. For Russell on
the other hand, virtually all of his contributions to logic were fashioned in the
aftermath of his paradox. His work was deeply marked by eﬀorts to evade it, and
was so in ways that gave further impetus to the instrumental turn in logic, albeit

viii
Preface
one that Russell tried to resist in the name of “logical common sense”. But it
would not be too long before Carnap would proclaim his Principle of Tolerance:
“In logic there are no morals. Everyone is at liberty to build up his
own logic . . . as he wishes.”
We may say, then, that the short period between the publication of the second
volume of the Grundgesetze (1903) and of Principles of Mathematics (1903) marks
the beginning of the end for a na¨ıve apriority about the principles of logic, an
epistemological shift that would reconﬁgure the explosive intellectual successes of
the ﬁrst ﬁfty years of the twentieth century.
Logic’s two dominant themes in the period from Russell to Church are its foun-
dational creativity and its procedural limitations and liabilities. One might say
that this was a period accentuated by both triumph and crisis. This is the time
when logic would acquire its modern face, what with the emergence of model the-
ory, proof theory, recursion theory, set theory and metamathematics. Hence the
great names: Russell, Brouwer, Heyting, Skolem, L¨owenheim, Herbrand, Wittgen-
stein, Ramsey, Lesniewski, Hilbert, G¨odel, Tarski, Post, Gentzen, Curry and
Church.
But it was also the time in which these foundational breakthroughs
would have to be engineered in the face of, in addition to Russell’s paradox, the
semantic paradoxes of Tarski and others and the incompleteness results of G¨odel,
all of which which tested Hilbert’s insistence that mathematical truth has no home
beyond the safe-harbours of formal proof. The problems that attended the emer-
gence and development of mathematical logic were not only diﬃcult; they were
also treacherous. The ﬁrst great technical accomplishment in logic was Aristo-
tle’s all-but-correct proof of the perfectibility of syllogisms. There are those who
think that the mediaeval doctrine of suppositio ranks high, as it surely does in the
form in which categorical propositions are construed as multiply-quantiﬁed state-
ments of identity. The 20th century originators of modern logic faced crises that
threatened the collapse of two of its foundations — set theory and model theory
— and a third which signiﬁcantly attenuated the scope of a further foundation
— proof theory. The great ambitions of logic would have to be navigated be-
yond the reach of these perils. Meeting these diﬃculties demanded, and received,
system-building of extraordinary virtuosity, unparalled by anything that had gone
before. From this there emerged a stable idea of what it took to be a logic: a
precise, and typically a recursively generated, grammar; a well-developed formal
semantics; a syntactic theory of formal proof; and the capacity to answer its own
metatheoretical questions - soundness, completeness, decidability and the like. In
the ﬁfty-year period covered by the present volume, mathematization became a
necessary part of what it took to be a logic; in the following ﬁfty years many would
see mathematical virtuosity as suﬃcient. For the most part the founders tried to
honour Russell’s principle of logical common sense. While they sought to produce
mathematically robust systems, they also wanted these systems to be conceptually
sound. The paradoxes were a wrench to such ambitions. It is to the everlasting
credit of the founders that the paradoxes were no bar to mathematical virtuosity

Preface
ix
(indeed they were in large part the provocateurs of it). But the same could not
be said of conceptual ﬁdelity. The founders knew this, and said so; the age of
intuitive foundations for logic was coming to an end. What for the founders was
a philosophical discouragement has been for at least some of their descendents a
na¨ıve and dispensable presumption. Concerning the concepts that logicians have
an interest in analyzing, what has come to count above all is the mathematical
adequacy of the systems that describes them. Conceptual adequacy has become a
separate issue at best.
The founders of twentieth-century logic were mainly philosophers, and those
who weren’t were respectful of philosophical motivations. Their investigations of
logic were driven by philosophical considerations and judged by the standards
of philosophical soundness, such as they may be. But as the fortunes of math-
ematical virtuosity rose and those of philosophical cogency diminished, a corre-
sponding transformation was underway in the administrative arrangements under
which intellectual work was institutionalized and professionalized. What began
as a philosophical discipline became, in the space of ﬁve decades, a mathematical
one. The irony is unmistakable. In the hands of Frege and Russell, the role of
logic was a take-over of mathematics. Take-overs are tricky, whether the Norman
occupation of Britain of Daimler’s absorption of Chrysler. There is always the
lurking possibility of “going native”, which is precisely what happened to these
two invaders. How could it also not happen to any logic that was purpose-built to
capture arithmetic? In its take-over of mathematics, logic went native.
Some will think talk of “take-over” and “going native” too melodramatic for
serious scholarship. But this is a stylistic objection, not a substantive one. The
transformation of logic into mathematics is one of the momentous events of intel-
lectual history. It is a transformation initiated by the very people who would not
have wanted to see it happen. In remarking upon it here, it is not necessary to
lament philosophy’s diminution; one might just as well celebrate logic’s liberation.
Was it not a philosopher who remarked that logic is an old discipline, and that
since 1879 is a great one? Even so, the question remains whether philosophy has
a future in the developments in logic that lie ahead.
We should also say a word or two about the inclusion here of Meinongian logic.
Meinong was not a logician and never thought of himself as one. So Meinong did
not make our list of pantheonic names. Even so, Meinong had an elaborate theory
of objects and a concomitant, if largely implicit, theory of reference for them.
One of the most distinctive features of Russell’s logic — and of most of those
that followed in its wake — is the theory of reference reﬂected in the doctrine of
logically proper names and deﬁnite descriptions. In some ways, Russell’s theory
of reference was conceived of as an alternative to Meinong’s theory of objects. If
we here allow alternativeness to be symmetric, then Meinong’s implicit theory of
reference is also an alternative to Russell’s, which Russell took seriously enough
to try to rebut, and it is interesting if only on that account. In what has come to
be called “Meinongian logic”, Meinong’s theory of reference has been transformed
into a formal semantics, one that pivots on a domain of discourse that reﬂects

x
Preface
the main features of Meinong’s theory of objects. While Meinongian logic has not
entered the 20th century mainstream, it is the ﬁrst modern example of a logic of
existence-neutral quantiﬁcation which, in the second half of the twentieth century,
did become a contending logic for the treatment of negative existentials and so-
called empty referring expressions.
Once again we are deeply and most gratefully in the debt of the volume’s superb
authors. We also warmly thank the following persons: Professor Margaret Schabas,
Head of the Philosophy Department and Professor Nancy Gallini, Dean of the
Faculty of Arts, at the University of British Columbia; Professor Michael Stingl,
Chair of the Philosophy Department and Christopher Nicol, Dean of the Faculty
of Arts and Science, at the University of Lethbridge; Jane Spurr, Publications
Administrator in London; Carol Woods, Production Associate in Vancouver, and
our colleagues at Elsevier, Senior Acquisitions Editor, Lauren Schultz and Gavin
Becker, Development Editor.
Dov M. Gabbay
King’s College London
John Woods
University of British Columbia
and
King’s College London
and
University of Lethbridge

CONTRIBUTORS
Mark van Atten
University of Paris, France.
mark.vanatten@univ-paris1.fr
Serge Autexier
DFKI, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany.
serge@dfki.de
Christoph Benzm¨uller
Saarland University, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany.
chris@ags.uni-sb.de
Andrea Cantini
Universit`a di Firenze, Italy.
cantini@philos.uniﬁ.it
Felice Cardone
University di Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy.
cardone@disco.unimib.it
Jens Erik Fenstad
University of Oslo, Norway.
jfenstad@math.uio.no
J. Roger Hindley
University of Swansea, UK.
J.R.Hindley@swansea.ac.uk
Andrew D. Irvine
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
a.irvine@.ubc.ca
Dale Jacquette
University of Bern, Switzerland.
Dale.jacquette@philo.unibe.ch
Juliette Kennedy
University of Helsinki, Finland.
juliette.kennedy@helsinki.ﬁ
Joan Rand Moschovakis
(Occidental College, USA) and MPLA, Greece.
joan.rand@gmail.com

xii
Jan von Plato
University of Helsinki, Finland.
jan.vonplato@helsinki.ﬁ
Michael Potter
Cambridge University, UK.
michael.potter@phil.cam.ac.uk
Jonathan P. Seldin
University of Lethbridge, Canada.
jonathan.seldin@uleth.ca
Wilfried Sieg
Carnegie Mellon University, USA.
sieg@cmu.edu
J¨org Siekmann
DFKI, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany.
siekmann@dfki.de
Keith Simmons
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
ksimmons@email.unc.edu
Peter M. Simons
University of Leeds, UK.
P.M.Simons@leeds.ac.uk
Hartley Slater
University of Western Australia, Australia.
slaterbh@arts.uwa.edu.au
Alasdair Urquhart
University of Toronto, Canada.
urquhart@cs.toronto.edu
Claus-Peter Wirth
Saarland University, Germany.
drcp@surfeu.de
Contributors

BERTRAND RUSSELL’S LOGIC
Andrew D. Irvine
Bertrand Russell is generally recognized as one of the most important English-
speaking philosophers, logicians and essayists of the twentieth century. Often cited
along with G.E. Moore as one of the founders of modern analytic philosophy and
along with Kurt G¨odel as one of the most inﬂuential logicians of his time, Russell
is also widely recognized for his sustained public contributions to many of the most
controversial social, political and educational issues of his day. Even so, more than
anything else, it is Russell’s work in logic and the foundations of mathematics that
serves as his core contribution to intellectual history and that makes Russell the
seminal thinker he is. His most signiﬁcant achievements include
1. his reﬁning and popularizing of Giuseppe Peano’s and Gottlob Frege’s ﬁrst
attempts at developing a modern mathematical logic,
2. his discovery of the paradox that bears his name,
3. his introduction of the theory of types (his way of avoiding the paradox),
4. his defense of logicism, the view that mathematics is in some important sense
reducible to logic, and his many detailed derivations supporting this view,
5. his ground-breaking advances in technical philosophy, including both his
theory of deﬁnite descriptions and his theory of logical constructions,
6. his theory of logical relations, including his impressively general theory of
relation arithmetic,
7. his formalization of the reals,
8. his theory of logical atomism, and
9. his championing of the many connections between modern logic, mathemat-
ics, science, and knowledge in general.
Russell’s ﬁrst important book about logic, The Principles of Mathematics, ap-
peared in 1903. This was followed by the landmark articles “On Denoting” (in
1905) and “Mathematical Logic as based on the Theory of Types” (in 1908). A
decade of technical work then culminated with the publication (in 1910, 1912 and
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

2
Andrew D. Irvine
1913) of the three-volume Principia Mathematica, co-authored with Russell’s for-
mer teacher, Alfred North Whitehead.1 This was followed by several books and
articles intended to help underscore the philosophical importance of the new math-
ematical logic that Russell, Whitehead, Peano and Frege had developed, including
“The Philosophy of Logical Atomism” (in 1918–19), Introduction to Mathematical
Philosophy (in 1919), “Logical Atomism” (in 1924), and My Philosophical Devel-
opment (in 1959).
Russell received the Order of Merit in 1949 and the Nobel
Prize in 1950. Born in 1872, he wrote over ﬁfty books, over 4,000 articles, book
chapters, reviews and other more minor publications, and over 61,000 letters. He
died in 1970, having lived a very full and public life.
Developing a comprehensive, coherent interpretation of Russell’s logic and phi-
losophy of mathematics is both important and challenging. It is important be-
cause of the tremendous inﬂuence his work has had on philosophy, mathematics,
economics, decision theory, computability theory, computer science and other dis-
ciplines over the past one hundred years. It is challenging for at least three rea-
sons. First, modern logic is intrinsically abstract and complex. Even mastering
the full notation of Principia Mathematica may be judged an accomplishment in
itself. (This is especially true given that, over the past century, many parts of
the notation have been modiﬁed or replaced by more modern kinds of symbolism.
Learning it in complete detail is thus something that not even all Russell scholars
have achieved.) Second, as with the work of any intellectual pioneer, it is often
suggested, not only that Russell’s views changed and developed over time, but
that at important times they were also relatively inchoate. Third, as with the
work of many other important historical ﬁgures, it sometimes can be diﬃcult to
distinguish between Russell’s actual views and those attributed to him by various
well-known commentators and interpreters.
Today there exist two main approaches to understanding the most diﬃcult and
demanding aspects of Russell’s philosophy. The ﬁrst is to claim that Russell’s work
is largely a series of almost unconnected views, views that not only changed over
time but that also were largely indebted to the work of others. This is the view
that characterizes Russell primarily as a popularizer and as a less-than-systematic
thinker. The second is to see in Russell’s writings a much more systematic and
original body of work. To give just one example, there are many often-overlooked
connections between Russell’s logic, his theory of language (especially his theory
of deﬁnite descriptions), and his epistemology (for example, his multiple-relation
theory of judgment). According to this second view we fail to see these many
connections at our peril. Signiﬁcantly, it is also this second view — that Russell
is oﬀering us a fully integrated body of intellectual work — that is much more in
line with Russell’s own statements about his philosophical aims and achievements,
statements that many writers over the years have conveniently chosen to ignore.
1Although anticipated in several respects in the writings of Gottlob Frege, Principia Math-
ematica remains just as intellectually impressive an achievement as Frege’s Grundgesetze der
Arithmetik. The case might also be made that, without it, Frege’s work might never have re-
ceived the prominence it deserves.

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
3
Whether explicitly or not, it is also this integrated view of logical, philosophical and
scientiﬁc knowledge that has inﬂuenced an entire century of western philosophy.
Understanding not only Russell’s substantive logical and philosophical views,
but also his methodological views, is therefore crucial to understanding the domi-
nant paradigm of intellectual work carried out in philosophy over the past century.
Today it is hard to imagine a philosophy undergraduate anywhere in the western
world whose education has not been inﬂuenced, at least in part, by Russell’s math-
ematical logic and philosophical method.
INITIAL INFLUENCES
At the age of eleven, I began Euclid, with my brother as my tutor.
This was one of the great events of my life, as dazzling as ﬁrst love. I
had not imagined there was anything so delicious in the world. After
I had learned the ﬁfth proposition, my brother told me that it was
generally considered diﬃcult, but I had found no diﬃculty whatever.
This was the ﬁrst time it had dawned upon me that I might have some
intelligence. From that moment until I met Whitehead and I ﬁnished
Principia Mathematica, when I was thirty-eight, mathematics was my
chief interest and my chief source of happiness.
Like all happiness,
however, it was not unalloyed.
I had been told that Euclid proved
things, and was much disappointed that he started with axioms. At
ﬁrst I refused to accept them unless my brother could oﬀer me some
reason for doing so, but he said: “If you don’t accept them we cannot
go on,” and as I wished to go on, I reluctantly admitted them pro
tem.
The doubt as to the premises of mathematics which I felt at
that moment remained with me, and determined the course of my
subsequent work. [Russell, 1967, pp. 37–8]
So begins the story in Russell’s Autobiography of how Russell came to be inter-
ested in the foundations of mathematics. Educated at home by a series of Swiss
and German governesses and tutors before entering Cambridge in 1890, Russell
embraced academic life enthusiastically. He obtained a ﬁrst in Mathematics in
1893. Even so, with the exception of the lectures given by Whitehead, Russell
found the teaching of mathematics at Cambridge “deﬁnitely bad.”2 As a result,
he became even more determined to try to learn exactly what it is that gives
mathematics its high degree of certainty.
Having ﬁnished his undergraduate program in mathematics, Russell “plunged
with whole-hearted delight into the fantastic world of philosophy”3 and the follow-
ing year he completed the Moral Sciences Tripos. In philosophy he was initially
inﬂuenced by the absolute idealism of J. M. E. McTaggart, F. H. Bradley and the
2[Russell, 1959, p. 38].
3[Russell, 1959, p. 38].

4
Andrew D. Irvine
other Ox-bridge neo-Hegelians of the time.4 As Russell understood it, absolute
idealism depended crucially on the doctrine of internal relations, the doctrine that
any relational fact (for example, that x is related to y) is really a fact about the
natures of the related terms. According to this view, if x is greater than y, then
being greater than y is a part of the nature of x. Object y is thus, in some sig-
niﬁcant sense, a part of x and x, similarly, is a part of y. Given the complexity
of relations in the world, it turns out that all objects must be related to all other
objects. Hence it follows that there exists only a single, all encompassing unity.
Further, since if one is aware of x, x must also (on this view) be a part of one’s
mind, it follows that everything conceivable must be a part of consciousness.
Initially, Russell used this idealist framework in his approach to mathematics,
for example in his Essay on the Foundations of Geometry (1897). However, he
became disenchanted with idealism once he realized how incompatible the view
was with his developing understanding of both mathematics and science.
On
Russell’s emerging theory, geometrical points, for example, could be individuated
only by their relations.
But according to absolute idealism, relations in turn
depended on the intrinsic natures of their individual relata. Since, for the idealist,
any relation holding between two or more distinct objects must be present in (or
grounded in) the nature of the objects being related, relations must be internal
to objects. In other words, the unreality of relations was an essential consequence
of idealist doctrine.
In yet other words, relations can never have an external
existence or reality. Russell’s revolt against idealism thus hinged on the reality of
relations, on the idea that relations are, in some importance sense, independent of
the objects being related, that they are objective and real in just the same way as
are particulars.
Of course Russell admits that for some relations, the idealist view may turn
out to be plausible. If Abelard loves H´elo¨ıse, in all likelihood the relation of love
will simply reduce to certain kinds of mental states belonging to Abelard. Even
an atheist, says Russell, will take it to be a fact that some people love God. Yet
if God does not exist, this means that the “relation” of love need not rely in any
realist way upon the second of the relation’s two relata. Similarly, if Ponce de
Leon desires to drink from the fountain of youth, and if there in fact is no such
fountain, the “relation” of desire cannot plausibly be thought to be something
holding between two separate and independent objects. Instead, the relation again
will be understood most plausibly as simply a certain kind of state of mind of the
individual having the desire in question. In this way, it will not require reference
to either a (non-existent) fountain of youth or an external relation.
In contrast, in the case of many other relations, the facts seem to point towards
an alternative theory. If e1 and e2 are events, and if e1 is earlier than e2, then
it seems that there is nothing about e1, and nothing about e2, that determines
that such a relation must in fact hold.
Similarly, to cite another of Russell’s
favorite examples (due originally to Leibniz), if a man living in Europe has a
wife in India who dies without his knowing it, it is nonsense to think that at the
4[Griﬃn, 1991].

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
5
moment of her death the man will undergo some form of intrinsic change. The
relation between the two has been altered tragically and permanently, but the man,
until he learns of the event, will remain unaﬀected. Since asymmetrical ordering
relations (for example, the relation of being a predecessor, or of being earlier
than) are essential to both mathematics and science, Russell saw immediately the
importance of abandoning a doctrine of purely internal relations.
Forced to choose between idealism and mathematics, Russell thus unhesitatingly
chose mathematics, replacing idealism with realism and replacing the doctrine of
internal relations with a new doctrine that he called “the doctrine of external
relations,” the view that relations, like objects, have a reality independent of
the objects they relate, not in the sense that they exist alone in the world, but
simply in the sense that they are not equivalent to, or reducible to, any property
or properties of the objects being related. On Russell’s view, relations are thus
something independent of (although not separate from) the individuals they relate.
They are also (for the most part) independent of both mind and language.
This change in Russell’s view also meant abandoning the idealistic doctrine
of monism. Since the doctrine of internal relations holds that every relation is
grounded in the natures of its related terms, and since every object is related
to every other object, it follows that the universe is not a collection of sepa-
rate, independent individuals but that, in some important sense, it is a single,
all-encompassing unity. To reject the doctrine of internal relations thus meant ac-
cepting the three main factors underlying Russell’s defense of the “new realism,”
namely
1. pluralism, the view that the universe is populated by numerous logically
independent particulars and relations,
2. anti-psychologism, the view that mind and the world are independent, in the
sense that the world (including both its logical and material components)
does not depend upon mind for its existence, and
3. the scientiﬁc outlook, the view that advances in knowledge (including ad-
vances even in logical knowledge) occur only through careful analysis, the
weighing of evidence, and the attitude that all opinions must be held tenta-
tively, or with an awareness that new evidence may at any moment lead to
their abandonment.
All three of these inﬂuences soon came to inform Russell’s understanding of,
and his expansion of, the new “mathematical logic” of his day.
MODERN MATHEMATICAL LOGIC
Russell’s ﬁnal break with idealism came in July 1900 when he met Peano. The
International Congress of Philosophy had been organized that year to coincide
with the Paris Exhibition, and it was in Paris that Russell ﬁnally discovered the
building blocks he needed for his positive account of mathematical knowledge:

6
Andrew D. Irvine
The Congress was a turning point in my intellectual life, because I
there met Peano. I already knew him by name and had seen some of
his work, but had not taken the trouble to master his notation. In
discussions at the Congress I observed that he was always more precise
than anyone else, and that he invariably got the better of any argument
upon which he embarked. As the days went by, I decided that this must
be owing to his mathematical logic. I therefore got him to give me all
his works, and as soon as the Congress was over I retired to Fernhurst
to study quietly every word written by him and his disciples. It became
clear to me that his notation aﬀorded an instrument of logical analysis
such as I had been seeking for years, and that by studying him I was
acquiring a new and powerful technique for the work that I had long
wanted to do. [Russell, 1967, pp. 217–18]
In particular, Russell found in Peano’s work two advances that would prove es-
sential to his purposes. The ﬁrst was the introduction of the quantiﬁers. The sec-
ond was the distinction between a unit class and its sole member. Together, these
two advances allowed Russell (like Frege) to introduce the idea of a propositional
function. Like more familiar mathematical functions, propositional functions are
a kind of “incomplete symbol.” By themselves they fail to express propositions.
But once their variables are replaced with constants, the result in each case will be
a proposition that is either true or false. Russell then used the idea of a proposi-
tional function to distinguish between names and deﬁnite descriptions and between
classes deﬁned by enumeration and classes deﬁned by abstraction. An example
helps make both of these conceptual developments clear.
Prior to the introduction of the quantiﬁers (i.e., the introduction of explicitly
logical phrases such as “For all objects x”, represented by the symbol “∀x”, and
“For some objects x”, represented by the symbol “∃x”), the propositions “All
Greeks are mortal” and “Socrates is mortal” were assumed to have much the same
logical form. Both appeared to assign a predicate (such as “is mortal”) to a subject
(such as “Socrates”). In contrast, modern logic sees these two propositions as
having quite diﬀerent logical forms. “Socrates is mortal” still retains this subject-
predicate form. Thus if M is introduced to stand for the predicate “is mortal”,
and s is introduced to stand for the individual Socrates, the proposition will be
represented as Ms. In contrast, “All Greeks are mortal” takes the quite diﬀerent
form, “For all objects x, if x is Greek then x is mortal.” If we allow G to stand for
the predicate “is Greek” and M to stand for the predicate “is mortal,” this form
then can be represented in modern logical notation as “∀x(Gx ⊃Mx)”. The result
is that the second proposition is no longer seen as assigning a predicate to a subject.
Instead, it is seen as asserting a relation between two propositional functions, Gx
and Mx.
Put in other words, despite initial appearances, the proposition “All
Greeks are mortal” does not speciﬁcally talk about (or refer to) a given class (or
set) of individuals, namely the Greeks. Instead it makes a (quite diﬀerent) claim
about every individual in the universe, saying that for any such individual, if it
has the property of being a Greek, then it also has the property of being mortal.

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
7
Thus unlike “Socrates is mortal”, the proposition “All Greeks are mortal” refers to
no particular individual or class of individuals. Instead, it expresses a relationship
between propositional functions (or predicates). For this reason it will be true (if
in fact it is true), regardless of whether there are even any Greeks to which one
may be intending to refer.
The distinction between a unit class (or unit set) and its sole member was
equally important to Russell. As Russell saw it, the class of natural satellites of
the Earth has only a single member, the Moon. But if we are to identify the two
terms “natural satellite of the Earth” and “the Moon”, the logic of classes (and
hence the theory of numbers) becomes muddled in innumerable ways. In other
words, because “the Moon” functions most often as a name, and so refers directly
to the Moon regardless of whatever properties we may want to assign to it, it
follows that it can be used successfully only by those who are aware of (or at least
who are capable of making) this reference. In contrast, the term “natural satellite
of the Earth” can be used successfully by all language users who understand the
meaning of the phrase, regardless of whether they have direct acquaintance with
the Moon, and regardless of whether the Moon even exists. Put in other words,
by distinguishing between the unit class (whose sole member is the Moon) and the
Moon itself, Russell was able to distinguish clearly between a referring term that
names the Moon (“the Moon”) and the property (being a natural satellite of the
Earth) that deﬁnes the unit class having only this single member.
These two advances (the introduction of the quantiﬁers and the distinction be-
tween a unit class and its sole member) led Russell to a much clearer understanding
of the idea of a propositional function. This, in turn, led him to a completely new
way of understanding both logic and the foundations of mathematics.
RUSSELL’S PARADOX
Russell tells us that he ﬁnished the ﬁrst draft of his Principles of Mathematics “on
the last day of the nineteenth century — i.e. 31 December, 1900.”5 The months
since meeting Peano had been the most fruitful and intellectually promising of his
life. He had made tremendous advances, not only in understanding Peano’s logic,
but also in developing a formidable logic of relations. It was these developments,
Russell believed, that would prove to be essential for his larger logicist ambition,
that of proving mathematics to be reducible to logic.
However, by May 1901,
Russell’s “intellectual honeymoon” came crashing to an end. As he tells us, “the
honeymoon could not last, and early in the following year intellectual sorrow de-
scended upon me in full measure.”6 The reason was the discovery of the paradox
that now bears Russell’s name.
Russell’s paradox is the most famous of the logical or set-theoretical paradoxes.
The paradox arises within naive set theory by considering the class of all classes
5[Russell, 1959, p. 73].
6[Russell, 1959, p. 73].

8
Andrew D. Irvine
that are not members of themselves. Such a class appears to be a member of itself
if and only if it is not a member of itself, clearly an impossible result.
To understand the paradox, it is best to begin with a simple example. Some
classes, such as the class of all prime numbers, are not members of themselves.
In other words, the class (or set or collection) of all prime numbers is not itself
a prime number. Other classes, such as the class of all things that are not prime
numbers, are members of themselves. In other words, the class or set or collection,
of all things that are not prime numbers is itself not a prime number. Call the
class of all classes that are not members of themselves “R.” If R is a member of
itself, then by deﬁnition it must not be a member of itself. Similarly, if R is not
a member of itself, then by deﬁnition it must be a member of itself. Yet it must
be one or the other and cannot be both. Discovered by Russell in the late spring
of 1901, the paradox appeared to put an end to the new logic that Russell, Peano
and Frege had been developing.
Cesare Burali-Forti, an assistant to Giuseppe Peano, had discovered a similar
antinomy in 1897 when he noticed that since the class of ordinals is well ordered,
it too must have an ordinal. However, this ordinal must be both an element of the
class of all ordinals and yet larger than every such element. Believing that this
puzzle likely resulted from a simple ambiguity in Burali-Forti’s reasoning, Russell
had not spent much time focusing on the problem. Instead, he came to his new
paradox via a quite diﬀerent route: by studying Georg Cantor’s proof that there
is no largest cardinal. Asking whether there is a largest class of objects led Russell
to realize that some classes are members of themselves while others are not. This
led to consideration of the class of all classes that are not members of themselves.
This, in turn, led to the paradox. Unlike both Burali-Forti’s paradox and Cantor’s
famous proof, Russell’s paradox did not involve reasoning about either ordinals
or cardinals and relied instead only on the primitive notion of a class. It thus
struck Russell as almost purely logical in nature, and so that much more diﬃcult
to resolve.
The signiﬁcance of the paradox can be seen once it is realized that, using classical
logic, all sentences follow from a contradiction. For example, assuming both p and
∼p, any arbitrary proposition, q, can be proved as follows: from p we obtain
p ∨q by the rule of Addition; then from p ∨q and ∼p we obtain q by the rule of
Disjunctive Syllogism. Because set theory underlies all branches of mathematics,
Russell immediately began to worry that the inconsistency of set theory would
show that no mathematical proof could be completely trustworthy.
Far from
having helped secure the foundations of mathematics, Russell had inadvertently
discovered a new and devastating weakness.
Russell wrote to Frege with news of his paradox on June 16, 1902.7 The paradox
was of signiﬁcance to Frege’s work since, in eﬀect, it showed that the axioms Frege
was using to formalize his logic were inconsistent. Speciﬁcally, Frege’s Rule V,
which states that two classes are equal if and only if their corresponding functions
coincide in values for all possible arguments, requires that an expression such
7Russell [1902]. Cf. [Frege, 1902].

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
9
as f(x) be considered both a function of the argument x and a function of the
argument f. In eﬀect, it was this ambiguity that allowed Russell to construct R
in such a way that it could both be and not be a member of itself.
Russell’s letter to Frege arrived just as the second volume of Frege’s Grundge-
setze der Arithmetik (The Basic Laws of Arithmetic) was in press. Immediately
appreciating the diﬃculty the paradox posed, Frege added to the Grundgesetze a
hastily composed appendix discussing Russell’s discovery. In the appendix Frege
observes that the consequences of Russell’s paradox are not immediately clear.
For example, “Is it always permissible to speak of the extension of a concept, of a
class? And if not, how do we recognize the exceptional cases? Can we always infer
from the extension of one concept’s coinciding with that of a second, that every
object which falls under the ﬁrst concept also falls under the second? These are
the questions,” Frege notes, “raised by Mr Russell’s communication.”8 Because
of these worries, Frege eventually felt forced to abandon many of his views about
logic and mathematics.
THE THEORY OF TYPES
Like Frege, Russell was also concerned about the contradiction. Upon learning
that Frege agreed with him about the signiﬁcance of the discovery, he immediately
began writing an appendix for his own soon-to-be-released Principles of Mathe-
matics. Entitled “Appendix B: The Doctrine of Types,” the appendix represents
Russell’s ﬁrst signiﬁcant attempt at providing a principled method for avoiding
the contradiction.
Russell’s paradox ultimately stems from the na¨ıve idea that any condition (or
property) may be used to determine a class. For example, the property of being
evenly divisible only by itself and by one determines the class of prime numbers.
The conjunctive property of being a vertebrate, being warm-blooded, having hair
or fur, having an external ear, having lungs and a diaphragm, giving birth to live
young and nourishing them with milk determines the class of mammals. The prop-
erty of being both a square and not a square (or any other contradictory property)
determines the empty class, and so on. As a result, Russell’s mind immediately
turned toward the possibility of restricting the principles governing class existence.
Speciﬁcally, he asked whether there might be some way of restricting the so-called
Abstraction (or Comprehension) axiom, the axiom that states that any proposi-
tional function, f(x), containing x as a free variable can be used to determine a
class. In other words, is it true that corresponding to every propositional function,
f(x), there will exist a class whose members are exactly those things, x, that have
the property f?
In Russell’s mind, any resolution to the paradox would have to meet three
conditions. In descending order of importance these conditions were as follows:
First, it would have to avoid the contradiction.
Second, it would have to be
8[Frege, 1903, 127] (repr., p. 1).

10
Andrew D. Irvine
compatible with retaining as much classical mathematics as possible. Third, it
would have to be mathematically and philosophically plausible, and not simply an
ad hoc solution. In other words, the solution would have to coincide, as much as
possible, with what Russell called “logical common sense.”9
In his appendix, Russell suggests that reference to troublesome classes (such
as R) might be avoided by arranging all sentences into a hierarchy, beginning
with sentences about individuals at the lowest level, sentences about classes of
individuals at the next lowest level, sentences about classes of classes of individuals
at the next lowest level, and so on.
Then, using the so-called “vicious circle
principle” (VCP) introduced by Henri Poincar´e, Russell hoped to be able to explain
why propositional functions, such as the function ‘x is a class,’ could not be applied
to themselves: they could not be applied to themselves since self-application would
involve a vicious circle. In other words, it is possible to refer to a class or collection
of objects for which a given condition (or predicate) holds only if each member
of the class is deﬁned independently of (or prior to) the predicate in question. In
Russell’s terminology, it is possible to refer to a class or collection of objects only
if they are all at the same level or of the same “type.”
The reasoning behind the VCP may be summed up as follows: when we assert
a proposition such as ∀x(fx), if the assertion is to be signiﬁcant, the values over
which the variable x ranges will have to be well deﬁned. (As Russell puts it, they
must be deﬁnite.)
In other words, if the function is to be unambiguous there
will have to be a ﬁxed totality of values over which x will range. Otherwise, the
proposition will fail to have meaning. However, if we now proceed to create new
values over which x will range, values that can only be deﬁned in terms of that
totality, the totality both will have to contain and not contain these new values.
But if so, it follows that the totality cannot be deﬁnite or well deﬁned. Of course
we might attempt simply to include these new values in some new totality, but if
they can only be created on the basis of a previous “totality,” this attempt must
always fail. In other words, the assertion will never “catch up” to itself, it will
both be and not be a totality, it will never be capable of becoming deﬁnite.
The moral Russell draws from this argument is that propositions that refer to
a given totality of propositions may never themselves become members of that
totality. The result, if we want to be able to discuss this new type of proposition,
will have to be to create a hierarchy of propositions. First-order propositions will
turn out to be those that fail to refer to any totality of propositions; second-order
propositions will turn out to be those that refer to totalities of ﬁrst-order propo-
sitions; third-order propositions will turn out to be those that refer to totalities
of second-order propositions; and so on ad inﬁnitum. In this way, the vicious self-
reference that Russell believed lay at the heart of Russell’s paradox is eliminated.
Although ﬁrst introduced by Russell in his appendix to the Principles, his theory
of types eventually found its more mature expression in his 1908 article “Mathe-
matical Logic as based on the Theory of Types” and in Principia Mathematica.
This more mature theory involved two diﬀerent kinds of hierarchy. First, there is a
9[Russell, 1959, p. 79].

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
11
simple extensional hierarchy consisting of individuals, classes of individuals, classes
of classes of individuals, and so on. Second there is a hierarchy of propositional
functions, consisting ﬁrst of the so-called predicative functions (propositional func-
tions which do not refer to any totality of functions), then of ﬁrst-order functions
(propositional functions which refer to the totality of predicative functions), then
of second-order functions (propositional functions which refer to the totality of
ﬁrst-order functions), and so on. Thus, in its details, Russell’s theory admits of
two quite diﬀerent versions, the “simple theory” and the “ramiﬁed theory.” The
need for the more complex theory apparently arose because, as Russell points out
in his appendix, there is also a more insidious version of the paradox that depends
upon the interaction between classes and propositions.
Because, in Russell’s theory, propositions are objectively existing objects, it fol-
lows that they can be members of classes. But propositions can also be about
classes, and even about classes containing propositions. For every class of propo-
sitions, it then appears that there will have to be a proposition stating that all
propositions in that class are true. Let us say that these latter propositions assert
the “logical product” of their respective classes.
Intuitively, it seems plausible to imagine that some of these propositions will
themselves be in the class whose logical product they assert. Others will not be.
For example, the proposition asserting that all propositions in the universal class
of propositions are true will itself be a proposition. As a result, it will be in the
class whose logical product it asserts. In contrast, the proposition stating that all
propositions in the null class of propositions are true will not itself be in the null
class of propositions. As a result, it will not be in the class whose logical product
it asserts.
Now, consider the class, c1, which consists of all propositions that state the
logical product of some class c2 in which they are not contained. This class, c1,
will itself be a class of propositions, and so there will exist a proposition — call
it P — that states its logical product. A contradiction now arises, for if P is a
member of c1, then it follows that it must not be in c1; and if it is not in c1, then it
follows that it must be in c1. As Russell saw it, only by regimenting propositions
into a hierarchy of types would this contradiction be avoided.
Both versions of Russell’s theory of types eventually came under attack. Some
critics claimed the theories were too weak, since they failed to resolve all of the
known paradoxes. Other critics claimed they were too strong, since they disallowed
many mathematical deﬁnitions that, although seemingly consistent, appeared to
violate the VCP. Russell’s response to the second of these objections was to in-
troduce, within the ramiﬁed theory, his so-called axiom of reducibility, an axiom
that claimed that any higher-order property or proposition can be reduced to an
equivalent ﬁrst-order one. Although the axiom successfully lessened the VCP’s
scope of application, many claimed that it was simply too ad hoc to be justiﬁed
philosophically and so, even according to Russell’s own list of desiderata, it failed
to provide a satisfactory resolution to the paradoxes.

12
Andrew D. Irvine
LOGICISM
The discovery of Russell’s paradox led Russell to conclude that his work in the
Principles of Mathematics was at best incomplete and at worst incoherent. To-
gether with Whitehead, he therefore set out to revisit the subject and to provide a
more secure foundation for mathematics. The result was Principia Mathematica.10
Fundamental to Principia was the goal of reducing mathematics to logic. In
essence, this goal consisted of two main theses. The ﬁrst was that all mathematical
truths should be capable of being translated into logical truths or, in other words,
that it should be provable that the vocabulary of mathematics is a proper subset
of that of logic. The second was that all mathematical proofs should be capable
of being recast as logical proofs or, in other words, that it should be provable that
the theorems of mathematics are a proper subset of those of logic.
Russell’s basic strategy for defending logicism thus came in two parts. First,
there was the idea that numbers should be able to be identiﬁed with classes of
classes and that classes, in turn, should be able to be identiﬁed with propositional
functions. Second, there was the idea that number-theoretic statements should be
able to be rewritten using the purely logical notions of quantiﬁcation and identity
and then proved as theorems of logic. Thus the number one would be identiﬁed
with the class of all unit classes, the number two with the class of all two-membered
classes, and so on. At the same time, statements such as “There are two books”
would be recast as statements such as “There is a book, x, and there is a book,
y, and x is not identical to y.” It would follow that number-theoretic operations
could be explained in terms of logical operations such as conjunction, disjunction
and negation and in terms of set-theoretic operations such as intersection, union,
and diﬀerence.
Like Frege, who had made the same discovery independently sixteen years ear-
lier, Russell observed that counting requires more than a simple one-to-one corre-
spondence between objects and numerals. Since one deck of playing cards can be
counted as one deck, four suits, 52 cards, or some other large number of molecules,
things can be counted only relative to a given property or predicate (i.e., qua decks,
suits, cards, etc.). Hence there is the importance of becoming clear on the idea of
a propositional function. To say Socrates is an instance of the property of being
a man is to say that Socrates is a value of x for which “x is a man” is true. Thus
numbers, Russell concludes, will not be properties of things, but of propositional
functions.
Since, under the right circumstances, classes can be identiﬁed with
10On the issue of co-authorship, Russell states the following: “The problems with which we
had to contend were of two sorts: philosophical and mathematical. Broadly speaking, Whitehead
left the philosophical problems to me. As for the mathematical problems, Whitehead invented
most of the notation, except in so far as it was taken over from Peano; I did most of the work
concerned with series and Whitehead did most of the rest. But this only applies to ﬁrst drafts.
Every part was done three times over. When one of us had produced a ﬁrst draft, he would send
it to the other, who would usually modify it considerably. After which, the one who had made
the ﬁrst draft would put it into ﬁnal form. There is hardly a line in all the three volumes which
is not a joint product.” [Russell, 1959, p. 74].

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
13
propositional functions, it follows that numbers can be thought of as classes of
classes.
According to this view, the number one is a property of any propositional func-
tion such that there is an x which makes the function true and, for any y, if y
makes the function true, then y turns out to be numerically identical to x. If we
call such functions unitary functions, then the number one is the property that all
unitary functions share. Similarly, zero is the property of being a null-function (of
being a function which is false for all values of x); two is the property of all couples
(of being a class for which there are members x and y, such that x is distinct from
y and, if z is a member of the class, then z is identical to x or to y); three is the
property of all triples, and so on.
More generally, numbers can be said to be classes of classes having the property
of similarity.
Two classes may be said to be similar if and only if there is a
one-to-one, onto relation between their members. For example, in a monogamous
country, the number of married men is identical to the number of married women
(i.e., there is a one-to-one, onto relation — what Russell calls a “one-one relation”
— between these two groups), so the two classes are similar. The number of any
class is then deﬁned as the class of all classes similar to it.
These deﬁnitions turned out to have several advantages.
First they worked
mathematically. In other words, they appeared to satisfy all the formal require-
ments for any theory purporting to give a secure foundation for mathematics.
Second, they avoided the philosophical problem of having to postulate zero as a
property of nothing, something that had mitigated against the introduction of zero
as a number centuries earlier. Third, they worked equally well for both ﬁnite and
inﬁnite numbers.
As a result, in Principia Mathematica Whitehead and Russell were able to pro-
vide (in volume 2) many detailed derivations of major theorems in ﬁnite and trans-
ﬁnite cardinal arithmetic and in ﬁnite and transﬁnite relation arithmetic. They
then went on (in volumes 2 and 3) to develop a general theory of series (including
compact, rational and continuous series) and to prove many standard results re-
garding the limits of functions, the theory of ordinals, the theory of vectors, and
elementary measure theory. The derivations, which over three volumes comprised
some 1900 pages, are by themselves an immense intellectual achievement; and
having achieved so many, and so many elegant and striking, derivations, it is no
wonder that Russell and Whitehead became convinced of the truth of logicism.
The Introduction (in volume 1, drafted initially by Russell) remains one of the
most insightful and informative expositions of logic ever written. A fourth volume
(on geometry) was planned but never completed.
Among the most interesting developments due to Russell were his formalization
of the intuitive idea of series (in which he deﬁnes a series as a set of terms that
has an order imposed upon it by a relation that is asymmetrical, transitive, and
connected), his novel but quite workable theory of the reals (in which he deﬁnes
the reals as classes of rational numbers consisting of everything above zero up to
a certain point; for example, on this account the square root of two becomes the

14
Andrew D. Irvine
class of all rational numbers whose square is less than two), and his extension
of mathematical induction into a quite general theory of transﬁnite induction.
Of even greater interest are Russell’s comprehensive theory of relations and his
amazingly sophisticated theory of relation arithmetic.
Because of his realism, Russell understood relations as something more than
merely sets of ordered couples.
For Russell, just as a property common to all
members of a set gives unity to that set, a relation is what gives unity to sets
of ordered couples. It is knowledge of this unity (this property or relation) that
allows us to have the knowledge of sets (and of sets of sets, etc.) whose members
(whether ﬁnite or inﬁnite) we are unable to enumerate.
With this insight in mind, Russell went on to introduce each of the following
(now standard) concepts in the theory of relations: (i) the class of terms having
relation R to a given ﬁxed term; (ii) the class of terms to which a given ﬁxed
term has relation R; (iii) the domain of a relation R, consisting of the class of
terms that have R to something or other; (iv) the converse domain of a relation
R, consisting of the class of terms to which something or other has R; (v) the ﬁeld
of R, consisting of the union of the domain and converse domain of R; (vi) the
converse of a relation R, which is the relation that holds between terms y and x
whenever R holds between x and y; (vii) the relative product of two relations, R
and S, which holds between x and z whenever there is an intermediate term, y,
such that x has R to y and y has S to z; and (viii) plurals, consisting of the class
of all terms, if given a separate class c, which have relation R to some member
of c.
For example, if R is the relation of being a parent, then the class of terms having
R to a given ﬁxed term, a, will be the parents of a; the class of terms to which
a given ﬁxed term, b, has relation R will be the children of b; the domain of a
relation R will be the class of all people who have children; the converse domain
of R will be the class of all people who have parents; the ﬁeld of R will be the
class of all people who either are or have parents; the converse of R will be the
relation of being a child (i.e. being a son or daughter); the relative product of the
two relations parent and parent will be the relation of being a grandparent; and
the relation of being a parent of an Olympian will be an example of a plural.
Using these concepts, Russell went on (in the second half of volume 2) to gener-
alize the idea of an ordinal number. The result was the theory of Russell’s so-called
“relation numbers.” Relation arithmetic then turned out to include many of the
familiar formal laws that hold true of ordinary ordinal arithmetic. Beginning with
a deﬁnition of similarity between classes as the existence of a one-one relation
between the classes, Russell deﬁned ordinal similarity (a relation holding between
two relations, R and S) as the existence of a correlation between the ﬁeld of R and
the ﬁeld of S such that, whenever two terms have the relation R, then their corre-
lates also have the relation S, and vice-versa. The relation number of a relation R
can then be deﬁned as the class of those relations that are ordinally similar to R.
(This is analogous to cardinal arithmetic, but with ordinal similarity being substi-
tuted for class similarity and relations being substituted for classes.) Analogous

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
15
deﬁnitions of the basic arithmetical relations can then be given, such that the new
generalized operations of addition and multiplication obey several familiar laws
(such as associativity, commutivity and distributivity), although sometimes only
in limited cases.
If a well-ordered series is then deﬁned as a series in which any sub-class that has
members has a ﬁrst term, ordinal numbers turn out to be a sub-class of Russell’s
relation numbers, namely those that apply to well-ordered series. Then, just as
Cantor was able to generalize the idea of an ordinal number from the ﬁnite to the
inﬁnite case, Russell is also able to generalize his idea of a relation number from
the ﬁnite to the inﬁnite. It was also using relation numbers that Russell was able
to provide the ﬁrst precise deﬁnition of the idea of structure, again by generalizing
the idea of similarity between classes to that of ordinal similarity with regard to
relations.
MATHEMATICAL CERTAINTY
At the same time that he and Whitehead were completing the technical aspects
of Principia Mathematica, Russell was also focusing his attention on the apparent
certainty of mathematical knowledge. Russell saw two tasks as being of funda-
mental importance for any mathematical epistemology. The ﬁrst was the task of
explaining in what sense “a comparatively obscure and diﬃcult proposition [i.e. a
logical axiom] may be said to be a premise for a comparatively obvious proposition
[e.g. a truth in elementary arithmetic].”11 The second was the task of explaining
how such comparatively obscure premises are ever discovered and then justiﬁed.
In response to the ﬁrst of these two tasks, Russell distinguishes between two
quite diﬀerent types of premise.
The ﬁrst type is what he calls an “empirical
premise,” a premise “from which we are actually led to believe the proposition
in question.”12 The second is what Russell calls a “logical premise,” a premise
that is logically simpler than its consequences and that can be used to obtain the
proposition in question. (In other words, it is a proposition with fewer logical
constituents but powerful enough to generate the kinds of results necessary for a
given theory.) Most often in mathematics, Russell then tells us, the empirical and
logical premises coincide. It is in exactly these cases that a mathematical proof is
of direct epistemological value. However, as Russell points out, this is not always
the case. It is simply not true that a logically simpler idea or proposition is always
more readily accepted than a more complicated one. Just as is the case with our
intuitions about the physical world, it is more commonly the mid-range concepts
(concepts which are neither extremely fundamental nor extremely complex) that
are usually understood most readily. In some cases, despite their logical simplic-
11[Russell, 1907, p. 272].
12[Russell, 1907, p. 272]. Russell’s use of the phrase “empirical premise” can be misleading.
Not all of his “empirical premises” need to be observational, although many are. Nor need they
be directly about the empirical world. Rather, what Russell means by an “empirical premise” is
simply a premise that has epistemic value.

16
Andrew D. Irvine
ity, such premises will have less epistemic simplicity (and less certainty) than the
conclusion that follows from them. Hence, there exists the possibility of a “com-
paratively obscure and diﬃcult proposition” acting as a (logical) premise for a
“comparatively obvious proposition.”
Russell goes on to note that in these cases it is not the purpose of a mathemat-
ical proof so much to prove the conclusion as it is to prove that the conclusion
follows from those premises. What such proofs show is that from a particular
set of logically simple (but sometimes epistemologically complex) premises, other
(sometimes epistemologically simple) conclusions follow deductively. This is im-
portant since such proofs help resolve the second of Russell’s two tasks, that of
explaining how it is that such comparatively obscure and diﬃcult propositions can
themselves ever be discovered and justiﬁed.
Russell’s explanation is that in cases where previously accepted conclusions can
be shown to follow from a particular logical premise (or set of premises) via a valid
deduction, such a deduction tends to help justify, not the previously accepted con-
clusion, but rather the original premise (or set of premises) in question. This is a
result of what Russell calls the “regressive method.”13 Russell contends that be-
cause of this “regressive” aspect of mathematics, the methodology of mathematics
is closely related to that of the ordinary sciences of observation. In Russell’s words,
We tend to believe the premises because we can see that their con-
sequences are true, instead of believing the consequences because we
know the premises to be true. But the inferring of premises from con-
sequences is the essence of induction; thus the method in investigating
the principles of mathematics is really an inductive method, and is
substantially the same as the method of discovering general laws in
any other science. [Russell, 1907, 1973, pp. 273f]
Science begins with the ordinary facts of observation, of which we are all quite
certain. It then attempts to answer two resulting questions: First, what follows
from these facts? Second, from what do these facts themselves follow? Answers to
the second of these questions determine the general laws of the science, proposi-
tions which are logically simpler than observation statements but which are often
epistemologically more diﬃcult to justify. When the initial facts are conjoined
with these general laws, answers to the ﬁrst question yield further observation
statements, and it is in this way that science gains its predictive power.
According to Russell, mathematics is no exception to this general account. Epis-
temologically simple propositions such as elementary propositions of arithmetic are
originally justiﬁed via inference from concrete, often physical, cases.14 These ob-
servations form the basic facts within mathematics of which we are most certain.
Statements describing these facts in turn follow from the logically simpler general
laws which become as certain as our original empirical premises only if one of the
13In a number of respects, Russell’s regressive method is similar to Peirce’s abduction.
In
contemporary terminology, it might also be called “inference to the best explanation.”
14[Russell, 1907, p. 272].

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
17
following two cases obtains: either it must be shown that no signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
hypotheses or general laws could lead to the same empirical premises, or (what is
often the case in logic and mathematics) the general laws, once discovered, turn
out to be just as obvious as the original empirical premises. As an example of
the latter, Russell cites the law of contradiction. This law, Russell feels, “must
have been originally discovered by generalizing from instances, though, once dis-
covered, it was found to be quite as indubitable as the instances. Thus it is both
an empirical and a logical premise.”15 In the cases where the general laws cannot
be shown to be the only ones possible, and are not themselves evident to the same
extent as are empirical premises, they must remain merely probable, but often
probable to a very high degree. Thus, it is by answering the question, “From what
do empirical premises follow?” that Russell’s second task (the task of explaining
how even epistemologically complex logical premises are discovered and justiﬁed)
is resolved.
With the above observations in mind, the following summary of Russell’s overall
theory of mathematical knowledge can be given. According to Russell, mathemat-
ical knowledge begins in the ﬁrst instance from particular observations, e.g., the
observation that two objects together with two distinct objects are four objects.
These observations form our ﬁrst epistemologically relevant premises. From these
empirical premises we obtain generalizations, e.g., that 2 + 2 = 4. Such general-
izations in turn are often recognized to be “suﬃciently obvious to be themselves
taken as empirical premises”16 and so to have additional epistemic value.
In addition to these initial empirical premises of which we are quite certain,
there exist two other classes of mathematical knowledge. The ﬁrst consists of the
mathematical knowledge that follows from empirical premises (or from empiri-
cal premises together with other known premises) by means of deductive proof.
The second consists of that “regressively” justiﬁed mathematical knowledge (which
includes the general laws of logic and mathematics) from which the original empir-
ical premises can be shown to follow. The ﬁrst of these two types of mathematical
knowledge is reasonably straightforward in terms of its justiﬁcation. As Russell
points out, the expanded body of empirical premises “. . .
when discovered, [is]
pretty certain to lead to a number of new results which could not otherwise have
been known: in the sciences, this is so obvious that it needs no illustration, and
in mathematics it is no less true.”17
In contrast, the second of these two additional classes of knowledge requires
a somewhat more sophisticated account for its justiﬁcation.
Here the general
laws of mathematics are discovered “regressively” when even the mathematician
inquires after the fewest and logically simplest premises from which all known
empirical premises can themselves be deduced. Because of the inductive method
that underlies it, such knowledge is sometimes less certain than the (deductively)
proven parts of mathematics. As with fundamental laws in the physical sciences,
15[Russell, 1907, p. 274].
16[Russell, 1907, p. 275].
17[Russell, 1907, pp. 282f].

18
Andrew D. Irvine
those general laws of logic that do not appear to be as obvious as the original
empirical premises will be justiﬁed only to the extent that they can be shown to
be the most plausible source from which those original premises may be deduced.
The result is that even the most fundamental of logical laws may remain merely
probable. Russell himself is explicit on this inductivist point:
In induction, if p is our logical premise and q our empirical premise,
we know that p implies q, and in a text-book we are apt to begin with
p and deduce q.
But p is only believed on account of q.
Thus we
require a greater or less probability that q implies p, or, what comes
to the same thing, that not-p implies not-q. If we can prove that not-p
implies not-q, i.e. that p is the only hypothesis consistent with the
facts, that settles the question. But usually what we do is to test as
many alternative hypotheses as we can think of. If they all fail, that
makes it probable, more or less, that any hypothesis other than p will
fail. But in this we are simply betting on our inventiveness: we think
it unlikely that we should not have thought of a better hypothesis if
there were one. [Russell, 1907, pp. 272f]
This inductivist element of Russell’s mathematical epistemology diﬀers markedly
from the often-repeated account that identiﬁes Russell as a paradigm advocate of
the view that mathematical knowledge gains its certainty directly as a result of its
deductive foundations. This often-repeated view, when it notices Russell’s induc-
tivist tendencies at all, usually puts oﬀthese tendencies as the occasional lapses
of an otherwise stanch defender of what might be called “epistemic logicism.”
Such an interpretation is understandable. After all, other logicists have conspic-
uously advocated positions which are decidedly inconsistent with any inductive or
“regressive” element whatsoever. Frege, for example, espouses the view that ax-
ioms are truths, as are theorems, but that “they are truths for which no proof can
be given in our system, and for which no proof is needed. It follows that there
are no false axioms, and that we cannot accept a thought as an axiom if we are in
doubt about its truth . . . .”18 In contrast, for Russell it is logic that ultimately
gains its justiﬁcation as a result of its mathematical consequences, not vice-versa,
and it is the distinction between logical and epistemological order within math-
ematics that Russell emphasizes time and time again throughout his career. For
example, in the ﬁrst volume of Principia we read the following:
But in fact self-evidence is never more than a part of the reason for
accepting an axiom, and is never indispensable. The reason for accept-
ing an axiom, as for accepting any other proposition, is always largely
inductive, namely that many propositions which are nearly indubitable
can be deduced from it, and that no equally plausible way is known
by which these propositions could be true if the axiom were false, and
nothing which is probably false can be deduced from it. If the axiom is
18[Frege, 1914, p. 205].

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
19
apparently self-evident, that only means, practically, that it is nearly
indubitable; for things have been thought to be self-evident and have
yet turned out to be false. And if the axiom itself is nearly indubitable,
that merely adds to the inductive evidence derived from the fact that
its consequences are nearly indubitable: it does not provide new evi-
dence of a radically diﬀerent kind. Infallibility is never attainable, and
therefore some element of doubt should always attach to every axiom
and to all its consequences. In formal logic, the element of doubt is less
than in most sciences, but it is not absent, as appears from the fact
that the paradoxes followed from premisses which were not previously
known to require limitations. [Whitehead and Russell, 1910, p. 62]
(second edn, p. 59).
Later, in the Introduction to the second edition in 1927, Russell’s comments
are to much the same eﬀect when he introduces talk of the “purely pragmatic
justiﬁcation” of the axiom of reducibility.19
Pr´ecis of this same position are given in several of Russell’s other publications.
In his Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy Russell observes that the propo-
sitions of simple arithmetic are more obvious than those of logic and that “The
most obvious and easy things in mathematics are not those that come logically at
the beginning; they are things that, from the point of view of logical deduction,
come somewhere in the middle.”20 Later, in his 1924 essay “Logical Atomism”,
Russell again explains his position but in greater detail. His comments are worth
quoting in their entirety because of their clarity:
When pure mathematics is organized as a deductive system . . .
it
becomes obvious that, if we are to believe in the truth of pure math-
ematics, it cannot be solely because we believe in the truth of the set
of premises. Some of the premises are much less obvious than some
of their consequences, and are believed chieﬂy because of their conse-
quences. This will be found to be always the case when a science is
arranged as a deductive system. It is not the logically simplest proposi-
tions of the system that are the most obvious, or that provide the chief
part of our reasons for believing in the system. With the empirical
sciences this is evident. Electro-dynamics, for example, can be con-
centrated into Maxwell’s equations, but these equations are believed
because of the observed truth of certain of their logical consequences.
Exactly the same thing happens in the pure realm of logic; the log-
ically ﬁrst principles of logic — at least some of them — are to be
19[Whitehead and Russell, 1910, p. xiv]. Despite such comments, Russell apparently never gave
up the hope of deducing such axioms from other, more self-evident logical truths. For example,
see the Introduction to the second edition of Principia, vol. 1, p. xiv. Once it is admitted, as
Russell does, that these axioms are in part empirical, such hope seems inexplicably misguided
since, if this is so, it follows immediately that one would not expect them to be derivable from
purely logical premises, whether self-evident or not.
20[Russell, 1919, p. 2].

20
Andrew D. Irvine
believed, not on their own account, but on account of their conse-
quences. The epistemological question: ‘Why should I believe this set
of propositions?’ is quite diﬀerent from the logical question: ‘What is
the smallest and logically simplest group of propositions from which
this set of propositions can be deduced?’ Our reasons for believing
logic and pure mathematics are, in part, only inductive and probable,
in spite of the fact that, in their logical order, the propositions of logic
and pure mathematics follow from the premises of logic by pure de-
duction. I think this point important, since errors are liable to arise
from assimilating the logical to the epistemological order, and also,
conversely, from assimilating the epistemological to the logical order.
[Russell, 1924, pp. 361f]. Reprinted in [Russell, 1956, pp. 325f]
Just what are the lessons that should be learned from such comments? The ma-
jor lesson is that Russell’s regressive method, emphasizing as it does the distinction
between logical and epistemological order, shows how closely Russell’s mathemat-
ical epistemology was integrated within his general theory of knowledge. Wood,
for example, emphasizes exactly this close relationship. After describing the im-
portance of inductive reasoning for Russell, Wood concludes that the regressive
method is characteristic, not only of Russell’s mathematical epistemology, but
of his epistemology in general.21
Russell himself bolsters this contention when
he states that throughout his academic life, epistemological concerns have been
the “one constant preoccupation”22 and when he notes that Wood’s account “ad-
mirably clariﬁes various things that might otherwise cause misunderstanding.”23
At the same time, upon careful reading it becomes clear that Russell’s regressive
method is not in any way inconsistent with other comments of Russell’s, such as
the claim that “Mathematics is a deductive science.”24 Read in context, it becomes
clear in such cases that Russell is referring only to the logical order of the discipline.
Following the above quotation, for example, Russell goes on to explain that “No
appeal to common sense, or ‘intuition’, or anything except strict deductive logic,
ought to be needed in mathematics after the premises have been laid down”,25
leaving unanswered within the then current context the question of just how the
original axioms are to be obtained.
The second major lesson that should be learned from the above observations
is just how important Russell felt the analogy between epistemological concerns
in mathematics and in the sciences to be. Given the number of times that Rus-
sell emphasizes this analogy, together with the fact that the stated purpose of
these comments was “to emphasize the close analogy between the methods of pure
mathematics and the methods of the sciences of observation”,26 Russell’s intention
21[Wood, 1959, pp. 265–266].
22[Russell, 1959, p. 11].
23[Russell, 1959, p. 3].
24[Russell, 1919, p. 144].
25[Russell, 1919, p. 145] (emphasis added).
26[Russell, 1907, p. 272].

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
21
should be clear: only by emphasizing this analogy can a complete and accurate
picture of the acquisition and nature of mathematical knowledge be obtained.
LOGIC AND ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY
In much the same way that Russell used his new logic in an attempt to clarify
issues in mathematics, he also used it in an attempt to clarify issues in philosophy.
As one of the founders of analytic philosophy, Russell made signiﬁcant contribu-
tions to a wide variety of areas, including metaphysics, epistemology, ethics and
political theory, as well as to the history of the discipline. Underlying these various
projects were not only Russell’s use of logical analysis, but also his long-standing
aim of discovering whether, and to what extent, any kind of knowledge is possible.
“Philosophy arises from an unusually obstinate attempt to arrive at real knowl-
edge,” he writes in 1927. “What passes for knowledge in ordinary life suﬀers from
three defects: it is cocksure, vague, and self-contradictory.”27 As a result, Russell
took the question of how much can be known, and with what degree of certainty
or doubtfulness, to be the most essentially philosophical of all questions.
More than this, Russell’s various contributions to both mathematics and phi-
losophy were also uniﬁed by his views concerning both the centrality of scientiﬁc
knowledge and the importance of an underlying scientiﬁc methodology common
to philosophy and science. In the case of philosophy, this methodology expressed
itself through Russell’s use of logical analysis. In fact, Russell often claimed that
he had more conﬁdence in his methodology than in any particular philosophical
conclusion.
Russell’s methodology consisted of the making and testing of hypotheses through
the weighing of evidence (hence Russell’s comment that he wished to emphasize
the “scientiﬁc method” in philosophy), together with a rigorous analysis of prob-
lematic propositions using the machinery of ﬁrst-order logic. It was Russell’s belief
that by using the new logic of his day, philosophers would be able to exhibit the
underlying “logical form” of natural language statements. A statement’s logical
form, in turn, would help philosophers resolve problems of reference associated
with the ambiguity and vagueness of natural language. The result was Russell’s
doctrine of logical atomism (the doctrine that the world consists of a plurality of
independently existing particulars exhibiting qualities and standing in relations,
with all complex facts being constructed out of these logically simple building
blocks) and the complete integration of logic with metaphysics.
Just as we distinguish three separate sense of “is” (the is of predication, the
is of identity, and the is of existence) and exhibit these three senses by using
three separate logical notations (Px, x = y, and ∃x respectively), we will also
discover other ontologically signiﬁcant distinctions by being aware of a sentence’s
correct logical form. On Russell’s view, the subject matter of philosophy is then
distinguished from that of the sciences only by the generality and the a prioricity
27[Russell, 1927, p. 1].

22
Andrew D. Irvine
of philosophical statements, not by the underlying methodology of the discipline.
In philosophy, as in mathematics, Russell believed that it was by applying logical
machinery and insights that advances would be made.
Russell’s most famous example of his “analytic” method concerns denoting
phrases such as descriptions and proper names. In his Principles of Mathematics,
Russell held the view that every denoting phrase (for example, “Scott,” “blue,”
“the number two,” “the golden mountain”) denoted, or referred to, an existing
entity.
By the time his landmark article, “On Denoting,” appeared two years
later, in 1905, Russell had modiﬁed this extreme realism and had instead become
convinced that denoting phrases need not possess a theoretical unity.
While logically proper names (words such as “this” or “that” which refer to
sensations of which an agent is immediately aware) necessarily have referents as-
sociated with them, descriptive phrases (such as “the largest number less than pi”)
should be viewed simply as a collection of quantiﬁers (such as “all” and “some”)
and propositional functions (such as “x is a number”). As such, they need not
be understood as referring terms but, rather, as “incomplete symbols.” In other
words, such phrases may be thought of as symbols that take on meaning within
appropriate contexts, but that are meaningless in isolation.
Thus, in the sentence “The present King of France is bald,” the deﬁnite de-
scription “The present King of France” plays a role quite diﬀerent from that of a
proper name such as “Scott” in the sentence “Scott is bald.” For example, letting
K abbreviate the predicate “is a present King of France,” B abbreviate the pred-
icate “is bald,” and s abbreviate the name “Scott,” Russell represents the former
as ∃x[(Kx & ∀y(Ky ⊃y = x)) & Bx] and the latter simply as Bs. This distinc-
tion between distinct logical forms allows Russell to explain away three important
puzzles.
The ﬁrst of these puzzles relates to true negative existential claims, such as
the claim “The golden mountain does not exist.” Here, once again, by treating
deﬁnite descriptions as having a logical form distinct from that of proper names,
Russell is able to give an account of how a speaker may be committed to the
truth of a negative existential without also being committed to the belief that
the subject term has reference. That is, the claim that Scott does not exist is
false since the sentence “∼∃x(x = s)” is self-contradictory. (After all, there must
be at least one thing that is identical to s since it is a logical truth that s is
identical to itself!) In contrast, the claim that a golden mountain does not exist
may be true since, assuming that G abbreviates the predicate “is golden” and
Mabbreviates the predicate “is a mountain,” there is nothing contradictory about
“∼∃x(Gx & Mx).”
The second puzzle concerns the operation of the Law of Excluded Middle and
how this law relates to denoting terms. According to one reading of the Law of
Excluded Middle, it must be the case that either “The present King of France
is bald” is true or “The present King of France is not bald” is true. But if so,
both sentences appear to entail the existence of a present King of France, clearly
an undesirable result whenever no such individual exists. Russell’s analysis shows

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
23
how this conclusion can be avoided. By appealing to the above analysis, it follows
that there is a way to deny the sentence “The present King of France is bald”
without being committed to the existence of a present King of France, namely by
accepting that “It is not the case that there exists a present King of France who
is bald” is true.
The third puzzle concerns the Law of Identity as it operates in (so-called) opaque
contexts.
Even though “Scott is the author of Waverley” is true, it does not
follow that the two referring terms “Scott” and “the author of Waverley” are
interchangeable in every situation. Thus although “George IV wanted to know
whether Scott was the author of Waverley” is true, “George IV wanted to know
whether Scott was Scott” is, presumably, false. Russell’s distinction between the
logical forms associated with the use of proper names and deﬁnite descriptions
shows why this is so. To see this we once again let s abbreviate the name “Scott.”
We also let w abbreviate “Waverley” and A abbreviate the two-place predicate “is
the author of.” It then follows that the sentence “s = s” is not at all equivalent
to the sentence “∃x[Axw & ∀y(Ayw ⊃y = x) & x = s].”
Russell’s emphasis upon logical analysis had immediate consequences for his
metaphysics. In response to the traditional problem of the external world which,
it is claimed, arises since the external world can be known only by inference, Rus-
sell developed his famous 1910 distinction between “knowledge by acquaintance
and knowledge by description.” He then went on, in his 1918 lectures on logical
atomism, to argue that the world itself consists of a complex of logical atoms (such
as “little patches of colour”) and their properties. Together they form the atomic
facts which, in turn, are combined to form logically complex objects. What we
normally take to be inferred entities (for example, enduring physical objects) are
then understood to be “logical constructions” formed from the immediately given
entities of sensation, viz., “sensibilia.” For Russell, it is only these latter entities
that are known non-inferentially and with certainty.
Put in other words, it is the philosopher’s job is to discover a logically ideal
language that will exhibit the true nature and structure of the world in such a
way that the speaker will not be misled by the casual surface structure of natural
language. Just as atomic facts (the association of universals with an appropriate
number of individuals) may be combined into molecular facts in the world itself,
such a language would allow for the description of such combinations using logical
connectives such as “and” and “or.” In addition to atomic and molecular facts,
Russell also held that general facts (facts about “all” of something) were needed
to complete the picture of the world. Famously, he vacillated on whether negative
facts were also required.
Thus, unlike Leibniz, Russell believed there was more to scientiﬁc, mathemat-
ical and philosophical knowledge than ‘getting the concepts right.’ Even so, just
as Leibniz had wanted to develop a logically ideal language (or characteristica
universalis), together with an instrument of universal deductive reasoning (his
calculus ratiocinator), Russell believed that modern logic would help us represent
the world as it actually is and reason about it without fear of error. As Russell

24
Andrew D. Irvine
himself translates one of Leibniz’s most famous quotations,
We should be able to reason in metaphysics and morals in much the
same way as in geometry and analysis ... If controversies were to arise,
there would be no more need of disputation between two philosophers
than between two accountants. For it would suﬃce to take their pencils
in their hands, to sit down to their slates, and to say to each other (with
a friend as witness, if they liked): Let us calculate. [Russell, 1900, pp.
169-170]
Logical analysis may not have the air of empirical discovery about it, but it is
just as crucial to the scientiﬁc enterprise as observation and experiment.
CONCLUSION
By contemporary standards, Russell’s logic is in some respects quite primitive. The
notation is clumsy. Many of the crucial technical ideas were borrowed from Peano,
and some of the most important philosophical ideas from Leibniz and Poincar´e.
Over the years, the axioms that Russell and Whitehead introduced have been
simpliﬁed in signiﬁcant ways. The theory of types is unbearably complicated and
scholars still argue about whether Russell’s use of propositional functions was
sophisticated or confused. There appears to be no signiﬁcant appreciation of the
explosion of meta-theoretical results that would soon follow Russell’s groundbreak-
ing insights.
But regardless of such shortcomings, a century of hindsight has proved the
lasting value of Russell’s work.
The now archaic notation (introduced largely
by Whitehead) was in its day a tremendous improvement upon that of Frege and
Peano, and it is unlikely that without it the ﬁeld of modern logic would have gained
the prominence it has today. New proposals for the simpliﬁcation of axioms and
the theory of types came as much from Russell and his students as from anyone
else. The most fertile seeds for modern work in meta-theory and model theory
have been found more often in the questions Russell posed about his own work
than anywhere else.
Even more importantly, it was Russell’s logic that prompted important new
research to be done in ﬁelds as diverse as philosophy, mathematics, economics,
decision theory, computability theory and computer science. In December 1955,
when Herbert Simon and Allen Newell wanted to test their ﬁrst “thinking ma-
chine,” it was to Russell’s logic that they immediately turned. After developing
the ﬁrst theorem prover designed to replicate many of the theorems of Principia,
the two men wrote to Russell to tell him of their accomplishment.
“I am de-
lighted to know that Principia Mathematica can now be done by machinery,”
Russell wrote back. I wish Whitehead and I had known of this possibility before
we wasted 10 years doing it by hand.”28 As Isaac Newton reminds us, intellectual
28[Lewis, 2001].

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
25
and scientiﬁc progress only occurs if we are privileged enough to be able to stand
on the shoulders of giants.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Blackwell and Ruja, 1994] K. Blackwell and H. Ruja. A Bibliography of Bertrand Russell, 3
vols, London: Routledge, 1994.
[Broad, 1973] C. D. Broad. Bertrand Russell, as Philosopher, Bulletin of the London Mathemat-
ical Society, 5, 328-341, 1973; repr. in A.D. Irvine, Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments,
vol. 1, New York and London: Routledge, 1999, 1-15.
[Carnap, 1931] R. Carnap. The Logicist Foundations of Mathematics, Erkenntnis, 2, 91-105,
1931; repr. in Benacerraf, Paul, and Hilary Putnam (eds), Philosophy of Mathematics, 2nd
ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983, 41-52; in Klemke, E.D. (ed.), Essays on
Bertrand Russell, Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1970, 341-354; in Pears, David F. (ed.),
Bertrand Russell: A Collection of Critical Essays, Garden City, New York: Anchor Books,
1972, 175-191; and ; in A.D. Irvine, Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments, vol. 2, New York
and London: Routledge, 1999, 135-146.
[Church, 1974] A. Church. Russellian Simple Type Theory, Proceedings and Addresses of the
American Philosophical Association, 47, 21-33, 1974.
[Church, 1976] A. Church. Comparison of Russell’s Resolution of the Semantical Antinomies
with That of Tarski, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 41, 747-760, 1976; repr. in A.D. Irvine,
Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments, vol. 2, New York and London: Routledge, 1999,
96-112.
[Clark, 1975] R. W. Clark. The Life of Bertrand Russell, London: J. Cape, 1975.
[Clark, 1981] R. W. Clark. Bertrand Russell and His World, London: Thames and Hudson,
1981.
[Copi, 1971] I. Copi. The Theory of Logical Types, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1981.
[Eames, 1969] E. R. Eames. Bertrand Russell’s Theory of Knowledge, London: George Allen
and Unwin, 1969.
[Frege, 1893, 1903] G. Frege. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, 2 vols, Jena: Pohle, 1893, 1903;
abridged and translated by Montgomery Furth as The Basic Laws of Arithmetic, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1964.
[Frege, 1902] G. Frege. Letter to Russell, 1902. In van Heijenoort, Jean, From Frege to G¨odel,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967, 126-128.
[Frege, 1903] G. Frege. The Russell Paradox, 1903. In The Basic Laws of Arithmetic, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1964, 127-130; abridged and repr. in A.D. Irvine, Bertrand
Russell: Critical Assessments, vol. 2, New York and London: Routledge, 1999, 1-3.
[Frege, 1914] G. Frege. Logic in Mathematics, 1914. Translated by Peter Long and Roger White
in Frege, Posthumous Writings, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979, 203-250.
[Gandy, 1973] R. O. Gandy. Bertrand Russell, as Mathematician, Bulletin of the London Mathe-
matical Society, 5, 342-348, 1973; repr. in A.D. Irvine, Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments,
vol. 1, New York and London: Routledge, 1999, 16-23.
[G¨odel, 1944] K. G¨odel. Russell’s Mathematical Logic. In Schilpp, Paul Arthur (ed.), The Philos-
ophy of Bertrand Russell, 1944. 3rd ed., New York: Tudor, 1951, 123-153; repr. in Benacerraf,
Paul, and Hilary Putnam (eds), Philosophy of Mathematics, 2nd ed., Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1983, 447-469; in Pears, David F. (ed.) (1972) Bertrand Russell: A Col-
lection of Critical Essays, Garden City, New York: Anchor Books, 192-226; and; in A.D.
Irvine, Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments, vol. 2, New York and London: Routledge,
1999, 113-134.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1977] I. Grattan-Guinness. Dear Russell, Dear Jourdain: A Commentary
on Russell’s Logic, Based on His Correspondence with Philip Jourdain, New York: Columbia
University Press, 1977.
[Griﬃn, 1991] N. Griﬃn. Russell’s Idealist Apprenticeship, Oxford: Clarendon, 1991.
[Hager, 1994] P. J. Hager. Continuity and Change in the Development of Russell’s Philosophy,
Dordrecht: Nijhoﬀ, 1994.

26
Andrew D. Irvine
[Hylton, 1990a] P. W. Hylton. Logic in Russell’s Logicism. In Bell, David, and Neil Cooper (eds),
The Analytic Tradition: Philosophical Quarterly Monographs, Vol. 1, Cambridge: Blackwell,
137-172, 1990.
[Hylton, 1990b] P. W. Hylton. Russell, Idealism, and the Emergence of Analytic Philosophy,
Oxford: Clarendon, 1990.
[Irvine, 1989] A. D. Irvine. Epistemic Logicism and Russell’s Regressive Method, Philosophical
Studies, 55, 303-327, 1989.
[Irvine, 1999] A. D. Irvine, ed. Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments, 4 vols, London: Rout-
ledge, 1999.
[Irvine, 2004] A. D. Irvine. Russell on Method. In Godehard Link (ed.), One Hundred Years of
Russell’s Paradox, Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter, 481-500, 2004.
[Irvine and Wedeking, 1993] A. D. Irvine and G. A. Wedeking, eds. Russell and Analytic Phi-
losophy, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1993.
[Jager, 1972] R. Jager. The Development of Bertrand Russell’s Philosophy, London: George
Allen and Unwin, 1972.
[Kaplan, 1970] D. Kaplan. What is Russell’s Theory of Descriptions? In Yourgrau, Wolfgang,
and Allen D. Breck, (eds), Physics, Logic, and History, New York: Plenum, 277-288, 1970;
repr. in Pears, David F. (ed.), Bertrand Russell: A Collection of Critical Essays, Garden
City, New York: Anchor Books, 1972, 227-244.
[Klemke, 1970] E. D. Klemke. Essays on Bertrand Russell, Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
1970.
[Landini, 1998] G. Landini. Russell’s Hidden Substitutional Theory, New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1998.
[Lewis, 2001] P. Lewis. Herbert A. Simon, Nobel Winner for Economics, Dies at 84, New York
Times, 10 February 2001.
[Linsky, 1999] B. Linsky. Russell’s Metaphysical Logic, Stanford: CSLI Publications, 1999.
[Lycan, 1981] W. Lycan. Logical Atomism and Ontological Atoms, Synthese, 46, 207-229, 1981.
[Monk, 1996] R. Monk. Bertrand Russell: The Spirit of Solitude, London: Jonathan Cape,
1996.
[Monk, 2000] R. Monk. Bertrand Russell: The Ghost of Madness, London: Jonathan Cape,
2000.
[Monk and Palmer, 1996] R. Monk and A. Palmer, eds. Bertrand Russell and the Origins of
Analytic Philosophy, Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1996.
[Nakhnikian, 1974] G. Nakhnikian, ed. Bertrand Russell’s Philosophy, London:
Duckworth,
1974.
[Patterson, 1993] W. Patterson. Bertrand Russell’s Philosophy of Logical Atomism, New York:
Lang, 1993.
[Pears, 1967] D. F. Pears. Bertrand Russell and the British Tradition in Philosophy, London:
Collins, 1967.
[Pears, 1972] D. F. Pears, ed. Bertrand Russell: A Collection of Critical Essays, New York:
Doubleday, 1972.
[Putnam, 1967] H. Putnam. The Thesis that Mathematics is Logic. In Schoenman, Ralph (ed.),
Bertrand Russell: Philosopher of the Century, London: Allen and Unwin, 273-303, 1967; repr.
in Putnam, Hilary, Mathematics, Matter and Method, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1975, 12-42.
[Quine, 1938] W. V. O. Quine. On the Theory of Types, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 3, 125-139,
1938; repr. in A.D. Irvine, Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments, vol. 2, New York and
London: Routledge, 1999, 78-95.
[Quine, 1966] W. V. O. Quine. Selected Logic Papers, New York: Random House, 1966.
[Ramsey, 1926] F. P. Ramsey. Mathematical Logic, Mathematical Gazette, 13, 185-194, 1926;
repr. in Ramsey, Frank Plumpton, The Foundations of Mathematics, London: Kegan Paul,
Trench, Trubner, 1931, 62-81; in Ramsey, Frank Plumpton, Foundations, London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1978, 213-232; in Ramsey, Frank Plumpton, Philosophical Papers, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990, 225-244; and in A.D. Irvine, Bertrand Russell:
Critical Assessments, vol. 2, New York and London: Routledge, 1999, 54-66.
[Ramsey, 1960] F. P. Ramsey. The Foundations of Mathematics, Paterson, NJ: Littleﬁeld,
Adams and Co, 1960.
[Roberts, 1979] F. W. Roberts, ed. Bertrand Russell Memorial Volume, London: Allen and
Unwin, 1979.

Bertrand Russell’s Logic
27
[Rodrigues-Consuegra, 1991] F. A. Rodriguez-Consuegra. The Mathematical Philosophy of
Bertrand Russell: Origins and Development, Basel: Birkhauser Verlag, 1991.
[Russell, 1897] B. Russell. An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry, Cambridge: At the Uni-
versity Press, 1897.
[Russell, 1900] B. Russell. A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz, Cambridge: At
the University Press, 1900.
[Russell, 1901] B. Russell. Recent Work on the Principles of Mathematics, International
Monthly, 4, 83-101, 1901; repr. as “Mathematics and the Metaphysicians” in Russell,
Bertrand, Mysticism and Logic, London: Longmans Green, 1918, 74-96.
[Russell, 1902] B. Russell. Letter to Frege, 1902. In van Heijenoort, Jean, From Frege to G¨odel,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967, 124-125.
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge: At the University Press,
1903.
[Russell, 1905] B. Russell. On Denoting, Mind, 14, 479-493, 1905; repr. in Russell, Bertrand,
Essays in Analysis, London: Allen and Unwin, 1973, 103-119.
[Russell, 1907] B. Russell. The Regressive Method of Discovering the Premises of Mathematics,
1907. In Essays in Analysis, London: George Allen and Unwin, 1973, 272-283.
[Russell, 1908] B. Russell. Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory of Types, American
Journal of Mathematics, 30, 222-262, 1908; repr. in Russell, Bertrand, Logic and Knowledge,
London: Allen and Unwin, 1956, 59-102, and in van Heijenoort, Jean, From Frege to G¨odel,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967, 152-182.
[Russell, 1910] B. Russell. Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description, Proceed-
ings of the Aristotelian Society, 11, 108-128, 1910; repr. in Russell, Bertrand, Mysticism and
Logic, London: Allen and Unwin, 1963, 152-167.
[Russell, 1910] B. Russell. Philosophical Essays, London: Longmans, Green, 1910.
[Russell, 1912a] B. Russell. On the Relations of Universals and Particulars, Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, 12, 1-24, 1912; repr. in Russell, Bertrand, Logic and Knowledge, London:
Allen and Unwin, 1956, 105-124.
[Russell, 1912b] B. Russell. The Problems of Philosophy, London: Williams and Norgate; New
York: Henry Holt and Company, 1912.
[Russell, 1914] B. Russell. Our Knowledge of the External World, Chicago and London: The
Open Court Publishing Company, 1914.
[Russell, 1918] B. Russell. Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays, London and New York:
Longmans, Green, 1918; repr. as A Free Man’s Worship and Other Essays, London: Unwin
Paperbacks, 1976.
[Russell, 1918/1919] B. Russell. The Philosophy of Logical Atomism, Monist, 28, 495-527; 29,
32-63, 190-222, 345-380, 1918, 1919; repr. in Russell, Bertrand, Logic and Knowledge, London:
Allen and Unwin, 1956, 177-281.
[Russell, 1919] B. Russell. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, London: George Allen and
Unwin; New York: The Macmillan Company, 1919.
[Russell, 1924] B. Russell. Logical Atomism. In Muirhead, J.H., Contemporary British Philoso-
phers, London: Allen and Unwin, 1924, 356-383; repr. in Russell, Bertrand, Logic and Knowl-
edge, London: Allen and Unwin, 1956, 323-343.
[Russell, 1927] B. Russell. An Outline of Philosophy, London: George Allen and Unwin, 1927;
repr. as Philosophy, New York: W.W. Norton, 1927.
[Russell, 1928] B. Russell. Sceptical Essays, London: George Allen and Unwin; New York: W.W.
Norton, 1928.
[Russell, 1931] B. Russell. The Scientiﬁc Outlook, London: George Allen and Unwin; New York:
W.W. Norton, 1931.
[Russell, 1940] B. Russell. An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, London: George Allen and
Unwin; New York: W.W. Norton, 1940.
[Russell, 1948] B. Russell. Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits, London: George Allen and
Unwin; New York: Simon and Schuster, 1948.
[Russell, 1949] B. Russell. The Philosophy of Logical Atomism, Minneapolis, Minnesota: De-
partment of Philosophy, University of Minnesota, 1949; repr. as Russell’s Logical Atomism,
Oxford: Fontana/Collins, 1972.
[Russell, 1956] B. Russell. Logic and Knowledge: Essays, 1901-1950, London: George Allen and
Unwin; New York: The Macmillan Company, 1956.
[Russell, 1959] B. Russell. My Philosophical Development, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1959.

28
Andrew D. Irvine
[Russell, 1967–69] B. Russell. The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, 3 vols, Boston and
Toronto: Little Brown and Company (Vols 1 and 2), 1967, 1968, New York: Simon and
Schuster (Vol. 3), 1969.
[Russell, 1973] B. Russell. Essays in Analysis, London: George Allen and Unwin, 1973.
[Russell, 1984] B. Russell. Theory of Knowledge: The 1913 Manuscript (The Collected Papers
of Bertrand Russell, Vol. 7), London, Boston, Sydney: George Allen and Unwin, 1984.
[Russell, 1986] B. Russell. The Philosophy of Logical Atomism and Other Essays (The Collected
Papers of Bertrand Russell, Vol. 8), 1914-19, London: George Allen and Unwin, 1986.
[Russell, 1992] B. Russell. Logical and Philosophical Papers, 1909-13 (The Collected Papers of
Bertrand Russell, Vol. 6), London and New York: Routledge, 1992.
[Russell, 1994a] B. Russell. Foundations of Logic, 1903-05 (The Collected Papers of Bertrand
Russell, Vol. 4), London and New York: Routledge, 1994.
[Russell, 1994b] B. Russell. Toward the Principles of Mathematics (The Collected Papers of
Bertrand Russell, Vol. 3), London and New York: Routledge, 1994.
[Aavage and Anderson, 1989] C. W. Savage and C. A. Anderson, eds. Rereading Russell: Essays
on Bertrand Russell’s Metaphysics and Epistemology, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1989.
[Schlipp, 1944] P. A. Schilpp, ed. The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell, Chicago: Northwestern
University, 1944; 3rd ed., New York: Harper and Row, 1963.
[Schoenman, 1967] R. Schoenman, ed. Bertrand Russell: Philosopher of the Century, London:
Allen and Unwin, 1967.
[Slater, 1994] J. G. Slater. Bertrand Russell, Bristol: Thoemmes, 1994.
[Strawson, 1950] P. F. Strawson. On Referring, Mind, 59, 320-344, 1950; repr. in Flew, Anthony
(ed.), Essays in Conceptual Analysis, London: Macmillan, 1960, 21-52, and in Klemke, E.D.
(ed.), Essays on Bertrand Russell, Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1970, 147-172.
[Urquhart, 1988] A. Urquhart. Russell’s Zig-Zag Path to the Ramiﬁed Theory of Types, Russell,
8, 82-91, 1988.
[Weitz, 1944] M. Weitz. Analysis and the Unity of Russell’s Philosophy. In Schilpp, Paul Arthur
(ed.), The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell, 1944; 3rd ed., New York: Tudor, 1951, 55-121.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910–1913] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica,
3 vols, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1910, 1912, 1913; second edition, 1925 (Vol.
1), 1927 (Vols 2, 3).
[Wittgenstein, 1921] L. Wittgenstein. Logisch-philosophische Abhandlung, 1921. Trans. as Trac-
tatus Logico-Philosophicus, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1922.
[Wittgenstein, 1956] L. Wittgenstein. Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics, Oxford:
Blackwell, 1956.
[Wood, 1957] A. Wood. Bertrand Russell: The Passionate Sceptic, London: Allen and Unwin,
1957.
[Wood, 1959] A. Wood. Russell’s Philosophy: A Study of its Development. In Russell, Bertrand,
My Philosophical Development, New York: Simon and Schuster, 255-277, 1959.

LOGIC FOR MEINONGIAN OBJECT THEORY
SEMANTICS
Dale Jacquette
1
MEINONG ON INTENDED OBJECTS
Alexius Meinong (1853–1920) was a talented musician, historian, psychologist,
and philosopher — but not much of a logician. His student Ernst Mally was a
highly competent logician, and served as a liaison for Meinong between current
developments in formal symbolic logic and the school of intentional experimental
psychology and semantic theory that Meinong founded in Graz, Austria, at the
turn of the previous century. We cannot, as a result, speak of Meinong’s logic, if we
wish to be historically accurate, but at most only of various versions of Meinongian
logic, inspired by Meinong’s object theory (Gegenstandstheorie), and intended to
formalize the principles by which Meinong sought to implement his teacher Franz
Brentano’s thesis of the distinctive intentionality of thought.1
What Meinong wanted to achieve was a theory of intended objects, most of
which, barring only a few interesting exceptions, were thinkable, but in general
independent of actual psychological acts. Meinong agrees with Brentano that ev-
ery thought is directed toward an intended object, but he denies Brentano’s early
immanent intentionality thesis, formulated in the latter’s monumental 1874 Psy-
chologie vom empirischen Standpunkt, according to which the intended objects of
thought are literally contained within the acts of thought by which they are in-
tended. Meinong, like others of Brentano’s students, preferred to distance himself
from this aspect of his teacher’s philosophy, which was interpreted as amounting to
a kind of philosophically objectionable psychologism. Instead, Meinong, in collab-
oration with Alois H¨oﬂer in H¨oﬂer’s 1890 Logik, advanced a distinction that was
to be developed at greater length in Kazimierz Twardowski’s 1894 Zur Lehre vom
Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellung, between the act, content, and intended
object of every psychological occurrence. Where Brentano in retrospect seems to
have conﬂated content and object, H¨oﬂer, Meinong, Twardowski, and others in
this early phenomenological tradition, argued instead that there is a sharp dis-
tinction between content and object, and that whereas the content of thought is
1A detailed account of the philosophical background to the formalization of Meinong’s object
theory would require many times the number of pages for this eﬀort to sketch one logical theory
of Meinongian semantics. The references below oﬀer an indication of the vast literature on the
subject.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

30
Dale Jacquette
something the thought immanently contains, the intended object of a thought is
not generally a part of the thought by which it is intended, but something that
stands outside of thought.2
In this way, Meinong and company proposed to establish a mind-independent
order of intended objects to which thought might be directed, but that were not
themselves in any sense the creatures of thought. The objects (Gegenst¨ande) of
Meinong’s object theory were thus meant to facilitate a rapprochement between a
reconstructed Brentanian thesis of the intentionality of mind with commonsense
reference to the objects intended in psychological acts of perception and memory,
where we ordinarily think of ourselves as directed in thought toward things that
exist outside of our own thoughts, and believe ourselves to be capable of thinking
of the same external objects as other persons. Thus, when I think about the Blue
Mosque in Istanbul, I suppose myself to be directed in thought to an entity that
exists outside of the contents of my own mind in real space and time, in a certain
part of far southeastern Europe, that would exist even if I were never to think of it,
and that stands as the very same intended object of thoughts of other thinkers who
are also not merely intending the contents of their own distinct mental episodes
when like me they also think about the Blue Mosque.
By virtue of adopting a qualiﬁed form of Brentano’s intentionality thesis,
Meinong nevertheless opened up a vista on a wonderful domain of intended ob-
jects, only some of which like the Blue Mosque happen to exist. If every thought
intends an object, and if intended objects are not psychologistically to be confused
with thought contents, but are in some sense independent of any individual acts of
thinking, then Meinong, true to these assumptions, must somehow accommodate
within his theory the intended objects of such thoughts as ‘Pegasus is a winged
horse’, ‘The golden mountain is golden and a mountain’, ‘Priestley believed in
Phlogiston’, and even, ‘The round square is round and square’.
Each of these thoughts on Meinong’s amended form of Brentano’s intentional-
ity thesis ostensibly intends a nonexistent object. The examples are diﬀerent in
interesting ways. The ﬁrst, concerning Pegasus, seems to be about a mythological
ﬂying equine, something that, as far as we know, happens contingently never to
have existed. The second example, about the golden mountain, apparently ex-
presses a kind of tautology or analytic truth. It is comparable in form to saying of
a contingently existent object, such as the tallest mountain, ‘The tallest mountain
is tall and a mountain’. If this thought and its expression in language are true,
even logically or analytically true, then why should another thought or sentence
of identical logical form not equally be true, merely because it intends an object
that happens not to exist? What can pure logic pretend to know about the kinds
of mountains that do or do not exist in the world? This is nevertheless the con-
2See Dale Jacquette, “The Origins of Gegenstandstheorie: Immanent and Transcendent In-
tentional Objects in Brentano, Twardowski, and Meinong”, Brentano Studien, 3, 1990–1991,
277–302. Jacquette, “Twardowski, Brentano’s Dilemma, and the Content-Object Distinction”,
in Actions, Products, and Things: Brentano and Polish Philosophy, Mind and Phenomenology
series, edited by Arkadiusz Chrudzimski and Dariusz Lukasiewicz, pp. 9–33 (Frankfurt: Ontos
Verlag, 2006.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
31
clusion that extensionalist logic and semantics since the time of Gottlob Frege
and Bertrand Russell after 1905, through the inﬂuential work of W.V.O. Quine
and others in mainstream analytic philosophy, have vigorously maintained with a
desperate conviction bordering almost on religious fervor.3
The third example is interesting in another way, because it combines reference
to an existent object, the 17th century chemist Joseph Priestley, with what has
been judged by science to be the nonexistent object, the substance of Phlogiston,
invoked before the discovery of oxygen in order to explain combustion and oxida-
tion. Here Meinong and common sense in one of its moods will declare that the
proposition is true, that Priestley did indeed (mistakenly) believe in the existence
of Phlogiston, something that only later turns out not to have actually existed.
If it is true of Preistly that he believed in the existence of Phlogiston, however,
then in order for this true thought and its expression in language to be true, we
must presumably be able to refer to and truly predicate properties of a nonexistent
intended object, namely Phlogiston. This nonexistent stuﬀ, wrongly supposed to
be given oﬀwhen something burns or rusts, has not only these properties, for that
is how Phlogiston is deﬁned and understood as distinct from other existent and
nonexistent chemical substances, but has the more remarkable property of having
been believed by the existent chemist Priestley to exist. Priestley was wrong, we
now know, his thought was false, but it was a thought about Phlogiston, and that,
indeed, is the essential part of what makes his thought false.
Finally, the fourth example is interesting for Meinong’s purposes because it is
identical in logical form to the second example, but it concerns the apparently
analytic attribution of properties to a putatively intended object that not only
3Bertrand Russell is responsible for much of the misinformation concerning Meinong’s ob-
ject theory semantics that has prevailed in the analytic philosophical community beginning with
Russell’s justly celebrated 1905 Mind essay, “On Denoting”. See Russell, Introduction to Math-
ematical Philosophy (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1971), p. 169. Russell’s Introduction was
ﬁrst published in 1919, after his conversion to radical extensionalism. But Russell’s interpretation
of Meinong’s object theory as committed to the being-predication thesis begins with his earliest
critical commentaries. Russell, “Meinong’s Theory of Complexes and Assumptions” (Mind, 13,
1904), rpt., Essays in Analysis, edited by Douglas Lackey (New York: George Braziller, 1973), p.
36: “The process suggested by Meinong’s argument is...exceedingly and curiously complicated.
First we think of a golden mountain, then we perceive that we are thinking of it; thence, we infer
that there is a presentation of a golden mountain, and thence ﬁnally that the golden mountain
subsists or has Being.” Also p. 59: “The immanent object does not exist, according to Meinong,
and is therefore no part of the mental state whose object it is; for this mental state exists. Yet,
although not part of any mental state, it is supposed to be in some sense psychical. But it cannot
be in any way bound up with any particular mental state of which it is the object; for other
states, at other times and in other people, may have precisely the same object, since an object or
a proposition can be presented or believed more than once. I confess these facts seem to me to
show, without more ado, that objects and propositions must always have being...” See Jacquette,
“Confessions of a Meinongian Logician”, Grazer Philosophische Studien, 58–59, 2000, pp. 151–
180, for some debunking of Meinong-bashing. The conference on ‘Russell versus Meinong: 100
Years After “On Denoting”’, organized by myself and Nicholas Griﬃn at McMaster University in
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, 14-18 May 2005, may have also helped dispel the myths that have
surrounded Meinong’s philosophy seen through Russell’s eyes throughout most of the history of
modern symbolic logic.

32
Dale Jacquette
contingently happens not to exist, like Pegasus, Phlogiston, or the golden moun-
tain, but an object that by deﬁnition cannot possibly exist. The round square
we may suppose is round and square at once, and it is for this very reason, by
virtue of possessing these properties, that there cannot be a round square. Still, if
someone were to ask what the fourth example listed above was about, the correct
answer would seem to be that it involved a thought about the round square, that
that was the object intended, even though no such thing exists or can exist.
2
MEINONG’S PHENOMENOLOGICAL TAXONOMY OF OBJECTS
Trained by Brentano to apply empirical methods to philosophical investigations,
Meinong pursues a policy similar to that of a naturalist studying mushrooms or
butterﬂies. He collects all the relevant examples and tries to organize them into a
sensible set of categories according to their distinctive features.
Thus, Meinong distinguishes between intended objects that have being and
those that do not have being. He observes a medieval Scholastic distinction that
he probably inherited from Brentano’s detailed study of Thomas Aquinas between
existent and subsistent entities as objects with being. Existent objects on this dis-
tinction are objects with being that occupy real space and time; they are physically
existent. Subsistent objects in contrast are abstract objects with being, in which
category Meinong includes numbers, but interestingly not geometrical ﬁgures like
the triangle, and properties, qualities and relations, and propositions as the ab-
stract meanings of concrete sentences. These are also assimilated to the category
of states of aﬀairs under Meinong’s concept of Objektive (objectives), themselves
a subcategory of intended objects. Most contemporary logicians who have been
interested in Meinong’s object theory have not been motivated to capture the
existence–subsistence distinction in their formalizations of Meinongian logic, nor
shall we in what follows below.
Among the objects lacking being or possessing nonbeing, Meinong as a seman-
tic taxonomist identiﬁes as further types those that are incomplete (unvollst¨andige
Gegenst¨ande) and those that are impossible (unm¨ogliche Gegenst¨ande). Incom-
plete objects include all those intended objects that are contingently nonexistent,
such as Pegasus, the golden mountain, Phlogiston, Santa Claus, Sherlock Holmes,
and others, that are nevertheless beingless intended objects of thought. These
objects are incomplete beingless objects according to Meinong because they are
lacking at least some property and its complement. Thus, unlike any truly existent
object, Pegasus is neither blue-eyed nor non-blue-eyed, neither an Arabian nor a
non-Arabian, and so on. Similarly for all other contingently beingless objects; they
are all lacking some, indeed, countlessly many, properties in a way that is never
true of actually existent or subsistent entities as intended objects of thought. It
is worth remarking that Meinong’s reason for regarding generalized geometrical
ﬁgures like the triangle as lacking being because he accepts an argument of the
eighteenth century British empiricist George Berkeley in his Three Dialogues Be-
tween Hylas and Philonous, to the eﬀect that we can have no idea of ‘the triangle’

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
33
if by this we are supposed to mean an object that is neither scalene nor isosceles,
right-angled nor non-right-angled, neither large nor small, with line segments that
are neither red nor white nor any other particular color, and so on. Whether this
is a conclusive basis for excluding the triangle as an abstract mathematical entity
from the order of intended objects with being rather depends on what kinds of
properties we expect such an object needs in order to qualify as complete rather
than incomplete.
Impossible objects are also typically but not necessarily incomplete. The two
subcategories of beingless objects accordingly are not exclusionary but permit a
substantial overlap. The round square is a good example with which to begin. For,
like the triangle, it is neither red nor non-red, neither large nor small, and so on. It
is only simultaneously both round and square. This implies in eﬀect that the round
square is both round and non-round, square and non-square, which no object with
being can possibly have. It is not the kind of thing like a golden mountain or a
ﬂying horse that might eventually turn up somewhere in the universe, or whose
existence does not oﬀend the assumptions of ontology, but something that by
deﬁnition could not exist because its properties cannot jointly be realized in any
existent object. We might nevertheless suppose that there could be an impossible
object that was also complete, if, for example, such an object were deﬁned as
possessing every property and the complement of at least one of its properties, so
that it would be just like an existent object except that, if, for example, it were
red, it would also be non-red; or if it were round, it would also be non-round.
Meinong, again in keeping with sound empiricist methodology, also proposes to
extract laws or principles governing the intended objects in the domain of objects
he posits as a consequence of his revisionary Brentanian intentionality thesis. He
maintains in the simplest most basic part of the theory with which we will be
concerned in this exposition that every assumption intends an object; that the
population of a semantic domain by intended objects is indiﬀerent to their ontic
status as having or failing to have being; that the so-being (Sosein), being-thus-
and-so, or possession of constitutive properties of an intended object is independent
of its ontic status. What is characteristic of an intensional Meinongian semantics
on this account and in contrast with extensionalist semantics is that it permits
reference and true predication of constitutive properties to beingless as well as
existent spatiotemporal and subsistent abstract intended objects. Semantically,
a Meinongian object theory is extraordinarily democratic; all objects are on an
equal footing at least insofar as they can stand as the objects of reference and true
predications of properties. The golden mountain and round square do not exist,
and the round square in particular cannot possibly exist. We can nevertheless
think of them, and, like existent objects, they are among the intended objects of
thought and language to which we can refer. Despite their ontic status as beingless,
they truly possess the constitutive properties predicated of them in assumptions
and related sorts of mental acts.4
4For formal deﬁnitions of incomplete and impossible objects, see Jacquette, Meinongian Logic:
The Semantics of Existence and Nonexistence (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1996), p. 117, and

34
Dale Jacquette
3
MEINONGIAN LOGIC FOR MEINONG’S OBJECT THEORY
SEMANTICS
A Meinongian logic of existent and nonexistent objects provides a formal theory
of reference and true predication for ordinary discourse, the semantics of onto-
logical commitment, and logic of ﬁction. The Meinongian logic proposed in what
follows oﬀers a rigorous Meinongian object theory semantics with nonstandard
propositional and predicate inference machinery. All such eﬀorts are necessarily
reconstructive, for the reasons we have already mentioned. Meinong was no lo-
gician, but he had interesting insights into the nature of intensional semantics
that were fueled by his commitment to some version of Brentano’s thesis of the
intentionality of thought, and derivatively to the intentionality of language as the
expression of thought.
Every logician who has tried to work out a Meinongian logic, and at this point
in time there have been about a dozen, have recognized the need to pick and choose
from among Meinong’s ideas, to idealize his suggestions and synthesize them into
a form that more or less conforms to the kinds of things Meinong explicitly said
about the meanings of terms, concerning the reference and true predication of
properties to beingless objects. An historically faithful contemporary symbolic
logic that formalizes Meinong’s Gegenstandstheorie is unavoidably conjectural and
a matter of approximation. That is the beauty and the temptation of trying to
mathematicize Meinongian semantics as a reconstructive task that must choose
among various elements of Meinong’s theory as he developed it over time, changing
his opinions along the way. Meinong did not write with the logician in mind, but
with his ﬁnger on the beating pulse of intentionalist phenomenological psychology,
and with a ﬁnely-tuned sensitivity to the nuances of thought and language to which
a semantics in his opinion must always pay attention. It is for this reason that
Meinong’s writings provide a wealth of useful raw material for the construction of
a new kind of logic, a logic that Meinong himself was never himself in a position
to articulate.
The system presented below is distinguished from previous formalizations of
object theory by virtue of its formal criteria for nuclear (constitutive) and ex-
tranuclear (nonconstitutive) properties, three-valued propositional semantics for
predications of nuclear properties to incomplete nonexistent objects for which the
objects ostensibly are undetermined, nonstandard set theory semantics with unre-
stricted comprehension for object theory predicate semantics (licensed by existence
restrictions on abstraction equivalence), demonstrations of internal determinacy,
consistency, and Henkin completeness, nonstandard deduction theorem, and con-
sistency considerations in light of free assumption and unrestricted comprehension.
It is a version of a Meinongian logic I have presented on several previous occasions,
with new reﬁnements and applications. Much of what appears in the formalization
will seem familiar to classical logicians, and that is just the point. A Meinongian
for theorems relating these and other properties of basic Meinongian categories of objects, pp.
122-140.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
35
logic need not be so entirely diﬀerent from the kinds of extensionalist logics already
available in many variations, including three-valued logics with some of the inno-
vations appropriated here for intensionalist purposes. By exhibiting the possibility
of providing a consistency, completeness, and compactness proof for Meinongian
logics with restricted lambda-abstraction and other precautions, the present sys-
tem seeks to demonstrate that Meinongian logics are formally as rigorous as their
extensionalist existence-presupposing counterparts, and as entitled, therefore, to
take their place alongside other nonstandard logics in the ﬁeld.
4
ELEMENTS OF A RECONSTRUCTED MEINONGIAN OBJECT
THEORY
Meinongian object theories, in the revisionary sense intended here, can be con-
structed around the following core of basic principles.
1. Any thought or corresponding expression can be assumed.
(Principle of unrestricted free assumption or Annahmen thesis)
2. Every assumption is directed toward an intentional object.
(Intentionality thesis)
3. Every intentional object has a nature, character, Sosein, ‘how-it-is’, ‘so-
being’, or ‘being thus-and-so’, regardless of its ontological status.
(Independence or independence of Sosein from Sein thesis)
4. Being or nonbeing is not part of the Sosein of any intentional object, nor of
the object considered in itself.
(Indiﬀerence thesis or doctrine of the Aussersein of the homeless pure object)
5. There are two modes of being or Sein for intentional objects:
(a) Spatio-temporal existence
(b) Platonic subsistence
(Existenz/Bestand thesis)
6. There are some intentional objects which do not have Sein, but neither exist
nor subsist (objects of which it is true to say that there are no such objects).
As indicated, most object theories that are Meinongian in all other respects do
not recognize or make use of the distinction between existence and subsistence.
For present purposes it is appropriate to relax principle (5) in order to permit
theories of this kind also to qualify as Meinongian.
Thesis (6) is similarly ex-
pendable when derived from (1)–(4). Meinong’s exposition of the theory includes
additional postulates, but the present amended list of assumptions is suﬃcient for

36
Dale Jacquette
a minimal Meinongian object theory. Alternative versions can be formulated by
supplementing the core with further assumptions consistent with it.5
5
SYNTAX, FORMATION AND INFERENCE PRINCIPLES
The formalization provides an exact interpretation of object theory logic and se-
mantics. The system developed is ontologically neutral in areas where traditional
logic is intolerably partisan. It is more encompassing and ﬂexible than alternative
standard and nonstandard logics of comparable power. The logic is paradox-free
and untyped. It preserves intact almost all the notation and inferences of standard
systems, replacing the usual propositional semantics with three truth values and
a Meinongian domain of existent and nonexistent objects.
5.1
Nuclear and Extranuclear Properties
The distinction between nuclear and extranuclear properties is represented in the
notation as a distinction between ‘P’ and ‘P!’ predicates. Reference to nuclear
or extranuclear properties indiﬀerently is indicated by placing the exclamation
in parentheses, ‘P(!)’. Quantiﬁcation over nuclear or extranuclear properties is
indicated by expressions of the form:
. . . (∀x) . . . (∀P n(!)) . . . (. . . P n(!)x1, . . . , xn . . .) . . .
The predications are higher-order in appearance only. The logic is type-unordered,
and propositions of the kind are instances of bounded quantiﬁcation, convenient
abbreviations for the more explicitly type-unordered expression . . . (∀x) . . . (∀y(!))
. . . (. . . y(!)x . . .) . . .. The leveling of types is appropriate in Meinongian logic be-
cause properties like anything that can be thought of are also intentional objects.
Nuclear P properties and extranuclear P! properties are distinguished by the
following criteria:
(C1)
−(∀x1) . . . (∀xn)(∀P n)(−P nx1, . . . , xn ≡P nx1, . . . , xn)
(C2)
(∀x1) . . . (∀xn)(∀P n!)(−P n!x1, . . . , xn ≡P n!x1, . . . , xn)
These can also be called the negation/counterpart-complementation criteria for
the nuclear-extranuclear property distinction. It suﬃces to rely on (C1) or (C2)
5See Alexius Meinong, Alexius Meinong Gesamtausgabe, Vols. I–VIII, edited by Rudolf Haller
and Rudolf Kindinger in collaboration with R. M. Chisholm (Graz: Akademische Druck– u.
Verlagsanstalt, 1969–1978). Also J.N. Findlay, Meinong’s Theory of Objects and Values, edited
with an Introduction by Dale Jacquette, from the second edition, Oxford University Press, 1963,
Aldershot, Ashgate Publishing (Gregg Revivals) (all references to this edition). Karel Lambert,
Meinong and the Principle of Independence: Its Place in Meinong’s Theory of Objects and
its Signiﬁcance in Contemporary Philosophical Logic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1983). Alternative formalizations of object theory are advanced by Terence Parsons, Nonexistent
Objects (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1980), and Richard Routley, Exploring Meinong’s
Jungle and Beyond, interim edition (Canberra: Australian National University, 1981).

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
37
exclusively, categorizing extranuclear properties as properties that do not satisfy
(C1), or nuclear properties as properties that do not satisfy (C2).
The criteria mark an important distinction between nuclear and extranuclear
properties.
Nuclear property and property complement pairs can fail to hold
of incomplete or indeterminate nonexistent objects.
George Berkeley’s golden
mountain (to belabor a familiar example) is neither taller than nor not taller than
Ren´e Daumal’s Mt. Analogue. Criterion (C1) reﬂects the fact that the property of
being taller than Mt. Analogue is nuclear rather than extranuclear by denying the
logical equivalence of sentence negation and nuclear predicate complementation
counterpart expressions. To say that the round square is nonsquare (because it is
round) is not to say that it is not the case that the round square is square (since
by the independence thesis it is both round and square).6
Extranuclear properties on the contrary do not permit this latitude even when
predicated of nonexistent incomplete indeterminate or impossible objects.
An
object, whether determinate or indeterminate, is either existent or not existent,
possible or impossible, self-identical or not self-identical, with no middle ground
or room for extranuclear incompleteness or indeterminacy. This means, as (C2) in
eﬀect requires, that extranuclear predicate complementation and sentence negation
counterparts are logically equivalent and extensionally intersubstitutable. For this
reason, the extranuclear subtheory of Meinongian logic, unlike the object theory of
nuclear predications, is classically bivalent. Nuclear constitutive properties belong
to the distinguishing or uniquely individuating Sosein of an intentional object, to
the absolute exclusion of extranuclear properties.
Criteria (C1) and (C2) by themselves do not determine which properties are
nuclear and which extranuclear. The criteria state distinguishing features of the
two kinds of properties, and in application require additional information about
whether or not the complement of a particular property predicated of an object
is logically equivalent to its sentence negation counterpart. An independent in-
formal criterion for the distinction can be provided to determine intuitively which
properties satisfy (C1) rather than (C2), and which (C2) rather than (C1). A
property is extranuclear on this conception if and only if it is deﬁnable in terms of
logical operators and uninterpreted predicate symbols alone. It is nuclear if and
only if it is not extranuclear, or if it is not deﬁnable in this way, but requires for
its deﬁnition the interpretation of at least some predicate symbols.
5.2
Syntax
Object theory O contains the following items of primitive syntax.
6Meinong introduces the distinction between konstitutorische and ausserkonstitutorische Bes-
timmungen (constitutive and extraconstitutive properties) in ¨Uber M¨oglichkeit und Wahrschein-
lichkeit: Beitr¨age zur Gegenstandstheorie und Erkenntnistheorie (Leipzig: Verlag von Johann
Ambrosius Barth, 1915) (same pagination as Barth), pp. 176-177. Findlay, in Meinong’s Theory
of Objects and Values, p. 176, proposes the English translations ‘nuclear’ and ‘extranuclear’. See
also Parsons, “Nuclear and Extranuclear Properties, Meinong, and Leibniz”, Noˆus, 12, 1978, pp.
137-151. Parsons, Nonexistent Objects.

38
Dale Jacquette
1. propositional negation: ‘−’
2. predicate complementation: ‘ ’
3. conditional: ‘⊃’
4. universal quantiﬁcation: ‘∀’
5. object variable: ‘x’
6. object constant: ‘o’
7. predicates: ‘P n’ (nuclear); ‘P n!’ (extranuclear)
(‘P n(!)’ denotes an n-ary nuclear or extranuclear property indiﬀerently; in
practice the superscript is implicit)
8. functor: ‘f n’
9. denumerable variable, constant, predicate, and functor indices:
‘1’, ‘2’, ‘3’, . . .
10. punctuation, including:
parentheses: ‘(’, ‘)’
square brackets: ‘[’, ‘]’
curly brackets: ‘{’, ‘}’
comma: ‘,’
ellipsis: ‘. . .’
blank space: ‘
’
In addition to the primitive syntax, deﬁned expressions, including connectives,
predicates, functors, and operators, are introduced as abbreviations or particular
applications of more complex expressions in the primitive syntax. In principle,
the primitive syntax can supply all needed variables, constants, predicates, and
functors, by subscripting natural number indices to the ‘x’, ‘o’, ‘P(!), and ‘f’
expressions, as in: ‘x1’, ‘x2’, ‘x3’, . . . , ‘o1’, ‘o2’, ‘o3’, . . . , ‘P(!)1’, ‘P(!)2’, ‘P(!)3’,. . . ,
and ‘f1’, ‘f2’, ‘f3’, . . . . In practice it is more convenient to use variables like ‘x’,
‘y’, ‘z’, predicates like ‘P’, ‘Q!’, ‘R(!)’, or those with mnemonic signiﬁcance, and
function symbols from traditional logical and mathematical notations, such as ‘∈’,
‘≤’, ‘̸=’.
Object constants are given special interpretations for convenience and readabil-
ity. In particular, an object constant oi(1 ≤i ≤n) may be chosen to represent an
arbitrary proposition, though in practice familiar propositional variables ‘p’, ‘q’,
and ‘r’ are used. Three object constants are chosen to represent the truth values
‘T’, ‘F’, and ‘U’. They are understood as the values true, false, undetermined.
These conventional applicationss are translatable into the oﬃcial primitive syntax.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
39
5.3
Formation Principles
The terms of object theory O are recursively inductively deﬁned as follows.
1. The x1 . . . , xn, . . . are terms.
2. The o1, . . . , on, . . . are terms.
3. If f n is n-ary, then f n(o1, . . . , on) is a term.
4. Nothing else is a term (closure).
The well-formed formulas or wﬀs of object theory O are recursively inductively
deﬁned as follows.
1. If P n(!) is n-ary, then P n(!)o1 . . . on is a wﬀ.
2. If P n(!) is n-ary, then P n(!)o1 . . . on is a wﬀ.
3. If p is a wﬀ, then −p is a wﬀ.
4. If p and q are wﬀs, then p ⊃q is a wﬀ.
5. If p is a wﬀ, then (∀x)p is a wﬀ.
6. Nothing else is a wﬀ(closure).
The following connectives and operators are introduced as abbreviations for the
primitive connectives and operators to which they are logically equivalent.
E1
p & q for −((−p ⊃−q) ⊃−q)
E2
p ∨q for −(−p & −q)
E3
p ≡q for (p ⊃q) & (q ⊃p)
E4
(∃x)p for −(∀x) −p
The formation principles can also be expanded to incorporate modality, deﬁnite
description, and lambda abstraction.
5.4
Inference Principles
A proof in the logic is a consecutively numbered sequence of well-formed formulas.
The inferences are justiﬁed by analogues of familiar axioms and rules of proposi-
tional and predicate logic.
The intent of inference structures is to permit the deduction from true assump-
tions of true conclusions only, and to prevent the deduction of false or undeter-
mined conclusions. For present purposes, it will suﬃce to advance a number of
logical axioms generally recognized as deductively valid, from which derived in-
ference principles can be obtained. The turnstile ‘⊢’ is used to indicate the valid

40
Dale Jacquette
deduction of a conclusion q from logical and nonlogical axioms, deﬁnitions, and
theorems p1, . . . , pn in p1, . . . , pn ⊢q. This means that it is deductively valid to
infer q from p1, . . . , pn. In a proof this is written:
1.
p1
...
n.
pn
n + 1
q
(1 −n)
The turnstile (⊢) is a metatheoretical device, a (non-truth-functional) function
from propositions to propositions. When the turnstile appears with a proposition
to its right but none to its left, it indicates that the proposition is unconditionally
true, a theorem or tautology of the logic.
The primitive axioms are presented as inference schemata, uniform substitution
instances of which may enter into any proof. Inference is by uniform substitution of
propositions for propositional variables, and a rule of detachment, modus ponendo
ponens.
A1
p ⊃(q ⊃p)
A2
(p ⊃q) ⊃((q ⊃r) ⊃(p ⊃r))
A3
(−p ⊃p) ⊃p
A4
(−p ⊃−q) ⊃(q ⊃p)
A5
(∀x1) . . . (∀xn)P n(!)x1 . . . xn ⊢P n(!)xi/oi (similarly for . . . P n(!) . . .)
(selectively substituting constants ‘oi’ for variables ‘xi’)
A6
P n(!)xi/oi ⊢(∀x1) . . . (∀xn)P n(!)x1 . . . xn (similarly for . . . P n(!) . . .)
(where ‘xi’ does not occur free in ‘P n(!)xi/oi’, ‘P n(!)xi/oi’)
A7
(∀x1) . . . (∀xn)(p ⊃q) ⊃(p ⊃(∀x1) . . . (∀xnq)
(where ‘xi’ does not occur free in ‘p’)
A8
(∀x1) . . . (∀xn)(P n(!)x1 . . . xn ≡P n(!)x1 . . . xn)
The logic distinguishes between propositional negation and predicate complemen-
tation. This requires a special double complementation principle in (A8). The
axiom states that an arbitrary predication of given length involving the comple-
ment of the complement of a property is equivalent to a predication of the same
length of the property itself. If it is not the case that an object has a nuclear
property, it does not follow that the object has the complement of the property.
If an object has the complement of a nuclear property, it does not follow that
the object does not have the property. The importance of these restrictions in
maintaining syntactical consistency are appreciated when the logic of incomplete
and impossible objects is presented.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
41
6
OBJECT THEORY SEMANTICS
The intended interpretation of the logic is described by explaining the meaning
of each term and well-formed formula. The semantics divides into two parts. If
p, q are wﬀs of O, then truth matrix interpretations are provided for negation in
−p, and implication in p ⊃q. If p is of the form P n(!)o1 . . . on or (∀x)p, it is
interpreted in a semantic model, expressed as an ordered pair of reference class
designators, or as an equivalent function on the Cartesian product of objects in
designated reference classes.
The most important primitive semantic relation is designation, not of existents
only, but of any object or set of objects in the semantic domain of existent and
nonexistent Meinongian objects. The dictum attributed to Quine that there can
be ‘No entity without identity’7 is expanded to provide the more inclusive princi-
ple that there can be no entity or nonentity without identity. Nonexistent objects
have Sosein identity conditions speciﬁable as identities of unordered sets of nuclear
properties. Existent and nonexistent objects alike are distinguishable elements of
the Meinongian semantic domain, and can therefore stand as the values of bound
variables (which in Meinongian quantiﬁcational logic carry no real existential or
ontological import). This removes philosophical obstacles to the claim that nonex-
istent objects are designatable.
The domain or universe of discourse includes a wide variety of objects, exis-
tent as well as incomplete and impossible nonexistent objects. Meinong identiﬁed
the major divisions among kinds of intentional objects, but he did not recognize
all interesting subdivisions. These can be mapped as intersections, unions, and
exclusions of partitioned reference classes of nonexistent objects.
There are three truth values in the logic’s formal semantics. They are required
because intentional discourse sometimes attributes properties to incomplete ob-
jects in predications that intuitively are neither true nor false. A third truth value
is therefore introduced for expressions in the logic undetermined in truth value.
The golden mountain is neither taller than nor not taller than Daumal’s Mt. Ana-
logue. Macbeth neither spoke nor was unable to speak Italian. Truth values are
distinguished as special objects of the semantic domain, and an identity predi-
cate is used to express identity relationships between truth values and truth value
functions applied to propositions.
6.1
Three-Valued Propositional Semantics
Let p, q be any well-formed formulas. Three objects in the semantic domain are
designated as truth values, symbolized in the usual way as ‘T’ for ‘true’, ‘F’
for ‘false’, and ‘U’ for ‘undetermined’. A function V is deﬁned for wﬀs of the
7The thesis is ascribed to Quine by Charles Parsons, “Frege’s Theory of Number”, in Max
Black, editor, Philosophy in America (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1965), p.
182.
See
W.V.O. Quine, Word and Object (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1960), pp. 200–205; Quine, “On-
tological Relativity”, in Quine, Ontological Relativity and Other Essays (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1969), pp. 26–68, pp. 32–34, 45–64.

42
Dale Jacquette
logic that gives the truth value of any wﬀtaken as argument. If V (p) = T then
V (−p) = F; if V (p) = T and V (q) = F, then V (p ⊃q) = F; V (p) = U if and
only if V (−p) = U. The complete truth functional relations for negation and the
conditional are represented in truth tables.
p
−q
T
F
F
T
U
U
p
q
p ⊃q
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
U
U
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
U
T
U
T
T
U
F
U
U
U
T
The undetermined truth value U is preserved through negation and through
conjunction with anything that has truth value T. It is natural to suppose that
if a wﬀis undetermined in truth value, then its negation is also undetermined. If
it is undetermined that the golden mountain is taller than Mt. Analogue, then it
is also undetermined that the golden mountain is not taller than Mt. Analogue.
If one conjunct of a conjunction is true and the others undetermined, then the
conjunction as a whole cannot unqualiﬁedly be said to be true or false. The un-
determined truth value is not preserved through conjunction with any proposition
that has truth value F, since a conjunction is rightly regarded as false if even one
of its conjuncts is false. The consequences of these evaluations for the conditional
are recorded in the truth tables. The propositional semantics are identical to the
trivalent system proposed by Jan Lukasiewicz.8
Predicate expressions of the form P n(!)o1 . . . on and complementary form
P n(!)o1 . . . on are interpreted by an extension of the truth value function.
It
is necessary to describe a domain of existent and nonexistent objects.
Among
nonexistent objects are impossible, incomplete, and impossible incomplete objects,
overdetermined objects, and a maximally impossible object. These are represented
diagrammatically on the following page.
8Jan Lukasiewicz,
“Philosophische Bemerkungen zu mehrwertigen Systemen des Aus-
sagenkalk¨uls”, Comptes rendus des se´ances de la Soci´et´e des sciences et des lettres de Varsovie,
Classe III, 23, 1930, pp. 51–77; translated in Storrs McCall, editor, Polish Logic: 1920–1939
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1967), pp. 40–65. See Nicholas Rescher, Many–Valued Logic
(New York: McGraw–Hill, 1969), p. 23. The truth tables are similar to those presented by S.C.
Kleene, Introduction to Metamathematics (Amsterdam: North–Holland Publishing Co., 1952),
pp. 334–335. The diﬀerence is that for Lukasiewicz, when V (p) = U, V (p ⊃p) = T; whereas for
Kleene, when V (p) = U, V (p ⊃p) = U.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
43
b
impossible
determinate
incomplete
d
e
a
c
In this hybrid Venn-Euler diagram, intentional objects are found within every
sphere, and no objects occur outside the interlocking spheres.
Clearly, no ob-
jects belong to the intersection of determinate and incomplete objects, nor to the
domain of neither incomplete nor determinate impossible objects, and in the dia-
gram this is indicated by hatching. Object a is the maximally impossible object
which has every nuclear constitutive property and its complement. Object b is
the (incomplete ﬁctional) golden mountain, and c the (impossible) round square.
Subsets d and e might distinguish Meinong’s ontological categories of existent and
subsistent determinate objects, though the distinction need not be observed.
6.2
Meinongian Set Theory
To interpret ‘P n(!)o1 . . . on’ and ‘P n(!)o1 . . . on’, a semantic model is provided
that can be directly transcribed from the logical syntax.
The model consists
of three ordered components: a domain D, an interpretation I on the domain,
and a truth valuation of propositions under the interpretation V , ⟨D, I, V ⟩. D
is the Meinongian domain of existent and nonexistent intentional objects, D =
{o1, o2, o3, . . . }. Every term designates an existent or nonexistent object, by the
Annahmen or unrestricted free assumption thesis. Domain D thus contains an
intentional object corresponding to every well-deﬁned term, constant, predicate,
functor (and deﬁnite descriptor and lambda abstract, if these are added). Some of
the objects are sets of objects, where every condition on any objects determines a
set.
A nonstandard version of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory drives the semantics.
Meinongian set membership, inclusion and exclusion, are nuclear relational prop-
erties in atomic predications undetermined in truth value. The philosophical justi-
ﬁcation for this is that incomplete objects like Pegasus intuitively are undetermined
with respect to nuclear properties not included in their Soseine or so-beings. The
proposition that Pegasus is blue-eyed intuitively is neither true nor false, so that
the corresponding membership statement that Pegasus ∈{blue-eyed things} must
also be undetermined.

44
Dale Jacquette
The classical set identity axiom states, for sets ϕ, ψ, membership ‘∈’ undeﬁned:
(∀ϕ)(∀ψ)[ϕ = ψ ≡(∀x)(x ∈ϕ ≡x ∈ψ)]
The principle cannot be introduced without modiﬁcation in trivalent semantics,
since it can happen that it is true or false that an object is a member of set ϕ
but undetermined that the object is a member of set ψ, or the reverse. The truth
matrix in that case dictates that it is also undetermined that ϕ = ψ, though
intuitively identity unlike set membership is a bivalent extranuclear relation.
There are several ways of reﬁning the standard extension axiom for set identity
to preserve bivalence of identity for three-valued membership. The most straight-
forward method is to require that membership of an object in sets ϕ and ψ always
has the same truth value when and only when set identity holds. The amended
set identity axiom states:
(∀ϕ)(∀ψ)(ϕ = ψ ≡(∀x)[(x ∈ϕ ≡x ∈ψ)&V (x ∈ϕ) = V (x ∈ψ)])
This assures that identity predications for sets are always true or false and
never undetermined, precluding identity when it is true or false that an object is
a member of ϕ, but undetermined that it is a member of ψ, or the reverse.
The principle may appear to be circular because of its explicit reference to the
valuations of membership predications in the second conjunct, since the truth val-
ues of predicate expressions are about to be interpreted in terms of set theoretical
operations on the domain of objects. Vicious circularity is avoided by the consid-
eration that interpretations of predicate expressions in the logic presuppose but do
not explicitly involve set identities. There is no more circularity in the nonstandard
set identity axiom than in standard applications of set theory in the semantics of
predicate logic, where predicate and quantiﬁcational expressions are interpreted
in set theoretical models, and the axioms of set theory are themselves expressed
as predicate or quantiﬁcational expressions. The loophole here as in standard se-
mantics lies in a hierarchy of logical object and metalanguages. The semantics are
given in a metalanguage to interpret predicate expressions in a subordinate object
language; the metalanguage is expressed by means of its own higher-order object
language, interpreted in an even higher-order metametalanguage.
The appearance of circularity in the nonstandard set identity axiom is entirely
avoided by introducing a new propositional operator ‘⇔’ according to the following
matrix, collapsing three truth values to two:

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
45
Strong Equivalence
p
q
p ⇔q
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
U
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
U
F
U
T
F
U
F
F
U
U
T
This makes it possible to redeﬁne the Meinongian set identity axiom without
hint of predicate valuation circularity.
(∀ϕ)(∀ψ)[ϕ = ψ ≡(∀x)(x ∈ϕ ⇔x ∈ψ)]
The complete axioms of the Meinongian set theory underlying the predicate
semantics can now be given; again for any sets ϕ, ψ, membership ‘∈’ and the null
set ‘∅’ undeﬁned.
Concept of Set
(∀x)[Set(x) ≡(∃y)(y ∈x ∨x = ∅)]
(Nuclear-Unrestricted) Comprehension
(∃ϕ)(∀P)(∀x)(x ∈ϕ ≡Px)
Meinongian Set Identity
(∀ϕ)(∀ψ)(ϕ = ψ ≡(∀x)[(x ∈ϕ ≡x ∈ψ) & V (x ∈ϕ) = V (x ∈ψ)])
(∀ϕ)(∀ψ)[ϕ = ψ ≡(∀x)(x ∈ϕ ⇔x ∈ψ)]
Subsets
(∀x)(∀P(!))(∃ϕ)[x ∈ϕ ≡P(!)x & (∃y)(y ∈x)]
Pairing
(∀ϕ)(∀ψ)(∃x)(∃y)[(x ∈ϕ & y ∈ψ) ⊃(∃γ)(ϕ ∈γ & ψ ∈γ)]
Union
(∀ϕ)(∃ψ)(∃x)(∀y)[(x ∈ϕ & y ∈x) ⊃y ∈ψ]
Power Set
(∀ϕ)(∃ψ)(∀x)(x ∈ψ ≡x ⊆ϕ)
Inﬁnity
(∃ϕ)[∅∈ϕ & (∀x)(x ∈ϕ ⊃x ∪{x} ∈ϕ)]
Choice
(∀ϕ)(∃f)(D(f) = {x|x ⊇ϕ & x ̸= ∅} & (∀ψ)[(ψ ⊆ϕ&ψ ̸= ∅) ⊃f(ψ) ∈ψ])

46
Dale Jacquette
(Replacement and Restriction axioms are excluded as optional to set theoretical
semantics.)
Comprehension and Free Assumption
The unrestricted set determination principle associates with every exclusively nu-
clear property of objects a set in the Meinongian domain. The principle is philo-
sophically justiﬁed as the set theory counterpart of the Annahmen or unrestricted
free assumption thesis in Meinongian object theory. If assumption is free, then
it can freely postulate sets as objects of thought corresponding to any condition
on objects. The naive determination of sets is standardly subject to set theory
paradoxes involving self-non-membership diagonalizations. But these are avoided
in Meinongian set theory and logic by restrictions on set abstraction. The proof
of this aspect of the logic is beyond the scope of the present exposition, but is
explained elsewhere.9
The naive comprehension principle or unrestricted determination of sets, and
the fact that Meinongian domain D is itself an object, implies that D as the set
of all objects is also (harmlessly) one of the objects and sets of objects in D. The
set of all sets in D, the power set of D, P(D), is itself an object, and so must
also belong to D. This entails by comprehension and the power set axiom that D
contains its own power set; the power set of D is therefore a member and subset
of D, P(D) ∈D & P(D)⊆D.
6.3
Intensional Set Theory Semantics
The predicate semantics for the object language of the logic can now be set
theoretically deﬁned.
The function I is an interpretation that assigns objects
as elements of the domain to items of syntax, terms, functors, predicates, de-
scriptors, and abstracts. To each constant ‘oi’ of O, I assigns an object in D.
I(‘oi’) = oi indicates that I assigns object oi to object constant ‘oi’. To each
n-ary functor or function symbol ‘f n
i ’ of O, I assigns an n-ary function from D
to D, I(‘f n
i ’) = f n
i . To each n-ary predicate ‘P n(!)i’ of O, I assigns an n-ary
property P n(!)i, I(‘P n(!)i’) = P n(!)i.
More precisely, I assigns to each n-ary
predicate ‘P n(!)i’ of O a set of ordered n-tuples of the objects in D, such that
I(‘P n(!)i’) = {⟨oi1, . . . , oin⟩, ⟨oj1, . . . , ojn⟩, . . . }. Similarly for ‘P n(!)’.
This provides an intensional counterpart of the identity of a property with the
existent and nonexistent objects in the intensions of corresponding predicates,
similar and in a way parallel to the identity of a property with the existent objects
in the extensions of corresponding predicates in standard extensional semantics.
The intension of a predicate is non-Fregean, though indirectly related to Frege’s
property ‘senses’ by virtue of the identity conditions for objects, determined by
their Soseine, or associated unordered sets of nuclear constitutive properties.
Function V is a truth valuation on the well-formed formulas of O, which gives a
unique truth value for every proposition as interpreted under I for D. The role of
9See Jacquette, Meinongian Logic, especially pp. 158-9, 174–86.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
47
truth valuation function V for the propositional fragment of the logic has already
been described. The valuations for predicate or quantiﬁcational theory can be
explained by means of I(‘P n(!)i’), I(‘P n(!)i’), and I(‘oi’), as previously deﬁned.
1. V (P n(!)o1, . . . , on) = T ≡⟨I(‘o1’), . . . , I(‘on’)⟩∈I(‘P n(!)’). V (P n(!)o1, . . . ,
on) = F
≡⟨I(‘o1’), . . . , I(‘on’)⟩
/∈I(‘P n(!)’).V (P no1 . . . on) = U
≡
−(⟨I(‘o1’), . . . , I(‘on’)⟩
∈
I(‘P n’) ∨⟨(‘o1’), . . . , I(‘on’)⟩
/∈
I(‘P n’)) (for
nuclear properties only).
2. V (P n(!)o1 . . . on) = T ≡⟨(‘o1’), . . . , I(‘on’)⟩∈I(‘P n(!)’). V (P n(!)o1 . . . on) =
F ≡⟨I(‘o1’), . . . , I(‘on’)⟩/∈I(‘P n(!)’).V (P no1 . . . on) = U ≡−(⟨I(‘o1’), . . . ,
I(‘on’)⟩∈I(‘P n’) & ⟨I(‘o1’), . . . , I(‘on’)⟩/∈I(‘P n’)) (for nuclear properties
only).
3. V (P no1 . . . on) = U ≡(V (−P no1 . . . on) = U & V (P no1 . . . on) = U & V
(−P no1 . . . on) = U) (for nuclear properties only).
The valuations for nuclear predications are diagrammed below. The extranu-
clear predications are classical, so their corresponding diagrams are standard with
closed intersections that permit no membership outside the interlocking circles.
Extranuclear Predications
x
x
P!
P!
¯P!
¯P!
V (P n!o1 . . . on) = T
V (P n!o1 . . . on) = T
V (−P n!o1 . . . on) = F
V (−P n!o1 . . . on) = T
V (P n!o1 . . . on) = F
V (P n!o1 . . . on) = F
V (−P n!o1 . . . on) = T
V (−P n!o1 . . . on) = F
Nuclear Predications
x . . . x
x. . . x
(x)
¯P
P
P
¯P
¯P
P
V (P no1 . . . on) = T
V (P no1 . . . on) = T
V (P no1 . . . on) = U
V (−P no1 . . . on) = F
V (−P no1 . . . on) = F
V (P no1 . . . on) = U
V (−P no1 . . . on) = U
V (−P no1 . . . on) = U

48
Dale Jacquette
¯P
P
x . . . x
x . . . x
P
¯P
V (P no1 . . . on) = F
V (P no1 . . . on) = F
V (−P no1 . . . on) = T
V (−P no1 . . . on) = T
The diagrams for nuclear predications distinguish intensions of property P and
its complement ¯P. Since some impossible objects have both property P and its
complement in their Soseine, the spheres that represent the intensions of properties
P and ¯P, or, the set of all existent and nonexistent objects with properties P or
¯P, are interlocking or overlapping.
Unlike the previous diagram for the entire
domain of O, in these diagrams objects can occur outside both spheres, to allow
for incomplete objects lacking property P and its complement.
The token ‘x’
indicates the location, inclusion or exclusion, of the ordered n-tuple of objects in
⟨o1, . . . , on⟩in or from or with respect to the intensions of predicates ‘P’ and ‘P’.
The use of ‘x . . . x’, as in Venn diagrams, indicates that ⟨o1, . . . , on⟩may be in
either of the intensions where either ‘x’ in ‘x. . . x’ occurs. This enables a single
diagram to represent several possibilities for the inclusion or exclusion of objects
in or from or with respect to the intensions of predicates with the same truth
valuational consequences. In the third diagram, ‘(x)’ indicates that ⟨o1, . . . , on⟩
is neither included in nor excluded from either the intension of nuclear predicate
‘P’ or the intension of its complement ‘P’. This means that it is undetermined
with respect to inclusion in or exclusion from the intensions of either predicate or
complement, or, in other words, from the sets of existent and nonexistent objects
with the corresponding properties.
4. V ((∀x)p) = T just in case for every truth valuation in ⟨D, I, V ⟩, V (p) = T.
V ((∀x)p = F just in case there is at least one truth valuation in ⟨D, I, V ⟩
such that V (p) = F. V ((∀x)p) = U just in case there is at least one truth
valuation in ⟨D, I, V ⟩such that V (p) = U, and there is no truth valuation
in ⟨D, I, V ⟩such that V (p) = F.
There
is
no
formal
contradiction
in
P n(!)o1 . . . on & −P n(!)o1 . . . on,
−P no1 . . . on & −P no1 . . . on, or P no1 . . . on & −P no1 . . . on, just as there is no
formal contradiction in P no1 . . . on&P no1 . . . on.
By the semantics of sentence
negation and predicate complementation, it is invalid to infer either conjunct from
the other.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
49
6.4
Validity
Validity of deductive inference is deﬁned by cases. The valid inference patterns
are:
T
⇒
T
F
⇒
F
F
⇒
T
F
⇒
U
U
⇒
T
U
⇒
U
The remaining possible constructible combinations of truth values yield formally
invalid inference patterns.
T
̸⇒
F
T
̸⇒
U
U
̸⇒
F
A proposition p is also said to be valid, a theorem or tautology of the logic, ⊢p,
if and only if, for every semantic model ⟨D, I, V ⟩, V (p) = T.
Comparison with the truth matrix for the conditional shows an exact correspon-
dence between valid inferences and true conditionals, and invalid inferences and
false or undetermined conditionals. This makes it possible to prove a nonstandard
version of the Deduction Theorem, oﬀered below in Section 7.
7
CONSISTENCY AND COMPLETENESS
This is a consistency, Henkin-type strong and weak completeness proof, based on
a version ﬁrst extended to three-valued logic by Leblanc, Goldberg, and Weaver.10
7.1
Internal Determinacy
It is useful to begin by establishing an internal determinacy theorem for Meinon-
gian logic.11 Although some propositions of O are logically true, and others logi-
cally false, no propositions of O are logically undetermined. The truth valuations
under which an undetermined proposition can validly be inferred prevent deduc-
tion of an undetermined proposition from true propositions. The semantics of O
do not require that any truth functionally complex proposition be undetermined
in truth value. If the undetermined truth valuation of a proposition can only come
from outside the logic in a particular scientiﬁc or philosophical application, then
10Hugues Leblanc, H. Goldberg, and George Weaver, “A Strong Completeness Theorem for
Three–Valued Logic: Part I”, in Leblanc, Existence, Truth, and Provability (Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1982), pp. 240–246; Leblanc, “A Strong Completeness Theorem
for Three–Valued Logic: Part II”, pp. 247–257. Leon Henkin, “The Completeness of the First–
Order Functional Calculus”, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 14, 1949, 159-166.
11Jacquette, “An Internal Determinacy Metatheorem for Lukasiewicz’s Aussagenkalk¨uls”, Bul-
letin of the Section of Logic, 29, 2000, 115–124.

50
Dale Jacquette
within the logic inference always carries from true to true, and never to unde-
termined, propositions. This preserves an exact semantic isomorphism with the
inference conditions of classical logic and the classical deduction theorem.
Internal Determinacy Theorem for O
No proposition of O is logically undetermined.
Proof. By mathematical induction on the length of wﬀs in O. Let p
be a wﬀof O.
1. If p = (q ⊃r), then by truth tables, V (p) = U if and only if
either V (q) = T and V (r) = U or V (q) = U and V (r) = F. But
then p cannot be logically undetermined unless q or r is logically
undetermined.
2. If p = −q, then by truth tables, V (p) = U if and only if V (q) = U.
But then p cannot be logically undetermined unless q is logically
undetermined.
3. If p is not truth functionally complex, then V (p) = T, V (p) = F,
or V (p) = U. But then p cannot be logically undetermined.
■
It follows that no proposition of O is logically or internally undetermined. The
truth valuation of a proposition of O as undetermined must come from outside
the logic. Undetermined nuclear predications of certain properties to incomplete
nonexistent objects can only be introduced as substitution instances for proposi-
tional compoments of axioms and theorems in extralogical applications.
7.2
Propositional Object Theory Logic
DEFINITIONS
1. Let O′ be the propositional fragment of O. A set ξ of wﬀs of O′ is syntactically
consistent if there is no wﬀp of O′ such that both p and −p are provable from
ξ. Set ξ is syntactically inconsistent if there is a wﬀp of O′ such that both
p and −p are deducible from ξ. As explained in the section on ‘Inference
Structures’, to be deducible in O’ means to be derivable in a sequence of wﬀs
by the logical axioms, deﬁnitions, nonlogical axioms, and inference principles
of O′. Set ξ is maximally consistent if (i) ξ is syntactically consistent; (ii)
ξ ⊢p for any wﬀp of O′ such that ξ ∪{p} is syntactically consistent.
2. Set ξ of wﬀs of O′ is semantically consistent if there is a nonstandard truth
value assignment for which all members of ξ have truth value T. Set ξ entails
a wﬀp of O′(ξ ⊨p) if, under any truth value assignment in O′, p has truth
value T when every member of ξ has truth value T. Proposition p is valid
(⊨p of ∅⊨p) if, under any truth value assignment in O′, p unconditionally
has truth value T.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
51
LEMMA 1.
1. If ξ ⊢p, then zxi′ ⊢p for every superset ξ′ of ξ. By deﬁnition. In particular,
if ⊢p, then ξ ⊢p (which, by validity semantics, holds for every set ξ of wﬀs
of O′).
2. If ξ ⊢p, then there is a ﬁnite subset ξ′ of ξ such that ξ′ ⊢p. By deﬁnition.
3. If p ∈ξ, then ξ ⊢p.
4. If ξ ⊢p and ξ ⊢(p ⊃q), then ξ ⊢q.
5. If ξ ∪{p} ⊢q, then ξ ⊢(p ⊃(p ⊃q)).
Proof. Assume that the wﬀsequence made up of r1, r2, r3, . . . , rn constitutes a
proof of q from ξ ∪{p}. By mathematical induction on i it is shown that ξ ⊢(p ⊃
(p ⊃ri)) for each i from 1 −n, and hence in particular that ξ ⊢(p ⊃(p ⊃q)).
There are three cases to consider.
Case 1. ri is an axiom or member of ξ(ri ∈ξ).
Then ξ ⊢ri, by (1) or (3). But ξ ⊢(ri ⊃(p ⊃ri)) by (1). Hence, ξ ⊢(p ⊃ri)
by (4). But ξ ⊢((p ⊃ri) ⊃(p ⊃(p ⊃ri))) by (1). Hence, ξ ⊢(p ⊃(p ⊃ri)) by
(4). In particular, then, ξ ⊢(p ⊃(p ⊃q)).
Case 2. ri = p.
Then ξ ⊢(p ⊃(p ⊃ri)) by (1). In particular, then, ξ ⊢(p ⊃(p ⊃q)).
Case 3. ri is derived from rj and rj ⊃ri.
Then ξ ⊢(p ⊃(p ⊃ri)) and ξ ⊢(p ⊃(p ⊃(rj ⊃ri))), by the hypothesis
of the induction. Hence ξ ⊢(p ⊃(p ⊃ri)) by (3) and (4). In particular, then,
ξ ⊢(p ⊃(p ⊃q)).
■
6. If ξ is syntactically inconsistent, then ξ ⊢p, for every wrﬀp of O′.
Proof. Assume that ξ ⊢q and ξ ⊢−q for some wﬀq of O′. Then by truth tables
and (4), ξ ⊢p for any wﬀp of O′.
■
7. ξ is syntactically inconsistent if and only if ξ ⊢(p & −p).
Proof.
By truth tables and internal determinacy, ξ ⊢(p ⊃p) for any wﬀp.
Hence, if ξ ⊢(p & −p), then by truth tables and the deﬁnition, ξ is syntactically
inconsistent. The converse follows by (6).
■
8. If ξ ∪{p} is syntactically inconsistent, then ξ ⊢−p.
Proof. Assume that ξ ∪{p} is syntactically inconsistent. Then ξ ∪{p} ⊢−p by
(6). Thus, ξ ⊢(p ⊃−p) by (5). Thus, ξ ⊢−p by truth tables and (4).
■
9. If ξ ∪{−p} is syntactically inconsistent, then ξ ⊢p.

52
Dale Jacquette
Proof. From (8), (1), and (4).
■
LEMMA 2. If any set ξ of wﬀs of O′ is syntactically consistent, then ξ is also
semantically consistent.
The proof involves the assumption that ξ is syntactically consistent, and the
construction of a ξ extension into a two-valued superset ξ∗. The members of ξ∗,
and hence of ξ, are shown to have truth value T under a special assignment that
constitutes a Henkin model for ξ in O′. The construction of ξ∗requires several
steps. Let ξ0 be ξ. Assume that the wﬀs of O′ are alphabetically well-ordered in
some unambiguous enumeration, and consider pi to be, for each i ≥1, the ith wﬀ
of O′. Then ξi is ξi−1∪{pi} if ξi−1∪{pi} is syntactically consistent, and otherwise
ξi is ξi−1. Finally, ξ∗= S(ξi).
It is shown that:
1. ξ∗is syntactically consistent.
2. ξ∗is maximally consistent.
Proof.
1. Assume for purposes of indirect proof that ξ∗is syntactically inconsistent.
Then by (7) and (2) of Lemma 1 at least one ﬁnite subset ξ′ of ξ∗is syntac-
tically inconsistent. But ξ′ must either be a subset of ξ0, ξ1, ξ2, ξ3,. . . , each
of which is syntactically consistent by condition of membership in ξ∗.
2. Assume that ξ∗̸⊢pi, where pi is the ith wﬀof O′ in the same unambiguous
alphabetical ordering as before. Then by (3) of Lemma 1, pi /∈ξ∗. Thus,
pi /∈ξi, and ξi−1 ∪{pi} is syntactically inconsistent. Hence, by (7) and (1)
of Lemma 1, ξ∗∪{pi} is also syntactically inconsistent.
■
THEOREM 3 Consistency Theorem for O′. Let there be a truth value assignment
in O′, VO′, that assigns to each propositional variable ‘pi’ of O′ the value T if
ξ∗⊢pi (so that by the syntactical consistency of ξ∗, ξ∗̸⊢−pi); the value F if
ξ∗⊢−pi (so that by the syntactical consistency of ξ∗, ξ∗̸⊢pi); and otherwise
assigns pi the undetermined truth value U.
For any wﬀpi of O′ it is shown that:
1. If ξ∗⊢pi (where ξ∗̸⊢−pi), V (pi) = T.
2. If ξ∗⊢−pi (where ξ∗̸⊢pi), V (pi) = F.
3. If ξ∗̸⊢pi and ξ∗̸⊢−pi, V (pi) = U.
Proof. The proof is by mathematical induction on the length of pi. The length
L(pi) of a propositional variable ‘pi’ is 1. The length L(−pi) of a negation ‘−pi’
is L(pi) + 1. The length L(pi ⊃pj) of a conditional ‘pi ⊃pj’ is L(pi) + L(pj) + 1.
It is assumed as conﬁrmable by truth table analysis and the recursive inductive

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
53
deﬁnition of the wﬀs of O′ that any wﬀof O′ can be truth functionally reduced to
equivalent form in the primitive notation, involving only negation and the condi-
tional.
Basis: L = 1.
Here pi is a propositional variable. The proof follows from the deﬁnition
of VO′.
Inductive step: L > 1.
There are two case to consider.
Case 1. pi = −q
1. Assume that ξ∗⊢−q. Then it is false that ξ∗⊢q. Hence, by the
hypothesis of the induction, V (q) = T and V (−q) = F.
2. Assume that ξ∗⊢−q. Then by truth tables and (4) of Lemma 1,
ξ∗⊢q. Hence, by the hypothesis of the induction, V (q) = T, and
V (−q) = F.
3. Assume that neither ξ∗⊢−q nor ξ∗⊢−q. If q were provable
from ξ∗, then by truth tables and (4) of Lemma 1, −q would also
be provable from ξ∗. Hence, neither ξ∗⊢q nor ξ∗⊢−q. Thus,
by the hypothesis of the induction, V (q) = U and V (−q) = U.
Case 2. pi = (q ⊃r)
1. Assume that ξ∗⊢(q ⊃r). If ξ∗⊢q, then V (q) = T by the
hypothesis. If ξ∗⊢r, then V (r) = T, again by the hypothesis of
the induction. Thus, if V (q) = T and V (r) = T, then V (q ⊃r) =
T.
2. Assume that ξ∗⊢−(q ⊃r). Then by truth tables ξ∗⊢q and
ξ∗⊢−r. Thus, by the hypothesis of the induction, V (q) = T and
V (r) = F. Therefore V (q ⊃r) = F.
3. Assume that neither ξ∗⊢(q ⊃r) nor ξ∗⊢−(q ⊃r). Then neither
V (r) = T nor V (q) = F. For by the hypothesis of the induction,
q, r, −q, or −r would then be deducible from ξ∗, and thus, by the
above, so would q ⊃r or −(q ⊃r), contrary to the assumption.
Suppose that V (q) = T. Then V (r) ̸= T and V (r) ̸= F. For then
by the hypothesis of the induction, q ⊃r or −(q ⊃r) would be
deducible from ξ∗, contrary to the assumption. V (q) ̸= T and
V (q) ̸= F, so V (q) = U. But if V (q) = U, V (r) ̸= T, for then by
truth tables and the hypothesis of the induction, q ⊃r would be
deducible from ξ∗, contrary to the assumption. Then V (r) ̸= U,
for then by truth tables and the hypothesis of the induction, q ⊃r
would be deducible from ξ∗, again contrary to the assumption.
Therefore, V (q) = T and V (r) = U or V (q) = U and V (r) = F;
and in either case, V (q ⊃r) = U and V (−(q ⊃r)) = U.

54
Dale Jacquette
Since every member of ξ is a member of ξ∗, every member of ξ is provable from
ξ∗by (3) of Lemma 1. This means that every member of ξ has truth value T
under truth value assignment VO′. Meinongian propositional object theory logic
O′ therefore has a Henkin model. It follows that:
If ξ is syntactically consistent, then ξ is semantically consistent.
■
THEOREM 4 Strong Completeness Theorem for O′. If ξ ⊨p, then ξ ⊢p.
Proof. Assume that ξ ⊨p. Then ξ ∪{−p} is semantically inconsistent. Hence,
by Lemma 2, ξ ∪{ −p} is syntactically inconsistent. From this and (9) of Lemma
1, it follows that ξ ⊢p.
■
THEOREM 5 Weak Completeness Theorem for O′. If ⊨p, then ⊢p.
Proof. From strong completeness, where ξ = ∅.
■
THEOREM 6 Compactness Theorem for O′. If every ﬁnite subset of ξ is seman-
tically consistent, then ξ is semantically consistent.
Proof.
If ξ is syntactically inconsistent, then by (7) of Lemma 1, there is a
proposition p of O′ such that ξ ⊢(p&−p). But then ξ is semantically inconsistent,
since by the hypothesis of the induction in the proof of Lemma 2, V (p) = T
and V (−p) = F. Thus, if ξ is syntactically inconsistent, then ξ is semantically
inconsistent. This implies by contraposition that if ξ is semantically consistent,
then ξ is syntactically consistent (the converse of Lemma 2).
It follows from
this and (2) and (7) of Lemma 1 that if every ﬁnite subset of x is semantically
consistent, then x is syntactically consistent. This, with Lemma 2, entails the
theorem.
■
7.3
Predicate Object Theory Logic
DEFINITIONS
1. A set ξ of wﬀs of O is syntactically decidable with respect to truth value
if there is a truth value assignment in O under which all members of x are
assigned truth value T.
2. A set ξ of wﬀs of O is semantically consistent if either ξ or some set isomor-
phic to ξ is syntactically decidable with respect to truth value. Set ξ entails
a wﬀp if ξ ∪{ −p} is semantically inconsistent.
Let ξ be a syntactically consistent and inﬁnitely extendible set of wﬀs of O.
Set ξ is extended into another set ξ∗∗, then ξ∗∗is extended into ξ∗∗∗, and ξ∗∗∗
extended into a set ξ∗, like that of the propositional metatheory, to which predicate
are added. It is shown that there is a truth value assignment according to which

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
55
every wﬀin set ξ receives truth value T. Set ξ∗∗is deﬁned as follows. Let ξ0 be ξ.
Assume that the quantiﬁed wﬀs of O are ordered alphabetically so that (∀xi)pi is
the ith wﬀof O for each i ≥1. Take ξi to be ξi−1 ∪{pi(oi/xi) ⊃(∀xi)pi}, where
‘oi’ designates any object of the domain not designated in ξi−1 such that (∀xi)pi.
Let ξ∗∗be the union set ξ0 ∪ξ1 ∪ξ2 ∪ξ3 ∪. . . ∪. . .. Set ξ∗∗∗is deﬁned as the
extension of ξ∗∗. Let ξ0
m = ξ∗∗. Set ξ∗is deﬁned as the extension of ξ∗∗∗. Let
ξ0 = ξ∗∗∗. Proposition pi is the ith wﬀof O in the expanded ordering of wﬀs of
ξ∗∗∗. Let ξi = ξi−1 ∪{pi} if ξi−1 ∪{pi} is syntactically consistent, and otherwise
take ξi to be ξi−1. Let ξ∗be the union set ξ0 ∪ξ1 ∪ξ2 ∪ξ3 ∪. . . ∪. . ..
It is shown that:
1. ξ∗∗∗is syntactically consistent.
2. ξ∗∗is syntactically consistent.
3. ξ∗is syntactically consistent.
4. ξ∗is maximally consistent.
Proof.
1. Assume for purposes of indirect proof that ξ∗∗∗is syntactically inconsistent.
Then by (7) and (2) of Lemma I, at least one ﬁnite subset ξ ∗∗′ of ξ∗∗∗
is syntactically inconsistent. But ξ ∗∗′ must either be ξ0
m, ξ1
m, ξ2
m, ξ3
m, . . .,
each of which is syntactically consistent by membership conditions for the
construction of ξ∗∗∗.
2. Assume that ξi is syntactically inconsistent.
Then by (8) of Lemma 1,
−(pi(oi/xi) ⊃(∀xi)pi) is provable from ξi−1.
Let xi′ be the ith vari-
able ranging over individuals of O not designated in (∀xi)pi. Then ξi−1 ⊢
(∀xi′) −(pi(xi′/xi) ⊃(∀xi)pi). From this it follows that:
ξi−1 ⊢(∀xi′) −(pi(xi′/xi) ⊃(∀xi)pi) ⊃−(∃xi′)(pi(xi′/xi) ⊃(∀xi)pi)
ξi−1 ⊢−(∃xi′)(pi(xi′/xi) ⊃(∀xi)pi)
ξi−1 ⊢(∃xi′)(pi(xi′/xi) ⊃(∀xi)pi) ⊃−(∃xi′)(pi(xi′/xi) ⊃(∀xi)pi)
ξi−1 ⊢(∃xi′)(pi(xi′/xi) ⊃(∀xi)pi)
Thus, ξi−1 is syntactically inconsistent. But ξi is syntactically consistent if ξi−1
is. By hypothesis, ξ0 is syntactically consistent. Thus, each of ξ0, ξ1, ξ2, ξ3,. . . is
syntactically consistent. Hence, by (1) and (2) above, ξ∗∗is syntactically consis-
tent.
3. Assume that ξ∗is syntactically inconsistent. Then by (7) and (2) of Lemma
1, at least one ﬁnite subset ξ∗∗∗′ of ξ∗is syntactically inconsistent. But ξ∗∗∗′
must either be a subset of ξ0, ξ1, ξ2, ξ3,. . . , each of which is syntactically
consistent by membership conditions for construction of ξ∗.

56
Dale Jacquette
4. Assume it is not the case that ξ∗⊢pi, where pi is the ith wﬀof O in the
unique ordering of ξ∗. Then by (3) above, pi /∈ξ∗. Hence, pi /∈ξ ∗∗′. Thus,
ξ ∗∗∪{pi} is syntactically inconsistent, and by (7) and (1) of Lemma 1,
ξ ∗∪{pi} is also syntactically inconsistent. Thus, ξ∗is maximally consistent.
■
Let VO be a truth value assignment in O that assigns to each propositional
variable ‘pi’ of O the truth value T if ξ∗⊢pi, F if ξ∗⊢−pi, and U if neither
ξ∗⊢pi nor ξ∗⊢−pi. It is proved for any wﬀpi of O:
1. If ξ∗⊢pi, then V (pi) = T.
2. If ξ∗⊢−pi, then V (pi) = F.
3. If neither ξ∗⊢pi nor ξ∗⊢−pi, then V (pi) = U.
Proof. The proof is by mathematical induction on the length of wﬀs. The length
L of a wﬀ, already deﬁned for propositional formulas, is now deﬁned for predicate
formulas.
The length L((∀x)pi) of a universally quantiﬁed formula ‘(∀x)pi’ is
L(pi(oi/x)) + 1, where ‘(pi(oi/x)’ indicates as before the replacement of object
term ‘oi’ for all occurrences of ‘x’ in pi. The subtheories of lambda abstraction
and deﬁnite description do not aﬀect induction on length of wﬀs in O, since they
only reductively introduce new kinds of object- and property-designating terms.
Basis: L = 1
Here pi is a propositional variable. The proof follows from the deﬁnition
of VO.
Inductive step: L > 1
There are three cases to consider.
Case 1. pi = −q
Proof as in propositional metatheory.
Case 2. pi = (q ⊃r)
Proof as in propositional metatheory.
Case 3. pi = (∀x)q
1. Assume that ξ∗⊢(∀x)q. Then ξ∗⊢q(oi/x) for every object oi of
O. Thus, by the hypothesis of the induction, V (q(oi/x)) = T for
every oi, and hence, V ((∀x)q) = T.
2. Assume that ξ∗⊢−(∀x)q. Let oi be the ith object of O, such that
q(oi/x) ⊃(∀x)q. Hence, ξ∗⊢−(∀x)q ⊃−q(oi/x). Thus, ξ∗⊢
−q(oi/x), and, by the hypothesis of the induction, V (q(oi/x)) =
F, so that V ((∀x)q) = F.
3. Assume that neither ξ∗⊢(∀x)q nor ξ∗⊢−(∀x)q. If V (q(oi/x)) =
F for any object oi of O, then by the hypothesis of the induc-
tion, −q(oi/x) would be provable from ξ∗for some oi, and hence,

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
57
−(∀x)q would also be provable from ξ∗for some oi, contrary to
the assumption. But if V (q(oi/x)) = T for every object oi of O,
then by the hypothesis of the induction, q(oi/x) would be prov-
able from ξ∗for every oi. But q(oi/x) ⊃(∀)q belongs to ξ∗, and
by (3) above is provable from ξ∗for at least some object oi of
O. Thus, if V (q(oi/x)) = T for every object oi of O, then by (4),
(∀x)q would be provable from ξ∗, also contrary to the assumption.
Hence, V ((∀x)q) = U.
Since every member of ξ is a member of ξ∗, every member of ξ∗is deducible from
ξ∗by (3) of Lemma 1. This means that every member of ξ has truth value T
under truth value assignment VO. Meinongian predicate object theory O therefore
has a Henkin model.
It follows that:
If ξ is syntactically consistent and inﬁnitely extendible, then ξ is syntactically
decidable with respect to truth value, and hence semantically consistent.
■
THEOREM 7 Strong Completeness Theorem for O. If ξ ⊨p, then ξ ⊢p.
Proof. Assume that ξ ⊨p. Then ξ ∪{ −p} is semantically inconsistent. Hence,
by Lemma 2, ξ ∪{ −p} is syntactically inconsistent. From this and (9) of Lemma
1 it follows that ξ ⊢p.
■
Weak Completeness Proof for O If ⊨p, then ⊢p.
Proof. From strong completeness, where ξ = ∅.
■
8
DEDUCTION THEOREM FOR O
If p is a wﬀof O, then for every wﬀq of O, under internal determinacy, ⊢(p ⊃q)
if and only if q is a theorem of O/p (where O/p is the theory obtained from O by
adding p as a nonlogical axiom).
Proof.
1. If ⊢(p ⊃q), then p and p ⊃q are theorems of O/p. Then q is a theorem of
O/p.
2. If q is an axiom of O/p, then if q = p, then (p ⊃q) = (p ⊃p), which is a
theorem of O, and therefore of O/p.
3. If q is an axiom of O/p, but q ̸= p, then q is an axiom of O, and not just of
O/p. Then q is a theorem of O. It follows that ⊢(p ⊃q).
4. If (r1, . . . , rn) ⊢q, then (p ⊃r1, . . . , p ⊃rn) ⊢(p ⊃q). By the hypothesis of
the induction, ⊢(p ⊃r1), . . . , ⊢(p ⊃rn). It follows that ⊢(p ⊃q).
■

58
Dale Jacquette
The conditional version of the deduction theorem holds for internally determi-
nate Meinongian object theory logic, and for its bivalent extranuclear fragment,
even in scientiﬁc and philosophical applications involving undetermined nuclear
predications to incomplete objects.12
9
CONSISTENCY AND FREE ASSUMPTION
The Annahmen or unrestricted freedom of assumption thesis in Meinongian logic
underwrites a powerful comprehension principle for the object theory semantic
domain. It is not so powerful, however, as to permit the ingress of outright logical
inconsistency or logically inconsistent Meinongian objects.
From a phenomenological standpoint, the assumption that there is an ob-
ject with both nuclear properties P and not-P is most naturally formalized as
(∃x)(Px & Px), and as such standardly comprehends an impossible but by no
means logically inconsistent Meinongian object oi such that Poi & Poi or λx[Px &
Px]oi. Here the object is freely assumed to have the above-named metaphysi-
cally impossible but logically consistent nuclear property or conjunction of nuclear
properties in its Sosein.
Logical inconsistency is avoided where free assumption and the comprehension
principle might otherwise be thought to introduce it in exploiting the syntactical
resources of the logic, by the restriction of the Annahmen thesis to the determi-
nation of objects exclusively by their nuclear properties. The assumption that
there is an object such that it has nuclear property P and it is not the case that
it has nuclear property P, (∃x)(Px& −Px), does not comprehend a logically in-
consistent Meinongian object. Although ‘P’ and ‘ ¯P’ are (nuclear) property terms,
‘−P’, according to the formation rules, is not a term at all, but an ill-formed sym-
bol combination that represents no nuclear or extranuclear property. The logical
inconsistency abstract ‘λx[Px & −Px]’, on the other hand, is a term, but for a
decidedly extranuclear property to which the logic’s comprehension principle via
free assumption does not apply. The abstract is correctly written ‘λx[Px&−Px]!’,
as in the assumption (∃y)(λx[Px & −Px]!y), since it evidently satisﬁes criterion
(C2) for extranuclear properties:
(∀y)(λx[Px & −Px]!y ≡−(λx[Px & −Px]!y))
The property of being logically inconsistent, like the property of being possible,
impossible, or logically consistent, is intuitively extranuclear rather than nuclear.
That an object has the complement of the property of being logically inconsistent
(or, is logically consistent) is logically equivalent to the object’s not being logically
inconsistent or to it not being the case that the object is logically inconsistent.13
12This formulation of the deduction theorem is adapted from J. R. Shoenﬁeld, Mathematical
Logic (Reading: Addison–Wesley Publishing Company, 1967), p. 33.
13See Jacquette, “Object Theory Foundations for Intensional Logic”, Acta Analytica, 13, 1995,
pp. 33–63.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
59
10
APPLICATION: IMPLEXIVE BEING, SO-BEING, AND NONBEING
The concept of implexive being in Meinong’s later thought makes it possible to
understand the relation between the Soseine of distinct intended objects. It also fa-
cilitates an extraordinary reduction in the Meinongian semantic domain, whereby
it is in many respects more austere than such quasi-nominalistic ontologies as those
of Quine.
Implexive being, appropriately enough, makes its ﬁrst appearance in Meinong’s
text as an explanation of the metaphysics of universals. Meinong, as a reﬂection
of his commitment to a Brentanian empiricism, accepts Berkeley’s rejection of
abstract general ideas as incomplete.14 Berkeley and Hume, from their respective
empiricist standpoints, seek to solve at most what might be called the epistemic
problem of universals. They reject universals or abstract general ideas because of
their essential incompleteness, and ﬁnd it necessary thereafter only to account for
what is popularly regarded as reasoning about abstract general ideas, given that
in fact there are no such ideas.
Berkeley’s ingenious solution, which Hume in A Treatise of Human Nature ad-
mires as “one of the greatest and most valuable discoveries that has been made
of late in the republic of letters”,15 has two parts. The intuitive belief that we
seem to reason about universals or abstract general ideas is ﬁrst interpreted by
the proposition that particular ideas are delegated in thought to represent any of
a class or category of similar particular ideas. Then, apparently as revealed by a
somewhat idealized introspection, Berkeley claims that if we wrongly try to draw
inferences about the properties of all the ideas in a category from the peculiarities
of the particular idea representing the others, then counterexamples that do not
14George Berkeley, A Treatise on the Principles of Human Knowledge, The Works of George
Berkeley Bishop of Cloyne, edited by A.A. Luce and T.E. Jessop (London: Thomas Nelson &
Sons, 1949), Vol. II, p. 45. Berkeley, Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous, Works,
II, pp. 192-194. David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding [1748], in David
Hume: Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals,
edited by L.A. Selby-Bigge, 3rd ed. revised by P.H. Nidditch (Oxford: The Clarendon Press,
1975), pp.
154-155: “An extension, that is neither tangible nor visible, cannot possibly be
conceived: and a tangible or visible extension, which is neither hard nor soft, black nor white,
is equally beyond the reach of human conception. Let any man try to conceive a triangle in
general, which is neither Isosceles nor Scalenum, nor has any particular length or proportion
of sides; and he will soon perceive the absurdity of all the scholastic notions with regard to
abstraction and general ideas.” Compare Meinong, ¨Uber M¨oglichkeit und Wahrscheinlichkeit, p.
178: “Besonders geeignet sind vielmehr Begriﬀsgegenst¨ande, wie uns deren etwa durch Deﬁni-
tionen gegeben werden. Das Dreick z.B., darin hatte der sicher nicht ¨uberrationalistische Locke
gegen Berkeley und gegen viele Sp¨atere) am Ende doch recht, ist als solches weder gleichseitig
noch gleichschenklig, weder rechtwinklig noch schiefwinklig, noch das Gegenteil davon: es ist in
diesen Hinsichten und noch in vielen anderen eben unbestimmt. Gegenst¨ande dieser Art stehen
in deutlichen Gegensatz zu solchen, die, wie wir deren oben zuerst betrachtet haben, in bezug
auf alle wie immer gearteten Gegenst¨ande bestimmt sind. Man kann solche Gegenst¨ande mit
Recht vollst¨andig bestimmte nennen, Blaues, Dreieck und ihresgleichen dagegen unvollst¨andig
bestimmte.”
15Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, [1739-40], edited by Selby-Bigge, second edition revised
by Nidditch (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1978), p. 17.

60
Dale Jacquette
share the same property will ordinarily occur at once to thought, rushing in to
challenge any false unwarranted generalizations.16
This explains or explains away what is called ‘reasoning about universals’. A
phenomenologically plausible nominalism accounts for abstract thinking without
adding universals or general abstract entities to the ontology. The solution nev-
ertheless leaves unanswered a cluster of important metaphysical problems. These
include the nagging suspicion that there must be something more in common be-
tween the particular triangles in the category ‘the triangle’, by virtue of which
particular triangles are rightly judged to belong to the same category. The sug-
gestion that all particulars of a certain sort are triangles solely because it is con-
venient or serves pragmatic interests to classify them together or give them all the
same general term is thought by many to be philosophically unsatisfying. We may
feel strongly that there must be more to it than that, even if we share empiri-
cism’s distrust of predicationally incomplete universals or abstract general ideas
as existent or subsistent entities. Arguably, the best approach might then be to
advance some version of Aristotle’s thesis that the forms, deﬁnitions, universals,
or secondary substances inhere or are somehow contained inherently in particular
existent primary substances, and that it is by virtue of such inherence of ‘the trian-
gle’ in any particular existent triangle that all particular triangles belong together
in the same category, to be rightly referred to by the same universal or abstract
general concept term.
It is to resolve the metaphysical problem of universals, left over from the British
empiricists’ solution to the epistemic problem of universals after universals have
been eliminated from ontology, that Meinong ﬁrst puts forward the concept of
implexive being and nonbeing.
Meinong agrees with Berkeley and Hume that
universals are essentially incomplete, and that therefore universals are neither
existent nor subsistent. He begins to cultivate these insights with his very ﬁrst
historical research in philosophy, undertaken at Brentano’s suggestion, leading
to his Habilitationsschrift on Hume’s nominalism. This work was published in
1878 as the Hume-Studien I in the Sitzungsberichte der Wiener Akademie der
Wissenschaften, and was followed in 1882 by the sequel on Hume’s theory of
relations, the Hume-Studien II.17 For Meinong, however, after he has elaborated
16Berkeley, A Treatise on the Principles of Human Knowledge, pp. 29-40; Three Dialogues
Between Hylas and Philonous, pp. 192-197. Hume endorses Berkeley’s theory of representative
generalization in place of abstract generalization in An Enquiry Concerning Human Understand-
ing, p. 158, n. 1: “...all general ideas are, in reality, particular ones, attached to a general term,
which recalls, upon occasion, other particular ones, that resemble, in certain circumstances, the
idea, present to the mind.”
17Meinong completed his 1877 Habilitationsschrift on Hume’s nominalism, undertaken on
Brentano’s recommendation, and appearing as the Hume-Studien I in 1878 in the Sitzungs-
berichte der Wiener Akademie der Wissenschaften, and followed by a sequel in 1882 on Hume’s
nominalist theory of relations, the Hume-Studien II. See Meinong, “Zur Gegenstandstheorie”,
in Raymund Schmidt, ed., Die Philosophie der Gegenwart in Selbstdarstellungen (Leipzig: Felix
Meiner Verlag, 1921). An English translation of Meinong’s Hume-Studien I, II, respectively, on
Hume’s nominalism and theory of relations (Gesamtausgabe, I, II), is given by Kenneth Frank
Barber, Meinong’s ‘Hume Studies’: Translation and Commentary, Ph.D. thesis, The University

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
61
the basic principles of Gegenstandstheorie, the fact that universals like ‘blueness’
or ‘the triangle’ are beingless incomplete objects means only that they belong to
a special category of the extraontological semantic domain or Außersein. True to
Brentano’s empiricist methodology and Aristotelian metaphysics, Meinong tries
to answer the question why all blue things are blue and all triangular things
triangles, by explaining in object theory terms what we can speak of somewhat
anachronistically as related to Aristotle’s notion of the inherence of secondary
substances in primary substances by the concept of the implection of beingless
essentially incomplete universals in complete existent or subsistent particulars.18
Meinong explains the metaphysics of universals by classifying them as being-
less incomplete objects implected in complete existent or subsistent objects. The
concept of implection appears in this context in Meinong’s ¨Uber M¨oglichkeit und
Wahrscheinlichkeit, when he writes:
Now, if we consider part-whole relations, we can characterize the rela-
tionship of the incomplete object in its entirety, not only in terms of
what it is not, but also in terms of what it is; thereby in particular
establishing the validity of what has often enough been conjectured.
Without a doubt, ‘the ball’, for example, has an exact meaning only if
this or that particular ball exists; and in this way the turn of phrase
‘the ball exists in this or that particular ball’ surely makes good sense
as a trope or analogy. I venture similarly to say the same, by means of
a special terminology, that ‘the ball’ is implected in my friend’s billiard
ball.19
Meinong oﬀers a positive account of incomplete objects.
He wants to move
beyond the purely negative statement that incomplete objects are other than or
that they are not complete objects. He sketches a theory in terms of a part-whole
relation between incomplete objects as in some sense mereologically though non-
physically contained in complete objects. Then he indicates that the mereological
concept aﬀords insight into what we can describe as the Aristotelian view that the
universal ball in some sense exists and may exist in all and only the particular
of Iowa, 1966 (Ann Arbor: University Microﬁlms, Inc., 1967).
See also, Barber, “Meinong’s
Hume Studies, Part I: Meinong’s Nominalism; Part II: Meinong’s Analysis of Relations”, Phi-
losophy and Phenomenological Research, 30, 1970, pp.
550-567; 31, 1971, pp.
564-584.
See
Jacquette, “Alexius Meinong 1853-1920”, in The School of Franz Brentano, edited by Roberto
Poli and Liliana Albertazzi (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishing, 1996), pp. 131-159.
18Aristotle, Categories 2a10-16; Metaphysics 1017b1-25.
19Meinong, ¨Uber M¨oglichkeit und Wahrscheinlichkeit, p. 211 (my translation). The original
reads: ‘Nun darf uns aber das Verh¨altnis des unvollst¨andigen Gegenstandes zum vollst¨andigen
nicht nur hinsichtlich dessen interessieren, was es nicht ist, sondern auch hinsichtlich dessen, was
es ist, zumal dabei zur Geltung kommen kann, was mutmaßlich oft genug eigentlich gemeint wor-
den ist, wenn man zur Beschreibung der Sachlage die Relation das Teiles zum Ganzen heranzog.
Ohne Zweifel bedeutet es n¨amlich doch etwas f¨ur “die Kugel”, when “eine Kugel”, genauer also,
wenn diese oder jene bestimmte Kugel existiert, und als Tropus oder Analogie ist der Wendung
“die Kugel existiert in dieser oder jene bestimmten Kugel” sicher ein guter Sinn beizulegen. Ich
versuche der Gefahr, ¨Ahnliches f¨ur gleich zu nehmen, durch besondere Benennung vorzubeugen,
indem ich von “der Kugel” sage, sie sei in der Billiardkugel meines Freundes “Implektiert”.’

62
Dale Jacquette
balls in which it inheres or is instantiated. But what exactly is the relation of
an incomplete object to the complete object in which it is implected? In what
sense are we to imagine ballness, ‘the ball’ or the universal ball as existing, not
in the usual way, but implexively, as having implexive being in Meinong’s friend’s
particular actually existing billiard ball?
Meinong distinguishes between diﬀerent objects by identity conditions based on
individuating Sein-independent and Sein-indiﬀerent Soseine consisting of distinct
sets of constitutive properties.20 To each unique set of such properties there is
associated a unique Meinongian object. The same Leibnizian identity principles
hold with respect to beingless as well as existent and subsistent entities. This
makes it possible to understand Meinong’s concept of implexive being, and of the
mereological implection of incomplete beingless objects in complete existent or
subsistent objects, in terms of set theoretical relations between the Sosein of the
incomplete beingless object and the Sosein of the complete existent or subsistent
object in which the implected object is implected.
The Sosein of my friend’s billiard ball consists among many other things of this
incompletely speciﬁed predicationally complete set of constitutive properties:
Sosein(my friend’s billiard ball) = {spherical; physical (spatiotempo-
ral); black; marked with the number ‘8’ in a circular white ﬁeld; weigh-
ing x grams; carved from illegally imported ivory; used in playing bil-
liards; belonging to my friend; . . . }
The Sosein of the universal ball or ‘the ball’ as a beingless incomplete object,
implected in my friend’s billiard ball, according to Meinong’s concept (if for sim-
plicity sake we leave out of account diﬀerently shaped ‘balls’ like rugby balls and
American footballs), might be understood on the present interpretation as con-
sisting of the following incompletely speciﬁed predicationally incomplete set of
constitutive properties:
Sosein(‘the ball’) = {spherical; . . . ; physical (spatiotemporal)}
Meinong’s concept of Sein-independent Sein-indiﬀerent Sosein associates with ev-
ery distinct abstract set of constitutive individuating properties a unique existent,
subsistent, or beingless object. This makes it possible to interpret implection cri-
teriologically as the inclusion of a proper subset of the constitutive properties of
an implected object in the set of constitutive properties in which the implected
20Meinong, “¨Uber Gegenstandstheorie”, Gesamtausgabe, II, pp. 490-493. See also Roderick M.
Chisholm, “Beyond Being and Non-Being”, Philosophical Studies, 24, 1972, pp. 245-255. Rein-
hardt Grossmann, “Meinong’s Doctrine of the Aussersein of the Pure Object”, Noˆus, 8, 1974,
pp. 67-82. The independence of Sosein from Sein thesis is formulated by Meinong’s student
Ernst Mally, in his “Untersuchungen zur Gegenstandstheorie des Messens”, in Meinong, ed., Un-
tersuchungen zur Gegenstandstheorie und Psychologie (Leipzig: Verlag von Johann Ambrosius
Barth, 1904), p. 127. Findlay, Meinong’s Theory of Objects and Values, p. 44. Karel Lambert,
“A Logical Interpretation of Meinong’s Principle of Independence”, Topoi, 1, 1982, pp. 87-96.
Lambert, Meinong and the Principle of Independence. Nicholas Griﬃn, “The Independence of
Sosein from Sein”, Grazer Philosophische Studien, 9, 1979, pp. 23-34.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
63
object is implected.
We can proceed now lightly to formalize the intuitive set
theoretical relations that obtain when an incomplete beingless Meinongian object
is implected in a complete existent or subsistent object.
The concept of implection, like intuitive proper subset membership, is, in ev-
ery interesting application, unidirectional. If object o1 is properly implected in
object o2, then object o2 is not implected in object o1, just as when a set S1
is a proper subset of set S2, then S2 is not a subset of S1. If we wish to allow
improper implection as a limiting case, in which objects are interimplected, then,
by means of an obvious symbolization, we can say that if any incomplete object
o1 is properly implected in any complete object o2, then o2 is not (properly or
improperly) implected in o1. More abstractly than in Meinong’s example, we can
then explain implexive being and nonbeing in set theoretical terms as the proper
subset membership of the elements of one Sosein set of constitutive properties of
the implected object in the Sosein set of constitutive properties of the object in
which the implected object is implected.
A Sosein function can ﬁrst be deﬁned exclusively for constitutive or nuclear
properties in this way:
(∀x)(∀P1)(∀P2) . . . (∀Pn) . . . (Sosein(x) = {P1, P2, . . . , Pn, . . . }
(P1x&P2x & . . . Pnx & . . .))
Implection (proper or improper) of an object in another object is formalized as:
(∀x)(∀y)(Implected!x, y ≡Sosein(x) ∈Sosein(y))
Proper and improper implection are distinguished by means of the following
pairs of logically equivalent forms:
(∀x)(∀y)(Prop-implected!x, y ≡(Implected!x, y & −Implected!y, x))
(∀x)(∀y)(Improp-implected!x, y ≡(Implected!x, y & Implected!y, x))
(∀x)(∀y)(Prop-implected!x, y ≡(Sosein(x) ∈Sosein(y) & Sosein(y) ̸∈
Sosein(x)))
(∀x)(∀y)(Improp-implected!x, y ≡(Sosein(x) ∈Sosein(y) & Sosein(y) ∈
Sosein(x)))
Where the Soseine of objects are as speciﬁed below, we can oﬀer a perspicuous
interpretation of the proper implection of o1 in o2 that, even in symbolic nota-
tion, is visually an entwining, interweaving, or embedding of the properties that
constitute a properly implected object in the relatively more complete set of prop-
erties that constitute the object in which a properly implected object is properly
implected. We then have:
Sosein(o1) = {P1, P2, . . . , Pi, . . . }
Sosein(o2) = {P1, P2, . . . , Pi, . . . , Pn, . . . }
We see that object o1 is properly implected in object o2 if and only if So-
sein(o1) ∈Sosein(o2) & Sosein(o1) ̸∈Sosein(o2). This provides an intuitive set

64
Dale Jacquette
theoretical sense in which an incomplete properly implected object is analogically
or metaphorically speaking embedded, interwoven, or entwined in a relatively more
complete object, by the literal embedding, interweaving, or entwining of the mem-
bers of the Sosein set of its constitutive properties in the Sosein set of constitutive
properties of objects in which the properly implected object is properly implected.
The same account explains implexive nonbeing as the embedding of the Sosein of
an implected object in the Sosein of a beingless object. The implexive so-being of
an implected object is the set of constitutive properties with which the implected
object is associated by virtue of its implection in a particular object with those
properties. The universal ball by this account has, not the so-being, but only the
implexive so-being, of being red, if it happens to be properly implected in a partic-
ular red ball, and the implexive so-being of being small and blue, if it is implected
in a particular small blue ball.21
Meinong’s theory of implection now permits a more streamlined domain of ob-
jects than is usually countenanced even by the most nominalistic kinds of ontologies
that admit abstract entities. In allowing incomplete and impossible nonexistent
and nonsubsistent objects, ﬁrst of all, contrary to a frequently voiced but entirely
misinformed complaint, Meinong cannot be said to have planted a jungle, for he
has not inﬂated ontology with explanatorily or otherwise theoretically unnecessary
objects. The objects Meinong posits are needed to account for the intentionality or
object-directedness of ordinary and scientiﬁc thought and discourse, which by his
broadly Brentanian understanding of intentionality, cannot be explained except as
about or directed toward beingless as well as existent and subsistent objects. Bein-
gless objects do not inﬂate ontology, because they reside instead in the Meinongian
semantic domain’s extraontology. Meinong obviously does not claim that nonexis-
tent nonsubsistent objects exist or subsist, or that beingless objects somehow after
all have some sort of being. Nor can Meinong’s object theory correctly be said
to have planted a tangled jungle in the sense of admitting logically or metaphysi-
cally disorderly objects into the ontology or extraontology. Beingless Meinongian
objects are identiﬁed and individuated, like existent and subsistent entities, by
application of Leibniz’s Law. Meinongian objects are identiﬁed and individuated
on the basis of the constitutive properties truly predicated of them as constituting
their unique being-independent being-indiﬀerent Soseine. Meinong’s object theory
as a result is neither an excessively lush nor tangled ontic or semantic jungle.22
The distinction between Meinongian ontology and extraontology permits object
theory to support an even more parsimonious ontology of existent or subsistent ob-
jects than Russell’s later extensionalist theory of entities or ‘individuals’, including
21Meinong, ¨Uber M¨oglichkeit und Wahrscheinlichkeit, pp. 209-214, 715.
22The origin of the phrase ‘Meinong’s Jungle’ seems to be William C. Kneale, Probability
and Induction (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1949), p. 12. See Findlay, Meinong’s Theory
of Objects and Values, Preface, p. xi. Routley, Exploring Meinong’s Jungle and Beyond, p.
v.
P.M.S. Hacker, Insight and Illusion: Themes in the Philosophy of Wittgenstein, revised
edition (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1986), p.
8.
Robert Campbell, “Did Meinong Plant
a Jungle?”, Philosophical Papers, 1, 1972, pp. 89-102. Jacquette, ‘On Defoliating Meinong’s
Jungle’, Axiomathes, special issue on ‘The Philosophy of Alexius Meinong’, 7, 1996, pp. 17–42.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
65
universals, or Quine’s extensionalist desert landscape ontology of spatiotemporal
entities and abstract classes.23
The idea is to have available a nonexistent nonsubsistent abstract referent that
does all the work of traditional existent or subsistent abstract entities, but for
which ontic commitment is unnecessary. Meinong’s extraontology makes it possi-
ble to go beyond concerns about whether Meinong planted a jungle to present an
ontically more streamlined desert-like ontology of existent entities than that pro-
vided by even the most austere materially adequate extensionalist metaphysics.24
Meinong himself, we should be clear, does not do this. He prefers to maintain
as part of ontology many but not all traditional abstract entities. In a revision-
ary neo-Meinongian object theory, in contrast, we can adapt Meinong’s theory in
such a way that the ontology is redeﬁned to contain all and only actual concrete
existent entities, from which abstracta of all kinds are removed and relegated to
a subdomain within the extraontology along with other incomplete objects and
alongside impossible nonexistent nonsubsistent objects like the golden mountain
and round square.25
Within a general Meinongian object theory framework, drawing on Meinong’s
concept of implexive being and nonbeing, it is possible to advance an absolutely
minimalist Meinongian extraontology consisting of only one beingless object, which
I shall call the maximally impossible object.26 The concept of implexive being and
nonbeing suggests an obvious strategy for extraontological reduction in Meinon-
gian logic. The beingless objects of the extraontology can be reduced in number
and made more orderly if at least some beingless objects are regarded as implected
in others. We approach this sort of economy in the miniature by acknowledging
the red round square as a beingless object in the extraontology, and interpreting
references to the red round (object), round square (object), red square (object),
round (object), square (object), and red (object), as implected in the red round
square. The idea can then be taken to its logical extreme by introducing the con-
23Russell, ‘The World of Universals’, The Problems of Philosophy [1912] (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1959), Chapter IX, pp. 95-97. Russell, “On the Relations of Universals and
Particulars”, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 12, 1911-12, pp. 1-24. Quine, “On What
There Is”, From a Logical Point of View (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1953), pp.
12-15, 18. Quine, “Logic and the Reiﬁcation of Universals”, From a Logical Point of View, pp.
112-117.
24Jacquette, “Virtual Relations”, Idealistic Studies, 25, 1995, pp. 141–154.
25I oﬀer a proposal speciﬁcally for an ontically neutral object theory of relations in Jacquette,
“Virtual Relations”. The present suggestion generalizes the strategy to all abstracta. See my
reply to William J. Rapaport in Jacquette and Rapaport, “Virtual Relations vs. Virtual Univer-
sals: Essay, Comments, and Reply” (with William J. Rapaport), Center for Cognitive Science
Technical Report 95–10 (Buﬀalo: State University of New York Technical Report Series, 1995),
pp. 1–20.
26I discuss the concept of a maximally impossible object in Jacquette, Meinongian Logic, pp.
103-104, 117, 125, 128, 135, 137, 139-140, 145. To be maximally impossible is not a constitutive
property. But the phrase ‘maximally impossible’ is used in this context as a shorthand for a
generalization of all constitutive properties and their complements, as in the red nonred, green
nongreen, round nonround, square nonsquare, etc., object. See also, Jacquette, “On Defoliating
Meinong’s Jungle”.

66
Dale Jacquette
cept of a single beingless object of the Meinongian extraontology in which all other
beingless objects are properly implected.
The maximally impossible object is the round square taken to its absolute pred-
icational limit. The maximally impossible object is the beingless object that has
in its Sosein every metaphysically possible and therefore collectively a maximally
metaphysically impossible combination of constitutive properties. It is the nonex-
istent nonsubsistent object that is not only round and square, but golden and
a mountain, nongolden and a nonmountain, fat, bald and a man, nonfat, non-
bald, a nonman, and so on, for every property and property-complement pair.
If the Meinongian extraontology admits the round square, it must surely admit
the maximally impossible object, despite the fact that Meinong nowhere mentions
such an object. Meinong’s concept of implexive being and nonbeing implies that
the maximally impossible object has implected within it every beingless possible
and impossible object. It does so by embedding in its excessively rich Sosein the
Sosein of every other beingless object. It is therefore possible for anyone concerned
about the lushness of the revisionary Meinongian extraontology to impose an ex-
traontological reduction on its contents, to reduce the sheer number of beingless
possible and impossible objects it contains to just one, the maximally impossible
object, in which every other beingless object is properly implected.27
From the maximally impossible object individual reference and true predication
of constitutive properties to the beingless objects it implexively contains can be
theoretically derived in much the same way that extensionalist semantic ontologists
sometimes propose a reduction to and derivation of such entities as properties from
sets or propositions, sets from propositions or properties, or properties from sets
or propositions, and of some kinds of sets, properties, or propositions from other
ontically more primitive kinds of sets, properties, or propositions. The Sosein of
the round square, and of the golden mountain, the possible fat bald man in the
doorway, the universal redness, and so on, and with them their distinguishing iden-
tity conditions, are all logically distinguishably properly implected in the Sosein of
the maximally impossible object. Meinong’s concept of implexive being and non-
being can thus be used to reduce even the extraontology of beingless objects to the
implexive nonbeing of possible beingless objects in existent (or subsistent, if these
are allowed) objects, by virtue of the proper implexive so-being of all beingless
objects in the so-being of the maximally impossible object, and of the improper
implexive so-being of the maximally impossible object in itself. The maximally
impossible object by this conception just is the coincidence in a single beingless
object of every constitutive property and its complement. The Leibnizian identity
conditions for all beingless objects, their uniquely individuating Soseine, can thus
be deﬁned in terms of selected subsets of constitutive properties and their comple-
ments implected in the Sosein of the maximally impossible object. The maximally
impossible object literally contains within itself the implexive nonbeing of every
beingless incomplete or impossible Meinongian object.
27See Jacquette, “Meinong’s Concept of Implexive Being and Nonbeing”, Grazer Philosophis-
che Studien, 50, pp. 233–271.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
67
Accordingly, we now add some new formalisms to the neo-Meinongian theory
of implection. This makes it possible to express the implection of all beingless
objects in a single maximally impossible object. We begin by regimenting some
working assumptions about the concept of being, featuring equivalences involving
the conditions of internal predicational completeness and consistency. As before,
an exclamation mark attached to a predicate indicates an extranuclear or extracon-
stitutive property, and the absence of an exclamation mark indicates a constitutive
or nuclear property.
(∀x)(Consistent!x ≡−(∃P)(Px & (Px))
(∀x)(Consistent!x ≡−(∃P)(P ∈Sosein(x) & (P ∈Sosein(x)))
(∀x)(Complete!x ≡(∀P)(P ∈Sosein(x) ∨(P ∈Sosein(x)))
(∀x)(Complete!x ≡(∀P)(Px ∨(Px))
(∀x)(Being!x ≡(Complete!x & Consistent!x))
(∀x)(Being!x ≡(∀P)((Px ∨(Px) & −(Px & (P)x)))
(∀x)(Being!x ≡((∀P)(P ∈Sosein(x) ∨(P ∈Sosein(x)) &
−(∃P)(P ∈Sosein(x) & (P ∈Sosein(x))))
(∀x)(Being!x ⊃Consistent!x)
(∀x)(Being!x ⊃Complete!x)
−(∀x)(Complete!x ⊃Being!x)
−(∀x)(Consistent!x ⊃Being!x)
Now we are ready to deﬁne the concept of the maximally impossible object as
the object that has in its Sosein every constitutive property and the complement
of every constitutive property. We consider two alternative deﬁnitions that are
logically equivalent by the concept of the Sosein function:
(∀x)(Maximpossible!x ⊃(∀P)(Px & (Px))
(∀x)(Maximpossible!x ⊃(∀P)(P ∈Sosein(x)&(P ∈Sosein(x)))
The Sosein function and deﬁnitions of the maximally impossible object, along
with Leibnizian identity conditions for Meinongian objects, further imply that
there is only one unique maximally impossible object:
(∀x)(∀y)((Maximpossible!x & Maximpossible!y) ⊃x = y)
We can therefore speak of the maximally impossible object. It is useful for this
purpose to formalize the concept of a Meinongian theory of deﬁnite description:
(∀F1)...(∀Fn)[F1(
ι
mx(Fix &...& Fnx) ≡(∃x)[(Fix) &...& Fnx) &
(∀y)[(Fiy &...& Fny) ≡(x = y)] & F1x]]
By comparison, classical Russellian deﬁnite description theory requires the ex-
traconstitutive existence or being of the deﬁnitely described object to which any
predicate truly applies:
(∀F1)...(∀Fn)[F1(
ι
rx(Fix&...&Fnx)) ≡(∃x)[(Being!x&Fix)&...&Fnx)&
(∀y)[(Fiy&...&Fny) ≡(x = y)]&F1x]]

68
Dale Jacquette
This allows us to use the Meinongian deﬁnite descriptor ‘
ι
mx’ by contrast with
the Russellian ‘
ι
rx’ to refer more succinctly to the maximally impossible object
and formalize in several ways its logical singularity. Here we posit the maximally
impossible object as belonging to the Meinongian domain by simple Meinongian
quantiﬁcation, and equivalently by Meinongian description and abstraction:
(∃x)Maximpossible!x
(∃x)(x =
ι
myMaximpossible!y)
(∃x)(λy[y =
ι
mzMaximpossible!z]x)
The Sosein function and deﬁnition of implection, proper implection, and of
the maximally impossible object now enables the logic to represent the implec-
tion of every beingless object in the maximally impossible object, and the proper
implection of every incomplete object and every beingless object other than the
maximally impossible object in the maximally impossible object. Here is a series
of such formalizations:
(∀x)(Maximpossible!x ≡x =
ι
myMaximpossible!y)
(∀x)(−Being!x ⊃Implected!x,
ι
myMaximpossible!y)
(∀x)(−Complete!x ⊃Prop-implected!x,
ι
myMaximp!y)
(∀x)((−Being!x & −Maximpossible!x) ⊃Implected!x,
ι
m yMaximpossible!y)
−(∃x)(−Being!x & −Implected!x,
ι
myMaximpossible!y)
−(∃x)(−Comp!x & −Prop-implected!x,
ι
myMaximpossible!y)
−(∃x)(−Being!x & −Maximpossible!x & −Implected!x,
ι
myMaximp!y)
−(∃x)(Being!x & Implected!x,
ι
myMaximp!y)
−(∃x)(∀y)(Being!x & Prop-implected!x, y)
The latter expressions by the deﬁnition of implection and proper implection
imply that there is no singularity of beinglessness, but a plurality of beingless
objects in neo-Meinongian extraontology. The simplest proof is to consider that
by free assumption we have beingless objects that by Leibnizian identity conditions
are distinct from or other than the maximally impossible object, so that not every
beingless object is strictly identical with, despite being implected in, the maximally
impossible object. Again, we have a variety of ways to express these conclusions:
(∃x)(−Being!x & Prop-implected!x,
ι
myMaximpossible!y)
(∃x)(−Being!x & −Prop-implected!,
ι
myMaximpossible!y, x)
(∃x)(−Being!x & −Maximpossible!x)
−(∀x)(−Being!x ⊃Maximpossible!x)
(∃x)(∀y)(−Being!x &Maximpossible!y & x ̸= y)
−(∃x)(λy[y =
ι
mz −Being!z]x)
−(∀x)(−Being!x ≡x =
ι
my −Being!y)
(∃x)(Pimp!x,
ι
myMaximpossible!y & −Being!x)
(∃x)(−Being!x & x ̸=
ι
myMaximpossible!y)
(∃x)(∃y)(−Being!x & −Being!y & x ̸= y)

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
69
The greater theoretical economy of a neo-Meinongian logic and semantics should
now be evident. There are just as many beingless objects in the new system as in
Meinong’s original extraontological jungle, for we have said that implection and
implexive being like implexive nonbeing should not be understood as a kind or
mode of being, but as a kind or mode of nonbeing.
Extraontological economy is achieved in a neo-Meinongian semantic domain if
reference to beingless objects in (the equivalent of the) axioms of the new object
theory or reductive metatheory are reduced to just one, the maximally impossi-
ble object. We know that there most deﬁnitely is only one such beingless object
in the object theory domain, and that all other beingless objects are properly
implected in it — including all incomplete or impossible, nonexistent or nonsub-
sistent Meinongian objects. The beinglessness of all beingless objects implected in
the maximally impossible object is conﬁrmed by the set theoretical interpretation
of the entwining or embedding of the elements of the Sosein set of the constitutive
properties of the implected object among the elements of the Sosein set of the
constitutive properties of the object in which the implected object is implected.
We can derive every beingless object from the singular maximally impossible
object in which all are implected. In this sense, as in other ontic reductions in
non-Meinongian extensional ontologies, a neo-Meinongian object theory or ex-
traontological metatheory need not acknowledge more than one beingless object
in its primitive terms and minimal ontic and extraontic domain commitments as
belonging to its extraontology. All other beingless objects are properly implected
in it, from which they can all therefore be theoretically derived. An economy re-
sults even in an extensional ontology by adopting a version of Aristotle’s inherence
theory to avoid explicit ontic commitment to the existence or subsistence of uni-
versals, from which they can then be abstracted, or by other ontically reductive
strategies. In much the same way, a neo-Meinongian object theory or intensional
ontology and extraontology accomplishes an economizing of the extraontology by
adopting a version of Meinong’s implection theory (which is also though it is some-
what more than an inherence and inhesion theory) and the concepts of implexive
being and nonbeing as two kinds or modes of nonbeing, allowing all beingless ob-
jects to be implected in the singular maximally impossible object from which they
can similarly be derived.
It must be emphasized that Meinong ventured no such application of his theory
of implexive being, so-being, and nonbeing. The concepts as he presents them
nevertheless seem naturally to lend themselves to this kind of reduction. We can
think of the Meinongian semantic domain as divided into two main parts. The
ontology consists only of actually existent spatiotemporal entities, a truly desert
landscape. The extraontology reductively speaking need consist only of the be-
ingless maximally impossible object, within the so-being of which the so-being of
every other beingless object is properly implected. Here, then, is surely no onto-
logical or extraontological lush or tangled jungle. The neo-Meinongian ontology,
consisting only of spatiotemporal existents, is more austere and desert-like than
even the most economical materially adequate extensional semantic domain. The

70
Dale Jacquette
neo-Meinongian extraontology is well-ordered by the identity conditions that asso-
ciate via the domain comprehension principle a unique beingless object with every
metaphysically incomplete or impossible set of constitutive properties.
Rather
every beingless object is identiﬁed and individuated by virtue of its unique combi-
nation of constitutive properties or their complements, and every such combination
is to be found implected within and can therefore be derived from the so-being of
the maximally impossible beingless object, the only object that extraontologically
primitively or reductively need be considered as belonging to the most austere
imaginable neo-Meinongian extraontology.
What, however, of the proper implection of existent and subsistent objects in
the maximally impossible object? Meinong does not consider this application of
the concept of implection, but it arises on the set theoretical interpretation even for
complete but impossible Meinongian objects other than the maximally impossible
object. An illustration is the proper implection of Meinong’s friend’s billiard ball
in the beingless impossible Meinongian object whose Sosein includes all of the
constitutive properties in the Sosein of Meinong’s friend’s billiard ball plus the
complement of at least one of its constitutive properties. There are two directions
in which this implication can be pursued. Meinong does not seriously entertain the
possibility that existent or subsistent objects might be properly implected in bein-
gless objects. This oversight might be explained in part by Meinong’s general lack
of interest in predicationally over-determined or complete but impossible objects.
If we choose to preserve Meinong’s restriction of implective being and nonbeing to
the implection of beingless objects only in existent, subsistent, or predicationally
relatively more complete but still beingless objects, then we can redeﬁne (proper
or improper) implection in this way:
(∀x)(∀y)(Implected!x, y ⊃(−Being!x & Sosein(x) ∈Sosein(y)))
The speciﬁc deﬁnitions of proper and improper implection can remain just as
they are formulated above, with correspondingly restricted entailments determined
by the limitation of implection to beingless Meinongian objects. This restricted
form of implection reﬂects a relatively metaphysically robust sense of implexive
being, by which implection of objects with being in any other object is forbidden,
and as such is more closely akin to Aristotelian inherence. It might be further
justiﬁed by the need to distinguish between the implection of objects in other
objects and the mereological physical containment of existent parts in existent
wholes.28
28Peter M. Simons, “Free Part-Whole Theory”, in Karel Lambert, ed., Philosophical Appli-
cations of Free Logic (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991), pp. 285-305. See section 5 on
‘Implexive Containment’, pp. 294-296. Simons argues that Meinongian implection of incomplete
in existents or subsistents has all the formal properties of mereological containment, provided
that the nuclear-extranuclear property distinction is enforced, but is not itself a genuine mereo-
logical part-whole relation. Simons’ example involves the existence of the proper parts of George
Washington and the nonexistence but only implexive existence of George Washington’s implexive
parts. The problem is clearly related to Meinong’s discussion of the relative degrees of possibility

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
71
If it is judged philosophically more correct to recognize implection as obtain-
ing wherever the Sosein set of constitutive properties of an object regardless of
its ontic status is contained in the Sosein set of an object regardless of its on-
tic status, then we can preserve the original unrevised deﬁnition of implection.
To do so is to permit the proper implection of existent and subsistent objects in
beingless overdetermined or predicationally complete but impossible Meinongian
objects, including the maximally impossible object. This ontically unrestricted
form of Meinongian implection is not nearly as metaphysically robust as the onti-
cally restricted concept in its similarity to Aristotelian inherence. It leads directly
to a Meinongian version of Parmenideanism, by which the phenomenal world of
physical or material spatiotemporal objects is implected in the maximally impos-
sible object as an all-absorbing One. Here we have implection as a purely abstract
logical or set theoretical relation, without ontic implications, in which the existent
and subsistent are properly implected in certain beingless objects and reductively
in the One maximally impossible object.29
Parmenides, as the fragments suggest, also believed that the phenomenal world
is nonexistent because of its ephemeral ever-changing ﬂuxlike nature.30 This ideal-
ist conception can also be accommodated in the ontically unrestricted formulation
of Meinong’s concept of implexive being and nonbeing. We might appeal for such
a conclusion to the essential predicational incompleteness of physical objects im-
plied by the indeterminacy thesis in quantum physics. If spatiotemporal objects at
the microphysical level consist of quanta that necessarily lack either determinate
position or determinate momentum or velocity, then all of what we are accustomed
to think of as existent physical reality by Meinong’s theory of beingless incomplete
objects is actually nonexistent.31 If ‘existent’ spatiotemporal or physical ‘reality’,
consisting of the entities we regard as constituting the furniture of the universe, is
of instantiation of a Goethe or a Beethoven.
Here we must distinguish between Goethe and
Beethoven on the one hand, and whatever subset of the Sosein set of constitutive properties of
these persons might be thought suﬃcient to instantiate an instance of a Goethe or a Beethoven.
It is not immediately clear how this might be done, except by nominal stipulation of a set of
essential properties that fall short of the complete haecceity of Goethe himself or Beethoven
himself. For other incomplete but not impossible objects like the golden mountain or Pegasus,
there is no clearcut basis by which to regard such objects as something more individual and less
universal than such standard examples of universals as the ideal state or the color blue.
29The beingless maximally impossible object as the Meinongian One is in other ways obviously
quite diﬀerent from the Parmenidean concept of the One interpreted as the only Reality.
30Parmenides’ fragments are collected in Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers: A Complete
Translation of the Fragments in Diels, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, Kathleen Freeman, ed. and
trans. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1957), pp. 41-51.
31Werner Heisenberg, The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, Carl Eckart and Frank
C. Hugh, trans.
(New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1930).
Heisenberg, Physics and Phi-
losophy: The Resolution in Modern Science (London: Allen and Unwin, 1959). Peter Forrest,
Quantum Metaphysics (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1988), especially pp. 25-45, 102-122. An el-
egant formal description implying the predicational incompleteness of quantum phenomena in
terms of probability t-cones is given by Bas C. van Fraassen, Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist
View (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1991), pp. 51-53. See Jagdish Mehra, The Quantum Prin-
ciple: Its Interpretation and Epistemology (Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1974),
pp. 107-116.

72
Dale Jacquette
predicationally incomplete and hence nonexistent, as Parmenides for diﬀerent but
related reasons also taught, then all beingless objects of the phenomenal world are
properly implected in a single beingless object, the maximally impossible object,
as the Meinongian-Parmenidean One.
The philosophical success of Meinong’s object theory is seen in its fundamental
ontic neutrality as the semantics of all possible thought and expression. Providing
the semantics for such opposite metaphysics of the phenomenal world as those of
Parmenides and Aristotle is the most demanding test of the ontic neutrality of
Meinong’s object theory. Through its concept of implexive being and nonbeing,
Meinong’s theory makes possible by means of special provision among many other
items in a spectrum of possibilities both the formulation of a Parmenidean notion of
the nonexistence of the phenomenal world and the collection of all that is thinkable
into an all-embracing One, and of the Aristotelian thesis of the phenomenal world
as the only reality consisting of primary substances or discrete existent physical
entities. We should expect Meinong’s object theory to provide the semantics for
these among many other correct or incorrect metaphysical systems, and we should
be prepared to criticize it if it did not.
Still, would it not be too remarkable if Meinong’s Brentanian Aristotelianism as
a methodological superstructure built on ontically neutral object theory founda-
tions, taken to its logical extreme, led back to Parmenides by way of the empiricist
epistemic limitations embodied in the indeterminacy principle of modern quantum
physics to a metaphysics of the (beingless) One and the world of empirical phenom-
ena as nonexistent because fundamentally predicationally incomplete? Meinong
avoids such inferences in the metaphysics he superimposes on his ontically neutral
object theory only by refusing to recognize the implection of any existent or sub-
sistent objects in other existent, subsistent, or beingless objects. We can express
Meinong’s implicit stipulation formally as proposed by means of a restriction on
the Sosein set theoretical interpretation of implection, allowing only beingless ob-
jects to be implected in other objects. However mad or intellectually objectional
we may ﬁnd Parmenidean idealism as opposed to Aristotelian realism to be, it is a
sign of the ontic neutrality of Meinong’s object theory semantics as the most gen-
eral theory of meaning that it provides an absolutely ontically neutral foundation
for the most diverse conceptions of metaphysics by means of its categories of the
extraontology and concept of implexive being and nonbeing.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am grateful to the Alexander von Humboldt-Stiftung for supporting my research
on Meinong and intensional logics in Germany in 1989-1990 at the Universit¨at
Mannheim and 2000–2001 at the at the Franz Brentano Forschung, Bayerische-
Julius-Maximilians-Universit¨at, W¨urzburg. This essay was completed during my
Resident Research Fellowship at the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study
(NIAS), Royal Netherlands Academy of the Arts and Sciences (KNAW), 2005–
2006. Ancestors of the formalisms presented here have appeared in my Meinongian

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
73
Logic, “Object Theory Foundations for Intensional Logic”, and “Meinong’s Con-
cept of Implexive Being and Nonbeing”; see References below and in the Notes. I
thank the series editors, Dov Gabbay and John Woods, for their kind invitation to
contribute an essay on the logic of Meinong’s object theory semantics, and Jane
Spurr at the Department of Computer Science, King’s College London for patient
reworking of a challenging electronic manuscript.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Abertazzi et al., 1996] L. Albertazzi, M. Libardi, and R. Poli, eds. The School of Franz
Brentano, Dordrecht and Boston, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996.
[Barber, 1967] K. F. Barber. Meinong’s ‘Hume Studies’: Translation and Commentary, 1966
Ph.D. thesis, The University of Iowa. Ann Arbor: University Microﬁlms, Inc, 1967.
[Barber, 1970] K. F. Barber. Meinong’s Hume Studies, Part I: Meinong’s Nominalism; Part II:
Meinong’s Analysis of Relations, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 30, 550-567; 31,
1971, 564-584, 1970.
[Berkeley, 1949] G. Berkeley. The Works of George Berkeley Bishop of Cloyne, edited by A.A.
Luce and T.E. Jessop. London: Thomas Nelson & Sons. A Treatise on the Principles of
Human Knowledge; Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous, Works, Vol. II, 1949.
[Campbell, 1972] R. Campbell. Did Meinong Plant a Jungle? Philosophical Papers, 1, 89-102,
1972.
[Carnap, 1956] R. Carnap. Meaning and Necessity: A Study in Semantics and Modal Logic,
enlarged edition, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1956.
[Chisholm, 1972] R. M. Chisholm. Beyond Being and Non-Being, Philosophical Studies, 24,
245-255, 1972.
[Chisholm, 1982a] R. M. Chisholm. Brentano and Meinong Studies, Atlantic Highlands, Hu-
manities Press, 1982.
[Chisholm, 1982b] R. M. Chisholm. Converse Intentional Properties, The Journal of Philosophy,
79, 537-545, 1982.
[Findlay, 1995] J. N. Findlay. Meinong’s Theory of Objects and Values, Edited with an Intro-
duction by Dale Jacquette, from the second edition, Oxford University Press, 1963, Aldershot,
Ashgate Publishing (Gregg Revivals), 1995.
[Fine, 1984] K. Fine. Critical Review of Parsons’ Nonexistent Objects, Philosophical Studies,
45, 95-142, 1984.
[Forrest, 1988] P. Forrest. Quantum Metaphysics. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1988.
[Freeman, 1957] K. Freeman, editor and translator. Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers: A
Complete Translation of the Fragments in Diels, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1957.
[Griﬃn, 1979] N. Griﬃn. The Independence of Sosein from Sein, Grazer Philosophische Studien,
9, 23-34, 1979.
[Grossmann, 1974a] R. Grossmann. Meinong’s Doctrine of the Aussersein of the Pure Object,
Noˆus, 8, 67-82, 1974.
[Grossmann, 1974b] R. Grossmann. Meinong, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1974.
[Hacker, 1986] P. M. S. Hacker. Insight and Illusion: Themes in the Philosophy of Wittgenstein,
revised edition. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1986.
[Haller, 1972] R. Haller, ed. Jenseits von Sein und Nichtsein, Graz, Akademische Druck- und
Verlagsanstalt, 1972.
[Heisenberg, 1930] W. Heisenberg. The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, Carl Eckart
and Frank C. Hugh, trans. New York: Dover Publications, Inc, 1930.
[Heisenberg, 1959] W. Heisenberg. Physics and Philosophy: The Resolution in Modern Science.
London: Allen and Unwin, 1959.
[Henkin, 1949] L. Henkin. The Completeness of the First–Order Functional Calculus, Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 14, 159–166, 1949.

74
Dale Jacquette
[Hume, 1975] D. Hume. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, in David Hume: En-
quiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals, edited
by L.A. Selby-Bigge, third edition, revised by P.H. Nidditch. Oxford: The Clarendon Press,
1975.
[Hume, 1978] D. Hume. A Treatise of Human Nature, edited by Selby-Bigge, second edition,
revised by P.H. Nidditch. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1978.
[Jacquette, 1982] D. Jacquette. Meinong’s Theory of Defective Objects, Grazer Philosophische
Studien, 15, 1-19, 1982.
[Jacquette, 1986] D. Jacquette. Meinong’s Doctrine of the Modal Moment, Grazer Philosophis-
che Studien, 25-6, 423-438, 1986.
[Jacquette, 1987] D. Jacquette. Twardowski on Content and Object, Conceptus: Zeitschrift f¨ur
Philosophie, 21, 193-199, 1987.
[Jacquette, 1988] D. Jacquette. Review of Karel Lambert, Meinong and the Principle of Inde-
pendence: Its Place in Meinong’s Theory of Objects and its Signiﬁcance in Contemporary
Philosophical Logic, International Studies in Philosophy, 20, 92–93, 1988.
[Jacquette, 1989a] D. Jacquette. Modal Meinongian Logic, Logique et Analyse, 125-26, 113-130,
1989.
[Jacquette, 1989b] D. Jacquette. Mally’s Heresy and the Logic of Meinong’s Object Theory,
History and Philosophy of Logic, 10, 1-14, 1989.
[Jacquette, 1989c] D. Jacquette. Intentional Semantics and the Logic of Fiction, The British
Journal of Aesthetics, 29, 168–176, 1989.
[Jacquette, 1989d] D. Jacquette, trans. Ernst Mally, ‘On the Objects’ Independence from
Thought’ (‘¨Uber die Unabh¨angigkeit der Gegenst¨ande vom Denken’), Man and World, 22,
215-231, 1989.
[Jacquette, 1990] D. Jacquette. Review of Marie–Luise Schubert Kalsi, Meinong’s Theory of
Knowledge, Noˆus, 24, 487–492, 1990.
[Jacquette, 1990–91] D. Jacquette. The Origins of Gegenstandstheorie: Immanent and Tran-
scendent Intentional Objects in Brentano, Twardowski, and Meinong, Brentano Studien, 3,
277-302, 1990–91.
[Jacquette, 1991a] D. Jacquette. Mally, Ernst, in Handbook of Metaphysics and Ontology, Hans
Burkhardt and Barry Smith, ed., Munich and Vienna, Philosophia Verlag, 485-486, 1991.
[Jacquette, 1991b] D. Jacquette. Review of Edward N. Zalta, Intensional Logic and the Meta-
physics of Intentionality, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 51, 439–444, 1991.
[Jacquette, 1992] D. Jacquette. Meinongian Models of Scientiﬁc Law, in Pa´sniczek, ed., 86-104,
1992.
[Jacquette, 1994a] D. Jacquette. Philosophy of Mind, Englewood Cliﬀs, Prentice Hall, 1994.
[Jacquette, 1994b] D. Jacquette. Meinongian Logic and Anselm’s Ontological Proof for the Ex-
istence of God, The Philosophical Forum, 25, 231-240, 1994.
[Jacquette, 1994c] D. Jacquette. Tarski’s Quantiﬁcational Semantics and Meinongian Object
Theory Domains, 75, 88-107, 1994.
[Jacquette, 1994d] D. Jacquette. A Meinongian Theory of Deﬁnite Description, Axiomathes, 5,
345-359, 1994.
[Jacquette, 1995a] D. Jacquette. Brentano, Franz, Meinong, Alexius, in The Cambridge Dictio-
nary of Philosophy, Robert Audi, ed., Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[Jacquette, 1995b] D. Jacquette. Findlay and Meinong, in Findlay, Meinong’s Theory of Objects
and Values, With an Introduction by Dale Jacquette, 1995.
[Jacquette, 1995c] D. Jacquette. Meinong’s Concept of Implexive Being and Nonbeing, Grazer
Philosophische Studien, 50, 233–271, 1995.
[Jacquette, 1995d] D. Jacquette. Object Theory Foundations for Intensional Logic, Acta Ana-
lytica, 13, 33–63, 1995.
[Jacquette, 1995e] D. Jacquette. Virtual Relations, Idealistic Studies, 25, 141–154, 1995.
[Jacquette, 1996a] D. Jacquette. Meinongian Logic: The Semantics of Existence and Nonexis-
tence, Berlin and New York, Walter de Gruyter, 1996.
[Jacquette, 1996b] D. Jacquette. On Defoliating Meinong’s Jungle, Axiomathes, 7, 17–42. 1996.
[Jacquette, 1996c] D. Jacquette. Alexius Meinong (1853-1920), in The School of Franz Brentano,
edited by Albertazzi, Libardi, and Poli, 131–159, 1996.
[Jacquette, 1997a] D. Jacquette. Conceivability, Intensionality, and the Logic of Anselm’s Modal
Argument for the Existence of God, International Journal for Philosophy of Religion, 42,
163–173, 1997.

Logic for Meinongian Object Theory Semantics
75
[Jacquette, 1997b] D. Jacquette. Reﬂections on Mally’s Heresy, Axiomathes, 8, 163–180, 1997.
[Jacquette, 1999a] D. Jacquette. Review of Marie-Luise Schubert Kalsi, Alexius Meinong’s El-
ements of Ethics, With a Translation of the Fragment Ethische Bausteine, Review of Meta-
physics, 52, 727–730, 1999.
[Jacquette, 1999b] D. Jacquette. Review of Jacek Pa´sniczek, The Logic of Intentional Objects:
A Meinongian Version of Classical Logic, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 64, 1847–1849, 1999.
[Jacquette, 2000a] D. Jacquette. Confessions of a Meinongian Logician, Grazer Philosophische
Studien, 58–59, 151–180, 2000.
[Jacquette, 2000b] D. Jacquette. An Internal Determinacy Metatheorem for Lukasiewicz’s Aus-
sagenkalk¨uls, Bulletin of the Section of Logic, 29, 115–124, 2000.
[Jacquette, 2001a] D. Jacquette. The School of Alexius Meinong, edited with Liliana Albertazzi
and Roberto Poli, Aldershot, Ashgate Publishing, 2001.
[Jacquette, 2001b] D. Jacquette. ‘Truth and Fiction in David Lewis’s Critique of Meinongian
Semantics, Metaphysica: International Journal for Ontology and Metaphysics, 2, 73–106,
2001.
[Jacquette, 2003a] D. Jacquette. David Lewis on Meinongian Logic of Fiction, Writing the Aus-
trian Traditions: Relations Between Philosophy and Literature, edited by Wolfgang Huemer
and Marc-Oliver Schuster. Toronto: University of Toronto Press,Wirth-Institute for Austrian
and Central European Studies, University of Alberta, 101–119, 2003.
[Jacquette, 2003b] D. Jacquette. Meinong on the Phenomenology of Assumption,
Studia
Phaenomenologica, 3, 155-177, 2003.
[Jacquette, 2006] D. Jacquette. Twardowski, Brentano’s Dilemma, and the Content-Object Dis-
tinction, Actions, Products and Things: Brentano and Polish Philkosophy, Mind and Phe-
nomenology series, edited by Arkadiusz Chrudzimski and Dariusz Lukasiewicz. Frankfurt:
Ontos Verlag, 2006, pp 9–33.
[Kant, 1965] I. Kant. Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith, New York, St.
Martin’s Press, 1965.
[Kleene, 1952] S. C. Kleene. Introduction to Metamathematics. Amsterdam:
North–Holland
Publishing Co, 1952.
[Kneale, 1949] W. C. Kneale. Probability and Induction. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1949.
[Lambert, 1982] K. Lambert. A Logical Interpretation of Meinong’s Principle of Independence,
Topoi, 1, 87-96, 1982.
[Lambert, 1983] K. Lambert. Meinong and the Principle of Independence:
Its Place in
Meinong’s Theory of Objects and its Signiﬁcance in Contemporary Philosophical Logic, Cam-
bridge, Cambridge University Press, 1983.
[Leblanc et al., 1982] H. Leblanc, H. Goldberg, and G. Weaver. A Strong Completeness Theo-
rem for Three–Valued Logic: Part I, in Leblanc, 1982b, 240–246, 1982.
[Leblanc, 1982a] H. Leblanc. A Strong Completeness Theorem for Three–Valued Logic: Part II,
in Leblanc, 1982b, 247–257, 1982.
[Leblanc, 1982b] J. Leblanc. Existence, Truth, and Provability. Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1982.
[Lukasiewicz, 1930] J. Lukasiewicz. Philosophische Bemerkungen zu mehrwertigen Systemen des
Aussagenkalk¨uls, Comptes rendus des se´ances de la Soci´et´e des sciences et des lettres de
Varsovie, Classe III, 23, 51–77, 1930.
[Mally, 1904] E. Mally. Untersuchungen zur Gegenstandstheorie des Messens, in Meinong, ed.,
Untersuchungen zur Gegenstandstheorie und Psychologie. Leipzig: Verlag von Johann Am-
brosius Barth, 1904.
[Mally, 1912] E. Mally. Gegenstandstheoretische Grundlagen der Logik und Logistik, Leipzig,
Verlag von Johann Ambrosius Barth, 1912.
[McCall, 1967] S. McCall, ed. Polish Logic: 1920–1939. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1967.
[Mehra, 1974] J. Mehra. The Quantum Principle: Its Interpretation and Epistemology. Dor-
drecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1974.
[Meinong, 1921] A. Meinong. Zur Gegenstandstheorie, in Raymund Schmidt, ed., Die Philoso-
phie der Gegenwart in Selbstdarstellungen. Leipzig: Felix Meiner Verlag, 1921.
[Meinong, 1965] A. Meinong. Philosophenbriefe:
aus der wissenschaftlichen Korrespondenz,
Rudolf Kindinger, ed., Graz, Akademische Druck- u. Verlagsanstalt, 1965.
[Meinong, 1969–78] A. Meinong. Alexius Meinong Gesamtausgabe, I-VIII, Rudolf Haller and
Rudolf Kindinger in collaboration with Roderick M. Chisholm, ed., Graz, Akademische Druck-
u. Verlagsanstalt, 1969–1978.

76
Dale Jacquette
[Parsons, 1965] C. D. Parsons. Frege’s Theory of Number in M. Black, ed., Philosophy in Amer-
ica. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1965.
[Parsons, 1974] T. Parsons. A Prolegomenon to Meinongian Semantics, The Journal of Philos-
ophy, 71, 561-580, 1974.
[Parsons, 1975] T. Parsons. A Meinongian Analysis of Fictional Objects, Grazer Philosophische
Studien, 1, 73-86, 1975.
[Parsons, 1978] T. Parsons. Nuclear and Extranuclear Properties, Meinong, and Leibniz, Noˆus,
12, 137-151, 1978.
[Parsons, 1980] T. Parsons. Nonexistent Objects, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1980.
[Paz´sniczek, 1992] J. Pa´sniczek, ed. Theories of Objects: Meinong and Twardowski, Lublin,
Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Marii Curie–Sklodowskiej, 1992.
[Pa´sniczek, 1998] J. Pa´sniczek. The Logic of Intentional Objects: A Meinongian Version of
Classical Logic, Dordrecht and Boston, Synthese Library, Kluwer Academic Publishing, 1998.
[Perszyk, 1993] K. J. Perszyk. Nonexistent Objects: Meinong and Contemporary Philosophy,
Dordrecht, Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1993.
[Quine, 1953a] W. V. O. Quine. On What There Is, From a Logical Point of View. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1953.
[Quine, 1953b] W. V. O. Quine. Logic and the Reiﬁcation of Universals, From a Logical Point
of View. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1953.
[Quine, 1960] W. V. O. Quine. Word and Object. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1960.
[Quine, 1969] W. V. O. Quine. Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1969.
[Rapaport, 1978] W. J. Rapaport. Meinongian Theories and a Russellian Paradox, Noˆus, 12,
153-180, 1978.
[Reicher, 1998] M. E. Reicher. Die Logik des Nichtseienden, Grazer Philosophische Studien, 54,
165-196, 1998.
[Rescher, 1969] N. Rescher. Many–Valued Logic. New York: McGraw–Hill, 1969.
[Routley, 1981] R. Routley. Exploring Meinong’s Jungle and Beyond, interim edition, Canberra,
Australian National University, 1981.
[Russell, 1904] B. Russell. Meinong’s Theory of Complexes and Assumptions, Mind, 13, 204-219,
1904.
[Russell, 1905a] B. Russell. On Denoting, Mind, 14, 479-493, 1905.
[Russell, 1905b] B. Russell. Review of A. Meinong, Untersuchungen zur Gegenstandstheorie und
Psychologie, Mind, 14, 530-538, 1905.
[Russell, 1907] B. Russell. Review of A. Meinong, ¨Uber die Stellung der Gegenstandstheorie im
System der Wissenschaften, Mind, 16, 436-439, 1907.
[Russell, 1911–12] B. Russell. On the Relations of Universals and Particulars, Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, 12, 1-24, 1911–1912.
[Russell, 1912] B. Russell. The World of Universals, The Problems of Philosophy. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1912.
[Russell, 1919] B. Russell. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1919.
[Ryle, 1933] G. Ryle. Review of J.N. Findlay, Meinong’s Theory of Objects, Oxford Magazine,
52, 118-120, 1933.
[Ryle, 1972] G. Ryle. Intentionality-Theory and the Nature of Thinking, in Haller, ed., Jenseits
von Sein und Nichtsein, 7-14, 1972.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1967] J. R. Shoenﬁeld. Mathematical Logic. Reading: Addison–Wesley Publishing
Company, 1967.
[van Fraassen, 1991] B. C. van Fraassen. Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View. Oxford:
The Clarendon Press, 1991.

THE LOGIC OF BROUWER AND HEYTING
Joan Rand Moschovakis
Intuitionistic logic consists of the principles of reasoning which were used in-
formally by L. E. J. Brouwer, formalized by A. Heyting (also partially by V.
Glivenko), interpreted by A. Kolmogorov, and studied by G. Gentzen and K.
G¨odel during the ﬁrst third of the twentieth century. Formally, intuitionistic ﬁrst-
order predicate logic is a proper subsystem of classical logic, obtained by replacing
the law of excluded middle A ∨¬A by ¬A ⊃(A ⊃B); it has inﬁnitely many dis-
tinct consistent axiomatic extensions, each necessarily contained in classical logic
(which is axiomatically complete). However, intuitionistic second-order logic is
inconsistent with classical second-order logic. In terms of expressibility, the intu-
itionistic logic and language are richer than the classical; as G¨odel and Gentzen
showed, classical ﬁrst-order arithmetic can be faithfully translated into the nega-
tive fragment of intuitionistic arithmetic, establishing proof-theoretical equivalence
and clarifying the distinction between the classical and constructive consequences
of mathematical axioms.
The logic of Brouwer and Heyting is eﬀective. The conclusion of an intuitionistic
derivation holds with the same degree of constructivity as the premises. Any proof
of a disjunction of two statements can be eﬀectively transformed into a proof of
one of the disjuncts, while any proof of an existential statement contains an eﬀec-
tive prescription for ﬁnding a witness. The negation of a statement is interpreted
as asserting that the statement is not merely false but absurd, i.e., leads to a
contradiction. Brouwer objected to the general law of excluded middle as claim-
ing a priori that every mathematical problem has a solution, and to the general
law ¬¬A ⊃A of double negation as asserting that every consistent mathematical
statement holds.
Brouwer called “the First Act of Intuitionism” the separation of mathematics
(an exclusively mental activity) from language. For him, all mathematical objects
(including proofs) were mental constructions carried out by individual mathemati-
cians. This insight together with “the intuition of the bare two-oneness” guided the
creation of intuitionistic logic and arithmetic, with full induction and a theory of
the rational numbers. It was limited, by Brouwer’s early insistence on predicative
deﬁnability, to the construction of entities which were ﬁnitely speciﬁable and thus
at most denumerably inﬁnite in number; this seemed to exclude the possibility of
a good intuitionistic theory of the continuum.
A later insight led Brouwer to “the Second Act of Intuitionism,” which ac-
cepted inﬁnitely proceeding sequences of independent choices of objects already
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

78
Joan Rand Moschovakis
constructed (choice sequences of natural numbers, for example) as legitimate math-
ematical entities. He succeeded in extracting positive information about the struc-
ture of the continuum from the fact that an individual choice sequence may be
known only by its ﬁnite approximations.
His “Bar Theorem” (actually a new
mathematical axiom) essentially accepted induction up to any denumerable ordi-
nal, signiﬁcantly extending the intuitionistically available part of classical arith-
metic and analysis. His Continuity Principle, which contradicted classical logic
(but not classical ﬁrst-order arithmetic), made possible the development of a rich
alternative theory of the continuum.
Brouwer’s constructive understanding of
the universal and existential quantiﬁers led him to accept some choice principles
stronger than those of classical mathematics, and at the same time to reject the
full classical axiom of choice.
Because intuitionistic logic is an ex post facto construction reﬂecting the forms
of reasoning actually used in intuitionistic mathematics, in order to give a full
account of the logic we will need to consider some of the mathematics as well.
And because “the possibilities of thinking cannot be reduced to a ﬁnite number
of rules constructed in advance,”1 we would do well to remember that this is not
the last word in the subject.
1
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF INTUITIONISTIC LOGIC
The Dutch mathematician and logician Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer was born
February 27, 1881 in Overschie, near Rotterdam, and died December 2, 1966 in
Blaricum, east of Amsterdam. He was a highly original thinker who developed
an intuitionistic alternative to classical mathematics, introduced the term “meta-
mathematics” for the mathematical study of logical reasoning, proved fundamental
theorems on continuous groups and on the ﬁxed points of continuous mappings,
and invented many of the basic notions of algebraic topology in the process of
establishing the topological invariance of dimension.2
Brouwer earned a master’s degree from the University of Amsterdam in 1904
with a thesis on continuous motions in real four-dimensional space.
His doc-
toral dissertation [Brouwer, 1908], written under the delicate supervision of D. J.
Korteweg and presented in 1907, was titled “On the Foundations of Mathemat-
ics” (Over de grondslagen der wiskunde) and divided into three parts: “The con-
struction of mathematics,” “Mathematics and experience” and “Mathematics and
logic.” Korteweg refused to accept some controversial material, but his student’s
critiques of the best-known mathematical philosophies of the time remained.
1A. Heyting, from the introduction to [Heyting, 1930a]; the translation is by A. S. Troelstra
[1991].
2In one dimension, Brouwer’s ﬁxed point theorem implies that every continuous mapping of
the real unit interval [0, 1] into itself holds at least one point ﬁxed. The invariance of dimension
means that if there is a one-to-one continuous mapping from real n-space into real m-space, then
n ≤m.

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
79
In Part I Brouwer built up the positive and negative integers and their arith-
metic, then the rationals with their denumerable dense ordering, and ﬁnally a
“measurable continuum,” the result of constructing a scale of order type η (the
order type of the rationals) on the raw one-dimensional continuum given by intu-
ition.3 In Part II he described the origin of scientiﬁc activity in the observation of
“causal systems in time,” disagreed with Kant by asserting that time is the only
a priori element in science, and distinguished between mathematics (“an action
and not a science”) and metamathematics (“an application of mathematics, that
is . . . an experimental science”).4,5
Part III began with the argument that mathematics is independent of and prior
to logic, which depends on it; this was a direct and immediate challenge to the
logicism of Frege and Russell, and also to the formalism of David Hilbert who was
then the most inﬂuential logician (possibly the most inﬂuential mathematician) in
Europe. Brouwer went on to criticize Cantor’s set theory, accepting in principle
every countable ordinal but rejecting Cantor’s second number class (the class of
all countable ordinals) as a completed totality because, being nondenumerable,
it “cannot be mathematically constructed.”6 Finally, he argued in detail against
logicism (which he attributed to Russell and Peano) and formalism.
The summary contained the following main points:
• “Mathematics is created by a free action independent of experience; it devel-
ops from a single aprioristic basic intuition, which may be called invariance
in change as well as unity in multitude.”7
3A linear ordering is of type η if and only if it is denumerable, has neither a smallest nor a
largest element, and has the property that between any two elements there is another element.
4Arguing against Russell’s defense of the Kantian a priority of space, Brouwer asserted that
three-dimensional Euclidean geometry is just a six-parameter group which has proved useful to
man in understanding and controlling the “phenomena of his world of experience.”
5Hilbert adopted the name “metamathematics” for his program of attempting to establish,
by ﬁnitary means, the consistency of formal systems representing logical and mathematical rea-
soning.
6Here Brouwer introduced the notion of a denumerably unﬁnished set, with “the following
properties: we can never construct in a well-deﬁned way more than a denumerable subset of it,
but when we have constructed such a subset, we can immediately deduce from it, following some
previously deﬁned mathematical process, new elements which are counted to the original set.
But from a strictly mathematical point of view this set does not exist as a whole; nor does its
power exist; however we can introduce these words here as an expression for a known intention.”
Thus he rejected Cantor’s platonism.
7Brouwer’s footnote to the ﬁrst point read: “The ﬁrst act of construction has two discrete
things thought together (also according to Cantor, Vortrag auf der Naturforscherversammlung
in Kassel 1903); F. Meyer (Verhandl. internat. Math. Congr. Heidelberg 1904, p. 678) says that
one thing is suﬃcient, because the circumstance that I think of it can be added as a second thing;
this is false, for exactly this adding (i.e., setting it while the former is retained) presupposes the
intuition of two-ity; only afterwards this simplest mathematical system is projected on the ﬁrst
thing and the ego which thinks the thing.”
Meyer’s claim, to which Brouwer objected, brings to mind the beginning of Dedekind’s argu-
ment (p. 64 in the 1901 English translation of [Dedekind, 1888]) for the existence of inﬁnite
sets: “My own realm of thoughts, i.e., the totality S of all things, which can be objects of my
thought, is inﬁnite. For if s signiﬁes an element of S, then is the thought s′, that s can be object

80
Joan Rand Moschovakis
• “Further, projecting mathematical systems on experience is also a free action,
which shows itself eﬃcient in the struggle for life; . . . ”
• “A logical construction of mathematics, independent of the mathematical
intuition, is impossible – for by this method no more is obtained than a
linguistic structure, which irrevocably remains separated from mathematics
. . . ”
In April 1908 Brouwer had the honor of addressing the International Congress of
Mathematicians in Rome, on the theory of Lie groups. The French preintuitionist
Poincar´e also spoke at the conference, on the future of mathematics.8 In Part III
of his doctoral dissertation Brouwer had already analyzed Poincar´e’s objections
to logicism and to Cantor’s set theory: “He blames mainly in logistics the petitio
principii and in Cantorism the hypothesis of the actual inﬁnite. But hereby he
does not touch upon the heart of the question, which is situated deeper, namely
in the confusion between the act of constructing mathematics and the language of
mathematics.”
That same year, in “The unreliability of the logical principles” (De onbetrouw-
baarheid der logische principes), Brouwer asked,
Is it allowed, in purely mathematical constructions and transforma-
tions, to neglect for some time the idea of the mathematical system
under construction and to operate in the corresponding linguistic struc-
ture, following the principles of syllogism, of contradiction and of ter-
tium exclusum, and can we then have conﬁdence that each part of the
argument can be justiﬁed by recalling to the mind the corresponding
mathematical construction?
His answer was to argue for modus ponens (syllogism) and the law of contradiction
but against the universal validity of the principle of excluded middle for properties
of inﬁnite systems, establishing a basis for what is now known as intuitionistic
propositional logic. Observing that the law of contradiction justiﬁes the double
negation of the law of excluded middle, he added in a footnote: “Consequently,
the theorems which are usually considered as proved in mathematics, ought to be
divided into those that are true and those that are non-contradictory.”
Following Korteweg’s advice, Brouwer spent the next few years solving funda-
mental problems in topology. His inaugural lecture as an unpaid privatdocent or
lecturer, given in 1909, was on the foundations of geometry and topology and in-
cluded his view that “the intuition of time or intuition of two-in-one” lies behind
all mathematical endeavor; while the nineteenth-century discovery of projective
and other non-Euclidean geometries refuted Kant’s belief in the a priority of (Eu-
of my thought, itself an element of S.”
In the preface Dedekind asserted that “numbers are free
creations of the human mind.”
8Dale M. Johnson, “Brouwer’s coming of age as a topologist,” page 65.

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
81
clidean) space.9 His “On analysis situs,” with ingenious topological counterexam-
ples, and two papers on perfect sets quickly followed.
In 1912 these eﬀorts were rewarded with a permanent appointment as Profes-
sor of Mathematics at the University of Amsterdam. An English translation of
Brouwer’s inaugural lecture, “Intuitionism and formalism,” appeared in 1913 in
the Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society. Here Brouwer used the term
“neo-intuitionism” to refer to his own philosophy, distinguishing it from the old-
style intuitionism which accepted Kant’s belief in the a priority of both space and
time. He objected strongly to the formalist position, which he identiﬁed with the
belief that a mathematical theory can be justiﬁed by separating its content from
its form (as in Peano’s formal system for ﬁrst-order arithmetic), and then proving
the impossibility of deriving both a sentence (thought of as a string of symbols)
and its negation from the axioms of the theory using formal logic.
The professorship gave him the freedom to continue developing and reﬁning intu-
itionistic mathematics and mathematical philosophy, most remarkably in [Brouwer,
1918] and [Brouwer, 1919], as well as the stature to profoundly inﬂuence the on-
going foundational discussion which had begun before the turn of the century and
was still going strong in 1930. It also brought him students, of whom Arend Heyt-
ing (1898–1980) was the one most devoted to intuitionism. Apparently realizing
the desirability of communicating his own ideas in a way that would be compre-
hensible to the general mathematical community, Brouwer suggested that Heyting
take as his doctoral subject the axiomatization and formalization of intuitionis-
tic logic and parts of mathematics. Heyting responded with enthusiasm, and in
1925 he defended his dissertation, on the axiomatization of intuitionistic projective
geometry. Related articles appeared in the Mathematische Annalen in 1927.10
In 1923 ([Brouwer, 1923], in Dutch) Brouwer published “Intuitionist splitting
of the fundamental notions of mathematics,” stressing the distinction between
the classical meaning of negation as falsity and Brouwer’s stronger interpretation
of negation as absurdity.
A German version [Brouwer, 1924a] and addendum
[Brouwer, 1927a] followed. W. P. van Stigt points out [1998, p. 275] that this
paper marked a radical departure for Brouwer, as it contained the statement and
proof of a purely logical theorem: “Absurdity-of-absurdity-of-absurdity is equiva-
lent with absurdity.” It also demonstrated the use of negation and double negation
as tools for deﬁning new relations between mathematical objects; for example,
beginning with the constructively deﬁned relations of coincidence and apartness
between points of the plane, Brouwer ﬁrst noted that coincidence was equivalent
to the absurdity of apartness, and then deﬁned the new concept of deviation as the
9In the same lecture Brouwer traced the beginning of the recognition that only the intuition of
time need be considered as a priori, back to Descartes’ seventeenth-century invention of analytic
geometry. And from the author’s note to the 1919 reprint: “If this lecture were given to-day, it
would certainly mention . . . the ‘general theory of relativity’, contrived after 1909 . . . ” (see the
English translation in [Brouwer, 1975], p. 120).
10Alongside his logical and philosophical work, Heyting continued making technical contribu-
tions to intuitionistic mathematics until his retirement. See A. S. Troelstra’s appreciation and
complete bibliography [Troelstra, 1968] of Heyting’s work.

82
Joan Rand Moschovakis
absurdity of coincidence (hence the absurdity of the absurdity of apartness). Intu-
itionistically, deviation did not imply apartness; but by the theorem just quoted,
the absurdity of deviation was equivalent to coincidence.
In 1926 R. Wavre published a comparison [Wavre, 1926] of classical and “em-
pirist” logical reasoning; the common principles were those he considered to belong
to “Brouwerian logic.”11 A lively discussion followed in print, with contributions
by L´evy, Barzin and Errera, Glivenko, Heyting, Borel and Church, among oth-
ers.12 Glivenko [1928] incompletely formalized intuitionistic propositional logic;
his second version [Glivenko, 1929] included two axioms proposed to him by Heyt-
ing, who would later credit Glivenko with simplifying his own axiomatization.13
Heyting’s brief 1930 article “On intuitionistic logic” [Heyting, 1930] began by
endorsing Glivenko’s formalization of intuitionistic propositional logic, and went
on “to examine how the logic conceived of by Mr. Glivenko is complicated by the
addition of the idea of provability Mr. Levy has brought into discussion and that
he unduly identiﬁes with the Brouwerian assertion.” Instead, wrote Heyting, the
Brouwerian assertion of p (written ⊢p) is “It is known how to prove p. . . . The
idea of an existence of mathematical entities outside our minds must not enter
into the proofs.” Then, introducing a new formal symbol + for “is provable,” he
examined in detail the relation between Brouwerian negation and + and observed:
“In order to be able to assert ⊢¬ + p, it suﬃces to reduce to a contradiction the
supposition that one can ﬁnd a construction proving p.” Thus it could happen
that for some p “one would have at the same time
⊢¬ + p and ⊢¬¬p. One
should abandon every hope of ever settling the question; the problem would be
unresolvable.”14
In 1928 Hilbert and Ackermann’s “Principles of Mathematical Logic”(Grundz¨uge
der theoretischen Logik [Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928]) appeared, with careful ax-
iomatizations of classical propositional and predicate logic; proofs of the complete-
ness and consistency of the ﬁrst; and a consistency proof and a clear statement of
the completeness problem for the second.15 One year later G¨odel earned his doc-
11Wavre accepted (A ⊃B) ⊃(¬B ⊃¬A) as empirically correct, observing that the converse
holds empirically only if B is a negation. He did not assert Heyting’s axiom ¬A ⊃(A ⊃B).
12Wavre, Borel and L´evy exchanged views in the Revue de M´etaphysique et de Morale. Barzin
and Errera, Glivenko, and Heyting published in the Bulletin of the Belgian Royal Academy.
Church [1928], in English, criticised Barzin and Errera’s [1927]. Details and some translations
are in [Mancosu, 1998]. The history can be found in [Hessling, 2003] and [Mancosu et al., 2009].
13Like Wavre, Glivenko at ﬁrst omitted the intuitionistic principle that a contradiction implies
every statement; also missing from his ﬁrst attempt was A ⊃(B ⊃A).
14Quotations are from the translation of Heyting [Heyting, 1930] by Amy L. Rocha, [Mancosu,
1998, p.
306ﬀ], with slightly diﬀerent symbolism.
The example Heyting used of a possibly
unresolvable mathematical question was the Goldbach conjecture, that every even integer (greater
than 2) can be expressed as the sum of two prime numbers.
While this conjecture remains
unresolved, it was not well chosen because its logical form is such that any proof of its double
negation would easily yield, by intuitionistic arithmetic, a proof of the conjecture itself. Since
Heyting asserted that in general “ ⊢+p has exactly the same meaning as ⊢p,” not both ⊢p and
⊢¬ + p can hold.
15The ﬁrst three editions of Hilbert and Ackermann’s very inﬂuential textbook were devoted

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
83
torate from the University of Vienna with a proof of the completeness of classical
predicate logic.16
Finally, in 1930 Heyting’s three fundamental articles “The formal rules of in-
tuitionistic logic” [Heyting, 1930a] and “The formal rules of intuitionistic math-
ematics” II and III [Heyting, 1930b; Heyting, 1930c] appeared in German in the
Sitzungsberichte of the Prussian Academy of Sciences. The ﬁrst of these formal-
ized intuitionistic propositional logic, the second presented formal systems for
intuitionistic ﬁrst-order predicate logic and arithmetic, and the third contained a
partial axiomatization of intuitionistic analysis and Brouwer’s theory of species
(his substitute for classical set theory). Heyting’s work, which will be discussed
in detail here, was partly anticipated by Glivenko and also by A. Kolmogorov,
whose axiomatization [Kolmogorov, 1925] of the intuitionistic propositional logic
of implication and negation (“minimal logic”) and part of intuitionistic ﬁrst-order
predicate logic was published in 1925 in Russian; it does not appear to have been
noticed in the West.17
In the 1930s Kurt G¨odel and Gerhard Gentzen independently observed that
classical logic and arithmetic could be eﬀectively translated into their intuition-
istic subtheories. G¨odel stated, and Gentzen proved, the disjunction and exis-
tence properties for intuitionistic formal logic and arithmetic.
A decade later
Brouwer’s work caught the attention of the American logician Stephen Kleene
who eventually, with his student Richard Vesley, developed in [Kleene and Ves-
ley, 1965] an eﬃcient axiomatization and a consistency proof for intuitionistic
analysis, clarifying its relation to the classical theory. In 1958 G¨odel proved the
consistency of classical analysis using primitive recursive functions of higher type
(the “Dialectica interpretation” [G¨odel, 1958]; cf. [Avigad and Feferman, 1998;
?]). Four years later Cliﬀord Spector, another Kleene student, used bar recursive
functionals for the same purpose in [Spector, 1962], extending to higher types one
of the key principles of intuitionistic analysis.
In 1973 Heyting’s student Anne S. Troelstra edited (and mostly wrote) the
inﬂuential survey [Troelstra, 1973], which was followed in the 1980s by Michael
Beeson’s [Beeson, 1985] and Troelstra and Dirk van Dalen’s [Troelstra and van
Dalen, 1988]. Many other logicians have contributed to the metamathematical
study of intuitionistic mathematics and logic, among them P. Aczel, E. W. Beth,
M. Bezem, J. Diller, M. Dummett, A. G. Dragalin, M. Fitting, M. Fourman, H.
Friedman, S. Ghilardi, R. Grayson, S. Hayashi, G. F. van der Hoeven, W. A.
Howard, R. Iemhoﬀ, J. J. de Iongh, D. H. J. de Jongh, G. Kreisel, S. Kripke,
entirely to classical logic. In the fourth German edition, published in 1959, Ackermann added
optional sections on intuitionistic logic and strong negation.
16For a full discussion of the classical completeness problem, its history and solution, see the
article in this volume titled “G¨odel’s logic” [?]. There, van Atten and Kennedy present evidence
that G¨odel was inﬂuenced by two lectures Brouwer gave in Vienna in March, 1928. They also
quote a passage from G¨odel’s doctoral dissertation, crediting Brouwer with stressing that the
consistency of a formal system did not in itself imply the existence of a model.
17Mancosu, Zach and Badesa [Mancosu et al., 2009] includes an analysis of the content of
[Kolmogorov, 1925].

84
Joan Rand Moschovakis
M. Krol, H. L¨auchli, D. Leivant, V. Lifschitz, M. L¨ob, I. Loeb, H. Luckhardt,
P. Martin-L¨of, D. McCarty, G. Mints, I. Moerdijk, J. Myhill, D. Nelson, J. van
Oosten, H. Rasiowa, W. Ruitenberg, B. Scarpellini, A. Scedrov, K. Sch¨utte, D.
Scott, P. Scowcroft, C. A. Smorynski, H. C. M. de Swart, A. S. Troelstra, W.
Veldman, A. Visser, F. Waaldijk, S. Weinstein and the author.18
Brouwer’s chair at the University of Amsterdam was held after his death by
Heyting, Troelstra and de Jongh in succession. The tradition of doing intuition-
istic mathematics in the spirit of Brouwer has been continued in Nijmegen in the
Netherlands by Wim Veldman, a student of J. J. de Iongh, who was a student of
Brouwer. Two alternative schools of mathematics based on intuitionistic logic are
the Russian recursive mathematics of A. A. Markov and his followers, and Errett
Bishop’s cautious constructive mathematics which is still under development by
Douglas Bridges, Fred Richman, Hajime Ishihara and many others. Intuitionistic
logic has found modern applications in computer science and category theory.
2
INTUITIONISTIC PROPOSITIONAL LOGIC
2.1
Brouwer’s View of Negation as Absurdity
Brouwer objected equally to the laws of excluded middle and double negation
because he interpreted negation not as falsity, but as absurdity. Thus “p or not
p” meant “either p is correct or p is contradictory ;” while “if not not p, then p”
meant that the absurdity of the absurdity of p (in other words, the consistency
of p) implies that p is correct.19
In [Brouwer, 1925] Brouwer thanked Bernays
for pointing out that the general law of excluded middle is derivable from the
general law of double negation; the converse observation had already appeared in
[Brouwer, 1908], where Brouwer equated the general law of excluded middle with
the (untenable) a priori position that every mathematical question is solvable.
Kolmogorov [1932] observed that Brouwer’s view transforms a negative asser-
tion into a positive one: “Thus the negation of a is transformed into an existential
proposition: ‘There exists a chain of logical inferences that, under the assumption
of the correctness of a, leads to a contradiction.’” Under material implication,
which Heyting explicitly accepted, every statement is derivable from any contra-
diction. Thus, given a particular contradictory assertion ⊥, the negation of a can
be deﬁned as “if a then ⊥,” reducing negation to implication. Nevertheless, all
the early intuitionistic formal systems include negation as a primitive symbol.
18Here the term “metamathematical” is used loosely to include the study, by constructive or
classical means, of formal systems whose intended interpretation is intuitionistic. Brouwer did
not long object in principle to formalizing parts of intuitionistic reasoning, but it is unlikely that
he would have approved of using classical methods to study the resulting formal systems.
19W. P. van Stigt singles out [Brouwer, 1923], in which Brouwer proves that “absurdity of
absurdity of absurdity is equivalent with absurdity,” as evidence of his (temporary) willingness
to study metamathematical questions. At that time Brouwer was also interested, with Mannoury,
in the Signiﬁcist philosophy which held that it was possible to improve communication by reﬁning
language.

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
85
2.2
Heyting’s Propositional Calculus
From a historical perspective the most signiﬁcant formalization of intuitionistic
propositional logic was the one published by Heyting in 1930 [Heyting, 1930a].
We present it here using Heyting’s notation, but omitting the “ ⊢⊢” preceding
each axiom. After observing that the intuitionistic logical connectives ⊃, ∧, ∨, ¬
are independent of one another (unlike the classical connectives), he proposed as
rules of inference:
1.2.
If a and b are correct formulas, then a ∧b is also correct.
1.3.
If a and a ⊃b are correct formulas, then b is also correct.
and as axiom schemata:
2.1.
· a ⊃a ∧a .
2.11. · a ∧b ⊃b ∧a .
2.12. · a ⊃b · ⊃· a ∧c ⊃b ∧c .
2.13. · a ⊃b · ∧· b ⊃c · ⊃· a ⊃c .
2.14. · b ⊃· a ⊃b .
2.15. · a ∧· a ⊃b · ⊃b .
3.1.
· a ⊃a ∨b .
3.11. · a ∨b ⊃b ∨a .
3.12. · a ⊃c · ∧· b ⊃c · ⊃· a ∨b ⊃c .
4.1.
· ¬a ⊃· a ⊃b .
4.11. · a ⊃b · ∧· a ⊃¬b · ⊃¬a .
In each rule or axiom the a, b, c are metavariables in the sense that each one may
be replaced, throughout the statement of the rule or axiom, by any well-deﬁned
formula.
Heyting deﬁned logical equivalence by
2.01. · a ⊃⊂b · =D · a ⊃b · ∧· b ⊃a .
and proceeded to sketch proofs for seventy formal theorems.
As an example,
consider20
2.2.
⊢· a ∧b ⊃a .
Proof. [2.14] ⊢· a ⊃· b ⊃a : ⊃:
20In Heyting’s version the last “a” of the proof was incorrectly printed as “b.”

86
Joan Rand Moschovakis
[2.12] ⊢· a ∧b ⊃· b ⊃a · ∧b · ⊃[2.15] a .
Observe that the last step involves an implicit use of axiom 2.11; the applications
of rule 1.3 are also implicit; but the argument is evidently sound, provided the
postulates are correct. We single out a few additional numbered results, omitting
the proof-sketches (which depend on intermediate theorems).21
2.22. ⊢· a ∧b ⊃b .
2.26. ⊢· b ⊃· a ⊃a ∧b .
4.2.
⊢· a ⊃b · ⊃· ¬b ⊃¬a .
4.3.
⊢· a ⊃¬¬a .
4.31. ⊢· ¬a ⊃¬¬¬a .
4.32. ⊢· ¬¬¬a ⊃¬a .
4.45. ⊢· a ∨¬a · ⊃· ¬¬a ⊃a .
4.46. ⊢· ¬a ∨b ⊃· a ⊃b .
4.47. ⊢· a ∨b ⊃· ¬a ⊃b .
4.8.
⊢· ¬¬(a ∨¬a) .
4.83. ⊢· a ∨¬a ⊃¬b · ⊃¬b .
4.9.
⊢· a ⊃b · ⊃¬(a ∧¬b) .
4.91. ⊢· a ∨b ⊃¬(¬a ∧¬b) .
4.92. ⊢· a ∧b ⊃¬(¬a ∨¬b) .
To show each of his axioms independent of the other ten, Heyting provided
eleven interpretations in the style of Bernays, using ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite
truth tables. To show axiom 2.15 is independent, for example, he used four truth
values 0, 1, 2, 3 (of which only 0 represents “correct”) with the tables
⊃
0
1
2
3
∧
0
1
2
3
∨
0
1
2
3
¬
0
1
2
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
2
3
2
2
0
0
0
2
2
1
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
3
2
0
2
0
3
2
1
2
2
3
0
3
2
3
When a, b, c independently take arbitrary values in {0, 1, 2, 3} every axiom but
2.15 takes the value 0 . But when a is 0 and b is 3 then a ∧· a ⊃b takes the
value 0 ∧2 = 2 , so a ∧· a ⊃b · ⊃b is 2 ⊃3 = 2 ̸= 0 .
21Heyting credited Glivenko with the formal proofs of 4.3 and 4.8, and with the statement of
4.83.

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
87
The requirement that the two rules of inference lead from correct formulas to
correct formulas imposed restrictions on the interpretations.
Heyting observed
that for rule 1.2 the condition 0 ∧0 = 0 was necessary and suﬃcient; while for
rule 1.3 it was enough that 0 ⊃a = 0 only when a = 0 (so the ﬁrst column of
the table for ⊃must have only one 0 representing the value of 0 ⊃0 ). However,
he failed to notice that rule 1.2 was derivable from the other postulates. To see
this, suppose a and b are correct. Then so are b ⊃a (by 2.14 with rule 1.3) and
b ∧b (by 2.1 with rule 1.3). But b ⊃a · ⊃· b ∧b ⊃a ∧b is an instance of 2.12,
so a ∧b follows by two applications of rule 1.3.
Finally Heyting provided a three-valued interpretation for which all the axioms
and rules are correct, but not ¬¬a ⊃a (and hence not a ∨¬a , by theorem 4.45
stated above). Note that for Heyting “correctness” was absolute: “The formula
a ⊃b means in general: ‘If a is correct, then b is also correct’,”22 from which
it follows that if b is correct, so is a ⊃b (the sense of axiom 2.14).
As his main sources Heyting listed Peano’s Formulaire des Math´ematiques, Rus-
sell and Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica, Hilbert and Ackerman’s Grundz¨uge
der theoretischen Logik, and two articles: Bernays’ “Axiomatische Untersuchung
des Aussagenkalk¨uls der ‘Principia Mathematica’ ” (Math. Zeitschrift 25 (1926)
p. 305) and Glivenko’s “Sur la logique de M. Brouwer” (Bulletins de l’Academie
royale de Belgique 5e serie vol. XIV (1928) p. 225). Glivenko’s article deserves a
closer look, as it both anticipated and was inﬂuenced by Heyting’s fomalization.
2.3
Glivenko’s Contribution
Inspired by Brouwer’s [1923], Valerii Glivenko published two notes in French in
the Acad´emie Royale de Belgique in 1928 [Glivenko, 1928] and 1929 [Glivenko,
1929]. The ﬁrst contained an incomplete axiomatization of intuitionistic proposi-
tional logic with modus ponens as its only rule of inference, and a formal proof of
¬¬(a ∨¬a) (“a remarkable theorem of Mr. Brouwer” [Glivenko, 1929]).
The second provided four additional axioms, including Heyting’s axioms 2.14
and 4.1 (which Glivenko justiﬁed intuitively as consequences of the intuitionisti-
cally acceptable principle a ∨¬b · ⊃· b ⊃a ).23 On the basis of his new axiomati-
zation, which he claimed to be complete for intuitionistic propositional reasoning,
Glivenko proved two metatheorems (known today as “Glivenko’s Theorems”) re-
lating intuitionistic and classical logic. In his own words:24
1. “If a certain expression in the logic of propositions is provable in classical
logic, it is the falsity of the falsity of this expression that is provable in
Brouwerian logic.”
22p. 44 of the German original.
23In a footnote Glivenko gave Heyting credit for convincing him of the necessity of these two
axioms, and referred to Heyting’s “memoir, which will soon appear in the Mathem. Annalen.”
In fact Brouwer, who had fallen out of favor with Hilbert, was no longer an editor of that journal
and Heyting’s formalization appeared instead in the Proceedings of the Prussian Academy of
Sciences as [Heyting, 1930a; Heyting, 1930b] and [Heyting, 1930c]; cf. [van Dalen, 1990].
24The translation is by Amy L. Rocha, [Mancosu, 1998, p. 301].

88
Joan Rand Moschovakis
2. “If the falsity of a certain expression in the logic of propositions is provable
in classical logic, that same falsity is provable in Brouwerian logic.”
To prove the ﬁrst theorem he used modus ponens with a ⊃¬¬a (already proved
in [Glivenko, 1928]) to derive the double negation of each of his axioms from the
axiom itself, then veriﬁed that ¬¬b is derivable in his augmented intuitionistic
system from ¬¬a and ¬¬(a ⊃b) . The second was an easy corollary of the ﬁrst,
using ¬¬¬a ⊃¬a (also proved in [Glivenko, 1928]).
Glivenko did not address the question whether all his axioms were necessary,
but each is provable in Heyting’s formalism. Conversely, each of Heyting’s axioms
is provable from Glivenko’s, and Heyting’s rule 1.2 follows from Glivenko’s axioms
by modus ponens (which is Heyting’s rule 1.3). From this point of view the two
formal systems are equivalent, although each has advantages and disadvantages.
In [Kleene, 1952], as we shall see, Kleene made a coherent selection of axioms from
their union.
2.4
Kolmogorov’s Problem Interpretation
In 1932 Kolmogorov [1932] provided a kind of semantics for intuitionistic logic, as
an alternative to Heyting’s emphasis on proofs. Taking the notions of (mathemat-
ical) “problem” and “solution of a problem” as already understood, he proposed
to attach to every expression of the form ⊢p(a, b, c, . . .) the problem “to give
a general method for the solution of p(a, b, c, . . .) for any single choice of prob-
lems a, b, c, . . ..” Here p(a, b, c, . . .) is a propositional formula with only the atoms
a, b, c, . . .
and the propositional connectives have the following interpretation:
If a and b are two problems, then a∧b designates the problem “to solve
both a and b,” while a ∨b designates the problem “to solve at least
one of the problems a and b.” Furthermore, a ⊃b is the problem “to
solve b provided that the solution for a is given” or, equivalently, “to
reduce the solution of b to the solution of a.”
. . .
Correspondingly,
¬a designates the problem “to obtain a contradiction provided that
the solution of a is given.”
Kolmogorov thus transformed the logical rules and axioms of Heyting’s proposi-
tional logic into the postulates of an “elementary calculus of problems.”25
These ideas, which Kolmogorov extended to predicate logic (see the next sec-
tion), anticipated Kleene and Nelson’s 1945 realizability interpretation [Kleene,
1945; Nelson, 1947] of intuitionistic arithmetic.
Together with Heyting’s proof
interpretation they form the basis of what is often called the “Brouwer-Heyting-
Kolmogorov (B-H-K) explication” of intuitionistic logic.
25The quotations are from Paolo Mancosu’s translation, [Mancosu, 1998], [Kolmogorov, 1932,
pp. 328–334].

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
89
3
INTUITIONISTIC FIRST-ORDER PREDICATE LOGIC
3.1
The Intuitionistic Universal and Existential Quantiﬁers
Brouwer accepted universal quantiﬁcation over the natural numbers, interpreting
the statement that every n has a certain property as an incomplete communication
of a construction which, applied in a uniform manner to each natural number n as
it is generated, veriﬁes the property for that n. The statement that there exists an
m with a certain property means that a particular number m with the property
has been constructed, or that a method for constructing such a number is known.
Kolmogorov similarly interpreted a universal statement as a problem requiring a
general method for its solution, and an existential statement as the problem of
ﬁnding a witness. Thus under the B-H-K interpretation the phrase “for every n
there is an m” aﬃrms the construction of an eﬀective operation which assigns to
each n an appropriate m; this is why the axiom of countable choice is generally
considered to be intuitionistically correct.
Quantiﬁcation over more complicated domains is meaningful intuitionistically
only if the elements of the domain are legitimate mathematical entities and the
structure of the domain admits uniform eﬀective operations. This interpretation
clearly distinguishes intuitionistic quantiﬁcation from the classical case where each
domain is assumed to consist of preexisting objects which can be examined simul-
taneously for the presence or absence of a given property, and the existential
quantiﬁer does not entail the production of a witness.
3.2
Heyting’s Predicate Calculus With Identity
Continuing the work he began in [Heyting, 1930a] (§2.2 above), in the introduction
to [Heyting, 1930b] Heyting wrote:26
To enable the further decomposition into subject and predicate, we
follow the path of functional calculus which was ﬁrst laid down by
Russell and Whitehead, and was recently lucidly presented and sig-
niﬁcantly improved by Hilbert and Ackermann in their book. Above
all, the concept of mathematical object must be explained. The real
construction of mathematics begins immediately with the treatment of
objects (natural numbers, sets, etc.) For the formal treatment, how-
ever, it turns out to be convenient to assume in advance general axioms
about the relations between objects and about formulas which contain
variables for objects.. . .
The fundamental relation between individuals is p == q, “ p is the same
object as q.” . . . The symbol = will be used for numerical equality and
similar concepts (e.g. cardinal equality for sets); this relation can hold
26Unless otherwise noted, all translations from the German of [Heyting, 1930b; Heyting, 1930c]
are my own.

90
Joan Rand Moschovakis
between objects which are not identical; . . . We also need a special
symbol for mathematical identity, which must be deﬁned for each sort
of mathematical objects . . . For mathematical identity we choose the
symbol ≡.27
He attributed to the formula p == p a strong sense according to which “we can
translate 6.1. ⊢⊢1 == 1 by ‘1 is an object.’ ”28 He used the notation

p
x

a
for “ ‘the expression which results from a by replacing the variable x throughout,
everywhere it appears, by the term (Zeichenzusammenstellung) p.’ ” Building on
Hilbert and Ackermann’s [Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] and his own [Heyting,
1930a], Heyting developed the formal language of his predicate calculus using
a, b, c, . . . for sentential variables (Aussagenver¨anderliche) and p, q, r, . . . for object
variables (Gegenstandver¨anderliche), with the relation symbols ==, ε, the function
application symbol ‘, and “objects (Gegenst¨ande) i, N, seq” and specifying that
the “quantiﬁers
 p
x

, (x), (Ex), where x is an object variable, make x into a
bound variable in the part of the formula they inﬂuence. Such [an x] can only be
replaced by another object variable.”
His “rules of operation” included an inductive deﬁnition of “expression” (i.e.
well-formed formula) extending the formation rules for ⊃, ∧, ∨and ¬ stated more
casually in [Heyting, 1930a], but for one clause of this deﬁnition the concept “cor-
rect formula” — which itself depended inductively on the axiom schemata and
rules of inference, including those of the propositional calculus — was required by
his use of
==
to confer legitimacy on terms; see rule 5.32 below. Heyting did not
deﬁne “term” but the usage made clear that object variables and constant objects
such as i were terms. We list his key new rules, omitting a few obvious conditions
on substitution in expressions but including the formation rules and the rules of
inference 5.4–5.7:29
5.3.
Every correct (richtige) formula is an expression (Ausdruck).
5.32. From an expression another expression results, if one replaces a propositional
variable throughout by the same expression, or an object variable throughout
by the same term p, for which p == p is a correct formula.
27In each mathematical application, = and ≡must be deﬁned for each sort of object in terms
of =
=. In arithmetic there is no diﬀerence.
28This use of =
= anticipated by decades a similar use of = in the logic of partial terms, cf.
[Scott, 1979; Beeson, 1985].
29Richard Zach has observed an anomaly in Heyting’s deﬁnition of “expression.”
Rule 5.7
(with 5.3) allows (y) ·
„ y
x
«
A ⊃⊂A to be an expression if x occurs (only) bound in A, but
then no rule guarantees that e.g.
„ y
x
«
A is an expression. The gap could be ﬁlled by extending
the “and conversely” in rule 5.34 to rule 5.36 and adding a rule to the eﬀect that if
„ p
x
«
A,
(x) A, or (Ex) A is an expression, so is A.

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
91
5.34. If A is an expression, so is ¬A, and conversely.
5.35. If A is an expression in which x does not appear as a bound variable, then

p
x

A, (x) A, (Ex) A are expressions.
5.36. If A and B are expressions, so are A ⊃B, A ∧B and A ∨B.
5.4.
From a correct formula another correct formula results, if one replaces a
propositional variable throughout by the same expression, or an object vari-
able throughout by a term p, for which p == p is a correct formula.
5.5.
If a ⊃b and (p) ·

p
x

a ⊃⊂a are correct formulas, then a ⊃(x) b is a
correct formula.
5.6.
If a ⊃b and (p) ·
 p
x

b ⊃⊂b are correct formulas, then (Ex) a ⊃b is a
correct formula.
5.7.
If in the expression A the variable x appears only bound, then (y)·
 y
x

A ⊃⊂
A is a correct formula.
As axiom schemata, in addition to those of intuitionistic propositional logic
extended to the predicate language, Heyting proposed the following. First, the
axioms for equality:
6.1.
1 == 1 .
6.11. p == p ∧q == q ⊃p == q ∨¬(p == q) .
6.12. q == p ⊃p == q .
The next group contained axioms asserting that the replacement operator com-
mutes with the propositional connectives, and also
6.2.
 x
x

a ⊃⊂a .
6.21.
⎛
⎝
 q
x

p
x
⎞
⎠a ⊃⊂
 q
x
  p
x

a .
6.26. · p == q ⊃·
 p
x

a ⊃
 q
x

a .
Heyting then introduced a notation g(x) for “g does not contain x,” with the
deﬁnition

92
Joan Rand Moschovakis
6.01. · g(x) =D · (p)

p
x

g == g · ∨· (p) ·

p
x

g ⊃⊂g .
Without commenting on the peculiarity of the disjunctions obtained by literally
replacing g throughout this deﬁnition by a term or expression, he remarked: “ . . .
The ﬁrst alternative in 6.01 holds, when g represents an object; the second, if g is
an expression. The introduction of this symbol will make possible the distinction
between function and sentence variables.”
This aspect of Heyting’s formalism
illustrates its incompatibility with modern treatments like that of Kleene [Kleene,
1952, p. 82], which will be considered later.
Six quantiﬁer axioms completed the predicate calculus:
6.3.
(x) a ⊃
 p
x

a .
6.31. (x) a ⊃(y)

y
x

a .
6.32. · (y) · y == y ⊃

y
x

a · ⊃(x) a .
6.5.

p
x

a ⊃(Ex) a .
6.51. · a (x) ⊃· (Ex) a ⊃(x) a .
6.52. · (x) · a ⊃b · ⊃· (Ex) a ⊃(Ex) b .
The thirty ﬁve formal theorems Heyting proved on this basis included
6.77. ⊢(Ex) ¬ ¬ a ⊃¬ ¬ (Ex) a .
6.78. ⊢¬ ¬ (x) a ⊃(x) ¬ ¬ a .
He remarked that neither converse is provable, observing “For 6.77 this follows
easily from the meaning of (Ex).” For 6.78 he used a Brouwerian counterexample,
the set A of all inﬁnitely proceeding sequences of digits 1, 2, such that once a 2
is chosen, only 2 may be chosen thereafter. To each (positive) natural number he
assigned an element of A as follows. The number 1 is associated with the constant
sequence 1111 . . . , 2 with the constant sequence 2222 . . . , 3 with 1222 . . . , 4 with
1122 . . . , and so on. Letting the object variable x range over the elements of A
and taking a to mean “x is assigned to a natural number,” Heyting argued that
(x) ¬ ¬ a held for this interpretation by the deﬁnition of A, while ¬ (x) a held by
the nonclassical form of Brouwer’s fan theorem, see §7 below. “However by 4.521
(x) ¬ ¬ a ∧¬ (x) a is incompatible with the converse of 6.78.”30
30In [Brouwer, 1925, p. 256], from which Heyting said he took this example, Brouwer drew
a stronger conclusion: that the set described is not eﬀectively enumerable (in the sense that no
correlation of distinct natural numbers to all of its elements is possible).

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
93
4
INTUITIONISTIC ARITHMETIC
In the remainder of [Heyting, 1930b] Heyting applied intuitionistic predicate logic
to arithmetic. The language he chose was so arcane that in the interest of compre-
hension it will not be used here except in this brief discussion from the historical
viewpoint.
4.1
Heyting’s Arithmetic
From the primitive symbols ε and ‘, with the intended interpretations of member-
ship and function application respectively, he ﬁrst constructed formal deﬁnitions
(or abbreviations) corresponding to the concepts “ x is a single-valued function
from p to q ” and “ s belongs to the image of r under x ,” then deﬁned mathemat-
ical identity between two functions from p to q extensionally in terms of == on
the range. Using the constant symbol N to represent the set of positive natural
numbers, and seq for the successor operation, he added axioms asserting that i is
a natural number, successor is a one-to-one function from numbers to numbers,
and i is not a successor; also the axiom schema of mathematical induction. He
deﬁned numerical equality = and mathematical identity ≡between numbers to
be the same as == . Then he gave the primitive recursive deﬁning equations for
+ and (quantiﬁer-free) explicit deﬁnitions for −, < and > , and developed the
quantiﬁer-free part of this theory. Among the formal theorems he proved was
10.524.
⊢p , q εN ⊃p = q ∨p > q ∨p < q .
Heyting did not draw the conclusion that every expression A involving only
i , seq , = , + , −, > , < and the propositional connectives is formally decidable
when all individual variables range over N, although he could have shown this by
a straightforward induction on the logical form of A . He did not add a symbol
and deﬁnition for multiplication. That same year (1930), in the Proceedings of
the First Congress of Mathematicians of the Slavic Countries held at Warsaw in
1929, M. Presburger [1930] published consistency and completeness proofs and
a decision procedure for a formal system of classical ﬁrst-order arithmetic with
addition but without multiplication.31
What is now usually meant by “Heyting’s arithmetic” is a ﬁrst-order formal-
ism with (at least) an individual constant 0 , a unary function symbol S or
′ ,
binary function symbols + and · , and axioms in which the individual variables
range implicitly rather than explicitly over the natural numbers. The importance
of multiplication is that it permits the coding of ﬁnite sequences of numbers by
numbers, and this in turn makes possible the coding of arithmetic within arith-
metic; cf. §5.1 below. Troelstra [1973] included the axioms for all primitive re-
31Cf. Kleene’s [1952, p. 204]. Presburger’s article is in German but the title of the volume is
in Polish. Kleene noted that Hilbert and Bernays [1934, pp. 359ﬀ.] adapted Presburger’s proof
to a less cumbersome classical formalism, and Joan Ross veriﬁed the corresponding result for the
intuitionistic subsystem of Presburger arithmetic .

94
Joan Rand Moschovakis
cursive number-theoretic functions, making his version of Heyting’s arithmetic an
extension of Primitive Recursive Arithmetic PRA and a subtheory of “Heyting’s
arithmetic of ﬁnite types” HAω.
4.2
Kleene’s Intuitionistic Arithmetic
Anticipating Kleene’s formalization of intuitionistic analysis, to be discussed in §6
below, we now present his standard treatment of intuitionistic arithmetic. With
minor changes in symbolism and numbering this is the formal system developed
and studied in Kleene’s fundamental 1952 textbook Introduction to Metamathe-
matics [Kleene, 1952], which played the same role for logicians in the third quarter
of the twentieth century as Hilbert and Ackermann’s [1928] in the second. Kleene’s
language has countably many individual variables a1, a2, a3, . . . , an individual con-
stant 0, a unary function symbol ′, two binary function symbols + and ·, and the
binary predicate symbol =. There are no other predicate symbols. Terms and
prime formulas are deﬁned inductively as follows:
• 0 is a term.
• Each individual variable is a term.
• If s and t are terms then s′, (s + t) and (s · t) are terms.
• If s and t are terms then (s = t) is a prime formula.
Every occurrence of a variable x in a term s or t is free in (s = t). Parentheses and
the symbol · may be omitted according to the usual mathematical conventions.
Formulas are built from prime formulas using ∧, ∨, ⊃, ¬, ∀, ∃, and parentheses
(omitted by the usual conventions when the scope of a logical symbol is clear
without them, as Heyting omitted unnecessary delimiting dots). An occurrence of
a variable x in a formula A is bound if it is within the scope of an existential or
universal quantiﬁer, otherwise free.
The only rules of inference are the logical rules R1 - R3 inherited from Kleene’s
treatment of propositional and predicate logic (compare Heyting’s rules 1.3 and
5.5 - 5.7) :
R1. From A and A ⊃B , conclude B.
R2. From C ⊃A(x) where x does not occur free in C, conclude C ⊃∀xA(x).
R3. From A(x) ⊃C where x does not occur free in C, conclude ∃xA(x) ⊃C.
The axioms are of three kinds: the logical axiom schemas X1 - X12, the math-
ematical induction schema X13, and the particular arithmetical axioms X14-X21
(from which the reﬂexivity, symmetry and transitivity of = follow). For X11 and
X12, A(x) may be any formula and t any term free for x in A(x). For X13,
A(x) may be any formula and x any variable. For X14 - X21 the a, b, c are three
particular distinct individual variables (for example a1, a2, a3 ), so these axioms

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
95
(unlike X13) are formulas rather than schemas. Their universal closures are prov-
able, and the conclusion of X13 can be strengthened to ∀xA(x) by R2 since x is
not free in the hypothesis.
X1. A ⊃(B ⊃A).
X2. (A ⊃B) ⊃((A ⊃(B ⊃C)) ⊃(A ⊃C)).
X3. A ⊃(B ⊃A ∧B).
X4. A ∧B ⊃A.
X5. A ∧B ⊃B.
X6. A ⊃A ∨B.
X7. B ⊃A ∨B.
X8. (A ⊃C) ⊃((B ⊃C) ⊃(A ∨B ⊃C)).
X9. (A ⊃B) ⊃((A ⊃¬B) ⊃¬A).
X10. ¬A ⊃(A ⊃B).
X11. ∀xA(x) ⊃A(t).
X12. A(t) ⊃∃xA(x).
X13. A(0) ∧∀x(A(x) ⊃A(x′)) ⊃A(x).
X14. (a′ = b′) ⊃(a = b).
X15. ¬(a′ = 0).
X16. (a = b) ⊃((a = c) ⊃(b = c)).
X17. (a = b) ⊃(a′ = b′).
X18. (a + 0) = a.
X19. (a + b′) = (a + b)′.
X20. (a · 0) = 0.
X21. (a · b′) = (a · b) + a.
After developing an unambiguous coding in this theory for ﬁnite sequences of
natural numbers, Kleene proved that symbols and deﬁning equations for any num-
ber of primitive recursive functions could be conservatively added to the system.
He went on to give a careful exposition of the negative results of G¨odel, Church
and Rosser for ﬁrst-order intuitionistic number theory as well as for the classical
theory which results when Heyting’s axiom schema X10 is replaced by ¬¬A ⊃A .

96
Joan Rand Moschovakis
We state these results in the next section; for details, and also for historical ev-
idence of Brouwer’s inﬂuence on G¨odel, see van Atten and Kennedy’s [?] in this
volume.
Kleene’s formalization of pure intuitionistic ﬁrst-order predicate logic without
equality is obtained by allowing only individual variables as terms, allowing as
prime formulas only proposition letters and expressions formed from n-place pred-
icate letters by ﬁlling the places with occurrences of variables, and omitting the
arithmetical axioms X13 - X21. From now on we refer to this theory, based on
rules R1 - R3 and axiom schemas X1 - X12, as “intuitionistic predicate logic”
IQC. By “intuitionistic propositional logic” IPC we mean the subtheory of IQC
with only proposition letters as prime formulas, only the rule R1 and only the
axiom schemas X1–X10.32
5
PROOF THEORY OF INTUITIONISTIC LOGIC AND ARITHMETIC
Classical propositional and predicate logic, and a version of classical (Presburger)
arithmetic, can be obtained from Heyting’s formal systems simply by replacing ax-
iom schema 4.1 by either the law of excluded middle or the law of double negation;
then 4.1 becomes a theorem. Kleene’s formalisms have the analogous property.
Thus intuitionistic logic and arithmetic are proper subtheories of the corresponding
classical theories.
Classical propositional logic can be formalized using only two logical connectives
(∧and ¬, for example), from which the others are deﬁnable. Classical predicate
logic needs only one quantiﬁer (for example, ∀) from which the other is deﬁn-
able using negation.33 The intuitionistic logical language is thus more expressive
than the classical, allowing ﬁner distinctions. But is intuitionistic logic essentially
weaker than classical logic? This question was answered in stages, and the answer
is a ﬁrm “no.”
5.1
Equiconsistency and the Negative Translations
Wishing to defend the consistency of the classical law of excluded middle, Kol-
mogorov [1925] gave a nearly complete axiomatization of minimal logic, the in-
tuitionistic propositional logic of ⊃and ¬ .34
Focusing on the importance of
what is now called “stability under double negation,” Kolmogorov showed that if
a proposition b in this language could be proved using also the classical schema
¬¬a ⊃a , then the proposition bk obtained from b by doubly negating each of
its prime components could be proved intuitionistically. This transformation ef-
fectively reduced all of classical propositional logic to Kolmogorov’s fragment of
32Troelstra and van Dalen [1988] used the acronyms IQC and IPC for diﬀerent, but equivalent,
axiomatizations of intuitionistic predicate and propositional logic respectively.
33Classically (but not intuitionistically) A ∨B is equivalent to ¬(¬A ∧¬B), A ⊃B is equiva-
lent to ¬(A ∧¬B), and ∃xA(x) is equivalent to ¬∀x¬A(x).
34Like Glivenko [1928], he omitted Heyting’s axiom 4.1; cf. [Mancosu et al., 2009].

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
97
minimal logic.
Glivenko [1928; 1929] also reduced the consistency of classical propositional logic
to that of the intuitionistic theory. If some formula and its negation were both
classically provable, then by Glivenko’s theorems both the double negation and
the negation of that formula would be provable intuitionistically, so intuitionistic
propositional logic would be inconsistent. Glivenko’s Theorems, as stated in §2.3,
do not hold for intuitionistic predicate logic, although G¨odel [1933] showed that
they do for the intermediate logic obtained by adding as axiom schema the converse
of Heyting’s theorem 6.78.35
G¨odel [1933] and Gentzen [1933] independently completed the picture by faith-
fully translating classical predicate logic into the fragment of intuitionistic predi-
cate logic without the logical symbols ∨, ∃, by recursion on the inductive deﬁnition
of formula (i.e. by “formula induction”). The G¨odel translation pg of a prime for-
mula p may be taken to be ¬¬p, and compound formulas are translated as follows:
(a ∧b)g ≡D ag ∧bg,
(a ⊃b)g ≡D ¬(ag ∧¬bg),
(a ∨b)g ≡D ¬(¬ag ∧¬bg),
(¬a)g ≡D ¬ag,
(∀x a)g ≡D ∀x ag
and
(∃x a)g ≡D ¬∀x¬ag.
It is not hard to show that a ⊃⊂ag is classically provable for every formula a, and
that the formula a is provable classically if and only if ag is provable intuitionis-
tically. The Gentzen translation is similar except that implications are translated
by implications.
The negative translation applies also to arithmetic, where prime formulas (equal-
ities) can be taken as their own translations. In intuitionistic arithmetic every for-
mula containing no disjunction and no existential quantiﬁer is stable under double
negation, in the sense that the formula and its double negation are provably equiv-
alent.
Kleene [1952, p. 497] remarked that van Dantzig [1947] suggested “that it may
be possible to interpret practically the whole of classical mathematics within this
stable part of the intuitionistic system;” much later P. Krauss [1992, unpublished]
carried out part of this plan. In essence, one simply treats the combinations ∀¬¬
and ¬¬∃as classical quantiﬁers, and the G¨odel translation of ∨as classical dis-
junction, within the intuitionistic language; cf. [Moschovakis, 2003]. The double
negation following the universal quantiﬁer is needed to break the uniform depen-
dence of the quantiﬁed expression on the variable in question.
The negative translation established the proof-theoretic equivalence of a variety
of classical theories with their intuitionistic subtheories.
In 1932 G¨odel [1932]
showed that if classical ﬁrst-order arithmetic with addition and multiplication is
ω-consistent (that is, if for no formula A(x) are ¬∀xA(x), A(0), A(1), A(2), . . .
all provable), then it is incomplete in the sense that there is a sentence E such
35Cf. Troelstra [1973, p. 93], where this converse is called “double negation shift.” Troelstra
notes that it also justiﬁes the negative translation of the axiom schema of countable choice.
However, as Heyting’s counterexample (§3.2 above) showed, double negation shift fails intuition-
istically when the universal quantiﬁer ranges over choice sequences.

98
Joan Rand Moschovakis
that neither
E
nor
¬E
is provable; and if it is simply consistent then the
sentence expressing its consistency is unprovable. These are G¨odel’s famous First
and Second Incompleteness Theorems. In 1936 Church [1936; 1936a] proved that
classical predicate logic and classical arithmetic (with + and · and assuming ω-
consistency) are undecidable in the sense that there is no recursive procedure for
deciding whether or not a given sentence is provable. In the same year Rosser
[1936] showed that simple consistency was a strong enough assumption for both
G¨odel’s and Church’s theorems.
These results hold also for the corresponding
intuitionistic subtheories.36
Simple consistency of classical (hence also of intuitionistic) predicate logic was
established by Hilbert and Ackermann using two-valued truth tables with a one-
element domain. After proving his incompleteness theorems, G¨odel remarked that
it might still be possible to establish the consistency of arithmetic using meth-
ods which were ﬁnitary in a wider sense, but not formalizable in arithmetic. By
rethinking the nature of logical derivation and admitting a rule of inference (the
ω-rule) with countably inﬁnitely many premises, Gentzen [1935] succeeded in con-
structing a consistency proof for a system of arithmetic for which consistency and
ω-consistency were equivalent by ﬁat. His method applied directly to intuitionistic
as well as to classical ω-arithmetic, by a simple structural restriction which also
marked the diﬀerence between his formal systems for intuitionistic and classical
logic. This brings us to the next topic.
5.2
Constructive Disjunction and Existence
The power of intuitionistic logic lies in the eﬀectiveness or constructiveness of its
conclusions. Within reason, negative translations of nonconstructive axioms can
be added to an intuitionistic theory without losing this eﬀectiveness; and although
the presence of all those double negations may seem clumsy and unnecessary to a
classical mathematician, there is a practical value to this approach.
The constructive nature of intuitionistic logic is exempliﬁed by the fact that if
A ∨B is provable and closed (i.e., contains no free occurrences of individual vari-
ables) then at least one of A, B must be provable. For intuitionistic propositional
logic this disjunction property [DP] was stated without proof by G¨odel [1932a] in
1932 and proved by Gentzen [1935] in 1935 (see the next subsection); Gentzen
also proved it for intuitionistic predicate logic. Implicit in Gentzen’s work and in
Sch¨utte [1950] was the existence property:
[EP] :
If ∃x A(x) is a closed theorem, then A(t) is a theorem for some term t.
for intuitionistic predicate logic.37
The following strong existence property for
intuitionistic arithmetic is due to Kleene [1945, p.
115] and Corollary 2(b) to
36See [?] for a fuller discussion of G¨odel’s, Church’s and Rosser’s theorems.
37Since individual variables are the only terms of pure predicate logic, it follows that if ∃xA(x)
is a closed theorem of pure intuitionistic predicate logic, so is ∀xA(x). Kleene [1962] observes:
“This result was evidently communicated by Gentzen to Heyting in advance of the publication
of [Gentzen, 1935] . . . ”

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
99
Theorem 62 of [Kleene, 1952], with the discussion following) and was reproved by
Harrop [1956], extending a partial result by Rasiowa [1955]:
[EPN] :
If ∃x A(x) is a closed theorem, then A(n) is a theorem for some numeral n.
Here the numerals are 0, 0′, 0′′, 0′′′, . . ..38
5.3
Gentzen’s Contribution
All the formal systems we have considered so far are Hilbert-style, with many ax-
ioms and few rules of inference. Proofs and derivations are linear, with each step
possibly depending logically on one or more earlier steps. For some uses a natu-
ral deduction system is preferable, with few axioms and many rules of inference;
derivations are presented as trees, clarifying the dependency relations.
Gentzen [1935] introduced a new kind of formal system for propositional and
predicate logic, in which antecedents (assumptions) as well as consequents were
listed at each step. Each step in a Gentzen-style derivation was a sequent of the
form A1, . . . , Am →B1, . . . Bs where A1, . . . , Am and B1, . . . Bs were formulas,
and for the intuitionistic system s must always be ≤1. The only axiom schema was
C →C . Rules of inference were of two kinds: rules for introducing logical symbols
in the antecedent and consequent of a sequent, and structural or bookkeeping rules.
We give the rules for introducing negation:39
(in consequent):
From A, Γ →Θ conclude Γ →Θ, ¬A.
(in antecedent):
From Γ →Θ, A conclude ¬A, Γ →Θ.
Here Γ and Θ are lists of formulas, with Θ empty for the intuitionistic system.
The reason for the restriction on s (which follows from the restrictions on Θ) for
the intuitionistic system becomes clear if we consider that for s > 1 the sequent
A1, . . . , Am →B1 ∨. . . ∨Bs could be derived from A1, . . . , Am →B1, . . . , Bs and
so →A ∨¬A would be provable from →A, ¬A which follows from A →A by
the unrestricted ﬁrst negation-introduction rule.
The only introduction rule for which the logical form of the hypothesis or hy-
potheses could not be determined from the logical form of the conclusion was the
cut rule, which for the intuitionistic system read as follows:
From Δ →A and B, Γ →Θ conclude A ⊃B, Δ, Γ →Θ.
38Kleene proved the stronger result that if ∀x∃yA(x, y) is a closed theorem of HA, then there
is a recursive function ϕ such that for every n : if ϕ(n) = m then A(n, m) is provable.
In arithmetic, disjunction can be deﬁned from existential quantiﬁcation by A ∨B ≡D ∃x[(x =
0 ⊃A) ∧(¬(x = 0) ⊃B)] so the existence property entails the disjunction property. In 1975 H.
Friedman [1975] showed that the converse holds also, for any recursively enumerable extension
of HA.
39We follow Kleene’s presentation of Gentzen’s system G1 in [Kleene, 1952, §77]. For more
detail see Kleene [Kleene, 1952, §§77–79] and von Plato’s chapter on Gentzen’s logic in this
volume.

100
Joan Rand Moschovakis
Gentzen proved that every (intuitionistic or classical) derivation in his system
could be reduced to a normal form, in which the cut rule was not used, and that
every formula occurring in any sequent of a normal derivation was a subformula of
some formula occurring in the antecedent or consequent of the last sequent. This
remarkable result is Gentzen’s Hauptsatz.
The disjunction property for intuitionistic logic is an immediate consequence.
In any Gentzen-style proof of a sentence E , the last sequent would be →E ; and
if E was A ∨B then the previous sequent in a normal intuitionistic derivation
must have been either →A or →B .
To see that the disjunction property
fails for classical propositional logic, consider P ∨¬P where P is prime. Since
propositional logic is closed under substitution, the provability of P or of ¬P
would yield inconsistency; yet P ∨¬P is classically provable.
5.4
Admissible Rules and Intermediate Logics
The disjunction and existence properties are special cases of an important struc-
tural diﬀerence, which has recently been illuminated, between intuitionistic and
classical logic. The diﬀerence concerns the distinction between derivable and non-
derivable admissible rules of inference.
A logical rule is a schema, a shorthand notation for inﬁnitely many particular
inferences. If S is a Hilbert-style formal system closed under substitution and if
A1, . . . , Ak, B, are formulas, the logical rule
From A1, . . . , Ak conclude B.
means that if σ(A1), . . . , σ(Ak), σ(B) are obtained by a uniform substitution of
particular formulas for the predicate letters occurring in A1, . . . , Ak, B, and if
σ(A1), . . . , σ(Ak) have already been deduced in S from assumptions Γ, then σ(B)
can also be deduced in S from Γ. In predicate logic there may be some restrictions
on the free variables. The rule is called admissible for S if, for every substitution
σ, if σ(A1), . . . , σ(Ak) are closed theorems of S, then σ(B) is also provable in S;
the standard notation for this situation is
A1, . . . , Ak |∼S B .
The rule is called derivable in S if the conclusion is deducible in S from the
hypotheses, i.e. if A1, . . . , Ak ⊢S B.
For pure classical logic there is essentially no diﬀerence; every admissible rule
of CPC is classically derivable, and every nonderivable admissible rule of CQC is
vacuous in the sense that there is no substitution σ which converts each hypothesis
into a closed theorem (cf. [Dzik, 2004]). Intuitionistically the situation is more
interesting.
One of the basic tenets of Brouwer’s philosophy is that no formal system can
adequately represent intuitionistic reasoning, even about mathematics. The pur-
pose of intuitionistic logic is to clarify some general kinds of reasoning which can

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
101
always be supported by correct constructions. From the intuitionistic viewpoint,
a rule of the form
From A1, . . . , Ak conclude B.
is admissible for a formal system S if there exists an algorithm which transforms
any given k-tuple Π1, . . . , Πk, such that each Πi is a proof in S of a sentence of
the form σ(Ai), into a proof in S of σ(B). The algorithm has no work to do in
the case of a substitution σ for which some σ(Ai) is unprovable in S, even if σ(Ai)
can be established by other intuitionistically correct means.
On the other hand, the rule is derivable in S if and only if there exists a general
deduction-schema in S establishing that B follows in S from A1, . . . , Ak. This is
evidently a stronger requirement on two counts: it applies to every (k + 1)-tuple
of formulas of the form A1, . . . , Ak, B, and it insists that S itself must provide an
algorithm for establishing the correctness of the inference.
The disjunction property, when stated as
From A ∨B conclude A or B
for A, B closed formulas, is an important admissible propositional rule of intu-
itionistic logic which is completed constructively by an algorithm for producing,
from an arbitrarily given proof of any sentence of the form A ∨B , either a proof
of A or a proof of B . In its presence every other admissible propositional rule
can be stated with a unique conclusion.
Two early examples of admissible nonderivable propositional rules of intuition-
istic logic are the “independence of premise” rule:
¬A ⊃B ∨C |∼(¬A ⊃B) ∨(¬A ⊃C).
and Mints’ rule:
(A ⊃B) ⊃A ∨C |∼((A ⊃B) ⊃A) ∨((A ⊃B) ⊃C).
The disjunction rule evidently works together with the other rules to strengthen
their conclusions. By generalizing Mints’ rule, A. Visser and D. H. J. de Jongh
identiﬁed a recursively enumerable sequence of successively stronger admissible
nonderivable rules of intuitionistic propositional logic and conjectured that they
form a basis for all such rules in the sense that every admissible rule of propositional
logic is derivable from them together with the disjunction property and modus
ponens. “Visser’s rules” are all the rules of the form
(A ⊃B ∨C) ∨D
|∼
n

i=1
(A ⊃Ei) ∨(A ⊃B) ∨(A ⊃C) ∨D.
where n is a positive integer and A is 	n
i=1(Ei →Fi) . Using results of Ghi-
lardi [1999], in 2001 R. Iemhoﬀ[2001] succeeded in proving their conjecture. Since
Visser’s comprehensive 1999 survey [Visser, 1999] contained a proof that the ad-
missible propositional rules of intuitionistic arithmetic are the same as those of

102
Joan Rand Moschovakis
intuitionistic propositional logic, Iemhoﬀ’s result applied also to Heyting arith-
metic.
Because its hypothesis as well as its conclusion depends on the provability rela-
tion, a rule which is admissible for one formal system may fail for an extension of
that system by additional axiom schemas. An intermediate propositional logic is
any consistent collection of propositional formulas containing all the theorems of
intuitionistic logic and closed under modus ponens and substitution (of arbitrary
formulas for propositional variables).
Every intermediate propositional logic is
contained in classical propositional logic.
G¨odel [1933] introduced an inﬁnite sequence of intermediate logics in order to
prove that intuitionistic propositional logic had no ﬁnite truth-table interpretation.
The nth G¨odel logic Gn is axiomatized over IPC by the two schemas
n

i=1
(
i−1

j=1
Aj ⊃Ai)
and
(A ⊃B) ∨(B ⊃A).
The Visser rules are derivable in Gn but the disjunction property does not hold.
Gabbay and de Jongh [1974] found an inﬁnite sequence of ﬁnitely axiomatizable
intermediate logics Dn with the disjunction property, such that the ﬁrst n + 1
Visser rules (but not the n + 2nd) are admissible for Dn. Finally Iemhoﬀ[2005]
proved that intuitionistic propositional logic is the only intermediate logic with
the disjunction property which is closed under all the Visser rules.
The nonderivable admissible predicate rules of intuitionistic predicate logic have
not been completely characterized, but they are known to form a complete Π0
2 set
and to include Markov’s rule for decidable predicates:
∀x(A(x) ∨¬A(x)) ∧¬∀x¬A(x)
|∼∃xA(x).
and an additional independence of premise rule:
∀x(A(x) ∨¬A(x)) ∧(∀xA(x) →∃yB(y))
|∼∃y(∀xA(x) →B(y)).
where y must not occur free in ∀xA(x).
These rules also hold for sentences
of intuitionistic arithmetic. Markov’s rule and the decidability (hence also the
stability under double negation) of quantiﬁer-free arithmetical formulas give the
important result [Kreisel, 1958] that classical and intuitionistic arithmetic prove
the same formulas of the form ∀x∃yA(x, y) with A(x, y) quantiﬁer-free, so they
have the same provably recursive functions.40
An admissible rule with no hypotheses is simply a logical theorem. The propo-
sitional logic of intuitionistic arithmetic consists of those formulas in the language
40A Π0
2 relation is one which can be expressed in ∀∃form, with a recursive scope. A relation
is complete Π0
2 if it is Π0
2, and every Π0
2 relation is recursive in it. The standard complete Π0
2
relation R(e) is “e is the G¨odel number of a total recursive function,” or equivalently “for every
n there is an m which is the G¨odel number of a computation of the value of the eth partial
recursive function on the argument n.”

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
103
of propositional logic, all of whose arithmetical substitution instances are prov-
able in Heyting arithmetic. De Jongh [1970] proved that the propositional logic of
Heyting arithmetic is IPC. To quote Visser [1999], de Jongh actually established
“a much stronger result, viz., that the logic of relative interpretations in HA is
Intuitionistic Predicate Logic . . . ”41 His proof was a clever combination of recur-
sive realizability and Kripke semantics, two interpretations of intuitionistic logic
and mathematics which will be introduced in the next section.
6
INTERPRETATIONS OF INTUITIONISTIC LOGIC AND ARITHMETIC
After the formalization of intuitionistic logic and G¨odel’s completeness proof for
classical logic, the search for classical interpretations of intuitionistic propositional
and predicate logic began. This semantic approach has produced two related inter-
pretations which are sound and complete for IPC and IQC: algebraic semantics
and Beth-Kripke semantics. The constructive viewpoint is probably best repre-
sented by Kleene and Nelson’s realizability semantics for HA, for which it is sound
but not complete. We discuss these three interpretations here in historical order.
6.1
Algebraic and Topological Interpretations
According to Troelstra [1991] the ﬁrst semantics for IPC, “due to the work of S.
Jaskowski, M. H. Stone, A. Tarski, G. Birkhoﬀ, T. Ogasawara in the years 1936-
1940,” was an algebraic interpretation in which elements of a Heyting algebra
were assigned as truth values to propositions. A Heyting algebra is a lattice with
a maximum and a minimum element and an operation ⊃satisfying the condition
a ∧b ≤c if and only if a ≤b ⊃c .
The topological interpretation, developed for IQC as well by Mostowski [1948]
and by Rasiowa and Sikorski [1954; 1963], uses the algebra of open sets of a topo-
logical space T under the partial ordering ⊆, with G ∪H , Int(G ∩H) and
Int(H ∪(T \ G)) respectively interpreting a ∨b , a ∧b , a ⊃b when a is inter-
preted by G and b by H . The logic then requires that ¬a be interpreted by
Int(T \ G) . For the extension to predicate logic ∃is interpreted by union, and ∀
by the interior of the intersection. Soundness guarantees that each closed theorem
is always interpreted by T . Completeness asserts that to each unprovable sentence
E of IPC or IQC there corresponds a topological space in which E does not take
T as value. The topological interpretation was later extended to (subsystems of)
intuitionistic analysis by Scott [1968; 1970], Krol’ [1973] and others.
41A relative interpretation is an interpretation of a theory over a domain which can be rep-
resented by a formula D(x) for which the theory proves ∃xD(x). Then ∀x(D(x) ⊃A′(x)) and
∃x(D(x) ∧A′(x)) interpret ∀xA(x) and ∃xA(x) respectively, if A′(x) interprets A(x).

104
Joan Rand Moschovakis
6.2
Recursive Realizability and Church’s Thesis
Kleene’s number-realizability interpretation [Kleene, 1945] for intuitionistic arith-
metic was inspired by a passage in Hilbert and Bernays [1934], but it can easily be
understood as a recursive implementation of the B-H-K explication of the logical
connectives and quantiﬁers. It used the fact that an ordered pair of natural num-
bers (n, m) can be (primitive) recursively coded by a natural number k in such a
way that n and m (call them (k)0 and (k)1, respectively) can be recovered (prim-
itive) recursively from k.42 It also used the recursively enumerable relation “e is
the G¨odel number of a partial recursive function which is deﬁned at the argument
x with value y,” abbreviated {e}(x) ≃y .
Kleene associated with each arithmetical sentence E a relation e realizes E,
deﬁned inductively as follows:
1. e realizes a prime sentence s = t if s = t is true under the intended inter-
pretation.
2. e realizes A ∧B if (e)0 realizes A and (e)1 realizes B.
3. e realizes A ∨B if (e)0 = 0 and (e)1 realizes A, or (e)0 > 0 and (e)1 realizes
B.
4. e realizes A ⊃B if whenever f realizes A, then {e}(f) is deﬁned and realizes
B.
5. e realizes ¬A if e realizes A ⊃1 = 0.
6. e realizes ∀xA(x) if for every n, {e}(n) is deﬁned and realizes A(n).
7. e realizes ∃xA(x) if {(e)1}(n) is deﬁned and realizes A(n), where n = (e)0.
The deﬁnition can be interpreted either constructively or classically. Kleene conjec-
tured, and in [Nelson, 1947] Kleene’s student D. Nelson proved, that the universal
closure of every axiom of intuitionistic arithmetic is realizable, and that if the
universal closure(s) of the premise(s) of a rule of inference are realizable then so
is the universal closure of the conclusion. Since 0 = 1 is not realizable, it follows
that every realizable sentence is consistent with HA. These results are known as
“Nelson’s Theorem:”
• Every arithmetical sentence which can be derived in intuitionistic arithmetic
from realizable sentences is realizable.
• Every extension of intuitionistic arithmetic by realizable axioms is consistent.
42Kleene chose the coding k = 2n · 3m so that (k)0 = n and (k)1 = m are the ﬁrst two
exponents in the prime factorization of k.

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
105
Nelson’s theorem established the consistency with HA of Church’s Thesis [CT0]
in the form
∀x∃yA(x, y) ⊃∃e∀x∃y[T(e, x, y) ∧∀z(U(y, z) ⊃A(x, z))].
where A(x, y) may be any formula containing only x and y free, and T(e, x, y)
and U(y, z) are decidable formulas expressing the primitive recursive relations
“y is the least g¨odel number of a computation of the value the partial recursive
function with g¨odel number e takes on the argument x” and “z is the value
computed by the computation with g¨odel number y” respectively. This schema,
which is inconsistent with classical arithmetic, holds for the recursive mathematics
of A. A. Markov.43 Markov’s Principle [MP] is also realizable, by a proof using
Markov’s Principle informally. The consistency of HA + CT0 + MP, expressing
a large part of Russian recursive mathematics, follows.
Nelson formalized the notion “e realizes E” within a conservative extension
HA′ of Heyting arithmetic with a new symbol r, and proved that for all formulas
A, B of the language of HA′:
• If A, B are sentences and A ⊃B is provable in HA′, so is rA ⊃rB.
• The universal closure C of the formula (A ⊃rA) ∧(rA ⊃A) is realizable.
• The sentence r C is provable in HA′.
Kleene [1945] discussed, interpreted and extended Nelson’s results. An impor-
tant modiﬁcation of what is now known as “number-realizability” was the relation
e realizes- ⊢E, obtained by changing the inductive cases for ∨, ⊃and ∃as follows:
3′. e realizes - ⊢A ∨B if (e)0 = 0 and (e)1 realizes - ⊢A and ⊢A, or (e)0 > 0
and (e)1 realizes - ⊢B and ⊢B.
4′. e realizes - ⊢A ⊃B if whenever f realizes - ⊢A and ⊢A, then {e}(f) is
deﬁned and realizes - ⊢B.
7′. e realizes - ⊢∃xA(x) if {(e)1}(n) is deﬁned and realizes - ⊢A(n) and ⊢
A(n), where n = (e)0.
The analogue of Nelson’s theorem holds for realizability - ⊢. A more general result
for realizability - (Γ ⊢) (replacing “ ⊢” by “ Γ ⊢” in each inductive clause) is
• Every sentence which can be derived in intuitionistic arithmetic from realiz-
able - ⊢sentences Γ is realizable - (Γ ⊢).
Realizability - ⊢gives the disjunction and existence properties for HA, and the
closure of HA under Church’s Rule: If ∀x∃yA(x, y) is a closed theorem, so is
43Church’s Thesis was not accepted by Brouwer or Heyting, but this formulation plays a parallel
role for recursive mathematics to Brouwer’s continuity principle for intuitionistic analysis, to be
discussed in a later section.

106
Joan Rand Moschovakis
∀x∃y[T(e, x, y) ∧∀z(U(y, z) ⊃A(x, z))] for some numeral e. It follows that HA
can prove the existence only of provably recursive functions.44
Kleene initially hoped that realizability might provide a suitable notion of truth
in intuitionistic arithmetic. Nelson’s work veriﬁed that the schema
(A ⊃rA) ∧(rA ⊃A)
was consistent with HA. In [Troelstra, 1971], by carefully analyzing the induc-
tive deﬁnition, Troelstra isolated a schema he called “extended Church’s Thesis”
[ECT0] which had the eﬀect over HA of identifying truth with realizability. Troel-
stra argued further that HA + ECT0 + MP accurately represented the practice
of Russian recursive mathematics.
By that time Kleene had found that extending his notion smoothly to intu-
itionistic analysis required the use of functions, not numbers, as realizing objects,
and that this altered the class of realizable arithmetical formulas. Many modiﬁca-
tions of realizability have since been developed as tools to obtain consistency and
independence results for formal systems based on intuitionistic logic. Troelstra’s
[1998] and van Oosten’s [2002], taken together, tell the most important parts of
this intriguing story and bring it up to date.
6.3
Kripke Semantics for IPC and IQC
The completeness question for intuitionistic logic is subtle because IPC does not
admit a ﬁnite truth-table interpretation (G¨odel [1933]) and every classical model,
in the usual sense, of IQC is also a model of classical predicate logic. E. W. Beth
[1956; 1959] and S. Kripke [1965] each developed a “possible-world” semantics
based on allowing decisions about truth or falsity of atomic sentences to be post-
poned from one moment in time to a later moment, and to be made in diﬀerent
ways along diﬀerent branches in a partial ordering of possible situations. Each
proved a completeness theorem for IQC. Kripke’s models are simpler than Beth’s
so we present them ﬁrst, out of historical order.45
A Kripke model for intuitionistic propositional logic is a triple K = {K, ≤, ⊩}
where K is an inhabited (i.e. eﬀectively nonempty) set of nodes partially ordered
by ≤, and the forcing relation ⊩is a binary relation between nodes and prime
formulas P satisfying the restriction that if k, k′ ∈K and k ≤k′ and k ⊩P
then also k′ ⊩P.46 The forcing relation is extended inductively to all formulas
as follows:
1. k ⊩A ∧B if k ⊩A and k ⊩B.
44In contrast, PA proves ∀x∃y[(y = 0 ∧A(x)) ∨(y = 1 ∧¬A(x))] for every arithmetical for-
mula A(x).
45Kripke observed that his models can easily be transformed into Beth models of a special
kind. His completeness proof was based on Beth’s, which will be described in a later section.
46The “forcing” terminology was not used in this way by Kripke but is now standard.
In
Kripke’s original deﬁnition each prime formula P was assigned a truth value T or F at each node
k, with the condition that if k ≤k′ and P was T at k then also P was T at k′. Here “k ⊩A”
corresponds to “A is T at k.”

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
107
2. k ⊩A ∨B if k ⊩A or k ⊩B.
3. k ⊩A ⊃B if, for each k′ ≥k: if k′ ⊩A then k′ ⊩B.
4. k ⊩¬A if there is no k′ ≥k such that k′ ⊩A.
It is straightforward to prove that the forcing relation is monotone, consistent, and
sound for IPC:
• For every formula E : If k ≤k′ and k ⊩E then k′ ⊩E.
• For no k ∈K and no formula E do both k ⊩E and k ⊩¬E hold.
• If ⊢E then k ⊩E for every k ∈K.
A Kripke model is a tree model if each node k has a unique immediate prede-
cessor in the ordering ≤of K. The tree is rooted if there is a (necessarily unique)
k0 ∈K such that k0 ≤k for every k ∈K. The strong completeness result, from
which the decidability of intuitionistic propositional logic follows, is
• To each formula E which is not a theorem of IPC there is a ﬁnite rooted
tree Kripke model whose root k0 does not force E.47
For example, a simple Kripke counterexample to ¬P ∨¬¬P is given by K =
{k0, k1, k2} where k0 < k1, k0 < k2 and k1, k2 are incomparable, with the forcing
relation determined by k1 ⊩P.
A Kripke model for intuitionistic predicate logic is a quadruple K = {K, ≤, D, ⊩}
where K is an inhabited set of nodes partially ordered by ≤, and for each k ∈K
the domain of k is an inhabited set D(k) of objects with the restriction that if
k, k′ ∈K and k ≤k′ then D(k) ⊆D(k′). The forcing relation can be thought of
as a binary relation between nodes and prime sentences of an expanded language
with an individual constant for each element of 
k∈K D(k), with the restriction
that if k ∈K and k ⊩P where P is prime, then every constant occurring in P
is an element of D(k) and if k′ ∈K with k ≤k′ then also k′ ⊩P.48 The forcing
relation extends to all sentences of the expanded language using, in addition to
the clauses for the propositional connectives, the following:
5. k ⊩∀xA(x) if, for each k′ ≥k and each d′ ∈D(k′) : k′ ⊩A(d′).
6. k ⊩∃xA(x) if, for some d ∈D(k) : k ⊩A(d).
Monotonicity, consistency and soundness extend naturally to the predicate case.
The completeness theorem takes the form
47For details see [Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988] or [Smorynski, 1973], where the Kripke
completeness theorems for IPC and IQC are presented using the method of Aczel [1968].
48Instead of expanding the language, Kripke associated with each node k and each n-place
prime formula P a subset of [D(k)]n on which P was T at k, with the corresponding monotonic-
ity requirement. The two approaches are equivalent classically, and for counterexamples it is
convenient to have names in the language for elements of the domain.

108
Joan Rand Moschovakis
• If E is a sentence of the language of predicate logic which is forced at every
node of every Kripke model, then E is provable in IQC.
The argument actually shows that the assumption that E is unprovable is con-
tradictory; the existence of a proof then follows by informal Markov’s Principle.
Following G¨odel, Kreisel [1962] argued that completeness of intuitionistic predi-
cate logic entails Markov’s Principle, but Veldman [1976] found a way to escape
this conclusion by modifying Kripke’s deﬁnition to allow “exploding” nodes at
which all sentences of the relevant language are forced. The modiﬁcation involved
adding a propositional constant ⊥for absurdity to the language and deﬁning ¬A
to be A ⊃⊥, so clause 4 of the deﬁnition could be omitted. Because ⊥was a new
prime sentence, k ⊩⊥could happen at one or more nodes k of a Veldman model.
Because ⊢¬⊥(because ⊢⊥⊃⊥), if k ⊩⊥then k ⊩E for every sentence E.
From the classical point of view, a Kripke model is just a Veldman model with
all the exploding nodes omitted. But Veldman’s intuitionistic completeness proof
is a beautiful application of one of the main principles of intuitionistic analysis.
Since Beth’s completeness proof is best understood in terms of the intuitionistic
notion of spread, it is time for us to explore Brouwer’s boldest creation.
7
THE SECOND ACT OF INTUITIONISM
From the beginning Brouwer struggled with the problem of the continuum. In
his dissertation, while rejecting Kant’s claim for an a priori intuition of space,
Brouwer admitted the need for a separate intuition of the continuum:
. . . the basic intuition of mathematics (and of any intellectual activity)
as the substratum, divested of all quality, of any perception of change,
a unity of continuity and discreteness, a possibility of thinking together
several entities, connected by a ‘between’, which is never exhausted by
the insertion of new entities. . . . Having recognized that the intuition
of continuity of ‘ﬂuidity’, is as primitive as that of several things con-
ceived as forming together a unit, the latter being at the basis of every
mathematical construction, we are able to state properties of the con-
tinuum as a ‘matrix of points to be thought of as a whole’. [Brouwer,
1907, p. 17]
Then, after showing how to construct from the integers the rational numbers with
their dense linear ordering (of order type η ), he aﬃrmed a form of completeness
with the following justiﬁcation:
The mathematical intuition is unable to create other than denumer-
able sets of individuals. But it is able, after having created a scale of
ordertype η , to superimpose upon it a continuum as a whole, which
afterwards can be taken conversely as a measurable continuum, which
is the matrix of the points on the scale. [Brouwer, 1907, p. 45].

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
109
The problem was to reconcile this independent intuition of the continuum with
the fact that the only real numbers Brouwer then considered to be legitimate
mathematical entities were the deﬁnable real numbers. He believed that only ﬁ-
nite or denumerably inﬁnite sets could be constructed, and he accepted Cantor’s
diagonal argument for the nondenumerability of the continuum. Moreover, every
denumerable set must have measure zero, while the continuum should have posi-
tive measure.49 This conﬂict led the young Brouwer to the theoretical notion of
a “denumerably unﬁnished set” to describe such aggregates as Cantor’s second
number class, “the totality of deﬁnable points on the continuum, and a fortiori
the totality of all possible mathematical systems” [Brouwer, 1907, p. 82]. Such
sets, which would have to consist of more than denumerably many individual el-
ements, could not exist mathematically and so could not be put in one-to-one
correspondence with the continuum.
From the foundational viewpoint Brouwer was not satisﬁed with this ad hoc
solution. In [Brouwer, 1918] and [Brouwer, 1919] he ﬁnally succeeded in developing
an intuitionistic structure for the continuum, or more precisely its underlying Baire
space consisting of the inﬁnitely proceeding sequences of natural numbers with
the initial-segment topology. His construction could be interpreted classically or
intuitionistically; however, by considering the intuitionistically acceptable ways of
proving properties of the entire structure, Brouwer was led to two new principles
one of which contradicted the natural classical interpretation. With this bold step
he established intuitionistic analysis as an alternative to classical analysis, not just
a constructive part thereof.
7.1
Species, Spreads and Inﬁnitely Proceeding Sequences
In 1918 and 1919 Brouwer published two fundamental papers with the title “Foun-
dation of set theory independent of the logical principle of the excluded middle”
(Begr¨undung der Mengenlehre unabh¨angig vom logischen Satz vom ausgeschlosse-
nen Dritten). The ﬁrst ([Brouwer, 1918]) had the subtitle “General set theory”
(Allgemeine Mengenlehre) and the second [Brouwer, 1919] “Theory of sets of
points” (Theorie der Punktmengen).
He began by distinguishing between the
notions Species and Menge. A structured set (Menge) was a mathematical entity
of a deﬁnite kind, while a species of ﬁrst order (Spezies erster Ordnung) was “a
property which only a mathematical entity can possess, in which case it [the en-
tity] is called an element of the species of ﬁrst order . . . ” [Brouwer, 1918, p. 4].
A species of second order was a property which could be possessed by species of
ﬁrst order, and so on.
Brouwer explicitly rejected the comprehension axiom of classical set theory,
according to which each property determined a set (or a subset of a given set).
Instead, he accepted sets of choice sequences, inﬁnitely proceeding sequences of
49Sixty years later Errett Bishop [1967] succeeded in developing a constructive measure theory
on a continuum consisting only of constructive real numbers, making implicit use of the fact that
these numbers cannot be enumerated constructively.

110
Joan Rand Moschovakis
mathematical entities previously constructed, where each successive element was
allowed to be chosen more or less freely, restricted only by the ﬁnitely many choices
already made and by the law determining the set. The English term eventually
chosen by Brouwer [1954a] for this kind of structured set was “spread.” Here is
the deﬁnition he gave in [Brouwer, 1918]:50
A spread is a law on the basis of which, when again and again an ar-
bitrary integer (Ziﬀernkomplex) is chosen from the sequence ζ [of the
positive integers 1, 2, 3, . . .], each of these choices produces either a par-
ticular symbol (Zeichen), or nothing, or else leads to the termination
(Hemmung) of the process and the deﬁnitive annihilation of its results,
where for each n after an unterminated sequence of n −1 choices at
least one number can be speciﬁed which, if it is chosen as the n th
number, does not lead to the termination of the process. Every se-
quence (which therefore in general is not representable as ﬁnished) of
symbols chosen in this way from the spread is called an element of the
spread. We will also denote the common manner of generation of the
elements of a spread M brieﬂy by the spread M.51
The spread law is twofold, consisting of a choice law determining which integers
are available to be chosen at each stage of the process, and a correlation law
determining which symbol is attached to each permitted ﬁnite sequence of choices.
Brouwer left open the interpretation of “law” in this deﬁnition, and it is consistent
to assume that every choice sequence determines a spread of which it is the only
element.52 Certainly a spread law may be such that after a particular sequence
of n −1 permitted choices, every subsequent choice is determined in advance and
the process never terminates.
In his popular but detailed exposition “Intuitionism: An Introduction” [Heyt-
ing, 1956] Heyting simpliﬁed the deﬁnition of spread by omitting the possibility of
termination (which could be indicated instead by assigning a special symbol and
requiring all future choices to be 1, for example), and wrote:
. . . by an inﬁnitely proceeding sequence (abbreviated: ips) we mean
exactly what the words express, i.e. a sequence that can be continued
ad inﬁnitum. The question how the components of the sequence are
successively determined, whether by a law, by free choices, by throwing
a die, or by some other means, is entirely irrelevant.
Inﬁnitely proceeding sequences whose components were completely determined by
a (ﬁnite) deﬁnition were called by Brouwer “fundamental sequences” or “sharp
50The translation from the German is mine.
51[Brouwer, 1918, p. 4]. In his introduction to Part I of [Mancosu and van Stigt, 1998] van
Stigt points out that the idea of a structured set was already present in Brouwer’s 1914 review
of a book by Schoenﬂies and Hahn. The same volume contains van Stigt’s English translation of
Brouwer’s 1921 Dutch summary of [Brouwer, 1918] and [Brouwer, 1919], including a paragraph
similar to this.
52This relative interpretation is implicit in Kleene and Vesley’s [1965].

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
111
arrows.” Other authors have called them “lawlike.” Kreisel [1968] introduced a
complementary notion of “lawless” or “absolutely free” choice sequence, obeying
the second-order restriction that no restriction would ever be imposed on the
choices allowed.53
A fan or ﬁnitary spread is one with the property that after each sequence
a1, . . . , an−1 of successive choices permitted by the choice law, only ﬁnitely many
integers (how many and which ones depending on the choices already made) are
available to be chosen as the value of an.
A fan is the intuitionistic analogue
of a compact set in classical mathematics. At the other extreme is the universal
spread, in which every natural number is available to be chosen at each stage of the
construction, and the symbol correlated after each successive choice is the numeral
for the number just chosen.
Brouwer was especially interested in the spread of real number generators, each
representing (in one version) an inﬁnitely proceeding sequence of nested closed in-
tervals with rational endpoints and lengths converging toward zero, or (in another)
a Cauchy sequence {rn} of rational numbers.54
In particular, a canonical real
number generator can be deﬁned (cf. [Heyting, 1956, p. 41]) as an ips {xn2−n} ,
where the choice law determining which sequences {xn} of integers may be chosen
satisﬁes
| xn2−n −xn+12−n−1 | ≤2−n−1
or equivalently | 2xn −xn+1 | ≤1 . The ﬁnite initial segments of such a sequence
would give better and better rational approximations to the real number in the
process of generation, and this was the only information one could expect to have
about an arbitrary real number generator. Thus the general question whether any
two real number generators coincide, or converge to the same limit, is intuitionis-
tically undecidable.55
By asserting that spreads and their elements were legitimate mathematical en-
tities, Brouwer accepted inﬁnitely proceeding sequences of natural numbers, even
though “most” such sequences had no possibility of ever being completely deﬁned.
By accepting species of every ﬁnite order he made it possible to compare the
intuitionistic theory of properties with classical abstract set theory. This broad-
ening of the concept of a legitimate mathematical entity, with the new insights it
53In [Kreisel and Troelstra, 1970] Kreisel and Troelstra developed a formal theory of choice
sequences based on these two concepts.
54{rn} is Cauchy if for every positive integer k there is an n such that for all p : | rn−rn+p | <
1/k .
55Two real number generators r ≡{rn} and s ≡{sn} coincide (notation: r = s) if for every
positive integer k there is an n such that for all p: |rn+p −sn+p| < 1/k. If, on the other hand,
there is a k so that for all p: rn+p > sn+p +1/k, then r > s (and s < r). The classical trichotomy
law r < s∨r = s ∨r > s fails intuitionistically, but the following useful substitute holds: If r < s
then r < t ∨t < s for every real number generator t (cf. [Heyting, 1956, p. 25]). Apartness of
real number generators is a positive notion; precisely, r is apart from s if there exist k and n such
that for all p: |rn+p −sn+p| > 1/k. It follows that r is apart from s just in case r < s ∨r > s,
so if r is not apart from s then r and s coincide. Some of these results appeared in [Brouwer,
1930], the published version of a lecture Brouwer gave in Vienna in March 1928, with G¨odel in
the audience.

112
Joan Rand Moschovakis
engendered, was called by Brouwer “the second act of intuitionism.”
7.2
Brouwer’s Fan Theorem, Continuity Principle, and Bar Theorem
Brouwer was not an easy expositor of his own ideas and he published mostly
in Dutch or German.
The ﬁrst edition [Heyting, 1956] of Heyting’s delightful
“Intuitionism: An Introduction” appeared in 1956, clarifying the intuitionistic
approach to real numbers. After describing in detail the arithmetic of real number
generators, Heyting proved that every real number generator (abbreviated r.n.g.)
coincides with a canonical r.n.g. (abbreviated c.r.n.g.). The choice law for the
spread of the c.r.n.g. allows any integer to be chosen as x1 and from then on
requires xn+1 ∈{ 2xn −1, 2xn, 2xn + 1 } , so except for the ﬁrst choice it is
ﬁnitary.
If x = {xn2−n} and y = {yn2−n} are c.r.n.g., then x < y if and only if for
some n : xn + 2 < yn , and then yn+p2−(n+p) −xn+p2−(n+p) > 2−n for all p .
If a and b are c.r.n.g., the closed interval [ a, b ] consists of all c.r.n.g. x such
that ¬(x < a ∧x < b) and ¬(x > a ∧x > b). The basic representation theorem,
stated and proved in [Heyting, 1956, p. 42], where it is attributed to Brouwer
[1919; 1924], is then
Theorem [1]. Every closed interval of the continuum coincides with a
ﬁnitary spread [of canonical real number generators].56
Next Heyting stated and proved “Brouwer’s Fan Theorem” in a form which
is not strictly true classically but which illustrates the intuitionistic concept of a
total function:57
Theorem [2]. If an integer-valued function ϕ(δ) is deﬁned for every
element δ of a ﬁnitary spread S, then a natural number [N] can be
computed from the deﬁnition of ϕ, such that ϕ(δ) is determined by
the ﬁrst N components of δ; that is, if δ1 and δ2 are such elements of S
that the ﬁrst N components of δ1 are equal to the ﬁrst N components
of δ2, then ϕ(δ1) = ϕ(δ2).
As references Heyting cited Brouwer’s [1923b; 1924; 1927; 1952] and [1954]. In the
proof he worked with the underlying fan K of inﬁnitely proceeding sequences d of
integers allowed by the choice law of S, and with the function f(d) = ϕ(δ) where
δ is the element of S associated with d by the correlation law.
First he observed that “As f(d) must be calculable, its value must be determined
by a ﬁnite number of the components of d; that is to say, by a sequence a(d) in F”
56There is a subtlety here, as each rational number of the form m2−n is the limit of three
distinct c.r.n.g., including one approaching it from the left and one from the right; and these
approximating sequences coincide.
57In mathematical terms, these two theorems together assert that every function deﬁned ev-
erywhere on a closed bounded interval is uniformly continuous. Classically it is true that every
continuous total function on a closed bounded interval is uniformly continuous. Brouwer’s intu-
ition led him to the additional assumption that every (calculable) total function is continuous.

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
113
(where F is the species of ﬁnite sequences of integers which are permitted by the
choice law). This is an instance of Brouwer’s continuity principle (discussed below).
Then Heyting continued: “Let C be the species of the a(d) which correspond in
this way to the elements of K; then every element of K has a segment a(d) in C.
Also, if b is a sequence in F, every K-continuation of b has a segment in C; we
shall express this property by saying that b is K-barred by C.”
At this point a classical mathematician would invoke K¨onig’s Lemma, which
says in this context that if a fan has unbarred ﬁnite branches of arbitrary length
then it has an inﬁnite unbarred branch, to conclude by reductio ad absurdum that
there is an N such that every b in F has a segment in C of length ≤N. But the
use of proof by contradiction to establish a positive conclusion (here, the existence
of N) is not allowed intuitionistically. Instead, Heyting invoked Brouwer’s “Bar
Theorem” (explained below) to conclude that such an N exists, completing the
proof.
The heart of Brouwer’s reconstruction of analysis was contained in his continuity
principle and his principle of bar induction. The continuity principle depended
on a strictly ﬁnitary interpretation of the concept of a total function on a spread,
according to which the value such a function takes on an arbitrary element δ of the
spread must be determined on the basis of a ﬁnite initial segment of the underlying
i.p.s. d to which δ is correlated. This conﬂicted with the classical existence of
discontinuous functions, for example the function deﬁned on all inﬁnite sequences
of 0s and 1s which takes the value 0 on the identically zero sequence, and 1 on
every sequence which is not identically zero, since any ﬁnite sequence of 0s can be
followed by a 1 and then continued indeﬁnitely. In short, the continuity principle
provided a proof of
¬∀δ(∀xδ(x) = 0 ∨¬∀xδ(x) = 0),
giving a strong counterexample to the classical law of excluded middle.
The principle of bar induction (which Brouwer called the “Bar Theorem”) for
the universal spread of all choice sequences of natural numbers can be stated
as follows. If to each i.p.s. α of natural numbers a natural number nα can be
calculated such that the ﬁnite sequence ⟨α(1), . . . , α(nα)⟩belongs to the species C
(called a bar for the universal spread), and if each element of C is also an element
of the species A, where A has the property that if ⟨a1, . . . , an−1, k⟩∈A for every
k then also ⟨a1, . . . , an−1⟩∈A, then the empty sequence ⟨⟩belongs to A. The
principle follows for every spread, in particular for every fan.
Brouwer gave a
proof of the principle based on an analysis of the types of inference which might
be used to prove properties A of choice sequences. In the ﬁrst edition of [Heyting,
1956] Heyting repeated this argument, but in the second edition (published in
1966) he accepted Kleene’s conclusion that the “Bar Theorem” was actually a
new assumption and that the bar had to be detachable (see below).

114
Joan Rand Moschovakis
7.3
Kleene and Vesley’s Formalism for Intuitionistic Mathematics
Even before Heyting’s [1956] appeared, Kleene had been working on an axiom-
atization of intuitionistic analysis with the goal of making Brouwer’s reasoning
comprehensible and accessible, especially to classical mathematicians.
In 1965
Kleene and Vesley published “The Foundations of Intuitionistic Mathematics, Es-
pecially in Relation to Recursive Function Theory” containing a complete axiom-
atization of the theory of inﬁnitely proceeding sequences including real number
generators. The formal system FIM was based on a two-sorted language, with
variables x, y, . . . for numbers and α, β, . . . for choice sequences. Its mathematical
axioms included those of Heyting arithmetic (with additional primitive recursive
functions), an axiom schema of countable choice (or alternatively a comprehension
schema asserting the existence of deﬁnable functions), a strong axiom schema of
continuous choice which Kleene called “Brouwer’s Principle for Functions,” and
an axiom schema of bar induction which Kleene showed to be independent of the
other axioms.
Vesley worked out the application to real number generators. Using functions
rather than numbers as realizing objects, Kleene succeeded in giving a consistency
proof for FIM relative to its classically correct subsystem B (without Brouwer’s
Principle). Although FIM is inconsistent with the classical law of excluded mid-
dle, Kleene’s realizability interpretation and Vesley’s thorough development of the
theory of real number generators justiﬁed Brouwerian analysis as a coherent alter-
native to classical analysis.
Brouwer’s Principle made it possible to prove strong undecidability results
within intuitionistic analysis, obviating the need for weak counterexamples such
as the one Heyting used to show the unprovability, in his predicate logic, of
(x) ¬ ¬ a ⊃¬ ¬ (x) a . If A(α, x) is the formula α(x) = 0 then the following are
formal theorems of FIM which contradict classical logic:
• ⊢¬∀α[∀xA(α, x) ∨¬∀xA(α, x)] (∗27.17).
• ⊢¬∀α[¬∃x¬A(α, x) ∨¬¬∃x¬A(α, x)] (∗27.18).
• ⊢¬∀α[∀x(A(α, x) ∨¬∀xA(α, x)) ⊃∀xA(α, x) ∨¬∀xA(α, x)] (∗27.19).
If B(α) is ∀xA(α, x) ∨¬∀xA(α, x) then ⊢∀α¬¬B(α) (cf. formal theorem 4.8
in Heyting’s propositional logic) and so ⊢¬[∀α¬¬B(α) ⊃¬¬∀αB(α)] by ∗27.17,
giving a strong counterexample to double negation shift in place of Heyting’s weak
one. Here, of course, we are implicitly using the consistency of FIM.
Realizability and its variants provide relative consistency and independence
proofs for a variety of principles which have been proposed to extend intuition-
istic analysis. A strong version ∀α[¬∀x¬A(α, x) ⊃∃xA(α, x)] of Markov’s Prin-
ciple, while realizable classically and hence consistent with FIM, is unprovable
(Kleene [1965, p.
131], using a modiﬁcation of function-realizability inspired
by Kreisel [1959]).
A weak form ∀α¬¬GR(α) of Church’s Thesis is also con-
sistent with and independent of FIM, where GR(α) is a formula of the form

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
115
∃e∀x∃y[T(e, x, y) ∧∀z(U(y, z) ⊃α(x) = z)] expressing “α is general recursive”
(J. R. Moschovakis [1971], using a modiﬁed function-realizability interpretation
inspired by Vesley [1970]).
The strong form of Church’s Thesis conﬂicts with
Brouwer’s Principle, and in the presence of Markov’s Principle the weak form
conﬂicts with the Bar Theorem (cf. [Moschovakis, 2003]).
Troelstra [1973] proposed an extension GC (for “generalized continuity”) of
Brouwer’s Principle, and used it to characterize function-realizability just as he
had used ECT0 to axiomatize number-realizability. On the other hand, beginning
with the observation that FIM is consistent with classical arithmetic, Kleene
[1965] surveyed the possibilities of extending intuitionistic analysis consistently in
the classical direction. For other examples see [Troelstra, 1998] and [van Oosten,
2002].
7.4
Heyting’s Arithmetic of Species and HAω
In [Heyting, 1956, p. 37] Heyting repeated Brouwer’s deﬁnition from [Brouwer,
1918] (“Deﬁnition 1”) of a species as “a property which mathematical entities can
be supposed to possess,” and added:
Deﬁnition 2. After a species S has been deﬁned, any mathematical
entity which has been or might have been deﬁned before S and which
satisﬁes the condition S, is a member of the species S.
The “or might have been” allows for the possibility of inﬁnite species of natural
numbers or choice sequences. Heyting gives examples: “the property [of a real
number generator] of coinciding with a given number-generator is a species,” and
“The components of an ips ξ of natural numbers form a species . . . .” These are
species of type 0, while the continuum (consisting of species of type 0, as in the
ﬁrst example) is a species of type 1.
If S and T are species such that every element of T is also an element of S,
then T is a subspecies of S (T ⊆S), and S −T is the subspecies of those elements
of S which cannot belong to T. Two species S and T are equal if S ⊆T and
T ⊆S (so equality of species is extensional). “If T ⊆S then S′ = T ∪(S −T) is
not always identical with S, for S′ contains only those elements of S for which it
can be decided whether they belong to T or not.” However, S′ is congruent to S
(in the sense that neither species can contain an element which does not belong
to the other). If S′ = S then T is a detachable subspecies of S. There are many
detachable subspecies of the natural numbers, but “the continuum has no other
detachable subspecies than itself and the null species.”
Troelstra [1973] expanded on Heyting’s presentation in [Heyting, 1956] of the
intuitionistic theory of species, providing a formal system HAS0 extending HA
with variables for numbers and species of numbers, formulating axioms EXT of
extensionality and ACA of arithmetical comprehension, and proving that HAS0 +
ACA + EXT is conservative over HA. In [Troelstra, 1973a] he stated and proved

116
Joan Rand Moschovakis
the uniformity principle [UP]:
∀X ∃n A(X, n) ⊃∃n ∀X A(X, n),
explicitly contradicting classical second-order logic. A similar principle [UP1] holds
for the intuitionistic theory of species of choice sequences HAS1, where the lowest
type of variable ranges over inﬁnitely proceeding sequences of natural numbers.
The uniformity principle implies that the only detachable subspecies of an ar-
bitrary species of type 1 are the species itself and the null species, generalizing
Heyting’s comment quoted above.
Another extension of HA explored by Troelstra and others is intuitionistic
arithmetic of arbitrary ﬁnite type HAω (called N - HAω in [Troelstra, 1973]),
with variables of type 0 (over natural numbers) and for each pair σ, τ of types also
variables of type (σ, τ) (over functions from objects of type σ to objects of type τ).
Equality between objects of the same type may be taken to be intensional, hence
decidable (in I - HAω, where = expresses identity) or extensional (in E - HAω)
as in G¨odel’s Dialectica interpretation and the theory of choice sequences. The
axioms include those of ﬁrst-order Heyting arithmetic with induction extended to
arbitrary formulas of the language, and schemas deﬁning the function constants
of projection, application and primitive recursion at all appropriate types.58
7.5
Beth Models and Veldman’s Completeness Proof for IQC
A Beth model for IQC is a quintuple M = {B, ≤, k0, D ⊩} where (B, ≤) is a
ﬁnitely branching tree with root k0, the domain function D maps each k ∈B to
a set of positive integers where D(k) ⊆D(k′) if k ≤k′, and the forcing relation
for prime sentences P (of the language of IQC enhanced by constants for the
positive integers) satisﬁes the condition that k ⊩P if and only if every branch
through k eventually encounters a node k′ such that k′ ⊩P. Beth forcing extends
inductively to compound formulas in the same way as Kripke forcing except in the
cases of disjunction and existence, which are treated as follows:
2. k ⊩A ∨B if every branch through k eventually hits a node k′ such that
k′ ⊩A or k′ ⊩B.
6. k ⊩∃xA(x) if every branch through k eventually hits a node k′ such that,
for some d ∈D(k′) : k′ ⊩A(d).
In eﬀect, k ⊩A ∨B if the subtree through k is barred by the disjoint union of
two species C and D, where each node in C forces A and each node in D forces
B; and similarly for ∃. Beth [Beth, 1959, p. 447] gave his deﬁnition in terms
of validity on subtrees, so e.g. A ∨B is valid on M if M is the union of ﬁnitely
58See the discussion in Beeson [1985], a rich source of information about formalisms pro-
posed before 1985 for theories based on intuitionistic logic, including intuitionistic set theory
and Bishop’s constructive mathematics. Troelstra’s [1977] discusses choice sequences informally
from a variety of perspectives; cf. [Kreisel and Troelstra, 1970].

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
117
many (compatible) subtrees on each of which either A or B is valid. Fan induction
(bar induction on a ﬁnitary spread), or classical K¨onig’s Lemma, establishes the
equivalence of his deﬁnition with the one given here.59
Monotonicity and soundness are proved by the usual inductive arguments. The
completeness theorem asserts that every sentence E which is unprovable in IQC
has a Beth countermodel, i.e. a Beth model whose root does not force E. The
proof consists of a systematic search for a proof of E, using a diagram called a Beth
tableau to guide the construction of a ﬁnitely branching tree with sets of formulas
attached to the nodes. If the tableau is closed, giving a proof of E, then every
branch of the tree is ﬁnite; if not, then the resulting tree is a Beth countermodel
to E.
Citing Dyson and Kreisel [1961], Veldman [1976] observed that Beth’s construc-
tion was inadequate at least from the intuitionistic viewpoint, although Beth’s
ideas were used in Kripke’s classical completeness proof. By modifying Kripke se-
mantics to allow exploding nodes (see §6.3 for the deﬁnition), Veldman succeeded
in giving an intuitionistic proof of “the existence of a universal modiﬁed Kripke-
model, i.e. a model such that every sentence, true in the model, is derivable in
intuitionistic predicate calculus” while every intuitionistically provable sentence is
true in the model. A discussion of his method seems a suitable ending for this
historical exposition of the logic of Brouwer and Heyting.
Aczel [1968] used the notion of saturation to provide a perspicuous classical
proof of the Kripke completeness of IQC. A set Γ of sentences of the language
L[C], the pure predicate language (with ⊥instead of ¬ ) expanded by a set C of
individual constants, is C-saturated if it satisﬁes the following conditions:
(i) Γ has at least one element.
(ii) If Γ ⊢A ∨B where A ∨B ∈L[C], then A ∈Γ or B ∈Γ.
(iii) If Γ ⊢∃xA(x) where ∃xA(x) ∈L[C], then A(c) ∈Γ for some constant c ∈C.
Condition (ii) guarantees that a C-saturated set is closed under deducibility, since
if Γ ⊢A then also Γ ⊢A ∨A. For Veldman’s proof we do not require that Γ be
consistent.
To construct the universal Veldman model we need a denumerably inﬁnite set
C = {ci,k} of distinct individual constants, and an enumeration A0, A1, A2, . . .
without repetition of the sentences of L[C] such that each An contains only con-
stants ci,k with i, k < n, or equivalently with j(i, k) < j(0, n) where j is the
surjective pairing function obtained from the enumeration
⟨0, 0⟩; ⟨0, 1⟩, ⟨1, 0⟩, ⟨1, 1⟩; ⟨0, 2⟩, ⟨1, 2⟩, ⟨2, 0⟩, ⟨2, 1⟩, ⟨2, 2⟩; ⟨0, 3⟩, . . .
The simplest solution is to take ci,k = j(i, k), so C = {0, 1, 2, . . .}. We need the
corresponding projection functions j0, j1 so j0(j(i, k)) = i, j1(j(i, k)) = k and
59In their detailed presentation, Troelstra and van Dalen [Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988,
p. 677f.] observe that Beth used a constant domain function while van Dalen [1984] allowed
expanding domains.

118
Joan Rand Moschovakis
j(j0(h), j1(h)) = h. We need an enumeration d0, d1, . . . of all deductions in IQC,
of sentences of L[C] from ﬁnite sets of sentences of L[C]. We need a coding of
ﬁnite sequences of natural numbers (for example the primitive recursive coding
from [Kleene and Vesley, 1965]) and a concatenation operation ∗so that if w, v
code ⟨a0, . . . , an−1⟩and ⟨an, . . . , an+m−1⟩respectively then w ∗v is a code for
⟨a0, . . . , an+m−1⟩. If α is a function from numbers to numbers then α(n) codes
⟨α(0), . . . , α(n −1)⟩. All these ingredients of the proof are eﬀective.
The universal model is based on a spread with spread-law Σ and correlation law
⟨G, Γ⟩deﬁned step by step so that for each sequence code w:
(i) Σ(w) ∈{0, 1}, and w is permitted if and only if Σ(w) = 0.
(ii) If Σ(w) = 0 then G(w) ⊆C and Γ(w) is a ﬁnite set of sentences of L[G(w)]
and there is at least one q such that Σ(w ∗⟨q⟩) = 0.
(iii) If Σ(w ∗⟨q⟩) = 0 then one of the following happens:
(a) G(w) ⊊G(w ∗⟨q⟩) and Γ(w) = Γ(w ∗⟨q⟩),
(b) G(w) = G(w ∗⟨q⟩) and Γ(w) ⊊Γ(w ∗⟨q⟩).
(c) G(w) = G(w ∗⟨q⟩) and Γ(w) = Γ(w ∗⟨q⟩).
The deﬁnition begins with Σ(⟨⟩) = 0, G(⟨⟩) = {c(0,0), c(0,1), c(0,2), . . .}, and
Γ(⟨⟩) = ∅and the construction is arranged so that Σ(w ∗⟨q⟩) depends on whether
the length of w is of the form 3k, 3k + 1 or 3k + 2. In the 3k case q = 0 is allowed,
and (iii)(c) holds, if and only if it is not the case that (Aj1(k) is a sentence of
L[G(w)] and di proves Γ(w) ⊢Aj1(k) for some i < 3k); while q = 1 is allowed
if and only if Aj1(k) is a sentence of L[G(w)] (in which case Aj1(k) is put into
Γ(w ∗⟨1⟩)). In the 3k + 1 case every q is allowed, and the ﬁnitely many distinct
new constants c(k+1,0), . . . , c(k+1,q) from C are put into G(w ∗⟨q⟩) so (iii)(a) holds;
this ensures the availability of new constants for witnesses. In the 3k + 2 case we
look back to the 3k step and check whether Aj1(k) was added to Γ then, and if so
whether Aj1(k) was a disjunction or an existential sentence or neither, and decide
accordingly whether to allow only q = 0 with (iii)(c), or two or inﬁnitely many
q ≥1 with (iii)(b) enforcing the disjunction or existence property respectively.
Then the universal modiﬁed Kripke model V = {V, ≤, D, ⊩} is deﬁned by
setting
V = {α : ∀xΣ(α(x)) = 0 } where
(iv) For each α ∈V : Γα = 
x Γ(α(x)) and Gα = 
x G(α(x)) and the domain
D(α) is the set of all constants occurring in Γα (so D(α) ⊆Gα).
(v) If α, β ∈V then α ≤β if and only if Γα ⊆Γβ.
(vi) For each α ∈V and each prime sentence P of L[D(α)] (including ⊥): α ⊩P
if and only if P ∈Γα or ⊥∈Γα .

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
119
The construction was designed to have the following properties, for each α ∈V
and each n and m:
(vii) Γα is D(α)-saturated.
(viii) If An, Am are sentences of L[D(α)] then An ⊃Am ∈Γα if and only if for
each β ≥α: if An ∈Γβ then also Am ∈Γβ.
(ix) If An is a sentence of L[D(α)] of the form ∀xB(x), then An ∈Γα if and only
if for all β ≥α: B(a) ∈Γβ for all a ∈D(β).
The “only if” directions of (viii) and (ix) are immediate from (vii). Proving the
“if” direction of each requires the construction of an appropriate subfan of the
spread Σ. The subfan for (viii) is chosen so that each branch β satisﬁes
(a′) β(3j(0, n)) = 1 (so An ∈Γβ).
(b′) β(3k) ≥α(3k) for all k (so if Aj1(k) ∈Γ(α(3k + 1)) then also Aj1(k) ∈
Γ(β(3k + 1)), and so Γα ⊆Γβ).
(c′) β(1) = max(α(1), m, n) + 2 , and β(3k + 1) = max(α(3k + 1), β(3k −
2), m, n) + 2 for all k ≥1 (so G(β(3k + 2)) always contains two fresh con-
stants).
(d′) β(3k + 2) = α(3k + 2) except in the case that α(3k) = 0 and β(3k) = 1
and Aj1(k) is a disjunctive or existential sentence; then β(3k + 2) ∈{1, 2}
(if Aj1(k) is a disjunction) or β(3k + 2) ∈{c, d} where c, d are the two fresh
constants (if Aj1(k) is existential).
Now suppose An, Am are such that for each β ∈V with α ≤β: If An ∈Γβ then
Am ∈Γβ. Then by (a′) and (b′) with the Fan Theorem there is an x0 such that
Am ∈Γ(β(x0)) for every β in the subfan. By fan induction using (b′) and (d′): if
β is in the subfan and x ≤x0 then Γ(β(x)), Γα, An ⊢Am. Taking x = 0 and using
the Deduction Theorem, ﬁnally Γα ⊢An ⊃Am.
The proof of (ix) is similar. It follows that Γα consists exactly of those sentences
of L[D(α)] which are forced at α, and this is enough (together with the construction
of Γ) to establish Veldman’s completeness theorem. Informal Markov’s Principle
is not needed in the proof.
8
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am grateful to the students of the Graduate Program in Logic and Algorithms
(MΠΛA) in Athens, especially to Garyfallia Vafeiadou and Nikos Vaporis, for
reviving and expanding my enthusiasm for this subject over the past few years.
Anne Troelstra and Jaap van Oosten unwittingly showed me by example how
an encyclopedia article should be written. Mark van Atten, Garyfallia Vafeiadou,
Wim Veldman, Richard Vesley, Richard Zach and Yiannis Moschovakis generously

120
Joan Rand Moschovakis
read and commented on versions of the manuscript. I also thank Marcel Guillaume
and Paolo Mancosu for providing helpful information. All remaining errors and
omissions are exclusively mine.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Aczel, 1968] P. Aczel. Saturated intuitionistic theories, in H. Schmidt, K. Sch¨utte and H.-J.
Thiele, eds., Contributions to Mathematical Logic, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1968.
[Avigad and Feferman, 1998] J. Avigad and S. Feferman. G¨odel’s functional (“Dialectica”) in-
terpretation, Ch. V of [Buss, 1998], 337-405, 1998.
[Beth, 1956] E. W. Beth. Semantic construction of intuitionistic logic, Kon. Ned. Akad. v. Wet.
Afd. Let. Med. Nieuwe Serie 19/11, 357-388, 1956.
[Beth, 1959] E. W. Beth. The Foundations of Mathematics, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1959.
[Barzin and Errera, 1927] M. Barzin and A. Errera. Sur la logique de M. Brouwer, Bull. Acad.
Royale Belgique 13, 56-71, 1927.
[Beeson, 1985] M. Beeson. Foundations of Constructive Mathematics, Springer Verlag, Berlin,
1985.
[Bernays, 1926] P. Bernays. Axiomatische Untersuchung des Aussagenkalk¨uls der ‘Principia
Mathematica’, Math. Zeitschrift 25, 305, 1926.
[Biship, 1967] E. Bishop. Foundations of Constructive Analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967.
[Bridges and Richman, 1987] D. Bridges and F. Richman. Varieties of Constructive Mathemat-
ics, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1987.
[Brouwer, 1907] L. E. J. Brouwer. Over de Grondslagen der Wissenschafte, Thesis, Amsterdam,
1907. English trans. On the foundations of mathematics in Heyting, ed., Brouwer [1975, 11-
101].
[Brouwer, 1908] L. E. J. Brouwer. De onbetrouwbaarheid der logische principes, Tijdschrift voor
Wijsbegeerte 2, 152-158, 1908. English trans. The unreliability of the logical principles in
Heyting, ed., Brouwer [1975, 107-111].
[Brouwer, 1909] L. E. J. Brouwer. Het wezen der meetkunde, Amsterdam, 1909. English trans.
The nature of Geometry in Heyting, ed., Brouwer [1975, 112-120].
[Brouwer, 1912] L. E. J. Brouwer. Intuitionism and formalism, 1912. English trans. by A. Dres-
den, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 20, 81-96. Reprinted in Benacerraf and Putnam [1983, 77-89].
[Brouwer, 1918] L. E. J. Brouwer. Begrundung der Mengenlehre unabhangig vom logischen Satz
vom ausgeschlossenen Dritten. Erster Teil: Allgemeine Mengenlehre, Ver. Kon. Akad. v. Wet.
I, 12, no. 5, 1918. Reprinted in Heyting, ed., Brouwer [1975, 150-190].
[Brouwer, 1919] L. E. J. Brouwer. Begrundung der Mengenlehre unabhangig vom logischen Satz
vom ausgeschlossenen Dritten. Zweiter Teil: Theorie der Punktmengen, Ver. Kon. Akad. v.
Wet. I, 12, no. 7, 1919. Reprinted in Heyting, ed., Brouwer [1975, 191-221].
[Brouwer, 1923] L. E. J. Brouwer. Intuitionistische splitsing van mathematische grondbegrippen,
Ver. Kon. Akad. v. Wet. 32, 877-880, 1923. English trans. by W. P. van Stigt in Mancosu
[1998, 286-289].
[Brouwer, 1923a] L. E. J. Brouwer. ¨Uber die Bedeutung des Satzes vom ausgeschlossen Dritten in
der Mathematik, insbesondere in der Funktionentheorie, Journal f¨ur die reine und angewandte
Mathematik 154, 1-7, 1923. English trans. by S. Bauer-Mengelberg in van Heijenoort [1967,
334-341]. Cf. Brouwer [1954].
[Brouwer, 1923b] L. E. J. Brouwer. Begr¨undung der Funktionlehre unabh¨angig vom Logischen
Satz der ausgeschlossen Dritten, Ver. Akad. Wet. Amsterdam 13 No. 2, 1923.
[Brouwer, 1924] L. E. J. Brouwer. Beweis, dass jede volle Funktion gleichm¨assig stetig ist, Kon.
Ned. Akad. v. Wet. Proc. 27, 189-193, 1924. Reprinted in Heyting, ed., Brouwer [1975, 286-
290].
[Brouwer, 1924a] L. E. J. Brouwer. Intuitionistische Zerlegung mathematischer Grundbegriﬀe,
Jber. Deutsch Math. Verein. 33, 251-256, 1924. Reprinted in Heyting, ed., Brouwer [1975,
275-280]. English trans. by W. P. van Stigt in Mancosu [1998, 290-292].
[Brouwer, 1925] L. E. J. Brouwer. Zur Begr¨undung der intuitionistische Mathematik I, Math.
Annalen 93, 244-257, 1925.

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
121
[Brouwer, 1927] L. E. J. Brouwer. ¨Uber Deﬁnitionsbereiche von Funktionen, Math. Annalen
97, 60-75, 1927. English trans. of §1-3: On the domains of deﬁnition of functions by S.
Bauer-Mengelberg in van Heijenoort [1967, 446-463].
[Brouwer, 1927a] L. E. J. Brouwer. Zur intuitionistische Zerlegung mathematischer Grundbe-
griﬀe, Jber. Deutsch Math. Verein. 36, 127-129, 1927. Reprinted in Heyting, ed., Brouwer
[1975, 295-297]. English trans. by W. P. van Stigt in Mancosu [1998, 293-295].
[Brouwer, 1928] L. E. J. Brouwer.
Intuitionistische Betrachtungen ¨uber den Formalismus,
KNAW Proc. 31, 374-379, 1928. Also Sitzber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. (1928), 48-52. English
trans. of §I by S. Bauer-Mengelberg in van Heijenoort [1967, 490-492].
[Brouwer, 1930] L. E. J. Brouwer. Die Struktur des Kontinuums, 1930. In Heyting, ed., Brouwer
[1975, 429-440].
[Brouwer, 1952] L. E. J. Brouwer. Historical background, principles and methods of intuitionism,
South-African Jour. Sci. 49, 139-146, 1952.
[Brouwer, 1954] L. E. J. Brouwer.
Addenda and corrigenda and
Further addenda and corri-
genda to Brouwer [1923a], 1954. English trans. by S. Bauer-Mengelberg, C. Berndes Franck,
D. van Dalen and the editor in van Heijenoort [1967, 341-345].
[Brouwer, 1954a] L. E. J. Brouwer.
Points and spaces, Canad. Jour. Math. 6, 1-17, 1954.
Reprinted in Heyting, ed., Brouwer [1975, 522-538].
[Brouwer, 1975] L. E. J. Brouwer. Collected Works, 1, edited by A. Heyting, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1975.
[Brouwer, 1981] L. E. J. Brouwer. Brouwer’s Cambridge Lectures on Intuitionism, edited by D.
van Dalen, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1981.
[Buss, 1998] S. Buss, ed. The Handbook of Proof Theory, Elsevier, Amsterdam and New York,
1998.
[Church, 1928] A. Church. On the law of excluded middle, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 34, 75-78,
1928.
[Church, 1936] A. Church. An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory, Amer. Jour.
Math. 58, 345-363, 1936.
[Church, 1936a] A. Church. A note on the Entscheidungsproblem, Jour. Symb. Logic 1, 40-41.
Correction, Ibid., 101-102, 1936.
[Dedekind, 1888] R. Dedekind. Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen, Braunschweig, 1888. En-
glish trans. by W. Beman in R. Dedekind [1901], Essays on the Theory of Numbers,
Open Court, Chicago, reprinted by Dover (1963), 31-105.
[Dragalin, 1988] A. G. Dragalin. Mathematical Intuitionism:
Introduction to Proof Theory,
Trans. Math. Mon. 67, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1988. English trans. by E. Mendel-
sohn of the 1979 Russian version.
[Dummett, 1977] M. Dummett. f Elements of Intuitionism, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1977.
[Dyson and Kreisel, 1961] V. Dyson and G. Kreisel. Analysis of Beth’s semantic construction
of intuitionistic logic, Stanford Report, 1961.
[Dzik, 2004] W. Dzik. Chains of structurally complete predicate logics with the application of
Prucnal’s substitution, Reports on Math. Logic 38, 37-48, 2004.
[Friedman, 1975] H. Friedman. The disjunction property implies the existence property, Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 72, 2877-2878, 1975.
[Gabbay and de Jongh, 1974] D. Gabbay and D. H. J. de Jongh. A sequence of ﬁnitely ax-
iomatizable intermediate logics with the disjunction property, Jour. Symb. Logic 39, 67-78,
1974.
[Gentzen, 1933] G. Gentzen. ¨Uber das Verh¨altnis zwischen intuitionistischer und klassischer
Logik, accepted by Math. Annalen, 1933, but withdrawn. Published in Arch. Math. Logik
Grund. 16 (1974), 119-132. English trans. in Szabo, ed., Gentzen [1967, 53-67].
[Gentzen, 1935] G. Gentzen. Untersuchungen ¨uber das logische Schliessen, Math. Zeitschrift 39
(1934-5), 176-210, 405-431, 1935.
[Gentzen, 1967] G. Gentzen. Gentzen: Collected Papers, edited by M. E. Szabo, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1967.
[Ghilardi, 1999] S. Ghilardi. Uniﬁcation in intuitionistic logic, Jour. Symb. Logic 64, 859-880,
1999.
[Glivenko, 1928] V. Glivenko. Sur la logique de M. Brouwer, Bull. Acad. Royale de Belgique 14,
225-228, 1928.

122
Joan Rand Moschovakis
[Glivenko, 1929] V. Glivenko. Sur quelques points de la logique de M. Brouwer, Bull. Acad.
Royale de Belgique 15, 183-188, 1929. English trans. by A. Rocha in Mancosu [1998, 301-
305].
[G¨odel, 1932] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber Vollstandigkeit und Widerspruchfreiheit, Ergebnisse eines math.
Koll. 3 (for 1930-1931, pub. 1932), 12-13, 1932.
[G¨odel, 1932a] K. G¨odel. Zum intuistischen Aussagenkalk¨ul,
Akad. Wiss. Wien,
Math.-
naturwiss. Klasse, Anzeiger 69, 65-66, 1932.
[G¨odel, 1933] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber Unabh¨angigkeitsbeweise im Aussagenkalk¨ul, Ergebnisse eines
math. Koll. 4 (for 1932, pub. 1933), 9-10, 1933.
[G¨odel, 1933] K. G¨odel. Zur intuitionistischen Arithmetik und Zahlentheorie, Ergebnisse eines
math. Koll., 4 (for 1932, pub. 1933), 34-38, 1933.
[G¨odel, 1958] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber eine bisher noch nicht ben¨utzte Erweiterung des ﬁniten Stand-
punktes, Dialectica 12, 280-287, 1958.
[Harrop, 1956] R. Harrop. On disjunctions and existential statements in intuitionistic systems
of logic, Math. Annalen 132, 347-361, 1956.
[Hessling, 2003] D. Hesseling. Gnomes in the Fog: The Reception of Brouwer’s Intuitionism in
the 1920s, Birkha¨user, Basel, 2003.
[Heyting, 1930] A. Heyting. Sur la logique intuitionniste, Bull. Acad. Royale Belgique 16, 957-
963, 1930. English trans. by A. Rocha in Mancosu [1998, 306-310].
[Heyting, 1930a] A. Heyting. Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik, Sitzber. Preuss.
Akad. Wiss. (phys.-math. Klasse), Berlin, 42-56, 1930. English trans. in Mancosu [1998, 311-
327].
[Heyting, 1930b] A. Heyting. Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Mathematik II, Sitzber.
Preuss. Akad. Wiss. (phys.-math. Klasse), Berlin, 57-71, 1930.
[Heyting, 1930c] A. Heyting. Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Mathematik III, Sitzber.
Preuss. Akad. Wiss. (phys.-math. Klasse), Berlin, 158-169, 1930.
[Heyting, 1956] A. Heyting. Intuitionism: An Introduction, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1956.
[Heyting, 1946] A. Heyting. On weakened quantiﬁcation, Jour. Symb. Logic, 11, 119-121, 1946.
[Heyting, 1961] A. Heyting. Inﬁnitistic methods from a ﬁnitist point of view, in Inﬁnitistic
Methods, Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Mathematics (Warsaw 1959),
Pergamon Press, 185-192, 1961.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der theoretischen
Logik, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1928.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1934] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik 1, Springer
Verlag, Berlin, 1934.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1939] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik 2, Springer
Verlag, Berlin, 1939.
[Iemhoﬀ, 2001] R. Iemhoﬀ. On the admissible rules of intuitionistic propositional logic, Jour.
Symb. Logic 66, 281-294, 2001.
[Iemhoﬀ, 2005] R. Iemhoﬀ. Intermediate logics and Visser’s rules, Notre Dame Jour. Form. Logic
46, 65-81, 2005.
[de Jongh, 1970] D. H. J. de Jongh. The maximality of the intuitionistic propositional calculus
with respect to Heying’s arithmetic, Jour. Symb. Logic 36, 606, 1970.
[Kleene, 1945] S. C. Kleene. On the interpretation of intuitionistic number theory, Jour. Symb.
Logic 10, 109-124, 1945.
[Kleene, 1952] S. C. Kleene. Introduction to Metamathematics, North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1952.
[Kleene, 1962] S. C. Kleene. Disjunction and implication under implication in elementary intu-
itionistic formalisms, Jour. Symb. Logic 27, 11-18, 1962. Addendum (1963) in Jour. Symb.
Logic 28, 154-156.
[Kleene, 1965] S. C. Kleene. Classical extensions of intuitionistic mathematics, in Y. Bar-Hillel,
ed., Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 31-44, 1965.
[Kleene, 1967] S. C. Kleene. Constructive functions in “The Foundations of Intuitionistic Math-
ematics”, in Logic, Methodology and Philos. of Science III, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 137-
144, 1967.
[Kleene, 1969] S. C. Kleene. Formalized recursive functionals and formalized realizability, Mem.
Amer. Math. Soc. 89, 1969.

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
123
[Kleene and Vesley, 1965] S. C. Kleene and R. E. Vesley. The Foundations of Intuitionistic
Mathematics, Especially in Relation to Recursive Functions, North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1965.
[Kolmogorov, 1925] A. Kolmogorov. O principe tertium non datur, Matematiceskij Sbornik 32,
646-667, 1925. English trans. in van Heijenoort [1967, 414-437].
[Kolmogorov, 1932] A. Kolmogorov. Zur Deutung der intuitionistische Logik, Math. Zeitschrift
35, 58-65, 1932. English trans. in Mancosu [1998, 328-334].
[Krauss, 1992] P. Krauss. A constructive interpretation of classical mathematics,
Math.
Schriften Kassel, Preprint No. 5/92, 1992.
[Kreisel, 1958] G. Kreisel. Mathematical signiﬁcance of consistency proofs, Jour. Symb. Logic
23, 155-181, 1958.
[Kreisel, 1959] G. Kreisel. The non-derivability of ¬∀xA(x) →∃x¬A(x), A primitive recursive,
in intuitionistic formal systems (abstract), Jour. Symb. Logic 23 (No. 4 for 1958, publ. 1959),
456-457.
[Kreisel, 1962] G. Kreisel. On weak completeness of intuitionistic predicate logic, Jour. Symb.
Logic 27, 139-158, 1962.
[Kreisel, 1968] G. Kreisel. Lawless sequences of natural numbers, Comp. Math. 20, 222-248,
1968.
[Kreisel and Troelstra, 1970] G. Kreisel and A. S. Troelstra. Formal systems for some branches
of intuitionistic analysis, Ann. Math. Logic 1, 229-387, 1970.
[Kripke, 1965] S. Kripke. Semantical analysis of intuitionistic logic, in Formal Systems and
Recursive Functions (J. Crossley and M. Dummett, eds.), North-Holland, Amsterdam, 92-
130, 1965.
[Krol’, 1973] M. D. Krol’. A topological model for intuitionistic analysis with Kripke’s Schema,
Zeitsch. math. Logik Grund. 24, 427-436, 1973.
[Loeb, 2005] I. Loeb. Equivalents of the (Weak) Fan Theorem, Ann. Pure and Appl. Logic, 132,
51-66, 2005.
[Mancosu, 1998] P. Mancosu. From Brouwer to Hilbert: The Debate on the Foundations of
Mathematics in the 1920s, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford and New York, 1998.
[Mancosu and van Stigt, 1998] P. Mancosu and W. van Stigt. Intuitionistic logic, in Mancosu
[1998, 275-285].
[Mancosu et al., 2009] P. Mancosu, R. Zach and C. Badesa. The development of mathematical
logic from Russell to Tarski, in L. Haaparanta, ed., The Development of Modern Logic: A
Philosophical and Historical Handbook, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009.
[Martin-L¨of, 1984] P. Martin-L¨of. Intuitionistic Type Theory, Bibliopolis, Naples, 1984.
[Mints, 1976] G. Mints. Derivability of admissible rules, Jour. Soviet Math., 6, 417-421, 1976.
[Moschovakis, 1971] J. R. Moschovakis. Can there be no non-recursive functions?, Jour. Symb.
Logic 36, 309-315, 1971.
[Moschovakis, 1996] J. R. Moschovakis. A classical view of the intuitionistic continuum, Ann.
Pure and Appl. Logic 81, 9-24, 1996.
[Moschovakis, 2003] J. R. Moschovakis. Classical and constructive hierarchies in extended intu-
itionistic mathematics, Jour. Symb. Logic 68, 1015-1043, 2003.
[Moschovakis, 2004] J. R. Moschovakis. Intuitionistic Logic, in the Stanford On-Line Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy, 2004. {http://www.plato.stanford.edu}.
[Mostowski, 1948] A. Mostowski. Proofs of non-deducibility in intuitionistic functional calculus,
Jour. Symb. Logic 13, 204-207, 1958.
[Myhill et al., 1970] J. Myhill, A. Kino and R. Vesley, eds. Intuitionism and Proof Theory,
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1970.
[Nelson, 1947] D. Nelson. Recursive functions and intuitionistic number theory, Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc. 61, 307-368, 1947.
[Presburger, 1930] M. Presburger. ¨Uber die Vollstandigkeit eines gewissen Systems der Arith-
metik ganzer Zahlen in Welchem die Addition als einzige Operation hervortritt, Sprawoz-
danie z I Kongresu Matematyk´ow Kraj´ow Slowia´nskich (Comptes-rendus du I Congr´es des
Math´ematiciens des Pays Slaves), Warszawa 1929, Warsaw 92-101, 395, 1930.
[Rasiowa, 1955] H. Rasiowa. Algebraic models of axiomatic theories, Fund. Math. 41, 291-310,
1955.
[Rasiowa and Sikorski, 1954] H. Rasiowa and R. Sikorski. On existential theorems in non-
classical functional calculi, Fund. Math. 41, 21-28, 1954.

124
Joan Rand Moschovakis
[Rasiowa and Sikorski, 1963] H. Rasiowa and R. Sikorski. The Mathematics of Metamathemat-
ics, Warsaw, 1963.
[Rosser, 1936] J. B. Rosser. Extensions of some theorems of G¨odel and Church, Jour. Symb.
Logic 1, 87-91, 1936.
[Rybakov, 1997] V. Rybakov. Admissibility of Logical Inference Rules, Elsevier, Amsterdam,
1997.
[Sch¨utte, 1950] H. Sch¨utte. Schlussweisen-Kalk¨ule der Pr¨adikatenlogik, Math. Annalen 122, 47-
65, 1950.
[Scott, 1968] D. Scott. Extending the topological interpretation to intuitionistic analysis, Comp.
Math. 20, 194-210, 1968.
[Scott, 1970] D. Scott. Extending the topological interpretation to intuitionistic analysis II, in
[Myhill et al., 1970], 235-255, 1970.
[Scott, 1979] D. Scott. Identity and existence in intuitionistic logic, in Applications of Sheaves
(M. Fourman, C. Mulvey and D. Scott, eds.), Springer Verlag, Berlin, 660-696, 1979.
[Smorynski, 1973] C. Smorynski. Applications of Kripke models, Ch. V of Troelstra, ed. [Troel-
stra, 1973], 324-391, 1973.
[Spector, 1962] C. Spector. Provably recursive functionals of analysis: a consistency proof of
analysis by an extension of principles formulated in current intuitionistic mathematics, in J.
C. E. Dekker, ed., Recursive Function Theory, AMS Proc. Symp. Pure Math V., Providence,
1-27, 1962.
[Troelstra, 1968] A. S. Troelstra. The scientiﬁc work of A. Heyting, Comp. Math. 20, 3-12, 1968.
[Troelstra, 1971] A. S. Troelstra. Notions of realizability for intuitionistic arithmetic and in-
tuitionistic arithmetic in all ﬁnite types, in J. Fenstad, ed. The Second Scandinavian Logic
Symposium, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 369-405, 1971.
[Troelstra, 1973] A. S. Troelstra, ed. Metamathematical Investigations of Intuitionistic Arith-
metic and Analysis, Springer Lecture Notes in Math. 344, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1973.
[Troelstra, 1973a] A. S. Troelstra. Notes on intuitionistic second order arithmetic, in A. Mathias
and H. Rogers, eds. [1973], Cambridge Summer School in Mathematical Logic, Springer,
Berlin, 171-205, 1973.
[Troelstra, 1974] A. S. Troelstra. Note on the fan theorem, Jour. Symb. Logic 39, 584-596, 1974.
[Troelstra, 1977] A. S. Troelstra. Choice Sequences, a Chapter of Intuitionistic Mathematics,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1977.
[Troelstra, 1991] A. S. Troelstra. History of constructivism in the twentieth century, ITLI (Inst.
v. Taal, Logica en Informatie) Prepublication Series ML-91-05, Amsterdam, 1991.
[Troelstra, 1998] A. S. Troelstra. Realizability, Ch. VI of [Buss, 1998], 407-473, 1998.
[Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988] A. S. Troelstra and D. van Dalen. Constructivism in Mathe-
matics: An Introduction, 1 and 2, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1988.
[van Atten, 2005] M. van Atten. Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, in the Stanford On-Line En-
cyclopedia of Philosophy, 2005. http://www.plato.stanford.edu
[van Atten and Kennedy, 2007] M. van Atten and J. Kennedy. G¨odel’s Logic, in this volume.
[van Dalen, 1984] D. van Dalen. How to glue analysis models, Jour. Symb. Logic 49, 1339-1349,
1984.
[van Dalen, 1990] D. van Dalen. The war of the frogs and the mice, or the crisis of the Mathe-
matische Annalen, Math. Intelligencer 12(4), 17-31, 1990.
[van Dantzig, 1947] D. van Dantzig. On the principles of intuitionistic and aﬃrmative mathe-
matics, Ver. Kon. Akad. v. Wet. 50, 918-929, 1092-1103; also Indagationes math. 9, 429-440,
506-517, 1947.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort. From Frege to G¨odel: A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic 1897-1931, Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Mass, 1967.
[van Oosten, 1991] J. van Oosten. A semantical proof of de Jongh’s theorem, Arch. Math. Logic
31, 105-114, 1991.
[van Oosten, 2002] J. van Oosten. Realizability: a historical essay, Math. Struct. Comp. Sci.
12, 239-263, 2002.
[van Stigt, 1990] W. P. van Stigt. Brouwer’s Intuitionism, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1990.
[Veldman, 1976] W. Veldman. An intuitionistic completeness theorem for intuitionistic predicate
logic, Jour. Symb. Logic 41(1), 159-166, 1976.
[Vesley, 1970] R. E. Vesley. A palatable substitute for to Kripke’s Schema, in [Myhill et al.,
1970].

The Logic of Brouwer and Heyting
125
[Vesley, 1980] R. E. Vesley. Intuitionistic analysis: The search for axiomatization and under-
standing, in The Kleene Symposium, North- Holland, Amsterdam, 317-331, 1980.
[Visser, 1999] A. Visser. Rules and arithmetics, Notre Dame Jour. Form. Logic 40, 116-140,
1999.
[von Plato, 2007] J. von Plato. Gentzen’s Logic, in this volume.
[Wavre, 1926] R. Wavre. Logique formelle et logique empiriste, Revue de M´etaphysique et de
Morale 33, 65-75, 1926.
[Zach, 1999] R. Zach. Completeness before Post, Bull. Symb. Logic 5(3), 303-330, 1999.


THORALF ALBERT SKOLEM
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
1
INTRODUCTION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This chapter is based on the corresponding sections of Skolem’s Selected Works
in Logic [Skolem, 1970]. The biographical part is a revised version of the chapter
Thoralf Albert Skolem in memoriam [Skolem, 1970, pp. 9–15]. The section on
Skolem’s work in logic is a reprint of the corresponding chapter in the Selected
Works (Hao Wang, A survey of Skolem’s work in logic, [Skolem, 1970, pp. 17–52]).
Wang’s survey, written almost 40 years ago, is still an excellent introduction to
Skolem’s work. But it needs to be updated; it also needs some factual corrections.
I have, therefore, added some supplementary notes and references to the current
discussion of Skolem’s work. The literature on Skolem is vast; I have tried to draw
attention to some of the more important sources. I have also, in particular in
Section 4.6, added a few “interpretative remarks” expressing a personal view on
Skolem and his discussion of foundational matters.
The bibliography in Skolem 1970 is a complete listing of all the scientiﬁc works
of Skolem; here we have included only those items that relate to his work in logic.
The bibliography in Skolem 1970 was prepared by Herman Ruge Jervell. Jervell
has also been of great help in the preparation of this chapter. I want to thank him
for expert technical assistance and valuable advice on the scientiﬁc content.
2
BIOGRAPHY OF SKOLEM
Professor Thoralf Albert Skolem died on 23 March 1963, almost 76 years old. His
death was unexpected. He seemed to be as active as ever. He was preparing for
a visit to the USA where, as on many previous occasions, he had been invited to
lecture at several universities. Age had not diminished either his research drive or
creative ability.
Thoralf Skolem was born on 23 May 1887 in Sandsvær, in the county of Buskerud
in Southern Norway. His parents were Helene Olette Vaal (1850–1914) and Even
Skolem (1849–1926), who taught in elementary school, but the family was mainly
farming people. Skolem passed his “Examen artium” (which is the concluding
examination of the Norwegian gymnasium) in 1905 and immediately started to
study mathematics and science at the University of Oslo. The study for the state
examination (embetseksamen) was at the time divided into two parts, a ﬁrst or
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

128
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
general part covering a large number of subjects, and a higher or specialized part
in one subject, including a thesis.
Skolem passed the general part of the state examination in 1909 and the full
state examination in 1913, specializing in mathematics. For his thesis, Undersøkelser
innenfor logikkens algebra (Investigations on the Algebra of Logic) he obtained the
best possible mark. His outstanding achievement was reported, as happens on
rare occasions, to the King of Norway.
Already as a student, after he had passed the general part of the state exami-
nation, Skolem became in 1909 the private assistant to the well-known physicist
Kristian Birkeland.
He served in this position to 1914, and it was in physics
that Skolem, in collaboration with Birkeland, published his ﬁrst scientiﬁc papers.
Skolem accompanied Birkeland on an expedition to Egypt and Sudan in 1913–1914
to observe the zodiacal light.
In the winter of 1915–1916 Skolem studied in G¨ottingen, experiencing fully the
diﬃcult living conditions caused by the First World War. From 1916 to 1918 he
was a Research Fellow at the University of Oslo, and in 1918 he was appointed to
a newly created position as docent of Mathematics at the same university.
The docent position at that time was a permanent position and functioned in
a certain sense as a professorship-in-waiting. It carried a signiﬁcantly lower salary
than that of a professorship, but required the holder to give only three lectures
per week and spend the rest of his time on his own research — no administration
foreseen. In current terms it was a permanent postdoc. It was expected that the
docent would become the next professor when a vacancy occurred. And despite
the permanency of the position, a docent who did not advance to a professorship
was deﬁnitely an academic failure. When Skolem was appointed docent in 1918
at the age of 31, he had only published two papers in his own name, but it was
evident that he was judged to be a coming man in Norwegian mathematics.
In 1926, when he was nearly 40 years old, Skolem obtained his doctorate, the
thesis entitled Einige S¨atze ¨uber ganzzahlige L¨osungen gewisser Gleichungen und
Ungleichungen. The somewhat advanced age has the following explanation. In
their younger years, Viggo Brun and Skolem agreed that neither of them would
bother to obtain the degree of Doctor, probably feeling that, in Norway, it served
no useful function in the education of a young scientist. But in the middle twenties
a younger generation of Norwegian mathematicians emerged. It seems that Skolem
then felt he too ought to fulﬁll the formal requirement of having a doctorate, and
he “obtained permission” from Brun to submit a thesis. In 1924 Brun had become
a professor in mathematics at the Norwegian Institute of Technology.
On 23 May 1927 Skolem married Edith Wilhelmine Hasvold.
From 1930 to 1938 Skolem was a Research Associate at the Chr. Michelsen’s
Institute in Bergen. This was a very independent position, equivalent in many
respects to a professorship, but not carrying any teaching or administrative duties.
One of the conditions of the research grant was that he should live in Bergen.
Since there was no university in Bergen at that time, this meant that he was
scientiﬁcally very isolated.
He also had diﬃculties in obtaining the necessary

Thoralf Albert Skolem
129
mathematical literature while living there, which can be inferred from the preface
to the monograph Diophantische Gleichungen, which he wrote during his Bergen
years.
In 1938, at the age of 51, Skolem was appointed professor at the University of
Oslo. He conducted the regular graduate courses in algebra and number theory,
and rather infrequently lectured on mathematical logic. On a few occasions he
acted as thesis advisor for the state examination, the case of Ø. Ore being the
most prominent example. Thoralf Skolem was very modest and retiring by nature.
He did not create any school and had no research students, but through his great
accomplishments and research drive he inspired more than one of the younger
Norwegian mathematicians.
Skolem retired in 1957, thereafter visiting American universities on several occa-
sions. Professor Skolem always participated actively in the various administrative
and organizational duties which is so necessary in any ﬁeld of science. He was
for many years President of the Norwegian Mathematical Association. For a long
period he was Editor of Norsk matematisk tidsskrift, and continued after the re-
organization as Editor of Mathematica Scandinavica from 1952. He also served as
Associate Editor for many journals. Professor Skolem was a member of several sci-
entiﬁc academies, and as early as 1918 became a member of Vitenskaps-Akademiet
in Oslo. He was frequently invited to lecture at international congresses and sym-
posia, and received many scientiﬁc honours, e.g.
in 1962 he was awarded the
Gunnerus Medal by Det Kongelige Norske Vitenskabers Selskab. In 1954 he was
named a Knight of the 1st Class in the Royal Order of St. Olav by the King of
Norway.
It is for his scientiﬁc accomplishments, however, that Professor Skolem will
be remembered.
Teaching and organizational activities were necessary duties,
research was his life.
A rough count reveals that he wrote close to 200 papers, some of them opening
up new ﬁelds of research, most of them of lasting scientiﬁc value, and a few of per-
haps lesser interest today; for instance, as Editor of Norsk matematisk tidsskrift,
he would write a paper or two to secure a complete issue as the publication date
approached. Some notes on algebra and number theory belong in this category.
In the same journal there is the somewhat curious paper En liten studie i trans-
ﬁnit mekanikk (A small study on transﬁnite mechanics) from 1940. But he also
wrote some very important papers in this rather obscure journal, e.g.
¨Uber die
mathematische Logik in 1928. Professor Skolem also wrote many reviews here, not
just within the ﬁeld of mathematics, but also in physics and philosophy, subjects
which strongly held his interest. Logician and number-theorist, he was one of the
very few Norwegian mathematicians to regularly attend the physicists’ meetings.
Professor Skolem published the greater part of his papers in Videnskapsakademiets
Skrifter and Avhandlinger, in Norsk matematisk tidsskrift, and in Det Kongelige
Norske Videnskabsselskabs Forhandlinger. Another rough count shows that ap-
proximately two-thirds of his papers are published here, which has often been of
great inconvenience to his fellow scientists abroad. The proceedings of an academy,

130
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
being a haphazard mixture of every ﬁeld of science, are very often stacked away in
some central library, and rarely seen in the special library of a mathematical insti-
tute. This means that many of Professor Skolem’s most important contributions
have been diﬃcult to obtain.
Great mathematicians start to publish young. Professor Skolem was a coun-
terexample. When appointed docent in 1918, 31 years old, he had written only two
papers (disregarding the notes he co-authored with Kr. Birkeland), but from 1920
on he published a series of papers which gave him instant recognition as one of the
foremost among logicians: Untersuchungen ¨uber die Axiome des Klassenkalk¨uls
und ¨uber Produktations- und Summationsprobleme, welche gewisse Klassen von
Aussagen betreﬀen dates from 1919. The year after, Logisch-kombinatorische Un-
tersuchungen ¨uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit und Beweisbarkeit mathematischen S¨atze nebst
einem Theoreme ¨uber dichte Mengen appeared. In 1922 he gave a lecture at the
5th Scandinavian Mathematics Congress Einige Bemerkungen zur axiomatischen
Begr¨undung der Mengenlehre, and ﬁnally in 1923 the important paper Begr¨undung
der element¨aren Arithmetik durch die rekurrierende Denkweise ohne Anwendung
scheinbarer Ver¨anderlichen mit unendlichem Ausdehnugsbereich was published.
These are classics in the ﬁeld of mathematical logic, although they remained to a
large extent unnoticed and unread by contemporary mathematicians, in particular
Scandinavian mathematicians!
It would be impossible to characterize the scientiﬁc work of Professor Skolem
in just a few words, but we feel that it is essential to articulate a few of the ideas
and some of the problems he worked on.
In the paper from 1920 Skolem proved the theorem which is now known as the
L¨owenheim–Skolem theorem. Brieﬂy, this states that if a ﬁnite or countable inﬁnite
set of sentences formalized within a ﬁrst-order predicate calculus is satisﬁable (or,
in other terminology, has a model), then the sentences are satisﬁable within a
countable domain. A by-product of the proof is Skolem’s well-known normal form
for the predicate calculus. In his early papers we also ﬁnd the technique of using
Skolem functions to eliminate quantiﬁers and in the construction of models — a
technique of extraordinary importance in contemporary general model theory.
In the 1922 lecture the L¨owenheim–Skolem theorem was applied to a formaliza-
tion of set theory. The result was a relativization of the notion of set, later known
as the Skolem paradox: If the axiomatic system (e.g. as presented by Zermelo
with Skolem’s notion of deﬁniteness) is consistent, i.e. if it is at all satisﬁable,
then it must be satisﬁable within a countable Denkbereich (domain). But does
this not contradict Cantor’s theorem of the uncountable, the existence of a never-
ending sequence of transﬁnite powers? We shall discuss the “paradox” at length
in later sections of this paper, and what it means for for the foundation of set
theory. Here we just point out, as Skolem did in his 1922 lecture, that concepts
introduced in an axiomatic system only seem to acquire a meaning relative to a
model or interpretation of the system. Thus let A be a set deﬁned and proved
to be uncountable by the axioms, and let M by the L¨owenheim–Skolem theorem
be a countable model of the axioms. Let further AM be the interpretation of A

Thoralf Albert Skolem
131
in M. Then AM is uncountable in the sense of the model M, i.e. there is no
function inside M that establishes a one-to-one correspondence between AM and
the natural numbers in M. But AM as a part of the countable model M, must be
countable.
In the same lecture Skolem made several other important contributions to the
foundation of set theory. He came up with a method, now universally accepted,
for eliminating the psychologism inherent in Cantor’s description of a set and still
present in the axiomatization given by Zermelo. Skolem also extended and thus
completed Zermelo’s system on an important point by introducing the axiom of
replacement. This was also done at about the same time by A. Fraenkel. The
Fraenkel contributions became better known, but in all fairness one might claim
that what is today called the Zermelo–Fraenkel system of axiomatic theory ought
really to be known as the Zermelo–Fraenkel–Skolem system.
Skolem himself did not have much conﬁdence in set theory as a foundation for
“real” mathematics, and he was extremely doubtful about the transﬁnite powers
and non-constructive modes of reasoning of set-theoretical mathematics. His own
preferences are better represented by the important 1923 paper. Here Skolem tries
to build up elementary arithmetic without applying the unrestricted quantiﬁers
“for all” and “there exists” to the inﬁnite completed totality of natural numbers.
Historically, this is perhaps “a ﬁrst” paper in the theory of recursive arithmetic. In
a paper from 1924 he also gave a constructive proof for the fundamental theorem
of algebra. But, whereas recursion theory has witnessed a rich development, the
strictly ﬁnitistic construction of mathematics advocated by Skolem has aroused
less interest. In a lecture to the 1950 International Congress of Mathematicians he
hoped that “the very natural feature of my considerations would convince people
that this ﬁnitistic treatment of mathematics was not only a possible one but the
true or correct one”. For an ordinary mathematician this is an extreme position,
so Skolem hastens to add: “Now I will not be misunderstood. I am no fanatic.”
To this, everyone who knew Skolem would surely agree.
Skolem’s work in logic did not create much interest among his Scandinavian
colleagues at the time, and later he indicated that he could not derive much inspi-
ration while his papers remained unread. So, from the beginning of the 1920s, he
turned to more traditional and “respectable” ﬁelds — algebra and number theory.
Skolem has contributed extensively to the theory of Diophantine equations, not so
much to the study of particular equations, but in giving results and methods of a
more general nature. He is probably best known for the so-called p -adic method,
perhaps one of the more signiﬁcant developments in Diophantine equations in later
years. The method can be used quite generally to conclude that certain equations
have only a ﬁnite number of solutions in rational integers, and in many cases it
is possible to give constructive methods for actually ﬁnding the solutions.
An
important paper by Skolem on this method is Einige S¨atze ¨uber p -adische Poten-
zreihen mit Anwendung auf gewisse exponentielle Gleichungen from 1935. It is
not possible here to enter into the details of the method. The reader may refer
to an excellent survey by Skolem himself, The use of p-adic methods in the theory

132
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
of Diophantine equations from 1954. In 1938 Skolem wrote a book Diophantische
Gleichungen in the Ergebnisse series.
Skolem has also written a large number of papers on algebra. He is perhaps best
known in this ﬁeld for a result published in 1927 in Zur Theorie der assoziativen
Zahlensysteme. The theorem was later rediscovered by Emmy Noether and R.
Brauer, and to-day carries the name Skolem–Noether. It characterizes the auto-
morphisms of simple algebras and says in its modern form that there are no other
but inner automorphisms of a simple algebra A of ﬁnite rank over a ﬁeld K, where
K is the centre of A and supposed invariant under the automorphisms.
Skolem’s contribution to algebra and number theory, which is much more ex-
tensive than indicated here (e.g. there is a paper from 1944 ¨Uber Nebenk¨orper und
Nebenringe which has not perhaps been suﬃciently exploited), suﬃces to give him
an honourable position in the Mathematicians’ hierarchy. In addition, there is his
work on logic.
In 1928 he published a lecture ¨Uber die mathematische Logik which he gave
earlier the same year at a meeting of Norsk Matematisk Forening. This rather
modest title conceals a very important paper. He sets himself the task of showing
how the deduction problem for elementary logic can be reduced to an arithmetical-
combinatorial problem. Generally, the latter problem is not eﬀectively solvable,
but for certain classes of formulas it is possible to obtain an eﬀective decision
procedure.
The examples given by Skolem are important contributions to the
Entscheidungsproblem of logic. Skolem wrote several papers on this topic, and,
of necessity, they are quite combinatorial in method. Typical in this respect is a
short paper from 1933 Ein kombinatorischer Satz mit Anwendung auf ein logisches
Entscheidungsproblem. The combinatorial theorem referred to is the well-known
Ramsay’s theorem. Skolem gave a slightly sharper version with a simpler proof.
Skolem has written many papers on pure combinatorics. In collaboration with
Viggo Brun he edited the second edition of Netto’s Lehrbuch der Combinatorik,
which was greatly enriched with many original contributions by Brun and Skolem.
Skolem’s work in combinatorics is still an active part of current research. But
rather than giving a report on this, we will mention the sculpture, Skolem, choc
de blocs & chiﬀres au vent, by Jessica Stockholder in the garden of the Institut
des Hautes ´Etudes Scientiﬁque in Paris. The sculpture has its origin in a project
for school children and is based on a combinatorial problem originally proposed
by Skolem.
In 1929 one of the better known of Skolem’s contributions to logic appeared,
¨Uber einige Grundlagenfragen der Mathematik. In it he returns to the proof of
the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem and gives two new ones. One is short, but uses
the axiom of choice. The second, which is not constructive either, deserves special
comment. Skolem did not think of logic as an axiomatically given science. For him
the notion of consistency was to be interpreted semantically, i.e. as satisﬁability in
some non-empty domain of individuals. Today, it is more common to formulate the
notion proof-theoretically: there is no formula A such that both A and not-A are
provable. When Skolem stated the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem in the following

Thoralf Albert Skolem
133
manner: “If a formula A is consistent, then it is satisﬁable in a countable domain”,
one must remember that it is the semantic interpretation of “consistency” which
is intended.
On the proof-theoretic interpretation one obtains quite a diﬀerent theorem:
G¨odel’s completeness theorem for predicate logic. But what merits special com-
ment is the fact that the second 1929 proof of Skolem can, with some additions,
be made to serve as proof of G¨odel’s theorem.
The axiom of choice received an elegant formulation in the 1929 paper. There
exists a “global” choice function w such that x ∈y →w(x) ∈y. Skolem deeply
mistrusted this axiom. In a lecture from 1932 he stated: “If one works within a
completely formalized mathematics, based on a ﬁnite number of precisely stated
axioms, there is nothing to discuss but questions of consistency and ease of ma-
nipulation. But in ordinary mathematical practice, e.g., in the usual studies on
continua which are never given by a set of speciﬁed formal rules, the axiom of
choice is, in my opinion, deﬁnitely undesirable–a kind of scientiﬁc fraud.”
Towards the end of the 1929 paper Skolem expressed some doubts about the
complete axiomatizability of mathematical concepts. His scepticism was based on
the set-theoretic relativism which follows from the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem. In
1929 he could give only some partial results, but in a paper from 1934 (and a pre-
vious one from 1933) ¨Uber die Nichtcharacterisierbarkeit der Zahlenreihe mittels
endlich oder abz¨ahlbar unendlich vieler Aussagen mit ausschliesslich Zahlenvari-
ablen he could prove that there is no ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite set of sentences
in the language of Peano arithmetic which characterizes the natural numbers. To-
day, this follows as a simple consequence of G¨odel’s completeness theorem. The
technique used by Skolem was a more direct model-theoretic construction. And
this technique, suitably reﬁned to the so-called ultraproduct construction, has been
an important tool in recent work on model theory.
Skolem has also written many papers on recursion theory since 1923. Among his
many contributions may be mentioned a short and elegant paper from 1940, Ein-
facher Beweis der Unm¨oglichkeit eines allgemeinen L¨osungsverfahren f¨ur Arith-
metische Probleme. He ﬁrst shows that every general recursive relation is arith-
metical and concludes from this, by a simple application of Cantor’s diagonal
method, that if one identiﬁes “eﬀective” with general recursive, then there is no
eﬀective decision method for arithmetical problems. Perhaps the main unsolved
problem in this ﬁeld was at that time Hilbert’s 10th problem, which postulates an
eﬀective method for solving Diophantine equations. It is somewhat strange that
Skolem, being equally at home in recursion theory and Diophantine equations,
never seemed to have worked on this problem. In a paper from 1962 he remarks:
“It has been asked whether the recursively enumerable sets are all of them Dio-
phantine sets ... I regret not having had the opportunity to study this question
seriously.”
As previously remarked, Skolem published most of his papers in Norwegian
journals, and they have not always been easy to obtain for mathematicians abroad.
Others have thus rediscovered his results. One example is the Skolem-Noether

134
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
theorem.
Another is Skolem’s contributions to lattice theory, which remained
completely unnoticed at the time of their publication. In 1936 he even had to
write a paper ¨Uber gewisse ‘Verb¨ande’ oder ‘Lattices’ giving a survey of results
which he had obtained in 1913 and 1919 and which were rediscovered in the 1930s.
Skolem had been the ﬁrst, for example, to determine the free distributive lattice
generated by n elements [1913]; he had shown that every implicative lattice is
distributive and, as a partical converse, that every ﬁnite distributive lattice is
implicative [1919].
These results are of great interest for the algebraization of
mathematical logic.
Age did not diminish Skolem’s research activities. From 1948 to 1957, i.e. from
his 61st to his 70th year, he published 48 papers. Skolem was a truly creative
mathematician. In his greatest papers he started out from simple, but, as we now
recognize, fundamental situations. What he then wrote has remained basic for all
further work.
3
A SURVEY OF SKOLEM’S WORK IN LOGIC
Skolem has made many fundamental contributions to modern investigations on
the foundations of mathematics. If one has to single out one most intriguing item,
it would probably be his work on non-standard models of set theory and number
theory. He has also contributed several other basic new ideas and methods. A
comprehensive unifying theme is the nature of quantiﬁers (with inﬁnite ranges):
1. The Skolem functions and countable models as a general method of analysing
quantiﬁers both in pure logic and in axiomatic theories.
2. The founding of recursive arithmetic as a method of developing mathematics
on a quantiﬁer-free basis.
3. The invention and powerful applications of the decision method of eliminat-
ing quantiﬁers for axiomatic theories.
4. Various results on the decision and reduction problems of quantiﬁcation the-
ory (e.g. the Skolem normal form).
5. The classic explication of Zermelo’s concept of “deﬁnite property” by the
notation of quantiﬁcation theory.
6. The discovery and emphasis on non-standard models of axiomatic number
theory and set theory.
In addition Skolem has made contributions to the algebraisation of logic (e.g.
the “Skolem lattices”). In contemporary terminology, Skolem’s main contributions
are to model theory, recursive function theory, axiomatic set theory, and decision
problems. This way of describing is, however, rather misleading since his work
dealt with mathematical logic before such fragmentations became prevalent and

Thoralf Albert Skolem
135
has a quite diﬀerent ﬂavor from the more abstract current approaches: rather he
participated in the founding of these subjects by introducing initially several of
the basic ideas in their concrete and naked form.
Skolem has a tendency of treating general problems by concrete examples. Often
proofs seem to be presented in the same order as he came to discover them. This
results in a fresh informality as well as a certain inconclusiveness. Many of his
papers give the impression of reports on work in progress. Yet his ideas are often
pregnant and potentially capable of wide applications. He was very much a “free
spirit”: he did not belong to any school, he did not found any school of his own, he
did not usually make heavy use of known results in more specialized developments,
rather he was very much an innovator and most of his papers can be read and
understood by people without much specialized knowledge. It seems quite likely
that if he were young today, logic, in its more developed stage, would not have
appealed to him.
In Skolem’s earlier work, he was much inﬂuenced by Schr¨oder’s books and
L¨owenheim’s paper of 1915. He was also familiar with Zermelo’s work in axiomatic
set theory, and stated explicitly that he had studied Whitehead and Russell before
the autumn of 1919. His concurrent interest in ordinary number theory was on
several occasions helpful, notably in the invention of the necessary combinatorial
lemmas. During the latter half of his career, he was not always successful in taking
fully into consideration known results related to what he was working on.
In terms of the dates of publication, Skolem’s principal work in logic appeared
during the 15-year period 1919–1933 (when he was 32 to 46); in particular, the
eight papers [1919a; 1920a; 1922b; 1923a; 1928a; 1929b; 1930c; 1933d].
Ideas
for some of theses papers can be traced back to 1915-18. There are many other
interesting papers, but they do not seem to be equally central to logic and founda-
tions. The publication from 1934 onwards contain mostly remarks, exposistions,
alternative proofs of known theorems and partial results towards higher goals.
In what follows, we shall consider Skolem’s work in logic under four general
headings: quantiﬁcation theory, axiomatic set theory, algebraic aspects, and re-
cursive functions.
I am grateful to Professors Paul Bernays and Kurt G¨odel for reading an earlier
draft of this paper and pointing out several errors and inaccuracies.
3.1
Quantiﬁcation theory (Elementary logic)
3.1.1
Countable models and completeness
This section is concerned with §1 of [1920a], §3 of [1922b], [1928a], §4 and §5 of
[1929b], §1 of [1941a], and [1955c]. Related materials includes the ﬁrst edition of
Hilbert–Ackermann, Herbrand’s dissertation, G¨odel’s dissertation (and the pub-
lished paper on the completeness of elementary logic), and the second volume of
Hilbert–Bernays.
A quantiﬁcational schema is obtained from atomic schemata (predicate letters
followed by variables) by truth-functional connectives and quantiﬁers in the famil-

136
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
iar manner. One can consider the problems of satisﬁability and models (in partic-
ular, countable models) of any such schema without appeal to a formal system for
proving or refuting such schemata. In contrast, the problem of completeness can-
not be studied except by reference to a formal system since completeness means
that all desired schemata (viz. the valid ones) are provable in a formal system (of
quantiﬁcation theory).
In §1 of [1920a], Skolem proves several basic results without reference to any
formal system of logic.
THEOREM 1 The Skolem normal form theorem. There is a general method by
which, given any quantiﬁcational schema W, we can ﬁnd another one W ′ in the
Skolem satisﬁablity normal form
(1)
∀x1 . . . ∀xm∃y1 . . . ∃ynU(x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn)
such that W is satisﬁable if and only if W ′ is.
The proof of this can be illustrated by a simple example:
(2)
∀x∃u∀yU(x, u, y)
Take a new letter A. It is then clear that (2) is satisﬁable in a given domain if
and only if the following is:
(3)
∀x∃wA(x, w) ∧∀x∀u(A(x, u) ≡∀yU(x, u, y))
Hence, if and only if the following is
∀x∃wA(x, w) ∧∀x∀u((A(x, u) ∧∀yU(x, u, y)) ∨(¬A(x, u) ∧∃z¬U(x, u, z))
Therefore, (2) is satisﬁable in a domain if and only if the following is:
(4)
∀x∀u∀y∃w∃z(A(x, w) ∧((A(x, u) ∧U(x, u, y)) ∨(¬A(x, u) ∧U(x, u, z))))
This illustrates Skolem’s rather intuitive proof of Theorem 1. It diﬀers from
the proof in the standard textbooks which goes back to G¨odel’s dissertation either
directly or through the second edition of Hilbert–Ackermann. The alternative is
more economical on quantiﬁers. Thus, we replace ≡by ⊃in (3) and arrive at:
(5)
∀x∃wA(x, w) ∧∀x∀u(A(x, u) ⊃∀yU(x, u, y))
(6)
∀x∃wA(x, w) ∧∀x∀u∀y(A(x, u) ⊃U(x, u, y))
(7)
∀x∀u∀y∃w(A(x, w) ∨(A(x, u) ⊃U(x, u, y)))
If (5) is satisﬁable, then by the second half of (5), we can get (2) from the ﬁrst
half of (5). Conversely, if (2) is satisﬁable, we can interpret A(x, u) as ∀yU(x, u, y).

Thoralf Albert Skolem
137
1.1 The schema (2) is satisﬁable in a domain if and only if (6) or (7) is.
THEOREM 2
The L¨owenheim-Skolem submodel theorem. If a quantiﬁcational
schema W has a model M, then it has a countable model M ′ which is an elementary
submodel of M (i.e. the domain D′ of M ′ is a subset of the domain D of M, and
the predicate letters get in M ′ the same interpretation as in M only restricted to
D′). The same is true if instead of W a countable set of schemata is assumed to
have a model.
Skolem begins by considering a simple case:
(8)
∀x∃yU(x, y)
Assume that (8) is satisﬁed in a given domain D for certain interpretation of
the predicate letters. “Then, by virtue of the axiom of choice, we can imagine that
for every x a uniquely determined y is chosen in such a way that U(x, y) comes
out true”. This deﬁnes a mapping yx of the domain D into itself. Then
(9)
∀xU(x, yx)
is true for the given interpretation of the predicate letters. Let a be a particular
individual and D′ be the intersection of all classes X such that a ∈X and ya ∈X
if x ∈X. Then D′ is (either ﬁnite) or countable. But (9), and therefore (8), also
holds true in D′.
This sketch is followed by an elaboration of the general case of a single or
countable set of schemata each in Skolem normal form. The same method applies
also to schemata in the prenex form, and Skolem remarks on this in [1928a] and
[1941a].
The remainder of §1 of [1920a] is taken up by fairly direct results on “inﬁnitely
long expressions”.
Strictly speaking, the proof deals with extended quantiﬁcation theory because =
is implicitly included as a “relative” (predicate letter) with a ﬁxed interpretation.
The inclusion of equality does not aﬀect the general proof but requires merely a
slightly more complex notion of a model (viz. with an additional clause on =).
In recent years, an obvious generalization of Theorem 2 has been applied in
model theory: we can begin with, instead of {a}, and arbitrary inﬁnite subset D1
of D, and obtain an elementary submodel of M with D1 contained in its domain
which has the same cardinality as D1; a related result is to start with any inﬁnite
model M and a superset D2 of D and reach a model which contains M as an
elementary submodel and whose domain has the same cardinality as D2.
In §3 of [1922b], Skolem proves a diﬀerent version of Theorem 2 which avoids
the axiom of choice.
THEOREM 3 The L¨owenheim-Skolem approximation theorem. If a quantiﬁca-
tional schema is satisﬁed in any domain at all, it is already satisﬁed in a countable
domain. Similarly with a countable set of schemata.
The proof begins with a single schema in Skolem form assumed to be satisﬁable:

138
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
(10) ∀x1 . . . ∀xm∃y1 . . . ∃ynU(x1, . . . , xm; y1, . . . , yn)
While Skolem’s proof here is correct, it is not suﬃciently explicit at two points.
The same ideas are elaborated and improved in §4 of [1929b] beginning with a
schema in prenex form. Let us consider the two proofs together. Since the more
general case of a schemata in the prenex form involves no essential diﬀerence, we
conﬁne our attention to (10).
Since (10) is satisﬁed in a (non-empty) domain D, we can take an arbitrary ele-
ment of D and denote it by symbol 1. Then there must be certain n-tuple y1, . . . , yn
in D such that U(1, . . . , 1; y1, . . . , yn) is true (in the given model). Without loss of
generality, we can denote these elements by 2, . . . , n+1. In other words, there must
be ways of assigning truth-values to atomic schemata in U(1, . . . , 1; 2, . . . , n+1) so
that the whole schema gets the value “true”. We say that (10) has solution of level
1. This does not exclude the case that some or all the objects denoted by symbols
1, 2, . . . , n + 1 might be the same. (In the proof of 1922b, a slight complication is
introduced by saying merely that some n-tuple (y1, . . . , yn) can be selected from
{1, . . . , n + 1}n). Let
c1 = n + 1 , ck+1 = ck + n(cm
k −1)
For each k, consider the conjunction Kk+1 of all schemata
U(a1, . . . , am; b1, . . . , bn)
where (a1, . . . , am) is any m-tuple (say the (t + 1)-st in a reasonable enumeration)
from {1, . . . , ck}m and (b1, . . . , bn) is (nt + 1, . . . , nt + n). A model of Kk+1 is said
to be a solution of (10) of level k + 1. Since (10) is satisﬁable, it has solutions of
level k, for every k. Consider now the totality of all partial solutions of (10), i.e.
the totality of sets of truth-value assignments which are solutions of (10) of level
k, for some k.
For each k, there may be many (but always a ﬁnite number of) solutions. For
any two diﬀerent solutions L and L′ of arbitrary level, write L < L′ if and only if
R(i, j, . . .) gets “false” in L and “true” in L′, where R(i, j, . . .) is the ﬁrst atomic
schema having diﬀerent truth-values in L and L′. When p < q, every solution
of level q must be an extension of some solution of level p. Hence, at each level
k, there must be solutions which have inﬁnitely many extensions (i.e. solutions of
higher levels which extend them). (This step is missing in the proof of [1922b]
which is, therefore, incomplete). Let these be L(k)
1 , . . . , L(k)
tk arranged in the order
< just introduced. For each k, L(k+1)
1
must be an extension of L(k)
1 . Otherwise,
since L(k)
1
is indeﬁnitely extendable, there must be L(k+1)
i
which is an extension
of L(k)
1
such that L(k+1)
1
< L(k+1)
i
. Since L(k+1)
1
is not an extension of L(k)
1 , L(k+1)
i
must diﬀer from L(k+1)
1
in the assignments to the part Kk. But then there must
be L(k)
j
which is a part of L(k+1)
1
such that L(k)
j
< L(k)
1 . This is not possible.
Hence, L(1)
1 , L(2)
1 , L(3)
1 , . . . yield a simultaneous solution of (10), and therefore (10)
is satisﬁable in the domain of positive integers.

Thoralf Albert Skolem
139
In [1928a], Skolem introduces a refutation procedure P and asserts its complete-
ness:
P 1. Usual rules to turn a schema into prenex form.
P 2. Turn the schema into functional form: e.g. ;
(11) ∀x∀y∃u∀v∃wU(x, y, u, v, w)
into
U(x, y, f(x, y), v, g(x, y, v))
P 3. Use 0, f(0, 0), g(0, 0, 0), . . . to perform the role of 1, 2, 3, . . . in the preceding
proof and deﬁne solutions of level k, for each k.
P 4. Try successively for each k, whether (11) has a solution of level k.
A schema is refutable in P if and only if there is some k such that its prenex
form has, for some k, no solution of level k.
THEOREM 4. The refutation procedure P is complete; i.e. a schema W is refut-
able by P if and only if it is not satisﬁable.
The proof of this theorem is directly from Skolem’s other works as quoted a
moment ago. Thus, if W is satisﬁable, we see from the previous arguments that
W has a solution of level k, for every k, and, therefore, that W is not refutable by
P. On the other hand, if W is not refutable by P, then it has a solution of level
k, for every k. Hence, by the previous arguments, W is satisﬁable (in fact, in a
countable domain).
This diﬀers from the famous completeness theorem only in the use of an un-
familiar refutation system in place of a familiar proof system.
In fact, it is a
relatively small step to establish the completeness of a proof system S (say that of
Hilbert–Ackermann) by showing that if ¬W is refutable in P, then W is provable
in S.
However, Skolem’s arguments in his [1928a] paper, viewed as a proof of Theorem
4, are entirely inconclusive. Speciﬁcally, the inference from the existence of solu-
tions of every level to the satisﬁablity of W is defective. In the ﬁrst place, instead
of beginning with the assumption that W has no model, an (informal) derivation
of a contradiction from W is assumed. What confuses the issue is Skolem’s free
interchange of “satisﬁable” and “consistent”. This is explained by the fact that
Skolem is in the tradition of Boole, Schr¨oder, L¨owenheim, and Korselt. According
to this tradition, unlike that of Frege and Hilbert, logic is not thought of as a
deductive system. From this point of view, as Professor Bernays has pointed out,
satisﬁability is the same as consistency (non-contradiction), since, in the domain
of pure logic, no other hindrances for satisfying conditions can exist besides con-
tradiction. Hence, for Skolem, the completeness of the refutation system P can
only mean that if there is an informal disproof of W, then W is disprovable in
P. In fact this completeness theorem is stated fairly explicitly by Skolem (line 14

140
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
to line 10 from the bottom, p. 198): if W is contradictory, then there is some n
such that there is a contradiction at level n. This is obviously suﬃcient since, by
deﬁnition, such a number n can then be found by the rules of the system P.
The structure of Skolem’s proof of the above statement is as follows (the last 5
lines of p. 196 and the ﬁrst 15 lines of p. 197; the last 10 lines of p. 198 and the
ﬁrst 3 lines of p. 199). (α) An informal derivation D of a contradiction from W
is assumed. (β) The schema W is turned into functional form Wf. (γ) Instead
of D, an assumed derivation Df of a contradiction from Wf is considered, where
Df consists of substitutions and propositional combinations (“Every consequence
of the axiom results from repeated and combined use of it”). (δ) By substituting
0 for all free variables in the assumed deduction Df, a number n is deduced such
that a contradiction is forthcoming at level n (and, therefore, W has no solution
of level n).
Actually step (α) is left implicit because it is asserted that (i) Wf faithfully
represents W.
It is further assumed that (ii) all possible deductions from Wf
must be suﬃciently simple to satisfy (γ) and (δ).
Since no formal system for
codifying D and Df are given, the whole proof is somewhat vague. However, since
(i) and (ii) sound highly plausible, this approach to the completeness question
of the system P is not without appeal. One way to avoid the vagueness is to
use the arguments for proving Theorem 3. It is shown that there that if there
is no model of W, then there is a contradiction at some level n. Hence, since
evidently a correct informal disproof of W implies the nonexistence of models for
W, we arrive at Skolem’s desired conclusion. But Skolem apparently does not
wish to go through the nonﬁnitary reasoning involved in the proof of Theorem 3
but attempts instead to eliminate transﬁnite arguments from metamathematics.
As a result, he has to depend on the vague assumptions (i) and (ii). (By the way
Skolem’s assertion 1.3 described below is open to the same objection.)
At one place (p. 196, line 12 from below), Skolem states that he is trying to
reduce the deduction question of logic to an arithmetical-combinatorial question.
Here again, assumptions like (i) and (ii) seem to be used. In a sense, the Herbrand
type of work may be viewed as a partial realization of Skolem’s program, partial
because Herbrand begins with a deductive system S, assumed to be adequate for
all informal arguments of a logical nature. The Herbrand type of work establishes,
with more complex proofs, Skolem’s assertion to the extent that (a) deductions in
S from W by quantiﬁer theory theory are represented by deductions from Wf by
substitutions and truth-functional steps. The interesting assertion (a) shows that
if S is complete, then P is complete. But it does not yield Theorem 4. In fact,
(a) is not relevant to the classical completeness result. Rather it proposes to give
a sharper interpretation of the highly non-constructive remark that all theorems
of S are valid. Herbrand does state in eﬀect that (b) if W is valid (in a restricted
sense in a countable domain), then W is provable in S [1929, C. R. vol. 188, p.
1077, Theorem II; 1930, dissertation, Chapter 5, 6.2, Theorem 2]. Classically, of
course, the completeness of S follows as a corollary. However, the exact way in
which Herbrand proposes to prove (b) (in particular, also 1.2 below) is infected

Thoralf Albert Skolem
141
by a basic (correctable) error, which is crucial to his proof of (a) and is noted by
several people.
The completeness theorem, mathematically, is indeed an almost immediate con-
sequence of Skolem [1922b; 1929b]. However, the fact is, before G¨odel nobody
(including Skolem himself) had drawn this conclusion. Professor G¨odel attributes
this surprising failure to a widespread lack, at that time, of the required epistemo-
logical attitude toward metamathematics and toward nonﬁnitary reasoning. That
Skolem used nonﬁnitary reasoning to improve L¨owenheim’s theorem does not dis-
prove this interpretation. Pure model theory, where the concept of proof does not
come in, lies on the borderline between mathematics and metamathematics, and
its application to special systems with a ﬁnite number of axioms actually belongs
to mathematics, at least for the most part. Skolem undoubtedly felt that one has
to talk about more tangible things in a proof of completeness. Hence, his failure
to appeal to the argument of [Skolem, 1922b], as well as his unsuccessful attempt
to supply a syntactical argument.
The criterion of a complete system of logic was ﬁrst introduced by Bolzano
in Wissenschaftslehre [1837]. In 1928, Hilbert and Ackermann rediscovered the
formulation and presented it in connection with their exact system. “Whether
the axiom system is at least complete in the sense that all logical formulas, which
are valid (richtig) for all domains of individuals, are in fact derivable, remains an
unsolved question. It can only be stated that this axiom system is adequate to all
applications” (p. 68). “All examples of formulas, which are valid (allgemeingltig)
in every domain of individuals, can be proved from the axioms of the functional
calculus set up by us. It is conjectured that (not only these examples but indeed)
all such valid formulas are provable in the given system” (p. 80).
It is perhaps surprising that the problem of completeness, once so posed, was
not solved as more or less an exercise by applying Skolem’s proof of [1922b]. The
essential missing step is merely (compare the notation above):
1.2 If there is some k, Kk is contradictory (i.e. , there is no solution of level k),
then the negation of (10) can be derived in S from ¬Kk which is a tautology.
Even this step was available in Herbrand’s work [1929, C. R. vol. 188, p. 1076;
1930, dissertation].
But Herbrand refrained from drawing the conclusion, un-
doubtedly because he regarded the above concept of completeness as meaningless
on account of it being highly nonconstructive.
The completeness theorem is due to G¨odel [1930] and his proof is widely adopted
in expositions. G¨odel was not acquainted with Skolem [1922b], nor later papers
of Skolem and Herbrand. Hence, it is not pointed out in G¨odel’s paper that the
mathematical core is similar to §3 of [Skolem, 1922b].
G¨odel studied Hilbert–
Ackermann and [Skolem, 1920a], and then gave an attractive treatment of the
whole of the whole problem of the completeness of elementary logic. In his proof,
G¨odel appeals to familiar arguments (“so folgt nach bekannten Schlussweisen”) in
a step that corresponds to the inference from the existence of solutions at each
level to the existence of a sequence of solutions each containing the preceding

142
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
(p. 350). This refers to the inﬁnity lemma; in fact a complete proof is given in
G¨odel’s dissertation (pp. 20–22). In any case, G¨odel is not interested in avoiding
an appeal to the axiom of choice. The omitted step is elaborated in the exposition
of Hilbert–Ackermann (second edition, [1938, p. 80]), but many may have found
the elaboration not suﬃciently explicit since an implicit appeal is made to the
axiom of dependent choice. In contrast, Skolem is much more explicit and states
in [1929b] ﬁrst the principle of choice required and then proceeds to give the proof
summarized above which avoids the axiom of choice.
The submodel theorem implies a certain incompleteness of an axiomatic set
theory with ﬁnitely many axioms because an expression can be found in the system
to enumerate the elements of the countable submodel and the enumeration, though
expressible, cannot deﬁne a set in the system on account of the diagonal argument.
This general idea can be applied to show, for example that the Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory has no ﬁnite axiomatization.
Using G¨odel’s method of arithmetization, a sharper form of the completeness
theorem is obtained in Hilbert–Bernays II. This can be further modiﬁed to give
the following theorem:
THEOREM 5. If we add Con(S) (the usual formula expressing the consistency
of a ﬁrst order system S) to number theory as a new axiom, we can prove in the
resulting system arithmetic translations of all theorems of S.
There is a somewhat artiﬁcial question about the exact form of the formula
Con(S), especially when S has an inﬁnite number of axioms. One way to avoid
this complication is to use a ﬁnite axiomatization of quantiﬁcation theory with
additional rules of inference. Then the systems with ﬁnitely many axioms which
have interested us all receive ﬁnite axiomatization, and there is no longer room for
giving queer forms of Con(S).
Herbrand sometimes speaks of his fundamental theorem as “a more precise
statement of the well-known L¨owenheim–Skolem theorem”. Herbrand does not
accept the general concepts of a domain, model, satisﬁable, valid, but makes heavy
use of provability in a more or less standard formal system H of quantiﬁcation
theory. For the present purpose, Herbrand’s theorem can be stated as follows:
THEOREM 6. (1a) If a schema W does not have a solution of level k, for some
k, then W is refutable in H (i.e. ¬W is provable in H). (1b) Given the number
k, we can construct a refutation of W. (2a) If W is refutable in H, then there is
a number k such that W has no solution of level k. (2b) There is an elementary
method by which, given a refutation of any schema W, we can ﬁnd a number k
such that W has no solution of level k.
This then is the constructive version of the L¨owenheim–Skolem theorem; it
moves essentially between two integers (a proof and a level). Of the four parts,
the ﬁrst three do not go beyond some familiar proofs of the completeness theorem
which extend only slightly the ideas of Skolem discussed above. Part (2b) is an
important result in proof theory and calls for syntactic considerations. It has been
applied to obtain consistency results of mathematical theories of an elementary

Thoralf Albert Skolem
143
sort. It contains the cut-elimination theorem commonly attributed to Gentzen.
There are certain inconclusive considerations in Skolem [1928a] and [1929b, end
of §4] which have a similar ﬂavor as this part (2b). Skolem asserts that:
1.3 If there is, for every k, a solution of W of level k, then the theory obtained
from quantiﬁcation theory by adding W as an axiom is consistent.
The argument begins with a schema W in functional form, say:
(12) U(x, y, f(x, y), v, g(x, y, v))
The individual constants are those built up from 0 by iterated applications of
f and g. It is argued that if arrive at a contradiction, then we can replace all
individual variables with 0, so that we have a schema which is contradictory but
contains only individual constants of level k, for some k. Hence, (12) can have no
solution of level k. It is not clear how we can turn this suggestive sketch into a
convincing proof.
In §5 of [1929b], it is proved that if a schema W has a solution of level k, for
each k, then the conjunction W with schemata of the form
(13) ∃y∀x(¬V (y) ∨V (x))
also has a solution of level k, for each k. Then 1.3 is applied to conclude that the
addition of the law of excluded middle (13) introduces no new contradictions. It
is hard to evaluate the importance of proofs and comments in this section.
There are philosophical problems connected with the interpretation of the
L¨owenheim–Skolem and the completeness results.
As we have seen, Herbrand
adheres consistently to a constructive position and declines to accept the classical
interpretations of these results. G¨odel has in his dissertation (though not in the
published version) a characteristically lucid and balanced discussion of the foun-
dational and methodological issues connected with the completeness result. G¨odel
emphasizes that the problem of completeness (unlike that of consistency) did not
arise from the foundational debates and can be asked and answered meaningfully
in the framework of ordinary and “naive” mathematics. Hence, no restrictions on
the the methods of proof are made. Skolem’s position on these issues is somewhat
ambiguous. On the one hand, he discourses rather freely on arbitrary domains
(e.g. in [1922b] and [1929b]) and his results dealing with arbitrary domains are
of central importance in current model theory. On the other hand, in [1955c],
he voices unhappiness over the uncritical use of concepts such as satisﬁable, do-
main, valid: “What is the totality of all domains? Now it is possible by use of
L¨owenheim’s theorem to simplify the deﬁnition of satisﬁability by restricting the
variable predicates occurring in the considered formula to the domain N. How-
ever, the formulation of L¨owenheim’s theorem itself requires either a domain in
general namely by saying that if a formula is satisﬁed in an arbitrary domain then
it is satisﬁed in N, or we must formulate the theorem by saying that if ¬F is not
provable, then F can be satisﬁed in N”.

144
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
Skolem’s critical remark contains, among other things, two observations. First
“it is highly justiﬁed to ask what the starting point shall be, whether logic or set
theory”. It is, Skolem seems to assert, inappropriate to use set theory in studying
logic and at the same time say that logic is intended to give the foundations of all
mathematics. Second, Skolem seems to say that there is not one set theory but
diﬀerent axiom systems of set theory. “Sometimes I have had the task to write
reviews of articles, where set theoretic notions and theorems are used without any
explanation of what kind of set theory is meant. It is a disagreeable job to write
reviews in such cases.
One does not know what the author really means”.
If
we accept completely these observations, then they would be objections against
Skolem’s own theorems 2 and 3 given above. Implicit in Skolem’s views seems
to be the suggestion that since no axiom system of set theory is categorial, then
there can be no stable concept of set; that a mathematical concept is clear (or even
acceptable) only if we have (at least) a characterization of it by a formal system.
A digression on L¨owenheim [1915]
In L¨owenheim [1915], there is a proof of Theorem 3 which is more informal and
more complex than Skolem’s. Conﬁning to essentials, we may describe the proof
as follows.
Roughly speaking, every quantiﬁcational schema is ﬁrst transformed into one
in prenex form, e.g.:
(14) ∀x∃y∀zU(x, y, z)
It is asserted that, for a suitable function yx, (14) is equivalent to
(15) ∀x∀zU(x, yx, z)
in the sense that (14) is satisﬁable in D if and only if (15) is. Obviously (14) is
satisﬁable if (15) is. The reason L¨owenheim gives for the other direction amounts
to saying that if (15) is not satisﬁable in D, however we interpret the predicate
letters and function symbol yx, then (14) is not satisﬁable in D. This makes an
implicit appeal to the axiom of choice.
The use of “Skolem functions” seems to go back to the logicians of the Scr¨oder
school to which L¨owenheim and Korselt belong. They speak of a general logical
law (a distributive law) which, in modern notation, states:
∀x∃yA(x, y) ≡∃f∀xA(x, f(x))
As Skolem comments in §3 of [1922b]: “L¨owenheim’s proof is unnecessarily
complicated, and furthermore the complexity is rather essential to his argument,
since he introduces subscripts when he expands inﬁnite logical sums or products;
in this way he obtains logical expressions with an uncountably inﬁnite number of
terms. So he must make a detour, so to speak, through the uncountable”.

Thoralf Albert Skolem
145
In fact, this whole complex preliminary does not seem necessary for L¨owen-
heim’s proof since he continues with an argument somewhat similar to Skolem
[1922b; 1929b]. He introduces integers much as Skolem does and considers (in
somewhat diﬀerent terminology) solutions of diﬀerent levels. His argument is less
sophisticated than Skolem’s in proving that if a schema has a solution of level k,
for each k, then it is satisﬁable (in the domain N of positive integers). Suppose a
schema has solutions for each level k. Let Ek be the ﬁnite set of solutions of level
k and E be the inﬁnite union of these sets E1, E2, . . .. Within E1 there must be
a solution Q1 of level 1 which occurs as a part of inﬁnitely many members of E
since each of the inﬁnitely many solutions in E contains one of the ﬁnitely many
members of E1 as a member. Similarly, in E2 there must be a least one Q2 which
contains Q1 as a part and occurs in inﬁnitely many members of E. And so on.
Hence we can take the union of Q1, Q2, . . . and give an interpretation of the given
schema in N.
L¨owenheim’s argument establishes in a typical case what is today known as the
“inﬁnity lemma”. He makes an implicit appeal to the axiom of dependent choice
which is avoided in Skolem [1922b], as discussed above. L¨owenheim’s treatment
also includes equality as part of the quantiﬁcation theory.
With regard to the consequences of his famous theorem, L¨owenheim considers
an expression F which is intended to say that the universe of discourse is neither
ﬁnite nor countable. The expression F contains bound predicate or class or second-
order variables. L¨owenheim that as the number of individuals approaches inﬁnity,
the number of possible classes classes approaches the continuum. He does not seem
to envisage the possibility of expressing uncountability in a ﬁrst-order language or
of extending his result to second-order theories. In fact, his conclusion is rather
that it is not always possible to treat second-order quantiﬁers in a similar way:
otherwise his schema F, which, according to him, can have no ﬁnite or countable
model, would have, by his theorem, a ﬁnite or a countable model.
We make a digression on the inﬁnity lemma:
1.4 Every inﬁnite tree (or fan) contains an inﬁnite path.
Several things are implicit in the statement. In particular, it is to be understood
that, from each node, only ﬁnitely many branchings are permitted. The intuitive
proof of 1.4 is quite immediate, much as in L¨owenheim’s argument described above.
A statement not using concepts of graph theory is:
1.5 Given a sequence of (mutually disjoint) ﬁnite nonempty sets A1, A2, . . . and
a relation S such that y ∈An+1 if xSy and x ∈An, and for every xn+1 ∈An+1
there is one (and only one) xn ∈An, xnSxn+1. Then there is a sequence y1, y2, . . .
such that yi ∈Ai and yiSyi+1 for all i.
This can be proved by an appeal to the axiom of dependent choice:
1.6 If B is a nonempty set and S a relation such that

146
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
∀x(x ∈B ⊃∃y(y ∈B ∧xSy)
then there exists a sequence of elements x1, x2, . . . of B such that xnSxn+1 for all
n.
It is well-known that 1.6 is a direct consequence of the usual axiom of choice in
the form of obtaining a function from a relation R such that ∀x∃yR(y, x).
To prove 1.5 from 1.6, we delete ﬁrst all those nodes which do not occur in
inﬁnitely many paths. Thus since the union A of A1, A2, . . . is inﬁnite but each
Ai is ﬁnite, we can make the deletion by induction and be sure that the reduced
B1, B2, . . . all remain nonempty. Since A1 is ﬁnite, there must be some x1 in A1
which bears directly or indirectly the relation S (or its iteration) to inﬁnitely many
members of A. Deﬁne
Px
≡
there are inﬁnitely many members y of A such that xSny for some n
B1
=
{x|(x ∈A1 ∧Px)}
Bm+1
=
{x|(x ∈Am+1 ∧∃y(y ∈Bm ∧ySx) ∧Px)}
It is clear that if Bm is nonempty, then, since Am+1 is ﬁnite, Bm+1 is nonempty.
Let B be the union of B1, B2, . . . and apply 1.6 to get 1.5. In fact, we can avoid
the recursive deﬁnition of Bm and deﬁne directly: B = {x|(x ∈A ∧Px)}. This is
so because we can prove:
∀x((x ∈Am ∧Px) ⊃∃y(y ∈Am+1 ∧xSy ∧Py))
Note that if we are given in advance orderings of all members of each Ai in 1.5,
we can prove 1.5 without appealing to the axiom of (dependent) choice:
y1
=
the ﬁrst member of A1 such that Py1
ym+1
=
the ﬁrst member of Am+1 such that ymSym+1 and Pym+1
By the way, there is an ambiguity in L¨owenheim’s assignment of truth val-
ues to atomic formulas. I have chosen to interpret him as taking all consistent
assignments. The alternative interpretation of accusing him of using one ﬁxed
assignment for all except those atomic formulas containing the equality sign seems
to me to involve too many diﬃculties.
3.1.2
Decidable classes and reduction classes
This section deals with §4 of [1919a], §1 of [1920a], [1928a; 1933c; 1935g; 1935a;
1935f], and [1936f].
A reduction class (with respect to solvability) is a class K of quantiﬁcational
schemata for which there is a method by that, given any quantiﬁcational schema
W, we can ﬁnd W ′ in K such that W is satisﬁable if and only if W ′ is.

Thoralf Albert Skolem
147
L¨owenheim 1915 contains the earliest results on both reduction classes (the class
of schemata with dyadic letters only) and decidable classes (the class of schemata
with monadic predicate letters only). In §4 of [1919a], Skolem gives incidentally a
new proof of the decidability of monadic schemata.
In [1928a], Skolem gives two decidable classes:
2.1 The class of schemata of the form
∀x∃y1 . . . ∃ynU(x, y1, . . . , yn)
is decidable (i.e. there is a method by which, given any schema, we can decide
whether it is satisﬁable).
2.2 The class of schemata of the Skolem form
∀x1 . . . ∀xm∃y1 . . . ∃ynU(x1, . . . , xm; y1, . . . , yn)
in which each atomic part contains at least m distinct variables, is decidable.
Skolem obtains these results by applying his refutation procedure, viz. the part
of Herbrand’s theorem which has in recent years been employed for deciding these
and other classes, largely without awareness of Skolem’s early use of the same
method.
2.1 is independently obtained by Ackermann [1928, Math. Annalen, vol. 100,
pp. 638–649]. In [1935g], Skolem extends 2.1 and 2.2 to
2.3 The class of schemata of the form
∀x∃y1, . . . , ynU(x, y1, . . . , yn) ∧∀x1∀x2∀x3V (x1, x2, x3)
where U contains only dyadic predicate letters and V is a conjunction which says
that these predicates are symmetric and transitive, is decidable.
2.4 The class of Skolem schemata, in which each atomic part contains either at
least one of y1, . . . , yn or all of x1, . . . , xm, is decidable.
In [1935f], Skolem further extends 2.3 by permitting other predicate letters in
U and stipulating V to be the conjunction of m3 schemata Aijh(1 ≤i, j, h ≤m):
(Rij(x1, x2) ≡Rji(x1, x2)) ∧((Rij(x1, x2) ∧Rjh(x2, x3)) ⊃Rih(x1, x3))
In [1933c], Skolem gives a new proof of Ramsey’s theorem [1929, Proc. London
Math. Soc. vol 30]; see below) and improves Ramsey’s bound to the size of domain

148
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
in which a satisﬁable schema, which begins with only universal quantiﬁers followed
by a matrix containing also equality, is already satisﬁed.
Skolem’s best known contribution to the reduction problem is his normal form
(from §1 of [1920a]) quoted as Theorem 1 above. This can be restated:
2.5 The schemata in the Skolem normal form make up a reduction class.
In [1933d], G¨odel simpliﬁes the Skolem form to three universal quantiﬁers
(Monatsh. Math. Phys. vol. 40, pp. 433-443).
In [1935a], Skolem gives an al-
ternative proof of this and applies the proof to give a new reduction class:
2.6 The schemata of the form
∀x1∃y1 . . . ∃ynU ∧∀x1∀x2∃z1 . . . ∃zmU1 ∧∀x1∀x2∀x3V ∧∀x1∀x2V1
with U, U1, V, V1 in suitable special forms, form a reduction class.
In [1936f], Skolem gives several reduction classes in which each schema contains
only a single predicate letter, in fact a dyadic one, as variants of a previous result
by Kalmar.
Much progress has been made since Skolem worked on reduction classes. The
strongest central result would seem to be the following:
2.7 The schemata of the form ∀x∃y∀zU(x, y, z) with dyadic predicate letters only,
make up a reduction class; this is true even if U is restricted to contain only a
single dyadic predicate letter plus monadic predicate letters.
This result has various direct and indirect corollaries. By 1.1, it follows directly
that schemata of the form
∀x1∀x2∀x3∃yU(x1, x2, x3, y) (or ∀x1∀x2∀x3U(x1, x2, x3) ∧∀x1∃yV (x1, y))
form a reduction class. This result had been known before 2.7 was found, but
the above remarks supplies a measure of unity. In fact, with the help of 2.7, it is
easy to derive from other known results a general conclusion on all preﬁx classes
(a preﬁx class is determined by a given string or set of strings of quantiﬁers in
the sense that it contains all and only schemata in prenex form having the given
string or a string in the given set as preﬁx; one could extend the next theorem to
conjunction of parts each with some given string as preﬁx).
THEOREM 7. Given any string of quantiﬁers Q1x1 . . . Qkxk, the preﬁx class de-
termined by it is a reduction class relative to satisﬁablity if and only if the string
contains ∀∃∀or ∀∀∀∃as an order-preserving but not necessarily unbroken sub-
string. Each preﬁx class that is not a reduction class is decidable and contains no

Thoralf Albert Skolem
149
axiom of inﬁnity (i.e. no schemata which are satisﬁable but not satisﬁable in ﬁnite
domains).
Thus, by 2.7 and its corollary, if the string contains ∀∃∀or ∀∀∀∃, then it is a
reduction class. Otherwise, it either contains three or more consecutive ∀’s but
followed by no ∃’s or contains at most two consecutive ∀’s but no other ∀’s. In the
ﬁrst case, it falls under a general case ∃x1 . . . ∃xm∀y1 . . . ∀ym, decided by Bernays
and Sch¨onﬁnkel [1928, Math. Annalen, vol. 99, pp. 342–372]. In the second case, it
falls under the general case ∃x1 . . . ∃xm∀y1∀y2∃z1 . . . ∃zn decided by G¨odel (1933,
op. cit. )
and others.
In both cases, the absence of axioms of inﬁnity is also
explicitly established.
There is a slight ambiguity in the above theorem. In decidable cases, the inclu-
sion of equality often introduces substantial complications. If we exclude equality,
then Theorem 7 is ﬁrmly accomplished. But if we include equality, then there
seems to remain a precise and interesting open problem:
2.8
If equality is included in the G¨odel class, i.e. the class of schemata of the
form
∃x1 . . . ∃xm∀y1∀y2∃z1 . . . ∃znU(x1, . . . , xm, y1, y2, z1, . . . , zn)
is it decidable? Does every satisﬁable schema in the given class have a ﬁnite model?
At the end of G¨odel [1933], it is stated that the proof for the case without equal-
ity can be extended to answer both questions positively. This statement agrees
with Professor G¨odel’s present belief. Meanwhile, several people have attempted
to supply the details for such an extension but have failed so far. As can be seen
from Skolem’s results quoted above, preﬁx classes are by no means the only inter-
esting classiﬁcation for the purpose of studying decision and reduction problems of
elementary logic. There, however, seems to be no general clear principle to guide
a more detailed study of decidable classes and undecidable classes (in particular,
reduction classes).
A digression on Ramsey’s theorem
In [1929] (op. cit.), Ramsey proves the following.
2.9 Ramsey’s Theorem (ﬁnite case). Given m, n, k, we can ﬁnd a number N such
that if we divide all unordered k-tuples of elements of any set M with at least N
members, brieﬂy Pk(M), into any n disjoint sets C1, . . . , Cn, then there is always
an m-membered subset T of M so that Pk(T) is included in some Ci.
Skolem’s proof of this in [1933c] is simpler and gives a smaller value N. In the
basic case when k = 2 and n = 2, Skolem has:

150
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
2.10 If N ≥22m −1, then there is always a subset T with m-members such that
P2(T) ⊆C1 or P2(T) ⊆C2.
To illustrate applications of the theorem, consider a given ﬁnite set of N positive
integers arranged in an arbitrary order. By Ramsey’s theorem, we can show that
there are always at least m members either all in increasing natural order or all
in decreasing natural order. Thus, each arrangement divides all unordered pairs
{x, y} 1 ≤x < y ≤N, into two sets C1 and C2 according to whether the x-th
member in the arrangement is less than or greater than the y-th member. Hence,
there must be an m-membered subset T of {1, . . . , N}, say {i1, . . . , im}, such that
P2(T) ⊆C1 or P2(T) ⊆C2.
In the inﬁnite case, Ramsey’s theorem is sometimes stated thus
2.11 Ramsey’s Theorem (inﬁnite case). Let K be an inﬁnite set, n be a positive
integer, and Pn(k) = C1 ∪C2, C1 ∩C2 = ∅. Then there is an inﬁnite subset T of
K such that Pn(T) ⊆C1 or Pn(T) ⊆C2.
The proof of 2.11 can be reduced to the special case when n = 2 since for
n = m + 1, we can one-one correlate K and Km. We prove now the case n = 2.
Suppose ﬁrst there exist a sequence of members x1, x2, . . . of K together with
a sequence of subsets K1, K2, . . . of K such that:
• x1 ∈K, x1 ̸∈K1, K1 ⊂K, and {x1, y} ∈C1 for all y ∈K1
• xn+1 ∈K, xn+1 ̸∈Kn+1, Kn+1 ⊂Kn, and {xn+1, y} ∈C1 for all y ∈Kn+1
Then P2(T) ⊆C1, where T = {x1, x2, . . .}. Obviously, x1, x2, . . . are all distinct,
and K1, K2, . . . are all inﬁnite.
Suppose now no such pair of sequences exist.
This means that no matter
which member of K is taken as x1, there is a number n, such that, however
x2, . . . , xn, K1, . . . , Kn−1 are chosen to ensure that Kn is inﬁnite, Kn+1 is ﬁnite
for any choice of xn+1. Take any ﬁxed x1 and consider its associated Kn. Since
Kn is inﬁnite, we can ﬁnd y1, y2, . . . and J1, J2, . . . to satisfy:
• y1 ∈Kn, y1 ̸∈J1, J1 ⊂Kn, and {y1, z} ∈C2 for all z ∈J1
• ym+1 ∈Jm, ym+1 ̸∈Jm+1, Jm+1 ⊂Jm, and {ym+1, z} ∈C2 for all z ∈Jm+1
Thus,take J1 = {z|z ∈Kn ∧{y1, z} ∈C2}. J1 is inﬁnite because otherwise we
could have used y1 as xn+1 and {z|z ∈Kn ∧{y1, z} ∈C1} as Kn+1. Similarly,
for each m, given Jm, we can take any member of Jm as ym+1 and take {z|z ∈
Jm ∧{ym+1, z} ∈C2} as Jm+1. Jm+1 must be inﬁnite because otherwise we could
have taken ym+1 as xn+1 and {z|z ∈Jm ∧{ym+1, z} ∈C1} as Kn+1. Hence,
T = {y1, y2, . . .} and P2(T) ⊆C2.
Intuitively it is perhaps easier to think of K as well-ordered (by the axiom of
choice) and in terms of an inﬁnite tree. Begin with the ﬁrst member a of K and

Thoralf Albert Skolem
151
make two branches by A1 = {u|{a, u} ∈C1} and B1 = {u|{a, u} ∈C2}. Take the
ﬁrst members of A1 and B1 as the next nodes. Repeating this process as long as
we have an inﬁnite set along each branch, we obtain an inﬁnite tree. There must
be an inﬁnite path with all left branches or one with all right branches. Suppose
there is no inﬁnite path with all left branches, there is a node an with only a right
branch. Beginning with an, we have an inﬁnite path with only right branches,
otherwise if there were any left branches anywhere, we could have attached it
directly to an.
If K is uncountable, it must have a large cardinality in order that 2.11 is true
with a subset K of the same cardinality as K. We may think of K as ordered
and interpret {x1, . . . , xn} ∈C1 as φ(xi1, . . . , xin) being true, where xi1, . . . , xin
are x1, . . . , xn rearranged in the given order of K. Then Pn(T) may be said to
be indiscernible by the formula φ. If we think of K as the domain of a model of
a system S, then we may ask whether there is a subset T of K such that, for all
n, Pn(T) is indiscernible by any formula φ(x1, . . . , xn) of the language of S. If
an uncountable cardinal ρ is such that for every K of cardinality ρ has a subset
T of cardinality ρ that is indiscernible in the above sense, ρ is called a Ramsey
cardinal. The postulation of such cardinals has many interesting consequences
which have been studied in recent years.
For example, this implies that there
are only countably many constructible sets (in G¨odel’s sense) of integers; that all
uncountable cardinals are indiscernible in the constructible universe L; and so on.
It has been proved that measurable cardinals are Ramsey.
3.1.3
Decidable theories
This section deals with §3 and §4 of [1919a], [1928a], and [1930c].
§3 of [1919a] is devoted to fragments towards a decision procedure for the ele-
mentary theory of distributive lattices. As we know now, the theory as a whole is
in fact undecidable (Grzegorczyk, 1950, Fund. Math.,vol. 38).
§4 of [1919a] contains the earliest employment of the method of eliminating
quantiﬁers in decision problems. The theory S decided is equivalent to that of a
power set of a given set (a special kind of Boolean algebra). The atomic formulas
of S are of the forms a > n and a < n where a is a class expression obtained from
variables by intersection, union, and complementation as usual, and n is some
ﬁxed non-negative integer. Formulas in general are built up by truth functions
and quantiﬁers as usual.
The proof of decidability of S proceeds by giving a
procedure to transform any formula ∃uU(u, x1, . . . , xn) into an equivalent formula
U ′(x1, . . . , xn) and thus to perform essentially an induction to eliminate more
quantiﬁers in succession. Skolem allows also class constants in the basic formulas
and reduces in general a formula with quantiﬁers to one without. It is a routine
step to obtain, from Skolem’s procedure, the decision procedure when constants
are not included or when only constants for the universal and empty classes are
included.
Skolem’s theory S is easily seen to be equivalent to the theory of ⊆over the

152
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
power set of a given set. For example:
a ⊆b
for
a ∪b ≤0
a ≤0
for
∀x(a ⊆x)
a ≤1
for
∀x(x ⊆a ⊃x ≤0 ∨a ⊆x)
In [1928a], Skolem sketches for illustration a proof of Langford’s result [1926]
that the theory of open dense ordering is decidable. Instead of “decidable” Skolem
uses the term “categorical”. The proof proceeds by elimination of quantiﬁers.
Skolem [1930c] contains a sketch of the decision procedure for the elementary
theory of multiplication of natural numbers. A more elegant proof of this result,
using Skolem’s result on the theory S mentioned above, can be extracted from
Mostowski’s paper on direct products [1952, JSL]. Instead of providing a procedure
by which quantiﬁers are eliminated in general situation, Skolem gives ﬁve “typical
examples” and asserts “I believe that they are already suﬃcient to convince oneself
that we are in a position to handle all cases”. Skolem’s consideration generalizes
to other domains, e.g. integers over an arbitrary algebraic number ﬁeld.
The paper [1930c] begins with a decision procedure by elimination of quantiﬁers
for the following theory. A formula is obtained from atomic formulas s = t and
s < t by the usual logical operations. A term is deﬁned inductively: (1) a variable
(ranging over all integers) is a term; (2) a term multiplied by a rational number
is again a term; (3) the sum of two terms is a term; (4) if s is a term, so is
[s], the integral part of s. The decision result for this theory is applied both to
obtain the result on multiplication just described and to construct an example
to illustrate the relativity of the concepts of well-ordering and natural number.
The construction gives an ordered set M of objects and a set B of predicates
(propositional functions) over M which includes < and is closed under the ﬁve
logical operations. It is shown that, for every predicate in B, well-ordering holds,
but M is no longer well-ordered when suitable new predicates are used.
3.2
Axiomatic Set Theory
3.2.1
Deﬁnite properties and ﬁnite axiomatization
This section deals with [1922b; 1929b; 1930b; 1941a], and [1958d]. Related pub-
lications include Zermelo [1908] (Math. Annalen, vol. 65, pp. 261–281), Fraenkel
[1921] (abstract, Jahresbericht Deutsch. Math.-Ver., vol. 30); [1922] (paper on ax-
iom of choice) and [1925] (Math. Zeitsch.
vol. 22, pp. 250–273); von Neumann
[1925] (Crelle’s vol. 154) and [1928] (Fund. Math., vol. 16); Bernays [1937] (JSL,
vol. 2).
Contemporary formulation of set theory usually includes the following axioms:
(1) Extensionality; (2) separation; (3) power set; (4) union; (5) inﬁnity; (6) replace-
ment; (7) regularity; (8) choice. Often the axiom of choice is treated separately,
sometimes the axiom of regularity is not included. Of these axioms, (1) to (5)

Thoralf Albert Skolem
153
and (8) are included in Zermelo 1908, except that the axiom of separation is given
a somewhat informal formulation. The current formulation of (2) and replace-
ment appeared for the ﬁrst time in Skolem [1922b]. The axiom of regularity was
ﬁrst suggested by Mirimanoﬀ[1917] (L’enseignement math., vol. 19) and Skolem
[1922b, §6] and adopted by von Neumann [1925] and Zermelo [1930].
It is true that in 1921 Fraenkel voices dissatisfaction with Zermelo’s notion of
deﬁnite property and remarks on the unavailability of the set T = {ω, Pω, . . .},
giving an informal statement of the axiom of replacement.
However, Fraenkel
makes the ﬁrst serious attempt to explicate Zermelo’s only in [1922] and [1925],
and unsuccessfully. As shown in von Neumann [1928], by Fraenkel’s concept of
deﬁnite property, 3.2 below is a consequence of 3.1 below so that he does not have
a version of the axiom of replacement which goes beyond the axiom of separation.
In fact, an informal version of the axiom of replacement was given by Cantor
in [1899] (Gesammelte Abhandlungen, p. 444). When we consider the principal
diﬀerence between Zermelo’s original system and current formal system of set
theory, it seems more appropriate to refer to the latter as Zermelo–Skolem rather
than Zermelo-Fraenkel (an application introduced in Zermelo [1930]). However,
following custom, we shall continue to speak of ZF.
The axiom of separation is stated in Zermelo [1908] as:
3.1 Axiom of separation Whenever the class proposition E(x) is deﬁnite for all
elements of a set y, y possesses a subset yE containing as elements precisely those
elements x of y for which E(x) is true.
“A question or assertion E is said to be deﬁnite if the fundamental relations of
the domain, by means of the axioms and the universally valid laws of logic, deter-
mine without arbitrariness whether it holds or not. Likewise, a class proposition
E(x), in which the variable term x ranges over all individuals of a class K, is said
to be deﬁnite if it is deﬁnite for each single individual x of the class K”.
In order to prove the independence of the axiom of choice (using Urelements),
Fraenkel ﬁnds it necessary to render more explicit the concept of a deﬁnite prop-
erty. Similarly, Skolem ﬁnds it necessary to do so in order to apply the L¨owenheim–
Skolem Theorem.
In [1922b], Skolem remarks on the obvious lack of precision of Zermelo’s notion
and goes on to list the ﬁve familiar logical operations (conjunction, disjunction,
negation, universal and existential quantiﬁcations).
“By a deﬁnite proposition
we now means a ﬁnite expression constructed from elementary propositions of
the form a ∈b or a = b by means of the ﬁve operations mentioned. This is a
completely clear notion and one that is suﬃciently comprehensive to permit us to
carry out all ordinary set-theoretic proofs. I therefore adopt this conception as a
basis here”.
After thus making precise the axiom of separation, Skolem proceeds in §4 to
show that T = {ω, Pω, P 2ω, . . .} cannot be shown to be a set in Zermelo’s system
(P is the power set operation). The proof amounts to arguing that the union of

154
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
T forms a model of Zermelo’s set theory. Skolem states the axiom of replacement
thus:
3.2 Axiom of replacement Let U be a deﬁnite proposition that holds for certain
pairs ⟨a, b⟩in the domain B; assume, further, that for every a there exists at most
one b such that U is true. Then, as a ranges over the elements of a set Ma, b
ranges over all elements of a set Mb.
As we know, 3.1 follows from 3.2. If we require in 3.2 that U be a one-one
correspondence, then 3.1 will not follow.
In [1929], Zermelo, not knowing Skolem’s work, objects to Fraenkel’s concept
on the ground that it uses numbers and then proposes an elaborate deﬁnition of
deﬁnite properties. In [1930b], Skolem observes that one of Zermelo’s requirements
is rather obscure, and, if it is made precise in the natural way, Zermelo’s deﬁnition
agrees with Skolem’s own.
In Zermelo [1930], the exchange is mentioned, but
Zermelo continues to use an informal concept of deﬁnite properties and states that
he reserves a detailed discussion of the exchange for the future.
It remains to consider Fraenkel’s proposals and von Neumann’s modiﬁcation
thereof. In [1922], Fraenkel deﬁnes a deﬁnite property of x as f(x) ∈g(x) or f(x) ̸∈
g(x), where f(x) and g(x) are formed from x and further given objects by repeated
applications of the operations of pairing, power set, union, separation, and choice.
This deﬁnition is modiﬁed in 1925. By the way, the axiom of replacement is not
included by Fraenkel in either 1922 or 1925.
3.3 Fraenkel [1925] A deﬁnite property of x is of the form f(x) ◦g(x), where ◦
is =, ̸=, ∈or ̸∈and f(x) and g(x) are functions of x. A function of x is obtained
as follows:
• A constant or the variable x is a function of x
• Power set Px and union Ux are functions of x
• If f(x) and g(x) are functions of x, so are {f(x), g(x)} and f(g(x))
• If f(x, y) and g(x, y) are functions of x and u is a given set, so is h(x) =
{y|(y ∈U ∧f(x, y) ∈g(x, y)}
Using this deﬁnition, von Neumann [1928] shows:
3.4 For every set u and every function f, there is a function g, such that g(f, u) =
{y|∃x(x ∈u ∧y = f(x))}.
Further, Skolem shows in [1929b, §1]:
3.5 Every deﬁnite property according to 3.3 is also a deﬁnite property in Skolem’s
sense.
Von Neumann adds to 3.3 the following clause

Thoralf Albert Skolem
155
• If, for every x, {y|f(x, y) ◦g(x, y)} is a set, then h(x) = {y|f(x, y) ◦g(x, y)}
is a function of x.
It is easy to see that even after the modiﬁcation, every deﬁnite property by 3.3
is deﬁnite in Skolem’s sense. On the other hand, it seems likely that there are
deﬁnite properties in Skolem’s sense which go beyond the deﬁnition of Fraenkel
and von Neumann.
In [1925], von Neumann introduces a systematic treatment of functions by tak-
ing function as an undeﬁned notion and distinguishing between functions and ar-
guments as two kinds of object. This, besides providing an alternative to Skolem’s
analysis of deﬁnite properties, renders it possible to use just a ﬁnite number of ax-
ioms. Skolem 1941a gives a translation of von Neumann’s axioms directly into the
notation of quantiﬁcation theory by adding four primitive predicates. A congenial
thorough reformulation of von Neumann’s system is given in Bernays [1937] (and
later continuations) and widely used in the literature.
In [1958d], Skolem undertakes to reduce axiom schemata to simple axioms.
The result is rather similar to Bernays [1937], except that, instead of deﬁning
ﬁnite sequences, two primitive concepts (concatenation and “equal length”) are
introduced to deal with them directly. By using also variables over predicates, a
two-sorted theory is obtained, and then it is observed that, by adding two new
monadic predicates, we can turn the system into one in the usual quantiﬁcation
theory. It seems fair to say that Skolem [1958d] does not go essentially beyond
Bernays [1937]. By the way, Skolem [1961a] does not add much to [1958d].
3.3
Skolem’s paradox and impredicative deﬁnitions
It is ﬁrst remarked in Skolem [1922b]: “If Zermelo’s axiom system, when made
precise, is consistent, it must be possible to introduce an inﬁnite sequence of sym-
bols 1, 2, 3, . . . in such a way that they form a domain B in which all of Zermelo’s
axioms hold provided these symbols are suitably grouped into pairs of the form
a ∈b”. Since the intended model of Zermelo’s system is uncountable, this conse-
quence of the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem has been known as “Skolem’s paradox”.
In concluding [1922b], Skolem remarks: “The most important result above is that
set-theoretic notions are relative.
I had already communicated it orally to F.
Bernstein in G¨ottingen in the winter of 1915–16. . . . I believed it was so clear
that axiomatization in terms of sets was not a satisfactory ultimate foundation
of mathematics that mathematicians would, for the most part, not be very much
concerned with it. But in recent times I have seen to my surprise that so many
mathematicians think that these axioms of set theory provide the ideal foundation
for mathematics; therefore it seemed to me that the time had come to publish a
critique”.
In §3 of [1922b], Skolem explains how, e.g. Pω in a countable model B can be
uncountable “in the sense of the axiomatization”. This merely means that within
B there occurs no one-to-one mapping f of (Pω)B onto ω. Nevertheless, (Pω)B
is countable by a collection of pairs which is not a set in the model B. It is clear

156
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
that one can deﬁne subsets of ω which are not in (Pω)B, by referring to B, e.g.
n ∈D if and only if n does not belong to the nth member of B. The notions
“ﬁnite”, “inﬁnite”, “Dedekind chain”, and so forth are also relative in the same
sense. “Within a suitable axiomatic basis, therefore, the theorems of set theory
can be made to hold in a merely verbal sense, on the assumption, of course, that
the axiomatization is consistent; but this rests merely upon the fact that the use
of the word set has been regulated in a suitable way”. Similar remarks are made
in §7 of [1929b] with special emphasis on Cantor’s second number class: “It is
likely that already in the second number class there occurs so great a number α
that in order to characterize α, a logical expression of the level-number α must
be employed.
In any case, it is impossible to derive the second number class
from simpler concepts. One recognizes here again, as with the earlier review of
the L¨owenheim Theorem, that there is no possibility of introducing something
absolutely uncountable except by means of a pure dogma”. Another elaboration
of the “relativity” of set-theoretic concepts is given in §2 of [1941a].
While discussing “relativism”, Skolem also considers various related questions.
(1) Direct construction of countable models; (2) independence; (3) consistency;
(4) categoricity; (5) impredicative deﬁnitions. And beginning with §7 of [1929b],
Skolem brings in also the question of nonstandard models for arithmetic.
In §2 of [1929b], Skolem gives an axiom system of set theory in which operations
for introducing new sets from given sets are explicitly given. An enumeration of
all set symbols is given and these are put in ∈-pairs and ̸∈-pairs by the axioms. It
is then argued that these determine a countable model if the system is consistent.
Appeal to the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem is avoided. It is left open whether the
system is as strong as ZF.
In §6 of [1922b], Skolem, while discussing the categoricity of axioms of set
theory, remarks that it would be of great interest if we could extend a given model
B of axioms of set theory to a new model containing a subset of ω not in B.
Skolem continues to say “but this would probably be very diﬃcult” and adds a
long footnote. “Since Zermelo’s axioms do not uniquely determine the domain
B, it is very improbable that all cardinality problems are decidable by means of
these axioms. For example, it is quite probable that what is called the continuum
problem, namely whether 2ℵ0 > or = ℵ1, is not solvable on this basis; nothing
need to be decided about it. The situation may be exactly the same as in the
following case: an unspeciﬁed commutative ﬁeld is given, and one asks whether it
contains an element x such that x2 = 2. This is just not determined, on account
of the non-uniqueness of the domain”.
In §7 of [1922b], Skolem suggests that independence and consistency results in
set theory are to be studied by means of countable models: “If we do not again want
to take axioms for domains as basis (and so on ad inﬁnitum), I see no other way
out than to pass on to considerations such as those employed above in the proof
of L¨owenheim’s theorem, in which the ﬁnite integer is taken as basic”. Skolem
proceeds to side up with Poincar´e against Hilbert to argue that expressions behave
like integers and that induction is necessary for syntactic proofs of consistency.

Thoralf Albert Skolem
157
In §6 of [1922b], Skolem considers the question whether ZF is categorical. He
considers the possibility of sets which are not well-founded and speaks of ∈-
sequences:
. . . ∈x2 ∈x1 ∈x
“One now sees almost immediately that those sets in a domain B, for which the
∈-sequences necessarily terminate, must form a part B′ of B in which the axioms
still hold”. Skolem does not prove this in detail; in fact the familiar proof in terms
of ranks goes back to a paper by von Neumann in [1929]. If therefore, Skolem
remarks, we have a model which is not well-founded, we obtain immediately two
non-isomorphic models. Suppose now a given model B is well-founded. Skolem
goes on to outline a description of a new model B′ by adding a new object a which
is at the end of each branch of the “membership tree” of any set. The outline
is not without ambiguity, but it seems that, however we interpret it, we would
have some diﬃculty: it would seem that either a belongs to the empty set and
extensionality fails or a is the new empty set and the new model is isomorphic to
the old. Neither seems to establish the non-categorical character of the axioms.
In §3 of [1941a], Skolem returns to the question of categoricity and credits von
Neumann [1925] with remarking that his axioms are not categorical and that
probably no axiom system of set theory can be categorical. Then Skolem quotes
G¨odel’s incompleteness results which deﬁnitely settles this question.
In §5 of [1922b], impredicative deﬁnitions are singled out as the central diﬃ-
culty in the problem of proving the consistency of set theory. In §3 of [1929b], two
somewhat artiﬁcial and fragmentary axiom systems are given in which impredica-
tive requirements are included. Models for both are given, the second with the
law of excluded middle abolished. More elaborate examples are considered in §6,
which concludes with the suggestion that similar considerations may yield a proof
of consistency of the impredicative requirements in classical analysis.
Some of the general consequences Skolem draws from the existence of count-
able models seem unjustiﬁed. For example, that ZF, if consistent, has a countable
model does not in itself exclude the possibility of our having an objective concep-
tion of a standard or intended model of ZF. While it is an arguable point whether
there is an absolutely uncountable set, L¨owenheim’s theorem does not in itself jus-
tify Skolem’s conclusion that it can only come from a pure dogma. Skolem seems
also to overlook the distinction between relativity to an axiom system and to a
given (countable) model thereof. While (Pω)B in a countable model B of ZF is
(absolutely) countable, it does not follow from this that Pω is uncountable only
relative to ZF, unless the latter proposition is simply taken to mean the former.
In short, the L¨owenheim Theorem seems quite neutral with regard to the philo-
sophical issue whether sets are real and in what sense they are real. Skolem has
probably other subjective reasons for distrusting sets. In [1958a], Skolem proposes
to present “a relativist conception of the fundamental notions of mathematics. It
seems to me that this is clearer than the absolutist and Platonist conception which
dominates classical mathematics”. A proposition is true if it is formally proved

158
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
in a formal system. In simple cases such as recursive arithmetic, the intuition of
induction is suﬃcient to guide the construction of the formal system and to assure
consistency. “In the other case, one may accept an opportunist view. My point
of view is then that one must use formal systems for the development of mathe-
matical ideas”. After listing diverse formal systems of set theory, Skolem asserts:
“I do not understand why most mathematicians and logicians do not appear to
be satisﬁed with this notion of set as deﬁned by a formal system, but contrariwise
speak of the limitations of the axiomatic method. Of course this notion of a set
has a relative character, because it depends on the chosen formal system. But
if this system is chosen suitably, we can nonetheless develop mathematics on the
basis”. Clearly these views of Skolem go beyond mathematics proper and there
are many philosophical ramiﬁcations which cannot be discussed in this context.
Leaving aside Skolem’s scepticism about sets, his mathematical ideas have found
various important applications.
Thus, Skolem functions play a central role in
G¨odel’s proof of the relative consistency of the continuum hypothesis. Paul J.
Cohen’s independence proofs, at least in their original form and in their psycho-
logical origin, use countable models and Skolem functions in an essential way. The
independence of the continuum hypothesis makes strong use of the availability of
many subsets of ω lying outside a given countable model of ZF. In fact, using
Cohen’s method, it is now a common trick to “collapse cardinals” by introducing
new sets which one-one correlate cardinals that were originally non-equivalent.
3.3.1
Nonstandard models of arithmetic
In §3 of [1922b], Skolem mentions in passing that the number sequence ω deﬁned as
the intersection of all sets having the same (inductive) property would be diﬀerent
in diﬀerent models of ZF. In §7 of [1929b], it is pointed out that to characterize
the number sequence amounts to requiring the validity of mathematical induction,
which involves the concept of “propositional function” or “set”. Hence, what the
number sequence is depends on the axioms for the underlying sets. It is for the
ﬁrst time suggested in print (for an unpublished anticipation, compare Dedekind’s
letter, JSL, vol. 22, [1957, p. 150]) that given any set of theorems on natural
numbers, we can ﬁnd a nonstandard model in which these theorems are true. A
fragmentary example is given to show that a certain set of polynomials satisﬁes a
number of theorems on integers. In §2 of [1930c], this same set is shown to satisfy
more properties including closure with respect to the ﬁve logical operations.
Finally in [1933d] (also [1934b; 1941a; 1955d]), Skolem proves a general the-
orem on all formulas of elementary number theory P, i.e. those obtained in the
usual manner from: (1) variables ranging over natural numbers; (2) + (addition)
and · (multiplication); (3) > and =; (4) operations of the propositional calculus;
(5) quantiﬁers with number variables. (More complicated recursive and indeed
arithmetic functions can be deﬁned in P; alternatively, they can be added at the
beginning without aﬀecting Skolem’s proof).
THEOREM 8. There exists a system N ∗of things, for which two operations +

Thoralf Albert Skolem
159
and ·, and two relations = and < are deﬁned, such that N ∗is not isomorphic to
the system N of natural numbers, but, nevertheless, all sentences of P which are
true of N are also true of N ∗.
4.1 Corollary No axiom system using only the notation of P (i.e. using only
concepts of elementary number theory) can determine uniquely the structure of the
sequence of natural numbers.
The Theorem is stronger than 4.1 because it applies also when the given set of
true sentences is not axiomatizable (i.e. not a recursively enumerable set). 4.1 also
follows from G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem in a familiar manner.
Skolem often speaks of this theorem in terms of axiom systems. He may some-
times have in mind a broader sense of axiom system (so that the axioms need not
form a recursive set, but could be any set of sentences). In any case, his proof does
not depend on one’s beginning with an axiom system in the currently accepted
eﬀective sense.
Skolem’s proof uses Skolem functions to get rid of quantiﬁers and a combinato-
rial lemma which is quite general:
THEOREM 9. Let f1(x), f2(x), . . . be an inﬁnite sequence of functions of natural
numbers. Then there exists a monotone increasing function g(x) such that, for
any pair fi and fj one of the three following cases holds for almost all x (i. e., for
all but a ﬁnite number of them):
fi(g(x)) < fj(g(x)) , fi(g(x)) = fj(g(x)) , fi(g(x)) > fj(g(x))
Let fi ∼fj if fi(g(x)) = fj(g(x)) for almost all x. In other words, if C is the
set of all coﬁnite subsets of ω.
4.2 fi ∼fj if and only if {t|fi(g(t)) = fj(g(t))} ∈C.
For the proof of theorem 8, Skolem uses theorem 9 and takes the set of
equivalence classes (by 4.2) of all deﬁnable functions of one variable as N ∗=
{f1, f2, . . .}/ ∼.
There are various ways of generalizing Skolem’s argument for proving theorem
8. Roughly speaking, it provides a general method for getting, from a given model
M of a theory T a new and non-isomorphic model M ∗of T. To generalize the
proof of theorem 8 directly, we have to, among other things, make sure that the
negation of each atomic formula can be expressed as a positive truth function of
atomic formulas.
The current generalization of Skolem’s is to ultrapowers and ultraproducts.
There is a body of literature on these and related topics.
In the general case, Skolem’s method of constructing non-standard models is
highly non-constructive, and we do not know enough about these models to say
anything speciﬁc such as applying them to prove independence. In [1955d], Skolem

160
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
gives some examples for fragments of number theory and proposes a conjecture
on the independence of “
√
2 is irrational” from suitable axioms. The question is
answered by Shepherdson ([1964], Bull. Polish Acad. Sci., vol. 12). Shepherdson
and others have a number of papers in this area.
3.3.2
Approximations to the full comprehension axiom
Skolem has ﬁve papers dealing with approximations to the unrestricted compre-
hension axiom:
5.1 ∃y∀x(x ∈y ≡A(x, x1, . . . , xn)) for every formula A of set theory.
In [1952b], it is shown that even if we delete negation and use only positive
quantiﬁcation we can still get a contradiction from 5.1. Let b = {x|(x ∈x ⊃B)},
for any statement B. By 5.1,
5.2 b ∈b ≡(b ∈b ⊃B)
Assume b ∈b, we get B by modus ponens. Hence, by the deduction theorem,
b ∈b ⊃B. By 5.2 we get b ∈b, and, hence, also B. Hence, any statement B can
be derived from 5.1. This remark of Skolem’s seems to be essentially the same as
“Curry’s paradox” of [1942] (JSL, vol. 7, p. 115).
In [1957e], Skolem begins to use many-valued logics. The general problem is,
for each many-valued logic L, to ﬁnd a model in the sense of L for the language
of set theory so that 5.1 becomes true, i. e.:
5.3
For all x1, . . . , xn in the model, there is a member y of the model such
that for every x in the model, the truth-value of x ∈y is the same as that of
A(x, x1, . . . , xn).
The ﬁrst remark of [1957e] is that we cannot obtain a model to satisfy 5.3
if L is Lukasiewicz’s 3-valued logic. A contradiction can be got by considering
a = {x|(x ∈x ⊃(x ∈x ⊃¬x ∈x))}. Then it is shown that by using a suitable
inﬁnite-valued logic, 5.3 can be satisﬁed for those formulas A which contain no
quantiﬁers. Stronger results along this line have since been obtained by C. C.
Chang and J. E. Fenstad.
In [1960b], a certain 3-valued logic is proposed for which it is shown that 5.3 is
satisﬁable for quantiﬁer-free formulas A.
In [1960c], it is shown that 5.1 has a model M even in the 2-valued logic if A is
built up from atomic formulas by ∧and ∨only. In [1963c], the same model M is
shown to satisfy 5.1 when A is a formula in prenex form followed by a matrix not
containing negation. Next, a model is found for 5.1 when A contains negation but
no quantiﬁers, provided no atomic formulas of the form u ∈u occurs. Then an
improved proof of the main result of [1960b] is given. The paper concludes with
countable (2-valued) models for several fragments of current set theory. “I have

Thoralf Albert Skolem
161
not yet had the opportunity to extend these investigations to systems of axioms,
where the “Aussonderungsaxiom” or cases of it are taken into account, but I don’t
think there will be any essential diﬃculties”.
We also mention incidentally the two remarks of Skolem [1957b].
The ﬁrst
remark gives a formulation of the axiom of inﬁnity that explicitly gives a deﬁning
predicate for the inﬁnite set.
5.4 F(a, b) for a ∈b ∨¬{a} ∈b
5.5
I(a) is the conjunction of (1) 0 ∈a; (2) (E!y)F(y, a); (3) ∀z(z ∈a ⊃
∃uF(u, z)); (4) ∀u((0 ∈u ⊇a ∧(ιy)F(y, a) = (ιy)F(y, u)) ⊃u = a)
5.6 The axiom of inﬁnity ∃y∀x(x ∈y ≡I(x))
It is not clear that this is in any way superior to the formulations of the same
form based on familiar devices of converting inductive deﬁnitions to explicit ones,
e.g.
∃y∀x(x ∈y ≡∀z((0 ∈z ∧∀u(u ∈z ⊃{u} ∈z)) ⊃x ∈z)
The second remark deals with ordered n-tuples as sets. Starting with ⟨a, b⟩=
{a, {a, b}}, the familiar deﬁnition ⟨a, b, c⟩= ⟨⟨a, b⟩, c⟩is objected to on the ground
that when a, b, c are of the same type, members of ⟨a, b, c⟩are not of the same
type. Two proposals are made.
5.7
⟨a, b, c⟩
=
⟨⟨a, b⟩, ⟨a, c⟩⟩
⟨a1, . . . , an+1⟩
=
⟨⟨a1, an+1⟩, . . . , ⟨an, an+1⟩
5.8
⟨a, b, c⟩
=
{⟨a, b⟩, ⟨a, c⟩, ⟨b, c⟩}
⟨a, b, c, d⟩
=
{⟨a, b, c⟩, ⟨a, b, d⟩, ⟨a, c, d⟩, ⟨b, c, d⟩}
In conclusion, it is emphasized that “it is still a problem now how the ordered
n-tuple can be deﬁned in the most suitable way”.

162
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
3.4
Algebraic Aspects
3.4.1
Lattices and related matters
In Skolem [1913b], distributive lattices are studied on the basis of partial order-
ings. In Skolem [1919a], certain relations between distributive and general lattices
are considered. Results in these two papers are summarized and strengthened in
Skolem [1936g]. On the historical question of Skolem’s place as one of the orig-
inators of lattice theory, there are debates which we shall not discuss. Skolem
[1958b] contains an exposition of lattice-theoretic interpretations of intuitionist
logic. The isolated paper Skolem [1931d] (a shorter version has been published,
Skolem [1931b]) is derived from work done at about the same time as Skolem
[1913b].
In Skolem [1913b], a domain with a reﬂexive and transitive relation ≤is con-
sidered, for which it is assumed that for any elements a, b, there are elements c, d
such that, for all e
(e ≤c)
≡
(e ≤a ∧e ≤b)
(d ≤e)
≡
(a ≤e ∧b ≤e)
We put then c = a∩b, d = a∪b. Taking the domain of integers, divisibility may
be construed as ≤, greatest common divisor and least common multiple as a ∩b
and a ∪b.
Some calculations on free distributive lattices with n generators are made in
Skolem [1913b]. These are completed by a general theorem in Skolem [1936g].
6.1 The number of elements of the free distributive lattice generated by n symbols
is one less than the number of sets of subsets of {1, . . . , n} which are “maximal”
in them. A subset K of {1, . . . , n} is maximal in a set S if K ∈S and no superset
of K belongs to S.
Skolem [1913b] then considers what has been known as linear lattices. In addi-
tion, a process is introduced by which a product of two given lattices G and H is
deﬁned as a new lattice G ◦H consisting of pairs ⟨g, h⟩with g in G and h in H.
Skolem [1919a] deals also with what is known as pseudo-complemented lattices.
In fact, Skolem considers two kinds of lattices A and B: In a lattice of type A, for
any a and b, there is a maximum x denoted by b/a, such that ax ≤b; in one of
type B, there is always a minimum y, denoted by a −b, such that a ≤b + y.
6.2 Every lattice of type A or B is distributive.
6.3 Every ﬁnite distributive lattice is of types A and B.
Various other results are then proved about lattices of types A and B.

Thoralf Albert Skolem
163
In Skolem [1936g], the following additional theorems are proved.
6.4 If L is a ﬁnite lattice of types A and B, and 0 has only one neighbor (a say,
such that for no x, 0 < x < a), then V is a linear lattice.
6.5 If V is a ﬁnite lattice of types A and B, and a1, . . . , an are the neighbors of
0, then V is isomorphic to V1 ◦V ′ where
V1
=
{x ∈V |(a1 ∪. . . ∪an) ∩x ≤ai}, i = 1, . . . , n
V ′
=
{y ∈V |(a1 ∪. . . ∪an) ∩y ≤a2 ∪. . . ∪an}
Moreover, V is also isomorphic to V1 ◦. . . ◦Vn, where each Vi is linear.
The interpretation of intuitionistic logic by lattices and topologies was studied
in the 1930’s. In [1958b], Skolem returns to use lattices of type A to prove two
known results.
6.6
Let H be intuitionistic propositional calculus. Let F ∗be obtained from F
when we replace ∧, ∨, a ⊃b, ¬a by ∩, ∪, a/b, a/0. Then F is a theorem of H if and
only if F ∗is a theorem of a lattice of type A.
6.7 If A ∨B is a theorem of H, then A or B is.
Skolem [1931d] deals with symmetric general solutions of Boolean equations.
Let
(16) f{al, xk} = 0
be a Boolean equation with (possibly inﬁnitely many) variables xk and undeter-
mined coeﬃcients al. A general solution
(17) xi = gi{al, uk}
of (16) is said to be symmetric relative to a group G of permutations of al and xi
which transforms (16) into itself, if for every S in G there is a permutation T of
ui such that the system (17) of equations transforms into itself when S and T are
applied together. The solution is said to be normal if further xi = gi{al, xk} for
all solutions xi of (16) and the corresponding T permutes ui in the same way as
S permutes xi.
6.8
An equation f{xk} with constant coeﬃcients has symmetric general (and
also normal) solutions relative to G if and only if it remains solvable when all
variables variables xi are substituted for each other within each transitivity system
into which G divides the variables.

164
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
In the general case (16), let ΣA(AfA(xk)) be the Boolean development of
f{al, xk)} according to al and GA be the subgroup of G which transforms A
into itself. Let ΣB be the union of those constituents A of ΣA for which fA{xk}
has no symmetric general solution relative to GA.
6.9 The equation (16) has symmetric general (also normal) solutions if and only
if (a) each fA{xk} = 0 (an equation with constant coeﬃcients) has symmetric
general solutions relative to GA; and (b) ΣB = 0.
3.4.2
A note on classical propositional calculus
We digress to solve an open question raised in Skolem [1951a]. This paper gives
simpler independence proofs for the following system for Hilbert and Ackermann.
A1. ¬(a ∨a) ∨a
A2. ¬a ∨(a ∨b)
A3. ¬(a ∨b) ∨(b ∨a)
A4. ¬(¬a ∨b) ∨(¬(c ∨a) ∨(c ∨b))
R. If a and ¬a ∨b, then b
T. (A theorem). ¬a ∨a
The main results are an improvement from 4 to 3 truth values in the proofs of
the independence of A2 and A3 from A1, A3 (resp. A2), A4, R, and T. Since
A1 was originally proved independent by 3 values, A4 is the only one for which
no proof with 3 values is known. Skolem leaves this as an open problem: “As to
the independence proof of the fourth axiom I have not succeeded in carrying it
through with only three truth values. On the other hand, I have not been able
to show that the proof is impossible if we use only 3 truth values”. (p. 23). The
following arguments seem to clarify the situation.
On the one hand, the following simple table would work with designated value
D = {0} and non-designated values N = {1, 2}.
p
000
111
222
q
012
012
012
¬p
222
111
000
p ∨q
000
000
002
It is easy to verify that A1, A2, A3, T always get value 0, since we cannot
obtain enough 2’s without getting 0 by negation. A4 is not satisﬁed if we put
a = 1, b = c = 2 : ¬(1 ∨2) ∨(¬(2 ∨1) ∨(2 ∨2)) = ¬0 ∨(¬0 ∨2) = 2 ∨(2 ∨2) = 2.
The veriﬁcation of R is slightly complicated. We wish to show that v(b) is always
0 if v(a) and v(¬a ∨b) are always 0. Since v(a) is always 0, we must have also

Thoralf Albert Skolem
165
v(¬a ∨b) = 2 ∨v(b) always 0. We wish to conclude that v(b) is then always 0.
Certainly v(b) ̸= 2, otherwise 2 ∨v(b) = 2 ̸= 0. Consider the case that v(b) = 1
for suitable assignments of values to the components of b. If b is atomic, this is
impossible because v(b) could also be 2 then. If b is c ∨d, then it is impossible
that v(b) = 1, by the table. Suppose now b is ¬c, if v(b) = 1, then v(c) = 1 and
we can repeat the argument with c. Hence v(b) always get the value 0.
On the other hand, most independence proofs satisfy a stronger requirement
than R:
L1. If v(a) ∈D, v(b) ∈N, then v(¬a ∨b) ∈N; if v(a) ∈D, v(¬a ∨b) ∈D, then
v(b) ∈D.
We shall show that there is no 3-valued logic satisfying L1 which can establish
the independence of A4.
Since A1, A2, A3 and T must always get designated values, we have, using
L1 in most cases:
L2. If v(a ∨b) ∈D, then v(a) ∈D; therefore, if v(a) ∈N, then v(a ∨a) ∈N. By
A1.
L3. v(a ∨b) ∈D if and only if v(b ∨a) ∈D. By A3.
L4. If v(a) ∈D, then v(a ∨b) ∈D and v(b ∨a) ∈D. By A2 and L3.
L5. v(¬a ∨a) ∈D; v(a ∨¬a) ∈D. By T and L3.
L6. If v(a) = n ∈N, then v(¬a) ̸= n. Otherwise, v(¬a ∨a) = n ∨n. By L2,
n ∨n ∈N, contradicting L5.
L7. If v(a) = d ∈D, then v(¬a) ∈N. Otherwise, we can have v(b) = n ∈N,
v(a) = d and v(¬a ∨b) = ¬d ∨n = d′ ∨n. By L4, d′ ∨n ∈D, contradicting
L1.
We distinguish now between two cases.
Case I. There are two designated values, say D = {0, 1}, N = {2}.
In this case, L4, L2, L6, L7 narrow down the possible truth tables to those of
the following form:
p
q
p ∨q
¬p
d
d
d
2
d
2
d
2
d
d
d
2
2
2
However, no such table will establish the independence of A4. Thus, in order
that the value of A4 be 2, we must have v(c) = v(b) = 2, but then v(¬(c∨a)) = d
if v(a) = 2, and (v(¬(¬a ∨b)) = d if v(a) ∈D.

166
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
Case II. There is only one designated value, say D = {0}, N = {1, 2}.
In this case we have (i) ¬0 = n (i.e. 1 or 2) by L7; ¬1 = 0 or 2, ¬2 = 0 or
1 by L6. If ¬1 = 2 or ¬2 = 1, then, by L5 and L4, 1 ∨2 = 2 ∨1 = 0. But
then ¬0 ∨1 = 0 if ¬0 = 2, and ¬0 ∨2 = 0 if ¬0 = 1, contradicting L1 in either
case. Hence, (ii) ¬1 = 0, ¬2 = 0. By L4, (iii) 0 ∨x = x ∨0 = 0. By L2, (iv)
1 ∨1 = n, 2 ∨2 = n. By (i) and L1, (v) 1 ∨2 = 2 ∨1 = n.
At this stage, the separation of D and N is complete. The only remaining truth
tables are of the form:
a
000
111
222
b
012
012
012
a ∨b
000
0nn
0nn
¬a
n
0
0
But none of these tables can give A4 a non-designated value. Thus, if v(c)
or v(b) is 0, then A4 gets 0. Therefore, v(b), v(c) ∈N. If now v(a) ∈N, then
v(¬(c ∨a)) = 0 and A4 gets 0. If v(a) = 0, then v(¬(¬a ∨b)) = 0 and A4 gets 0.
3.5
Recursive Functions
3.5.1
Recursive arithmetic
About 16 papers on recursive functions are included in this collection of Skolem’s
work. Of these, [1947a] deals with the history of the subject; the papers [1923a;
1939b; 1940a; 1950a; 1956a] in one way or another involve derivability and de-
ﬁnability in formal systems. The rest deal with recursive functions as ordinary
mathematical objects; they will be considered in the next section.
Skolem [1923a] “was written in the autumn of 1919, after I had studied the
work of Russell and Whitehead”. The purpose is to show that the use of free
variables suﬃces to provide a foundation for large parts of mathematics.
The
justiﬁcation for introducing bound “ variables ranging inﬁnite domains therefore
seems very problematic; i. e., one can doubt the justiﬁcation of the actual inﬁnite
or the transﬁnite”. In [1947a], Skolem asserts that the paper [1923a] “is so far as
I know the ﬁrst investigation of recursive number theory. The utterance . . . that
recursive arithmetic can be traced back to Dedekind and Peano seems to me rather
strange, because the researches of these men had another purpose than to avoid the
use of quantiﬁers”. Perhaps the development in Hermann Grassmann’s Lehrbuch
der Arithmetik [1861] might claim to be an (unconscious) partial anticipation of
Skolem’s paper; although the spirit of Skolem [1923a] is closer to Kronecker.
The 8 sections of [1923a] are: addition, less than, multiplication, divisible, sub-
traction and division, g. c. d. and l. c. m. , prime, and some explicit uses of bounded
quantiﬁers. There is a polemic against regarding descriptions as incomplete sym-
bols. “This conception does not seem to me to be beyond doubt; but even if it
were correct for the descriptive functions of ordinary language, we would not need
to adopt it for the descriptive functions of arithmetic”. The culminating point

Thoralf Albert Skolem
167
of the paper is a statement and proof of the unique prime factorization theorem
(Theorem 74).
While Skolem’s basis correspond roughly to (primitive) recursive arithmetic in
Hilbert-Bernays [1934], Skolem does not give a formal system and in fact freely
uses devices which can be seen directly to be justiﬁable by taking “the recursive
mode of thought as basis”.
Examples are
7.1
Relations (propositional functions) can be deﬁned recursively in the same
manner as functions:
Deﬁnition 2. a < 1 is false. (a < b + 1) ≡(a < b ∨a = b)
Also deﬁnitions 5, 8, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 20.
7.2 Bounded quantiﬁers are shown to be dispensable in several cases, e.g.
Deﬁnition 5.
D(a, b, 1)
≡
(a = b)
D(a, b, c + 1)
≡
(D(a, b, c) ∨(a = b(c + 1)))
b|a
≡
D(a, b, a)
But, in general, it is argued in §8 that we can freely use bounded quantiﬁers
since we can see directly that they are all right. It is in G¨odel [1931] that we
have for the ﬁrst time an explicit deﬁnition of (primitive) recursive functions and
relations, as well as a general procedure for eliminating bounded quantiﬁers.
7.3 Descriptions (with a restricted domain of existence) are treated informally in
several deﬁnitions in a somewhat extended sense.
Deﬁnition 7. Subtraction (c −b = a) ≡(c = a + b)
Deﬁnition 9. Division (c/b = a) ≡(c = ba)
7.4 Deﬁnition by cases (using also course-of-values recursion implicitly).
Deﬁnition 10. a = b ⊃(a, b) = a; a > b ⊃(a, b) = ((a −b), b); a < b ⊃(a, b) =
(a, (b −a)).
7.5 Double recursion of propositional functions. Deﬁnitions 17 and 25.
7.6 Deﬁnition of functionals. Deﬁnition 23.
7.7 A bound function variable is used in the statement and proof of Theorem 76
to deal with the notion of cardinality. It is argued that the apparent vicious circle
from a ﬁnitist point of view is actually harmless. “Thus even in the cases mentioned

168
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
we can ﬁrst establish a theorem to the eﬀect that the number of mappings that
are possible at all is ﬁnite and after that give the general deﬁnition of the notion
of cardinality for classes of objects”.
Work since Skolem [1923a] by Ackermann, G¨odel, P´eter and others has rendered
more explicit the relation between these diverse devices and the sharper domain
of (primitive) recursive arithmetic. But we shall not pursue this matter.
From a philosophical point of view, Skolem [1923a] comes close to Hilbert’s ﬁni-
tist position and is somewhat more restrictive than Brouwer’s intuitionist view-
point. In one of his papers in Spanish, Skolem asserts that his treatment of func-
tions (10.7 above) is similar to Brouwer’s free choice sequences.
G¨odel’s epoch-making paper of [1931] includes incidentally some central results
on recursive functions. One of them is that all recursive functions are arithmetical
in the sense of being deﬁnable in the ordinary system P of number theory which
begins only with addition and multiplication as initial functions. (For a complete
proof of this result, see Hilbert-Bernays [1934]). Skolem [1937a] gives an extension
of this result to a wider class of inductively deﬁned functions.
7.8
If U(x1, . . . , xn, y, z1, . . . , zm) is built by disjunction and conjunction out of
given arithmetical functions of x1, . . . , zm and components of the form F(ξ1, . . . ,
ξn, η) where ξ1, . . . , ξn, η are such functions f1, . . . , fn, f of x1, . . . , zm that (ξ1, . . . ,
ξn) always precedes (x1, . . . , xn) in the lexicographical order and the equations
ξ1 = f(x1, . . . , zm), . . . , ξn = fn(x1, . . . , zm), η = f(x1, . . . , zm)
express arithmetical relations, and if
F(x1, . . . , xn, y) ≡∃z1 . . . ∃zmU(x1, . . . , xn, y, z1, . . . , zm)
then F(x1, . . . , xn, y) is an arithmetical propositional function.
The proof uses a device by which quantiﬁcation over ﬁnite classes and relations
are replaced by ones over natural numbers.
The theorem is no longer true if
negation is permitted in U. In fact, Skolem has previously given an example of
the more general form which is not arithmetical. Alternatively, we can take from
Hilbert-Bernays [1939] the deﬁnition of truth set of ordinary number theory P
which, for obvious reasons, is not deﬁnable in P.
Skolem [1939b] shows that more general forms of free variable induction, such
as
A(b, a) if A(b, 0) and A(φ(b, a), a) ⊃A(b, a + 1)
can be reduced to the ordinary form without using bound variables. An improve-
ment of this is given in P´eter [1940] (JSL, vol. 5, p. 35).
Skolem [1950a] contains the remark that in recursive arithmetic, at a certain
stage, the usual rule of induction can be reduced to the special rule:

Thoralf Albert Skolem
169
If f(0) = 0 and f(n) ≥n + 1 , then f(n) = 0
Skolem then asks whether it is even reducible to:
If f(0) = 0 and f(n) = f(n′) , then f(n) = f(0)
The answer is yes and follows from a previous argument of Bernays [1945] (Proc.
London Math. Soc. vol. 48, pp. 401-434).
Skolem [1956a] gives details of an alternative proof of a related result of Bernays
(ibid., pp. 407-408) that in recursive arithmetic the induction rule follows from the
principle that every function deﬁned by the primitive recursive schema is uniquely
determined.
3.5.2
Recursive function theory
The four notes of 1944 [1944a; b; c; d] and the paper [1953b] contain a number
of observations concerning primitive and general recursiveness. The other four
papers [1954b; 1954a; 1962b; 1963c] deal mainly with the problem of bases for
recursively enumerable sets (a collection K of functions is said to form an r.e.
basis if every r.e. set can be enumerated by a function in K).
In Skolem [1944a], the question is raised whether every general recursive func-
tion can be expressed in the simple form
(18) ϵyR(x1, . . . , xn, y)
where R is primitive recursive and ∀x1 . . . ∀xn∃yR(x1, . . . , xn, y).
8.1 If ψ is monotone increasing in the familiar normal form ψ(ϵyS(x1, . . . , xn, y))
of f, then f can be expressed in the form (18).
8.2
Every general recursive function is the diﬀerence of two general recursive
functions both expressible in the form (18).
8.3
A necessary and suﬃcient condition for a general recursive function f to
be expressible in the form (18) is that y = f(x1, . . . , xn) is a primitive recursive
relation. (Skolem [1944b]).
8.4 For suitable φ, φ is not primitive recursive, but z = φ(x, y) is.
8.5 It is not true that every general recursive functions with values restricted to
0 and 1 is a primitive recursive function.

170
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
In the remainder of [1944b] and in [1944c], alternative proofs are given for
the well-known results that there is no general method for deciding whether
∀x∃yP(x, y) for every primitive recursive P, and that there exists some primi-
tive recursive P such that ∃yP(x, y) is not primitive recursive.
Skolem [1944d] reverts to Theorem 9 in section 6 above from which it follows
immediately that, for every sequence of number functions f1(x), f2(x), . . . there
exist two functions g(x) and h(x), g(x) monotone increasing, such that for every
k, either fk(g(x)) > 0 for all x ≥h(k) or fk(g(x)) = 0 for all x ≥h(k). Results
are then proved about these functions g and h:
8.6
If the sequence fk(x) is an enumeration of all general (primitive) recursive
functions of x, then g(x) cannot be general (primitive) recursive.
Skolem also asserts that if fk(x) is a recursive enumeration of all primitive re-
cursive functions of x, then g(h(x)) is not recursive. The proof appeals to G¨odel’s
incompleteness theorem but seems to require some additional assumptions of prov-
ability.
Skolem [1953b] contains six notes. The ﬁrst note gives an alternative construc-
tion of an r.e. set which is not recursive. It is debatable whether this is simpler
than familiar proofs. In note 2, it is remarked for each general recursive relation
R, there are primitive recursive functions f1, . . . , fn such that
R(x1, . . . , xn) = ∃t(x1 = f1(t) ∨. . . ∨xn = fn(t))
In note 3, it is remarked that for those general recursive functions φ such that
y = φ(x1, . . . , xn) is primitive recursive, it is possible to replace them in quantiﬁer-
free contexts by primitive recursive functions, without introducing quantiﬁers.
Note 4 mentions the fact concerning G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem that it is
possible the f(a) = g(a) may be true and yet f(a) = 0 is provable in a given
system while g(a) = 0 is not.
In note 5, Skolem gives a short alternative proof of Markov’s theorem that if
g(t) is a primitive recursive function which takes on all values inﬁnitely often, then
for each n, there is a primitive recursive predicate Qn such that for each general
recursive function f of x1, . . . , xn a number e can be selected to satisfy:
f(x1, . . . , xn) = g(μtQn(x1, . . . , xn, t, e))
In note 6, it is shown that for every general recursive function g(x), we can
ﬁnd some primitive recursive functions f and h, f assuming all values, such that
g(x) = h(μt(x = f(t))). This result is actually due to Julia Robinson [1950] (Proc.
Am. Math. Soc., vol. 1, pp. 213-221, §5).
Skolem [1954b] provides alternative formulation of Kalmar’s class E of elemen-
tary functions and establishes that a number of basic devices can be obtained on
these bases. In [1954a], Skolem suggests a narrower class H obtained from E by
dropping the operation of indeﬁnite products. It is shown that functions in H are

Thoralf Albert Skolem
171
bounded by polynomials so that xy is not in H. On the other hand z = xy can be
expressed as an equation between functions in H. It is also shown that m = pn
(pn the n-th prime number) can be so expressed and that (m)n (the exponent of
the highest power of pn dividing m) is in H.
In [1962b] and [1963b], Skolem renames H the class of lower elementary func-
tions and establishes:
8.7 The lower elementary functions form an r.e. basis.
Actually this follows from a result of Moh Shaw-Kwei [1956] (Acta Mathematica
Sinica, vol. 6, pp. 548–564). But the proofs of Moh and Skolem are very diﬀerent.
At the end of [1962b], Skolem remarks: “It has been asked whether the recursively
enumerable sets are all of them Diophantine sets . . . I regret not having had the
opportunity yet to study this question seriously”.
4
SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
4.1
The Algebraic tradition in the development of logic
It is usual to recognize two lines of development in the history of modern logic.
Both take their point of departure the ideas of Leibniz of a universal characteristic.
We cannot do justice to Leibniz’s ideas in a short supplementary note. Let us just
note that Leibniz’s vision is seen by some as a principal source for the development
of a formal or symbolic logic, a calculus ratiocinator, to systematize valid patterns
of inference. For others, the real signiﬁcance of the universal characteristic goes
beyond formal logic and is seen as a lingua philosophica to express a knowledge of
the real world.
Frege in his Begriﬀschrift explicitly declares his adherence to the lingua philo-
sophica ideal and contrast his ideas with the Boole–Peirce–Schr¨oder algebraic tra-
dition, characterizing the latter as a mere calculus raticinator; see van Heijenoort
[1967, p. 2].
I do not know how closely the later development followed the philosophical ideas
of Leibniz. But there were two distinct schools in the development of modern
logic. One the Frege-Peano-Russell-Hilbert tradition, the other the Boole-Peirce-
Schr¨oder tradition.
With the publication in 1928 of the ﬁrst edition of the inﬂuential text-book of
Hilbert–Ackermann, Grundz¨uge der teoretischen Logik, the Frege tradition came
to dominate. And with the canonical source book, From Frege to G¨odel [van Hei-
jenoort, 1967], the algebraic approach to large extent disappeared from view. The
heritage from Frege dominated the discussion, in particular, in issues of semantics
and the theory of meaning; see e.g. the introductory chapter of Church [1956].
The history of logic is now becoming more faithful to the sources, and we see
today an increased interest in understanding both lines of development and how

172
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
they interacted in the development of logic in the early part of the twentieth
century.
A recent and interesting review of the development of the algebraic approach is
the book by G. Brady, From Peirce to Skolem, A Neglected Chapter in the History
of Logic, published in 2000. An important study of the landmark 1915 paper by
L. L¨owenheim, ¨Uber M¨oglichkeiten in Relativkalk¨ul, is the book by C. Badisa, The
Birth of Model Theory, from 2004. And a rich overview of the logic of Peirce can
be found in the collection, Studies in the Logic of Charles Sanders Peirce, from
1997.
L¨owenheim and Skolem emerge as central ﬁgures in these studies, integrating
in their work the insights of both schools. But despite the great originality and
importance of his 1915 paper, L¨owenheim remained true to the algebraic tradition
of Peirce and Schr¨oder; see his late paper in the Journal of Symbolic Logic from
1940, Einkleidung der Mathematik in Schr¨oderschen Relativkalk¨ul.
Skolem became the genuine bridge-builder. His thesis for the state examination
at the University of Oslo in 1913, Undersøkelser indenfor logikens algebra, was
directly derived from Schr¨oder volume I. The thesis was a rich and mathematically
sophisticated study of the theory of classes, or in the language of Schr¨oder, das
identische Kalk¨ul; see Skolem [1913b; 1919a; 1931d; 1936g].
Skolem spent the winter 1915–16 in G¨ottingen and became thoroughly familiar
with the Hilbert school. At that time we know that the Principia Mathematica of
Whitehead-Russell was intensively studied in G¨ottingen. This obviously had an
inﬂuence on Skolem’s work, as can be seen from his papers in the early 1920s; see,
in particular, his remark in the paper Skolem [1923a], which was written in 1919
“after I had studied the work of Russell and Whitehead [Skolem 1923a, p. 187]”.
After his great papers of the 1920s and early 1930s Skolem was recognized as
a major ﬁgure in the development of mathematical logic. His early adherence to
the Schr¨oder tradition became less pronounced, e.g. in his lectures on logic at the
University of Oslo in the mid-thirties (see [Skolem, 1936a]) he takes Hilbert and
Ackermann [1928] as his model. There is no explicit mention of Schr¨oder; but his
early interests are present through a chapter on “the class calculus”. In his later
years he used to refer to the two volumes of Hilbert and Bernays as “the” text on
mathematical logic.
4.2
Skolem and Lattice Theory
In the same year as his 1936 lectures we also ﬁnd his paper, ¨Uber gewisse “Verb¨ande”
or “lattices”, see [Skolem, 1936g]. He takes note of the contemporary advances
in this part of mathematics, in particular the work of G. Birkhoﬀ, and he calls
attention to his earlier work in the algebra of logic, Skolem [1913b; 1919a], where
some of the “recent” result can already be found.
This paper was reviewed by Birkhoﬀ[1937] (Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol 2).
One gets the impression that the main point of the review is to to assign a marginal
role to Skolem in the development of lattice theory. Wang in his survey of this

Thoralf Albert Skolem
173
part of Skolem’s work is rather non-committal on questions of priority.
Today we have a better picture. Workers in lattice theory have rediscovered
some quite important ideas and results in the early papers of Skolem, including
also in the part of Skolem [1920a] that was not reprinted in van Heijenoort [1967],
nor mentioned by Skolem in [1936]. A brief account of this, with full references to
the current literature, can be found in J. von Plato [2003], see also J. von Plato
[2007]. Particularly noteworthy is Skolem’s solution in [1920a] of the word problem
for both free and ﬁnitely presented lattices through a polynomial time algorithm.
This predates the work by P. Whitman [1941] on free lattices; for the rediscover
see Burris [1995]. We also ﬁnd in these early papers an anticipation of what later
has become know as the G¨odel-Dummett logic.
4.3
First Order Logic
The founders of modern logic, Frege, Schr¨oder, Russell, and Zermelo, all worked
within systems of higher-order logic. The story of how logic became predominantly
a study of ﬁrst-order systems is complex. It seems that it was Hilbert who in his
lectures in 1917–18 was the ﬁrst to make an explicit distinction between ﬁrst order
(engere) and higher order (erweiterte) systems of logic.
It was the work of Skolem and G¨odel that gave prominence to ﬁrst order logic.
And since set theory can be axiomatised as a ﬁrst order system, it was suggested
that ﬁrst order logic was suﬃcient as a universal frame-work. I use deliberately the
words “it” and ”frame-work” to hint at the complexity of the actual development;
for a careful discussion see [Goldfarb, 1979] and the recent paper [Eklund, 1996];
the latter has a review of the literature and an extensive bibliography.
What is of interest for this discussion is the fact that Skolem never restricted
himself to ﬁrst-order logic. In his Oslo 1936 lectures he follows the tradition of
Hilbert-Ackermann and has separate chapters on the engere and erweiterte func-
tional calculus. And as late as in his lecture to the congress of the International
Mathematical Union at Harvard University in 1950 he speaks about his recent
studies on how to develop arithmetic in ramiﬁed type theory. He returns to the
topic in his lectures on abstract set theory given at Notre Dame in 1957–56 (pub-
lished in [Skolem, 1962c]). Skolem obviously took this system very seriously as a
possible logical framework for arithmetic, and was “somewhat astonished by the
general lack of interest in this theory [Skolem, 1950d]”.
4.3.1
L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem
L¨owenheim’s theorem from 1915 and the later studies by Skolem in the 1920s are
today recognized as the starting point for the model theory of ﬁrst-order logic.
Supplementing the discussion in Wang we draw attention to three later studies.
The role of Skolem as a founder of model theory is convincingly argued in the
survey article, Model Theory before 1945, by R. L. Vaught [1974]. A recent and

174
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
most important study is the book by C. Badesa [2004], The Birth of Model The-
ory. We should also mention again the book by G. Brady [2000], From Peirce
to Skolem; A Neglected Chapter in the History of Logic.
These works, and in
particular, Badesa [2004], contain detailed studies of both the development of al-
gebraic logic, the [1915] paper of L¨owenheim, and the developments to come. The
originality of L¨owenheim’s 1915 paper is striking, there is nothing in the previous
development of logic that points to a result of this kind. One could speculate if he
drew some inspiration from contemporary developments in mathematics. There
were developments in algebra that could be suggestive, in particular W. Steinitz’s
[1910] great paper, Algebraische Theorie der K¨orper. I once suggested that the
construction of the algebraic closure could have been a guiding example, and I
noted that both Steinitz and L¨owenheim were active in Berlin at about the same
time. But, as reported in Brady [2000], p. 194, there is no evidence of any direct
contacts between the two.
4.3.2
Completeness of First-order Logic
This is a topic that has been extensively discussed in the literature; a recent
account can be found in the Introductory Note to G¨odel’s work on the completeness
of ﬁrst order logic by B. Dreben and J. van Heijenoort in G¨odel [1986]. We also
draw attention to Goldfarb’s 1971 review of [Skolem, 1970], the Skolem lecture by
Wang 1996, and the review of G¨odel’s correspondence as contained in volumes IV
and V of his Collected Works by J. von Plato [2004] (Bulletin of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 10, pp. 558–563).
We cannot go into details here, just point out that the fact that Skolem did
not prove completeness of ﬁrst-order logic is not necessarily an oversight on his
part. It is, perhaps, more correct to say that Skolem and G¨odel pursued diﬀerent
programs.
Skolem as a mathematician was interested in structures and algorithms. He
was, however, thoroughly familiar with the axiomatic methods and formal proof
systems; see his work on lattice theory referred to in Section 4.2. And his various
proofs of the L¨owenheim theorem showed an equal familiarity with the model
theory of ﬁrst-order logic. In his 1936 Oslo lectures he followed closely Hilbert-
Ackermann [1928] in his presentation of logic as an axiomatic system. But even in
the 1936 lectures there is no mention of the completeness theorem and its solution
by G¨odel [1930].
Skolem was following another program.
Both in his studies of arithmetic,
Skolem [1923a], and in his 1928 lecture on logic to the Norwegian Mathemati-
cal Society, Skolem [1928a], he was interested in algorithms and proof procedures.
For him the axiomatic method was a tool, not a foundation. This was a view that
was reinforced by the so-called “Skolem paradox” and his work on non-standard
models for arithmetic.
Thus it was not unreasonable to adopt a strategy of working from below, i.e.
on eﬀective proof procedures in logic and on primitive recursion in arithmetic, and

Thoralf Albert Skolem
175
to see how far one could go in catching logical and arithmetical “truth”. In the
1920s this was a perfectly sound strategy; the limitations came in the 1930s with
the work of G¨odel [1931] and Church [1936].
Skolem took an immediate interest in the work of Herbrand [1931]. He even
made a personal visit to the Herbrand family after Herbrand’s death in order
to obtain a copy of his thesis. The logical works of Herbrand are translated in
[Herbrand, 1968], and they are provided with extensive comments by B. Dreben,
W. Goldfarb, and J. van Heijenoort. Today we see the close relationship between
the work of the Skolem, G¨odel and Herbrand.
Quoting from the Dreben–van
Heijenoort Introductory Note [G¨odel, 1986, p.
55] we may sum up the their
relationship as follows: “Let us consider the sequence: Frege-type formal systems,
proof procedures, set-theoretic validity. Skolem connects (at least implicitly) the
second and the third, Herbrand the ﬁrst and the second, G¨odel the ﬁrst and the
third.”
4.3.3
Entscheidungsprobleme
We make three short remarks.
(i)
The classical decision problem. Wang, who was an expert himself in this ﬁeld,
presents in his survey a very complete picture. There is one new noteworthy
result we may mention, Goldfarb’s negative solution of the G¨odel case with
identity, which surely is a result that would have appealed to Skolem. An
up-to-date account of the ﬁeld can be found in B¨orger, Gr¨adel and Gurevich
[1997].
(ii) Thue systems.
Skolem did some early work on decidability of mathematical
systems. But it is interesting to note that he never dealt with the decidability
questions raised by A. Thue [1914]. He has a brief mention of Thue’s work in
his 1936 Oslo lectures, but not identifying the problem as one concerning the
word problem for semi-groups. Later, in Skolem [1954a], after he has become
aware of Post [1947], he brieﬂy reports the result. Post had been made aware
of the problem by Church, who had an encyclopedic knowledge of all ﬁelds
of mathematical logic. This is no great surprise, since Thue’s problem ﬁtted
nicely in with the work of the Princeton schools. Skolem as a student of, and
later as a younger colleague of Thue, surely knew the 1914 paper when it was
published, but he never worked on the problem.
(iii) Hilbert’s 10th problem. This is another story of opportunities lost. Toward the
end of his life Skolem took note of the problem: “It has been asked whether
the recursively enumerable sets are all of them Diophantine sets? I regret not
having had the opportunity to study this question seriously [Skolem, 1962b].”
His source was the well-known textbook by M. Davis from 1958.
Twenty years earlier, in 1938 Skolem published his inﬂuential book, Diophan-
tische Gleichungen. The introduction is wholly concerned with various decision

176
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
problems for Diophantine equations, with due reference to G¨odel [1931] and Church
[1936] — not standard references in number theoretic texts at that time. He also
notes, using the reduction techniques in G¨odel [1931] and Skolem [1937a], what
we recognize as the standard arithmetical representation of recursively enumer-
able sets. It “only” remains to reduce a mixed preﬁx to an existential form. Davis
[1958] presents some fairly obvious steps towards this goal, steps that Skolem could
have taken. This does not mean that Skolem could have taken the ﬁnal steps. The
solution of Hilbert’s 10th problem belongs to Y. Matiyasevich.
4.3.4
The Epsilon Theorem
Here I want brieﬂy to draw attention to the Skolem lecture on the epsilon-
substitution method by G. Mints [1996]. Mints notes in his lecture that Wang
in his survey of Skolem’s work remarks that “it is hard to evaluate the importance
of the proofs and comments in this section [Skolem, 1929b, §5]”. What Mints
points out is that this work “can be seen as instances of the epsilon-substitutions
and the proof of the epsilon-theorems. They provide speed-up estimates”.
4.4
Skolem and Axiomatic Set Theory
We have in recent years seen a number of studies on the history of axiomatic set
theory as it developed in the early part of the twentieth century. The literature
is vast, let me mention a few contributions of particular relevance to the under-
standing of Skolem’s role in this development: the papers by A. Kanamori in the
Bulletin of the ASL, see Kanamori [1996; 2004], and the forthcoming scientiﬁc
biography of E. Zermelo by H.-D. Ebbinghaus [2007]. For a broader survey of
the development of logic and set theory in the ﬁrst part of the last century see
Mancosu, Zach, and Badesa [2005].
These studies have given us a better understanding of how basic ideas and
techniques emerged and developed into the axiomatic theory as we know it today.
The work of Skolem on axiomatic set theory has its rightful place in these studies;
in this note we add a few brief remarks supplementing the discussion in Wang’s
survey.
But before we continue the discussion of foundational matters, let us note that
Skolem had a high opinion of Cantor as a creative mathematician; see Skolem
[1962c]. It was above all Cantor’s theory of ordinals that was the object of Skolem’s
admiration. At one place he writes that “these ordinals Cantor has introduced by a
creative process which is very characteristic of his way of thinking” [Skolem, 1962c,
p. 9]. This is Skolem speaking as a mathematician interested in structures and
algorithms, not foundational matters. Skolem kept his interest in understanding
the structures of ordinals and well-orderings “from below”; for a late contribution
see Skolem [1956c]. The problem posed by Skolem in this paper is still a subject
of research, see van den Dries L. and H. Levitz, [1984].

Thoralf Albert Skolem
177
4.4.1
Deﬁnite Eigenschaften
As Skolem pointed out in his 1922 lecture, if you want to play the axiomatic
game with respect to the set-theoretic foundation of mathematics, you can restrict
yourself to a ﬁrst-order formalism with the membership relation as the only non-
logical symbol. This is a remarkable result, with Peano as one of the main sources.
It was not at all obvious that the great wealth of mathematical concepts and
constructs can be coded into a ﬁrst order system with only one binary non-logical
constant. And it is still a point to debate what, in addition to formal provability,
is captured by this reduction. As we know from Ebbinghaus’s biography, Zermelo
had strong views about this issue; we shall return to this point in the remarks on
his dispute with Skolem.
But if you accept to play the game as Skolem did in his 1922 paper, you can
immediately give a precise answer to the troubling question how to express the
notion of deﬁnite Eigenschaften within the axiomatization. Skolem’s answer was
to identify deﬁnite Eigenschaften with properties expressed by a ﬁrst order formula
with the membership-relation as the only non-logical symbol. Hermann Weyl had
already in [1910] expressed similar ideas. His ideas were later developed in his
book Das Kontinuum [1918]. This book is a landmark in the development of the
predicative approach to the foundation of mathematics; for a careful historical
analysis of Weyl’s contribution and a survey of further developments see Feferman
[1998].
Weyl and Skolem pursued diﬀerent goals, but the technical details are similar.
Thus, if Skolem was acquainted with the work of Weyl from 1910 and 1918, there
should be an acknowledgments in his critical remarks from 1922.
And it does
indeed seem that Skolem knew about Weyl [1910]. The review of this work in
the Jahrbuch ¨uber die Fortschritte der Mathematik published in 1913 carries the
signature Sk. Sk has been read as an abbreviation for Skolem and the review has
entered the literature as a publication by Skolem, see Boos [1995] and Mancosu,
Zach, and Badesa 2005, where we in the latter paper read that “although Skolem
does not mention Weyl [1910], he was familiar with it, as he had reviewed it for
the Jahrbuch”. And in the bibliography we ﬁnd an item: Skolem 1912. But this
is not correct, a closer inspection of the Jahrbuch reveals the Sk is an acronym for
professor Salkowski, a geometer from Berlin. Concerning the 1922 lecture, this is
material originating from his visit to G¨ottingen in 1915–16 after Weyl had left for
Z¨urich, and thus independent of Weyl [1918].
It is, however, noteworthy that Skolem in his later work on the constructive
foundation of mathematics only has a few superﬁcial references to Weyl. We will
return to this point in Section 4.6.
4.4.2
The Skolem Paradox
The so-called Skolem Paradox has an extensive literature. Supplementing the dis-
cussion in Wang’s survey, we mention some recent contributions: A careful analysis
of the mathematical content of Skolem’s argument can be found in the PhD thesis

178
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
by T. Bays [2000]; see his article in the Handbook of the Philosophy of Science,
volume 5. For some recent studies of the philosophical and foundational implica-
tions of the paradox see A. George, Skolem and the L¨owenheim Theorem: A Case
Study of the Philosophical Signiﬁcance of Mathematical Results [George, 1985], I.
Jan´e [2001], Reﬂections on Skolem’s Relativity of Set-Theoretical Concepts, and
F.A.Muller [2004], Deﬂating Skolem.
For the working set theorist of today the Skolem Paradox has been turned into
a standard technical tool, the Skolem Hull construction, to be listed among the
preliminaries to further studies; see as an example, [Kanamori, 1997, p. 8].
4.4.3
The Dispute with Zermelo
Zermelo reacted strongly against the Skolem 1922 lecture, both to the L¨owenheim–
Skolem theorem and the application of it to axiomatic set theory. A full account of
the so-called “Skolem Controversy” can be found in Ebbbinghaus [2007, sections
4.8 and 4.9]. Zermelo evidently saw a challenge to real mathematics in the “Skolem
relativism”, and he started a campaign against it — a war on Skolemism in the
words of the German mathematician R. Baer (see [Ebbinghaus, 2007, 4.8.3]).
Except for one exchange, the Zermelo [1929] paper and the response in Skolem
[1930b], Skolem did not participate in the war. In the 1930s he was occupied with
his work on algebra, number theory, the decision problem, and the construction
of nonstandard models for arithmetic. The latter work can, perhaps, implicitly
be read as an argument against Zermelo.
It is also possible to read Skolem’s
1938 Z¨urich lecture in the same way, but only indirectly since there is no explicit
reference to Zermelo beyond the classics of 1908.
Both Skolem and Zermelo were logicians of the ﬁrst rank, and we need to pay
attention to the deep insights of both men. And, indeed, we do, most logicians
working in axiomatic set theory today are guided by the insight of Zermelo, both
in his fundamental studies from the early years of the century and the later papers
of the 1930s, in particular, his ¨Uber Grenzzahlen und Mengenbereiche. But when
we want to turn insights into proofs, we use the ﬁrst-order encoding and tools such
as the Skolem Hull Construction, a latter day technical version of the L¨owenheim-
Skolem theorem.
4.5
Nonstandard Models of Arithmetic
Skolem did not believe in an axiomatic foundation for mathematics. He could
and did play the axiomatic game on many occasions, and he never mistrusted
the axiomatic method as a tool in the study of mathematical structures.
But
axioms can never uniquely characterize the concepts involved. This, in his opinion,
was a direct consequence of the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem in the case of set
theory; see the discussion in Section 4.4. He quite early suspected that the same
“relativism” would also apply to the natural number sequence; see e.g. Skolem
[1929b, p.
269], where he writes “It would be interesting to verify that every
collection (Sammlung) of sentences (S¨atze) expressed in the language of ﬁrst-order

Thoralf Albert Skolem
179
arithmetic (Zahlaussagen) remains valid even when one makes certain changes to
the interpretation (Deutung) of “number”. If my conjecture is correct, one can
expect that it is always possible to make such reinterpretations without destroying
the validity (ohne Zerst¨orung der G¨ultigkeit) of the sentences.” During the 1920s
and early 1930s he published a number of works towards this goal. And in [1933d]
and [1934a] he succeeded in the construction of a nonstandard model of arithmetic.
Today the study of nonstandard models is an important part of logic and math-
ematics. And what was originally intended as a critique, has been turned into an
eﬃcient tool in logic and analysis. For a recent survey of applications to the meta-
theory of ﬁrst order arithmetic, see H´ajek and Pudlak [1993]. For applications to
nonstandard analysis, see the founding memoir, A. Robinson 1966.
Nonstandard analysis is yet another case where Skolem could have taken an im-
portant step forward, but did not. Skolem argued in a lecture to a Scandinavian
congress in 1929 against using inﬁnitesimals as a foundation for analysis: “We
know that such entities can be introduced — they can be exhibited in so-called
non-archimedian number systems — but it is not possible to construct a calculus
of inﬁnitesimals on such a foundation.” But history does not always follow pre-
conceived ideas. In 1933–34 Skolem constructed a non-archimedian, elementary
extension of the natural numbers. This is, in the same way as the Skolem Para-
dox, no contradiction, one only needs to make a distinction between internal and
external properties of the model. Thirty years later A. Robinson observed that
if one inverts an inﬁnitely large number in the Skolem model, one has a genuine
inﬁnitesimal. And he then proceeded to create a powerful system of inﬁnitesimal
analysis, see Robinson [1966].
Today we construct nonstandard models using the ultraproduct method. Skolem
used a more direct combinatorial approach. And he hoped that he could make his
method constructive, see the concluding remarks in Skolem [1955d]. But this is
not so, a careful comparison of Skolem’s construction and the ultraproduct con-
struction was carried out by D. Scott [1960]. A clear exposition is given in Bell
and Slomson [1969]. The crucial combinatorial lemma (see theorem 9 in Wang’s
survey) is today proved by an ultraproduct construction, but the combinatorial
methods of the two proofs are basically the same. And contrary to Skolem’s hopes,
the arguments go beyond the constructive (recursive) as they essentially depend
upon the Weak K¨onig Lemma.
4.6
Foundational Matters
The words “Begr¨undung”, “Grundlagenfragen”, and “foundational research” occur
frequently in the titles of Skolem’s papers. But to which extent did Skolem have
a complete and coherent view of the foundation of mathematics?
The young Skolem was a mathematician in the tradition of Kronecker; see e.g.
his discussion of Kronecker in Skolem [1955c]. The active professors of mathemat-
ics in Oslo in Skolem’s student days were A. Thue and C. Størmer, both experts in
number theory, in particular, in solving diophantine equations. Skolem continued

180
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
in this tradition, in fact, it is possible, as argued in Jervell [1996], to see this theme,
solving equations, as a common concern in much of Skolem’s work, including logic.
His fellow student was Viggo Brun, who later became famous for his work in com-
binatorics (on the Goldbach conjecture). As later colleagues, Skolem and Brun
edited a new edition of the standard text on combinatorics, Netto’s Lehrbuch der
Combinatorik.
The young Skolem was as mathematician interested in structures and algo-
rithms, working on the algebra of logic and on combinatorics. He knew, of course,
the new and exiting work of Zermelo on the axiom of choice and the foundation
of set theory. But he was skeptical as can be seen from his critical attitude to
the Zermelo axiomatization of set theory expressed during his G¨ottingen winter of
1915–16.
Skolem was himself an expert in using the axiomatic method in the study of al-
gebraic structures, see his early work on lattice theory, Section 4.2. But he did not
believe in the possibility of an axiomatic characterization of basic concepts such as
numbers and sets. His skepticism was based on his work on the so-called “set the-
oretical relativism” and on his construction of nonstandard models for arithmetic.
This was his ﬁrm conviction, and it is not likely that the current discussion of the
Skolem Paradox would have changed his attitude towards foundational matters.
His ﬁrst publication on recursive mathematics was the 1923 paper on the
Begr¨undung der elementaren Arithmetik durch die rekurrierende Denkweise. This
was the starting step — and it remained so. Skolem never worked out a complete
account similar to what we ﬁnd in the work of R. Goldstein [1957] and [1961] on
recursive arithmetic.
Skolem did, however, return to his “program” on many later occasions, some
important references are Skolem [1950a] and [1955c], but then mostly in form of
examples and suggestions. He wanted step-wise to build up a “sound” foundation.
This is clear from the pioneering Skolem [1923a], and is explicit in his later lecture
on The logical background of arithmetic, Skolem [1953a].
His style bears some
resemblance to current work in computer science, and some have seen him as an
early pioneer of this ﬁeld, see Jervell [1996].
“Basic objects” were almost always numbers. Skolem did not make any sys-
tematic attempt to build up a “constructive” analysis. He made over the years a
number of references to Brouwer and intuitionism, but it is unclear how well he was
acquainted with Brouwer’s actual writings. In his lectures on set theory at Notre
Dame, Skolem [1962c], he includes several short sections on alternative approaches
such as intuitionism and his own work on ramiﬁed type theory. It is further of
interest to note that he has a substantial section on the “operative” approach of
P. Lorenzen. This was an approach that evidently appealed to Skolem.
Skolem was acquainted with the work of H. Weyl [1918] on predicative analysis.
But he never seemed to have made a thorough study of Weyl’s work, and there are
only some very superﬁcial references to it in his papers. This is, perhaps, due to
a diﬀerence in style. Both Skolem and Weyl were concerned with the problem of
impredicativity and the unrestricted use of quantiﬁers in the tradition of Cantor

Thoralf Albert Skolem
181
and Frege. Skolem wanted to build bottom-up. Weyl, both in his [1910] paper
and his [1918] book, continued to work in the axiomatic tradition, but with proper
restrictions on the set existence axioms. In particular, he restricted the axiom
of comprehension to arithmetical properties, i.e. to properties expressible using
only ﬁrst-order quantiﬁers. A comprehensive study of Weyl’s contributions can
be found in Feferman [1998], see, in particular, the chapter Weyl vindicated: Das
Kontinuum seventy years later.
Skolem was, as we have argued, not interested in the meta-mathematics of the
constructive approach. It is interesting to note a similar attitude on Brouwer’s
part. He did not e.g. regard the axiomatization of intuitionistic logic to be partic-
ularly important, what mattered was the actual working out of the mathematics
guided by the correct insights.
Today we have a rather complete view of the meta-mathematics of the many
constructive approaches to mathematics, an excellent reference is Feferman [1998].
How would Skolem ﬁt into the picture drawn by Feferman? Skolem worked with
primitive recursive arithmetic in his [1923a] paper, he used some form of the K¨onig
lemma in his construction of non-standard models of arithmetic, he studied various
extended schemes of recursion. But as he did not develop his ideas into a full
account, we cannot know what principles he ultimately would have accepted. But
he would have been pleased to see the extent of “real” mathematics that can be
developed on a recursive or predicative basis.
5
SCIENTIFIC BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THORALF SKOLEM
Items in the bibliography are indexed by giving the year in which they appeared,
and for each year the various titles are distinguished by letters a, b, and so on.
As far as possible, an attempt has been made to follow the actual chronological
order. For lectures, the year given is usually that in which they were delivered.
A * in front of an entry indicates that this item is included in [Skolem, 1970].
Each entry includes references to reviews of it in the current reviewing journals.
Here have also been given references to “From Frege to G¨odel. A source book in
mathematical logic” (edited by J. van Heijenoort, Harvard University Press), for
papers reprinted there since each paper in this collection has been provided with
an extensive introductory comment.
The abbreviations used are mostly standard. Some of the lesser known are:
K.V. Skr.
for Skrifter, Videnskabsakademiet i Kristiania.
V.A. Skr.
for Skrifter, Vitenskapsakademiet i Oslo.
V.A. Avh.
for Avhandlinger, Vitenskapsakademiet i Oslo.
K.N.V. Forh. for Kongelige Norske Videnskabsselskabs Forhandlinge, Trondheim.
N.M.F. Skr.
for Norsk Matematisk Forening, Skrifter.
N.M.T.
for Norsk Matematisk Tidsskrift.
C.M. Inst.
for Christian Michelsens Institutt, Bergen.

182
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
The reviewing journals are identiﬁed by the following abbreviations:
MR for Mathematical reviews.
Z
for Zentralblatt f¨ur Mathematik.
R
for Referativny˘ı ˘Zurnal.
JSL for Journal of Symbolic Logic.
J
for Jahrbuch der Mathematik.
1913
*b. Om konstitusjonen av den identiske kalkyls grupper.
(On the structure of groups in the identity calculus.)
Proceedings of the 3rd Scand. Math. Congress. Kristiania 1913, pp 149-163.
1919
*a. Untersuchungen ¨uber die Axiome des Klassenkalk¨uls und ¨uber Produktations-
und Summationsprobleme, welche gewisse Klassen von Aussagen betreﬀen.
K.V. Skr No 3, pp 37.
1920
*a. Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen ¨uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit und Beweisbarkeit
mathematischen S¨atze nebst einem Theoreme ¨uber dichte Mengen.
K.V. Skr. I, No 4, pp 1-36.
J 48, p 1121 (Fr. Lange-Nielsen).
From Frege to G¨odel pp 252-263.
1922
*b. Einige Bemerkungen zur axiomatischen Begr¨undung der Mengenlehre.
Proceedings of the 5th Scand. Math. Congress. Helsinki 1922, pp 217-232.
J 49, p 138 (Fraenkel).
From Frege to G¨odel pp 290-301.
1923
*a. Begr¨undung der element¨aren Arithmetik durch die rekurrierende Denkweise ohne
Anwendung scheinbarer Ver¨anderlichen mit unendlichem Ausdehnungsbereich.
K.V. Skr. I, No 6, 38 pp.
From Frege to G¨odel pp 302-333.

Thoralf Albert Skolem
183
1924
b.
Ein Verfahren zu beliebig angen¨aherter Bestimmung einer Wurzel einer beliebigen
algebraischen Gleichung.
N.M.F. Skr. Series 1, No 15, 14 pp.
1926
a.
Litt om de viktigste diskussioner i den senere tid ang˚aende matematikkens grundlag.
(The most important recent discussions on the foundation of mathematics.)
N.M.T. 8, pp 1-13.
J 52, p 51 (Mollerup).
1927
*c. Netto: Lehrbuch der Combinatorik.
2nd ed. by Viggo Brun and T. Skolem.
Leipzig 1927.
(The 2nd edition contains a new chapter and several notes, totalling 60 pages,
written by Skolem.)
J 53, p 73 (G. Feigl).
1928
*a. ¨Uber die mathematische Logik.
N.M.T. 10, pp 125-142.
J 54, p 58 (Feigl).
From Frege to G¨odel, pp 508-524.
1929
*a. ¨Uber die Grundlagendiskussionen in der Mathematik.
Proceedings of the 7th Scand. Math. Congress, Oslo 1929, pp 3-21.
J 56, p 822 (Feigl).
*b. ¨Uber einige Grundlagenfragen der Mathematik.
V.A. Skr. I, No 4, pp 1-49.
J 55, p 31 (Fraenkl).
1930
*b. Einige Bemerkungen zu der Abhandlung von E. Zermelo: “¨Uber die Deﬁnitheit
in der Axiomatik”.
Fund. Math. T XV, pp 337-341.
J 56, p 46 (Scholz).

184
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
*c. ¨Uber einige Satzfunktionen in der Arithmetik.
V.A. Skr. I, No 7, pp 1-28.
J 57, p 1320 (Ackermann).
Z 2, p 3 (G¨odel).
1931
a.
Den matematiske logikk og matematikken.
(The mathematical logic and the arithmetic.)
C.M. Inst. I, 2, 20 pp.
J 57, p 1317 (Skolem).
*d. ¨Uber die symmetrisch allgemeinen L¨osungen im identischen Kalkul.
V.A. Skr. I, No6, pp 1-32.
J 58, p 65 (Ackerman).
Z 4, p 385 (G¨odel).
1933
*c. Ein kombinatorischer Satz mit Anwendung auf ein logisches Entscheidungsproblem.
Fund. Math. T XX, pp 254-261.
J 59, p 54 (Ackermann):
Z 7, p 97 (G¨odel).
*d. ¨Uber die Unm¨oglichkeit einer Charakterisierung der Zahlenreihe mittels eines
endlichen Axiomensystems.
N.M.F. Skr. Series 2, No 1-12, pp 73-82 and C.M. Inst. No 24.
J 59, p 53 (Ackermann).
Z 7, p 193 (G¨odel).
1934
*b. ¨Uber die Nichtcharakterisierbarkeit der Zahlenreihe mittels endlich oder abz¨ahlbar
unendlich vieler Aussagen mit ausschliesslich Zahlenvariabeln.
Fund. Math. T XXIII, pp 150-161.
J 60, p 25 (Ackermann).
R 1963, 12A70 (E. Orlovski˘ı).
Z 10, p 49 (G¨odel).
d.
Den matematiske grundlagsforskning.
(Foundational research in mathematics.)
N.M.T. 16, pp 75-92.
J 60, p 842 (Pietsch).

Thoralf Albert Skolem
185
1935
*a. Ein Satz ¨uber Z¨ahlausdr¨ucke.
Acta Szeged. T7, pp 193-199.
J 61, p 973 (Kalm´ar).
Z 12, p 385 (H.B. Curry).
*f. Ein Satz ¨uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit von einen Zahlausdr¨ucke der Form
(x)(Ey1, . . . , yn)K1(x, y1, . . . , yn) & (x1, x2, x3)K2(x1, x2, x3).
V.A. Skr. I, No 8, pp 1-10.
J 62, p 42 (Ackermann).
Z 13, p 243 (H.B. Curry).
*g. ¨Uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit gewisser Z¨ahlausdr¨ucke.
V.A. Skr. I, No 6, pp 1-14.
J 61, p 973 (Kalm´ar).
JSL 1, p 111 (C.H. Langford).
Z 13, p 97 (H.B. Curry).
1936
a.
Utvalgte kapitler av den matematiske logikk.
(Selected chapters of mathematical logic.)
C.M. Inst. VI, 6, 73 p.
J 62, p 1048 (Ackermann).
JSL 2, p 87 (Jørgen Jørgensen).
e.
Eine Bemerkung zum Entscheidungsproblem.
Proceedings of 8th International Math. Congress, Oslo 1936.
J 63, p 31.
JSL 3, p 57.
*f. Einige Reduktionen des Entscheidungsproblems.
V.A. Skr. I, No 6, pp 1-17.
J 62, p 1059 (Kalm´ar).
JSL 2, p 86 (C.H. Langford).
Z 15, p 338 (H.B. Curry).
*g. ¨Uber gewisse “Verb¨ande” oder “Lattices”.
V.A. Skr. I, No 7, pp 1-16.
J 62, p 1099 (Kalm´ar).
JSL 2, p 50 (Birkhoﬀ).
Z 15, p 243 (Birkhoﬀ).

186
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
1937
*a. ¨Uber die Zur¨uckf¨uhrbarkeit einiger durch Rekursionen deﬁnierter Relationen
auf “Arithmetische”.
Acta Szeged. T8, pp 73-88.
J 63, p 25 (Ackermann).
JSL 2, p 85 (Barkley Rosser).
Z 16, p 194 (H.B. Curry).
1938
c.
Diophantische Gleichungen.
Zentralblatt f¨ur Mathematik B5, 1938, 130 p.
and Chelsea Publishing Company, Bronx.
J 64, p 112 (Boehle).
Z 18, p 293 (Mahler).
1939
*b. Eine Bemerkung ¨uber die Induktionsschemata in der rekursiven Zahlentheorie.
Monatsheft f¨ur Math. und Physik, Leipzig und Wien, 48, pp 268-276.
J 65, p 31 (Ackermann).
Z 21, p 385 (Hermes).
MR 1, p 132 (Frink).
1940
*a. Einfacher Beweis der Unm¨oglichkeit eines allgemeinen L¨osungsverfahren
f¨ur Arithmetische Probleme.
K.N.V. Forh. XIII, pp 1-4.
J 66, p 32 (Ackermann).
JSL 9, p 21 (R´ozsa P´eter).
MR 2, p 210 (Frink).
1941
*a. Sur la Port´e du Th´eor`eme de L¨owenheim-Skolem.
Les Entretiens de Z¨urich, 6-9 Dec. 1938, Z¨urich 1941, pp 25-47, discussion pp 47-52.
MR 2, p 338 (Curry).
JSL 7, p 35 (Saunders MacLane).
1944
*a. Remarks on recursive functions and relations.
K.N.V. Forh. XVII, No 22, pp 89-92.
JSL 11, p 26 (Paul Bernays).
MR 8, p 4 (Curry).

Thoralf Albert Skolem
187
*b. Some remarks on recursive arithmetic.
K.N.V. Forh. XVII, No 26, pp 103-106.
JSL 11, p 26 (Paul Bernays).
MR 8, p 4 (Curry).
*c. A note on recursive arithmetic.
K.N.V. Forh. XVII, No 27, pp 107-109.
JSL 11, p 26 (Paul Bernays).
MR 8, p 4 (Curry).
*d. Some remarks on the comparison between recursive functions.
K.N.V. Forh. XVII, No 32, pp 126-129.
JSL 11, p 26 (Paul Bernays).
MR 8, p 4 (Curry).
1946
a.
Den rekursive aritmetikk.
(Recursive arithmetic.)
N.M.T. 28, pp 1-12.
JSL 13, p 169 (Oiva Kentonen).
MR 8, p 125 (Curry).
1947
*a. The development of recursive arithmetic.
Dixi`eme Congres des Math. Scand. Copenhagen 1946, pp 1-16, Copenhague 1947.
JSL 13, p 54 (David Nelson).
MR 8, p 558 (Curry).
Z 30, p101 (Ackermann).
1950
*a. A remark on the induction scheme.
K.N.V. Forh. XXIII, No 36, pp 167-170.
JSL 16, p 220 (Paul Bernays).
MR 11, p 635 (Curry).
Z 36, p 7 (Lorenzen).
c.
De logiske paradokser og botemidlene mot dem.
(The logical paradoxes and remedies against them.)
N.M.T. 32, pp 2-11.
JSL 16, p 62 (G.H. von Wright).
MR 11, p 708 (Curry).
Z 40, p 294 (G. Hasenjaeger).

188
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
*d. Some remarks on the foundation of set theory.
Proceedings of International Congress of Math., Masschussets 1950, pp 695-704.
JSL 18, p 77 (Abner Shimony).
MR 13, p 521 (R.M. Martin).
Z 49, p 165 (J.C. Shepherdson).
1951
*a. On the proof of independence of the axioms of the classical sentential calculus.
K.N.V. Forh. XXIV No 6, pp 20-25.
JSL 18, p 67 (Alonzo Church and Nicholas Rescher).
MR 14, p 526 (R.M. Martin).
Z 47, p 13 ( A. Rose).
1952
*b. A remark on a set theory based on positive logic.
K.N.V. Forh. XXV, No 22, pp 112-116.
JSL 21, p 97 (Frederic B. Fitch).
MR 14, p 937 (Novak G´al).
Z 50, p 246 (J.C. Shepherdson).
1953
*a. The logical background of arithmetic.
Bull. de la Soci´et´e Math. de Belgique 1953, pp 23-34.
JSL 23, p 228 (H.G. Rice).
MR 16, p 553 (G. Kreisel).
R 1956, 8528 (T.L. Ma˘ıstrova).
Z 57, p 6 (D. Tamari).
*b. Some considerations concerning recursive functions.
Math. Scand. 1, pp 213-221.
JSL 21, p 98 (Davis).
MR 15, p 667 (Frink).
R 1956, 964 (B.A. Trahtenbrot).
Z 52, p 248 (J.C. Shepherdson).
d.
Resultater i grundlagsforskningen.
(Results in foundational research.)
Proceedings of Math. Congress, Lund 1953, pp 273-289.
MR 16, p 553 (Curry).
R 1958, 3512 (A.S. Esenin-Vol’pin).
Z 56, p 254 (H. Gericke).

Thoralf Albert Skolem
189
1954
*a. Some considerations concerning recursive arithmetic.
Bull. de la Soci´et´e Math. de Belgique 1954, pp 35-46.
JSL 23, p 228 (H.G. Rice).
MR 16, p 553 (Kreisel).
Z 56, p 248 (J.C. Shepherdson).
*b. Remarks on “Elementary” arithmetic functions.
K.N.V. Forh. XXVII, No 6, 6 p.
MR 16, 324 (Novak-G´al).
R 1956, 963 (B.A. Trahtenbrot).
Z 58, p 5 (H. Ostmann).
e.
A critical remark on foundational research.
Proceedings of International Congress of Math., Amsterdam 1954,
Short lectures, pp 408-409.
R 1955, 5572 (T.L. Ma˘ıstrova).
1955
*c. A critical remark on foundational research.
K.N.V. Forh. XXVIII, No 20, pp 100-105.
MR 17, p 817 (P.C. Gilmore).
R 1958, 945 (V.A. Uspenski˘ı).
Z 66, p 248 (H. Scholz).
*d. Peano’s axioms and models of arithmetic.
Studies in logic and the foundation of Math., Amsterdam 1955, pp 1-14.
JSL 22, p 306 (S. Feferman).
MR 17, p 699 (E. Mendelson).
R 1958, 59 (V. Detlovs).
e.
The logical nature of arithmetic.
Synthese 9, pp 375-384.
JSL 23, p 237 (A. Church).
MR 18, p 269 (H.B. Curry).
R 1956, 1927 (B.A. Trahtenbrot).
1956
*a. A version of the proof of equivalence between complete induction and
the uniqueness of primitive recursions.
K.N.V. Forh. XXIX, No 3, pp 10-15.
JSL 24, p 69 (R. P´eter).
MR 18, p 2 (G. Kreisel).
R 1967, 52 (`E.S. Orlovski˘ı).
Z 72, p 6 (J.C. Shepherdson).

190
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
c. An ordered set of arithmetic functions representing the least ε-number.
K.N.V. Forh. XXIX, No 12, pp 54-59.
MR 18, p 785 (S. Ginsburg)
R 1959, 6536 (A. S. Esenin-Vol’pin).
1957
*b. Two remarks on set theory.
Math. Scand. 5, pp 40-46.
MR 19, p 933 (E.J. Cogan).
R 1959, 1371 (A.S. Esenin-Vol’pin).
Z 79, p 76 (J.C. Shepherdson).
d.
Mengenlehre gegr¨undet auf einer Logik mit
unendlich vielen Wahrscheinlichkeitswerten.
S-Ber. Berliner Math. Ges. 1957/58, pp 41-56.
MR 27, 3511 (J.R. Schoenﬁeld).
R 1961, 1A84 (Medvedev).
Z 116, p 9 (A. Oberschelp).
*e. Bemerkungen zum Komprehensionsaxiom.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Math. Logik und Grundlagen der Math. 3, pp 1-17.
JSL 32, p 128 (A. L´evy).
MR 20, 3067 (H.B. Curry).
R 1959, 6545 (A.S. Esenin-Vol’pin).
Z 95, p 9 (W. Ackermann).
f.
Forelesninger i mengdelære.
(Lectures on set theory.)
Universitetets mat. inst. Oslo 1957, 57 p (mimeographed).
1958
*a. Une relativisation des notions math´ematiques fondamentales.
Colloques internationaux des Centre National de la
Recherche Scientiﬁque, Paris 1958, pp 13-18.
MR 21, 4895 (E.W. Beth).
Z 87, p 8 (E. Specker).
*b. Remarks on the connection between intuionistic logic and a certain class of lattices.
Math. Scand. 6, pp 231- 236.
MR 21, 5574 (D. Scott).
R 1961, 2A56 (F.A. Kabakov).
Z 92, p 5 (B. van Rootselaar).

Thoralf Albert Skolem
191
*d. Reduction of axiom systems with axiom schemes to systems with only simple axioms.
Dialectica 12, pp 443-450.
JSL 27, p 230 (G. Hasenjaeger).
MR 21, 3325 (R.M. Martin).
R 1959, 9696 (S.I. Adjan).
Z 93, p 12 (G. Takeuti).
1960
*b. A set theory based on a certain 3-valued logic.
Math. Scand. 8, pp 127-136.
MR 23, A 3669 (A. Rose).
R 1961, 11A84 (F.A. Talaljan).
Z 96, p 243 (W. Ackermann).
*c. Investigations on a comprehension axiom without negation in
the deﬁning propositional functions.
Notre Dame Journal of formal logic 1, pp 13-22.
MR 26, 4890 (K. Sch¨utte).
Z 116, p 10 (S. Maehara).
1961
*a. Interpretation of mathematical theories in the ﬁrst order predicate calculus.
Festschrift vor A. Fraenkel 1961, pp 218-225.
MR 29, 4671 (H. Ribeiro).
1962
*a. Recursive enumeration of some classes of primitive recursive functions and a
majorisation theorem.
K.N.V. Forh. XXV, No 26, pp 142-148.
MR 27, 3512 (P. Axt).
R 1964, 1A111 (V. ˘Surygin).
Z 106, p 239 (E. Burger).
*b. Proof of some theorems on recursively enumerable sets.
Notre Dame Journal of formal logic 3, pp 65-74.
MR 27, 3513a (P. Axt).
Z 113, p 6 (T. Hailperin).
c.
Abstract set theory.
Notre Dame Math. Lectures No 8, v+70 p.
MR 28, 20 (P. Lorenzen).

192
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
1963
*b. Addendum to “Proof of some theorems on recursively enumerable sets”.
Notre Dame Journal of formal logic 4, pp 44-47.
MR 27, 3513b (P. Axt).
R 1965, 11A81 (G. Minc).
*c. Studies on the axiom of comprehension.
Notre Dame Journal of formal logic 4, pp 162-170.
MR 29, 5716 (E. Mendelson).
Z 133, p 258 (Fenstad).
1970
Selected Works in Logic
Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, 732 p.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Badesa, 2004] C. Badesa. , The Birth of Model Theory, Princeton University Press, 2004.
[Bays, to appear] T. Bays. The mathematics of Skolem’s paradox, in Handbook of the Philoso-
phy of Science, vol. 5, pp 485-518, to appear.
[Bell and Slomson, 1969] J. L. Bell and A. B. Slomson. Models and Ultraproducts, North Hol-
land Publ. Comp., Amsterdam, 1969.
[Birkhoﬀ, 1937] G. Birkhoﬀ. Review of [Skolem, 1936g[, Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 2, pp
50-51, 1937.
[Boos, 1995] W. Boos. Thoralf Skolem, Hermann Weyl and ”Das Gef¨uhl der Welt als begrenztes
Ganzes”, in J. Hintikka, ed, From Dedekind to G¨odel, Kl¨uwer Academic Press, Dordrecht, pp
283-329, 1995.
[Brady, 2000] G. Brady. From Peirce to Skolem: A Neglected Chapter in the History of Logic,
Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2000.
[Burris, 1995] S. Burris. Polynomial Time Uniform Word Problems, Mathematical Logic Quar-
terly, vol. 41, pp 173-182, 1995.
[B¨orger et al., 1997] E. B¨orger, E. Gr¨adel and Y. Gurevich. The Classical Decision Problem,
Springer, Heidelberg, 1997.
[Church, 1936] A. Church. A note on the Entscheidungsproblem, Journal of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 1, pp 40-41 and 101-102, 1936.
[Church, 1956] A. Church. Introduction to Mathematical Logic, Princeton University Press,
1956.
[Davis, 1958] M. Davis. Computability and Unsolvability, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1958..
[Dreben and van Heijenoort, 1986] B. Dreben and J. van Heijenoort. Introductory note to G¨odel
1929, 1930 and 1930a, in G¨odel vol. I, pp 44-59, 1986.
[Ebbinghaus, 2007] H. D. Ebbinghaus, in cooperation with V. Peckhaus. Zermelo. An Approach
to his Life and Work. Springer, Berlin, 2007.
[Eklund, 1996] M. Eklund. On How Logic Became First-Order, Nordic Journal of Philosophical
logic, vol. 1, pp 147-167, 1996.
[Feferman, 1998] S. Feferman. In the Light of Logic, Oxford University Press, 1998.
[George, 1985] A. George. Skolem and the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem: A Case Study of the
Philosophical Signiﬁcance of Mathematical Results, History and Philosophy of Logic, vol. 6,
pp 75-89, 1985.
[Goldfarb, 1971] W. Goldfarb. Review of [Skolem, 1970], The Journal of Philosophy, vol. 68, pp
520-530, 1971.

Thoralf Albert Skolem
193
[Goldfarb, 1979] W. Goldfarb. Logic in the Twenties: the Nature of the Quantiﬁer, Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 44, pp 351-368, 1979.
[G¨odel, 1931] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I, Monatsheft f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, vol. 38, pp 173-198, 1931.
[G¨odel, 1986] K. G¨odel. Collected Works, vol. I, S. Feferman et al, eds., Oxford University Press,
1986.
[Goodstein, 1957] R. L. Goodstein. Recursive Number Theory, North Holland Publ. Comp.,
Amsterdam, 1957.
[Goodstein, 1961] R. L. Goodstein. Recursive Analysis, North Holland Publ. Comp., Amster-
dam, 1961.
[H´ajek and Pudlak, 1993] P. H´ajek and P. Pudlak. Meta-Mathematics of First-Order Arith-
metic, Springer, Heidelberg, 1993.
[Herbrand, 1971] J. Herbrand. Logical Writings, ed. W. Goldfarb, D.Reidel Publ. Comp., Dor-
drecht, 1971.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der theoretischen
Logik, Springer, Heidelberg, 1928.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1934/1939] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik,
Springer, Heidelberg, 1934/1939.
[Houser et al., 1997] N. Houser, D. D. Roberts and J. van Evra, eds. Studies in the Logic of
Charles Sanders Peirce, Indiana University Press, 1997.
[Jan´e, 2001] I. Jan´e. Reﬂections on Skolem’s Relativity of Set-Theoretical Concepts, Philosoph-
ica Mathematica, vol. 9, pp 129-153, 2001.
[Jervell, 1996] H. R. Jervell. Thoralf Skolem: Pioneer of Computational Logic, Nordic Journal
of Philosophical Logic, vol. 1, pp 107-117, 1996.
[Kanamori, 1996] A. Kanamori. The Mathematical Development of Set Theory from Cantor to
Cohen, Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 2, pp 1-71, 1996
[Kanamori, 1997] A. Kanamori. The Higher Inﬁnite, Springer, Heidelberg, 1997..
[Kanamori, 2004] A. Kanamori. Zermelo and Set Theory, Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 10,
pp 487-553, 2004.
[L¨owenheim, 1915] L. L¨owenheim. ¨Uber M¨oglichkeiten im Relativkalk¨ul, Math. Annalen, vol.
76, pp 447-470, 1915.
[L¨owenheim, 1940] L. L¨owenheim. Einkleidung der Mathematik in Schr¨oderschen Relativkalk¨ul,
Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 5, pp 1-15, 1940.
[Mancosu et al., 2005] P. Mancosu, R. Zach and C. Badesa. , The Development of Mathematical
Logic from Russell to Tarski: 1900-1935, in L. Haaparanta, ed, The Development of Modern
Logic, Oxford University Press, 2005.
[Mints, 1996] G. Mints. Thoralf Skolem and the Epsilon Substitution Method for Predicate
Logic, Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic, vol. 1, pp 133-146, 1996.
[Muller, 2004] F. Muller. Deﬂating Skolem, Synthese, vol 137, 2004.
[Post, 1947] E. Post. , Recursive unsolvability of a problem of Thue, Journal of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 12, pp 1-11, 1947.
[Robinson, 1966] A. Robinson. Non-Standard Analysis, North Holland Publ. Comp., Amster-
dam, 1966.
[Scott, 1960] D. Scott. On constructing models for arithmetic, in Inﬁnistic Methods, Warsaw
1959, Pergamon Press, Oxford, pp 235-255, 1960.
[Thue, 1914] A. Thue. Probleme ¨uber Ver¨anderungen von Zeichenreihen nach gegebenen Regeln,
Vit.Ak. Skrifter 1914, Oslo, 1914.
[van den Dries and Levitz, 1984] L. van den Dries and H. Levitz. Trans. AMS, vol. 286, pp
339-349, 1984.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, ed. From Frege to G¨odel. A Source Book in Mathe-
matical Logic, 1879-1931, Harvard University Press, 1967.
[Vaught, 1974] R. Vaught. Model theory before 1945, in L. Henkin et al, eds, Proceedings of the
Tarski Symposium, American Math. Society, Providence, pp 153-172, 1974.
[von Plato, 2003] J. von Plato. Skolem’s Discovery of G¨odel-Dummett Logic, Studia Logica, vol.
73, pp 153-157, 2003.
[von Plato, 2004] J. von Plato. Review of Kurt G¨odel Collected Works, vol. IV-V, Bulletin of
Symbolic Logic, pp 558-563, 2004.

194
Jens Erik Fenstad and Hao Wang
[von Plato, 2007] J. von Plato. In the shadow of the L¨owenheim–Skolem theorem: Early com-
binatorial analyses of the mathematical proofs, Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 13, pp. 189-225,
2007.
[Wang, 1996] H. Wang. Skolem and G¨odel, Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic, vol. 1, pp
119-132, 1996.
[Weyl, 1910] H. Weyl. ¨Uber die Deﬁnitionen der mathematische Grundbegriﬀe, Mathematisch-
naturwissenschaftliche Bl¨atter, vol. 7, pp 93-95 and 109-113, 1910.
[Weyl, 1918] H. Weyl. Das Kontinuum, Veit, Leipzig, 1918.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910–1913] A. N. Whitehead. and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica,
Cambridge University Press, 1910-1913.
[Zermelo, 1929] E. Zermelo. ¨Uber den Begriﬀder Deﬁnitheit in der Axiomatik, Fund. Math.,
vol. 14, pp 339-344, 1929.
[Zermelo, 1930] E. Zermelo. ¨Uber Grenzzahlen und Mengenbereiche, Fund. Math., vol. 16, pp
29-47, 1930.

JACQUES HERBRAND: LIFE, LOGIC, AND
AUTOMATED DEDUCTION∗
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller,
Serge Autexier
1
PREFACE
The lives of mathematical prodigies who passed away very early after ground-
breaking work invoke a fascination for later generations: The early death of Niels
Henrik Abel (1802–1829) from ill health after a sled trip to visit his ﬁanc´e for
Christmas; the obscure circumstances of Evariste Galois’ (1811–1832) duel; the
deaths of consumption of Gotthold Eisenstein (1823–1852) (who sometimes lec-
tured his few students from his bedside) and of Gustav Roch (1839–1866) in Venice;
the drowning of the topologist Pavel Samuilovich Urysohn (1898–1924) on vaca-
tion; the burial of Raymond Paley (1907–1933) in an avalanche at Deception Pass
in the Rocky Mountains; as well as the fatal imprisonment of Gerhard Gentzen
(1909–1945) in Prague1 — these are tales most scholars of logic and mathematics
have heard in their student days.
Jacques Herbrand, a young prodigy admitted to the ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure
as the best student of the year 1925, when he was 17, died only six years later in a
mountaineering accident in La B´erarde (Is`ere) in France. He left a legacy in logic
and mathematics that is outstanding.
Inevitably, when all introductory words are said in the annual postgraduate
course on logic and automated deduction, the professor will feel the urge to point
out to the young students that there are things beyond the latest developments of
computer technology or the fabric of the Internet: eternal truths valid on planet
Earth but in all those far away galaxies just as well.
And as there are still ten minutes to go till the end of the lecture, the students
listen in surprise to the strange tale about the unknown ﬂying objects from the
far away, now visiting planet Earth and being welcomed by a party of human
dignitaries from all strata of society. Not knowing what to make of all this, the
little green visitors will ponder the state of evolution on this strange but beautiful
planet: obviously life is there — but can it think?
∗Second Readers: Irving H. Anellis, Paolo Bussotti, Lawrence C. Paulson.
1Cf. [Vihan, 1995].
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

196
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
The Earthlings seem to have ﬂying machines, they are all connected planet-wide
by communicators — but can they really think? Their gadgets and little pieces of
machinery appear impressive — but is there a true civilization on planet Earth?
How dangerous are they, these Earthlings made of a strange protoplasmic variant
of matter?
And then cautiously looking through the electronic windows of their ﬂying un-
known objects, they notice that strange little bearded Earthling, being pushed
into the back by the more powerful dignitaries, who holds up a sign post with
|=
≡
⊢
written on it.
Blank faces, not knowing what to make of all this, the oldest
and wisest scientist is slowly moved out through the e-door of the ﬂying object,
slowly being put down to the ground, and now the bearded Earthling is asked to
come forward and the two begin that cosmic debate about syntax and semantics,
proof theory and model theory, while the dignitaries stay stunned and silent. And
soon there is a sudden ﬂash of recognition and a warm smile on that green and
wrinkled old face, who has seen it all and now waves back to his fellow travelers
who remained safely within the ﬂying object: “Yes, they have minds — yes oh yes!”
And this is why the name “Jacques Herbrand” is ﬁnally written among others
with a piece of chalk onto the blackboard — and now that the introductory lecture
is coming to a close, the professor promises to tell next week, what this name stands
for and what that young scientist found out when he was only 21 years old.
And when the professor had grown old and frail, having told that tale more
often than he cared to remember, the students presented him with a framed little
birthday drawing that looked almost like this:

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
197
2
LIFE
This brief resum´e of Jacques Herbrand’s life focuses on his entourage and the
people he met.2 He was born on Feb. 12, 1908, in Paris, France, where his father,
Jacques Herbrand Sr., worked as a trader in antique paintings.3 He remained the
only child of his parents, who were of Belgian origin. He died — 23 years old —
in a mountaineering accident on July 27, 1931, in La B´erarde, Is`ere, France.
In 1925, only 17 years old, he was ranked ﬁrst at the entrance examination to
the prestigious ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure (ENS)4 in Paris — but he showed little
interest for the standard courses at the Sorbonne, which he considered a waste
of time.3 However, he closely followed the famous “S´eminaire Hadamard” at the
Coll`ege de France, organized by Jacques Salomon Hadamard (1865–1963), from
1913 until 1933.5
That seminar attracted many students. At Herbrand’s time,
among these students, prominent in their later lives, were:
name
lifetime
year of entering the ENS
Andr´e Weil
(1906–1998)
1922
Jean Dieudonn´e
(1906–1992)
1924
Jacques Herbrand
(1908–1931)
1925
Albert Lautman
(1908–1944)
1926
Claude Chevalley
(1909–1984)
1926
Weil, Dieudonn´e, and Chevalley would later be known among the founders of the
renowned Bourbaki group: the French mathematicians who published the book
series on the formalization of mathematics.
Weil, Lautman, and Chevalley were Herbrand’s friends. Chevalley and Her-
brand became particularly close friends6 and they worked together on algebra.7
Chevalley depicts Herbrand as an adventurous, passionate, and often perfection-
istic personality who was not only interested in mathematics, but also in poetry
and sports.3 In particular, he seemed to have liked extreme sportive challenges:
mountaineering, hiking, and long distance swimming. His interest in philosophical
issues and foundational problems of science was developed well beyond his age.
At that time, the ENS did not award a diploma, but the students had to prepare
the agr´egation, an examination necessary to be promoted to professeur agr´eg´e,8
even though most students engaged into research. Herbrand passed the agr´egation
2More complete accounts of Herbrand’s life and personality can be found in [Chevalley, 1935;
1982], [Chevalley and Lautman, 1931], [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. V, pp. 3–25].
All in all, very little is
known about his personality and life.
3Cf. [Chevalley, 1982].
4Cf. http://www.ens.fr for the ENS in general and http://www.archicubes.ens.fr for the
former students of the ENS.
5Cf. [Cartwright, 1965, p. 82], [Dieudonn´e, 1999, p. 107].
6Catherine Chevalley, the daughter of Claude Chevalley has written to Peter Roquette on
Herbrand: “he was maybe my father’s dearest friend” [Roquette, 2000, p. 36, Note 44].
7Cf. [Herbrand and Chevalley, 1931].
8This corresponds to a high-school teacher.
The original rˆole of the ENS was to educate
students to become high-school teachers.
Also Jean-Paul Sartre started his career like this.

198
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
in 1928, again ranked ﬁrst, and he prepared his doctoral thesis under the direction
of Ernest Vessiot (1865–1952), who was the director of the ENS since 1927.9
He submitted his thesis [Herbrand, 1930], entitled Recherches sur la th´eorie de
la d´emonstration, on April 14, 1929. It was approved for publication on June 20,
1929. In October that year he had to join the army for his military service which
lasted for one year in those days. He ﬁnally defended his thesis on June 11, 1930.10
After completing his military service in September 1930, awarded with a Rocke-
feller Scholarship, he spent the academic year 1930–1931 in Germany and intended
to stay in Princeton11 for the year after. He visited the following mathematicians:
hosting scientist
lifetime
place
time of Herbrand’s stay
John von Neumann
Emil Artin
Emmy Noether12
(1903–1957)
(1898–1962)
(1882–1935)
Berlin
Hamburg
G¨ottingen
{
{
{
middle of Oct. 1930
middle of May 1931
middle of June 1931
middle of July 193113
Herbrand discussed his ideas with Paul Bernays (1888–1977) in Berlin, and he
met Paul Bernays, David Hilbert (1862–1943), and Richard Courant (1988–1972)
later in G¨ottingen.14 On April 7, 1931, Herbrand wrote a letter to Kurt G¨odel
(1906–1978), who answered with some delay on July 25, most probably too late
for the letter to reach Herbrand before his early death two days later.15
In other words, although Jacques Herbrand was still a relatively unknown young
scientist, he was well connected to the best mathematicians and logicians of his
time, particularly to those interested in the foundations of mathematics.
Herbrand met Helmut Hasse (1898–1979) at the Schiefk¨orper-Kongress (Feb. 26
– March 1, 1931) in Marburg and later wrote several letters including plenty of
mathematical ideas to Hasse.16
After exchanging several compassionate letters
with Herbrand’s father,17 Hasse wrote Herbrand’s obituary which is printed as the
foreword to Herbrand’s article on the consistency of arithmetic [Herbrand, 1932a].
9It is interesting to note that Ernest Vessiot and Jacques Salomon Hadamard where the two
top-ranked students at the examination for the ENS in 1884.
10One reason for the late defense is that because of the minor rˆole mathematical logic played
at that time in France, Herbrand’s supervisor Ernest Vessiot had problems ﬁnding examiners
for the thesis. The ﬁnal committee consisted of Ernest Vessiot, Arnaud Denjoy (1884–1974) and
Maurice Ren´e Fr´echet (1878–1973).
11Cf. [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. V, p. 3f.].
Cf. [Roquette, 2008] for the letters between Hasse, Her-
brand, and Joseph H. M. Wedderburn (1882–1948) (Princeton) on Herbrand’s visit to Princeton.
12Herbrand had met Noether already very early in 1931 in Halle an der Saale.
Cf. [Lemmer-
meyer and Roquette, 2006, p.106, Note 10].
13According to [Dubreil, 1983, p.73], Herbrand stayed in G¨ottingen until the beginning of
July 1931. In his report to the Rockefeller Foundation Herbrand wrote that his stay in Germany
lasted from Oct. 20, 1930, until the end of July 1931, which is unlikely because he died on July 27,
1931, in France.
14That Herbrand met Bernays, Hilbert, and Courant in G¨ottingen is most likely, but we cannot
document it. Hilbert was still lecturing regularly in 1931, cf. [Reid, 1970, p.199]. Courant wrote
a letter to Herbrand’s father, cf. [Herbrand, 1971, p. 25, Note 1].
15Cf. [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. V, pp. 3–25].
16Cf. [Roquette, 2007; 2008].
17Cf. [Hasse and Herbrand Sr., 1931].

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
199
3
LOGIC
3.1
Finitistic Classical First-Order Proof Theory
Herbrand’s work on logic falls into the area of what is called proof theory today.
More speciﬁcally, he is concerned with the ﬁnitistic analysis of two-valued (i.e.
classical), ﬁrst-order logic and its relationship to sentential, i.e. propositional logic.
Over the millenia, logic developed as proof theory.
The key observation of
the ancient Greek schools, ﬁrst formulated by Aristotle of Stagira (384–322 B.C.),
is that certain patterns of reasoning are valid irrespective of their actual deno-
tation.
From “all men are mortal” and “Socrates is a man” we can conclude
that “Socrates is mortal”, irrespectively of Socrates’ most interesting personality
and the contentious meaning of “being mortal” in this and other possible worlds.
The discovery of those patterns of reasoning, called syllogisms, where meaningless
symbols are used instead of everyday words, was the starting point of the known
history of mathematical logic in the ancient world.
For over two millenia, the
development of these rules for drawing conclusions from given assumptions just
on the basis of their syntactical form was the main subject of logic.
Model theory — on the other hand — the study of formal languages and their
interpretation, became a respectable way of logical reasoning through the sem-
inal works of Leopold L¨owenheim (1878–1957) and Alfred Tarski (1901–1983).
Accepting the actual inﬁnite, model theory considers the set-theoretic semantical
structures of a given language. With Tarski’s work, the relationship between these
two areas of logic assumed overwhelming importance — as captured in our little
anecdote in the preface where ‘|=’ signiﬁes model-theoretic validity and ‘⊢’ denotes
proof-theoretic derivability.18
Herbrand’s scientiﬁc work coincided with the maturation of modern logic, as
marked inter alia by G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems of 1930–1931.19
It was
strongly inﬂuenced by the foundational crisis in mathematics as well.
Russell’s
Paradox was not only a personal calamity to Gottlob Frege (1848–1925),20 but it
jeopardized the whole enterprise of set theory and thus the foundation of modern
mathematics.
From an epistemological point of view, maybe there was less rea-
son for getting scared as it appeared at the time:
As Wittgenstein (1889–1951)
reasoned later,21 the detection of inconsistencies is an inevitable element of human
learning, and many logicians today would be happy to live at such an interesting
time of foundational crisis.
18As we will discuss in § 3.12, Jacques Herbrand still had problems in telling ‘⊢’ and ‘|=’ apart:
For instance, he blamed L¨owenheim for not showing consistency of ﬁrst-order logic, which is a
property related to Herbrand’s ‘⊢’,
but not to L¨owenheim’s ‘|=’.
19Cf. [G¨odel, 1931], [Rosser, 1936].
For an interesting discussion of the reception of the
incompleteness theorems cf. [Dawson Jr., 1991].
20Cf. [Frege, 1893/1903, Vol. II].
21Cf. [Wittgenstein, 1939].

200
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
The development of mathematics, however, more often than not attracts the
intelligent young men looking for clarity and reliability in a puzzling world, threat-
ened by social complexity. As David Hilbert put it:
“Und wo sonst soll Sicherheit und Wahrheit zu ﬁnden sein, wenn sogar
das mathematische Denken versagt?”22
“Es bildet ja gerade einen Hauptreiz bei der Besch¨aftigung mit einem
mathematischen Problem, dass wir in uns den steten Zuruf h¨oren: da
ist ein Problem, suche die L¨osung; du kannst sie durch reines Denken
ﬁnden; denn in der Mathematik gibt es kein Ignorabimus.”23
Furthermore, Hilbert did not want to surrender to the new “intuitionistic” move-
ments of Luitzen Brouwer (1881–1966) and Hermann Weyl (1885–1955), who sug-
gested a restructuring of mathematics with emphasis on the problems of existence
and consistency rather than elegance, giving up many previous achievements, es-
pecially in analysis and in the set theory of Georg Cantor (1845–1918):24
“Aus dem Paradies, das uns Cantor geschaﬀen, soll uns niemand ver-
treiben.”25
Building on the works of Richard Dedekind (1831–1916), Charles S. Peirce (1839–
1914), Ernst Schr¨oder (1841–1902), Gottlob Frege (1848–1925), and Guiseppe
Peano (1858–1932),
the celebrated three volumes of Principia Mathematica
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910–1913]
of Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947)
and Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) had provided evidence that — in principle —
mathematical proofs could be reduced to logic, using only a few rules of inference
and appropriate axioms.
The goals of Hilbert’s programme on the foundation of mathematics, however,
extended well beyond this: His contention was that the reduction of mathematics
to formal theories of logical calculi would be insuﬃcient to resolve the foundational
crisis of mathematics, neither would it protect against Russell’s Paradox and other
inconsistencies in the future — unless the consistency of these theories could be
shown formally by “simple means”.
22Cf. [Hilbert, 1926, p.170].
“And where else are security and truth to be found, if even mathematical thinking fails?”
23Cf. [Hilbert, 1926, p.180, modernized orthography].
“After all, one of the things that attract us most when we apply ourselves to a mathematical
problem is precisely that within us we always hear the call: here is a problem, search for the
solution; you can ﬁnd it by pure thought, for in mathematics there is no ignorabimus.”
[Heijenoort, 1971a, p. 384, translation by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg]
24Cf. [Brouwer, 1925a; 1925b; 1926], [Weyl, 1921; 1928], [Cantor, 1932].
25Cf. [Hilbert, 1926, p.170].
“No one shall drive us from the paradise Cantor has created.”

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
201
Hilbert’s view on mathematics in the 1920s was inﬂuenced by Kant’s Critique
of pure reason.26 Mathematics as directly and intuitionally perceived by a mathe-
matician is called contentual (inhaltlich) by Hilbert. According to [Hilbert, 1926],
the notions and methods of contentual mathematics are partly abstracted from
ﬁnite symbolic structures (such as explicitly and concretely given natural num-
bers, proofs, and algorithms) where we can eﬀectively decide (in ﬁnitely many
eﬀective steps) whether a given object has a certain property or not.
Beyond
these aposterioristic abstractions from phenomena, contentual mathematics also
has a synthetic27 aprioristic28 aspect, which depends neither on experience nor on
deduction, and which cannot be reduced to logic. Or, as Hilbert put it:
“Schon Kant hat gelehrt – und zwar bildet dies einen integrieren-
den Bestandteil seiner Lehre –, dass die Mathematik ¨uber einen un-
abh¨angig von aller Logik gesicherten Inhalt verf¨ugt und daher nie und
nimmer allein durch Logik begr¨undet werden kann, weshalb auch die
Bestrebungen von Frege und Dedekind scheitern mussten.
Vielmehr
ist als Vorbedingung f¨ur die Anwendung logischer Schl¨usse und f¨ur
die Bet¨atigung logischer Operationen schon etwas in der Vorstellung
gegeben: gewisse, außer-logische konkrete Objekte, die anschaulich als
unmittelbares Erlebnis vor allem Denken da sind.”29
26The Critique of pure reason [Kant, 1787] elaborates how little we can know about things
independent of an observer (things in themselves, Dinge an sich selbst) in comparison to our con-
ceptions, i.e. the representations of the things within our thinking (Erscheinungen, Vorstellungen,
Anschauungen). In what he compared to the Kopernikan revolution [Kant, 1787, p. XVI], Kant
considered the conceptions gained in connection with sensual experience to be real and partly
objectiﬁable, and accepted the things in themselves only as limits of our thinking, about which
nothing can be known for certain.
27“synthetic” is the opposite of “analytic” and means that a statement provides new informa-
tion that cannot be deduced from a given knowledge base.
Contrary to Kant’s opinion that
all mathematical theorems are synthetic [Kant, 1787, p.14], (contentual) mathematics also has
analytic sentences. In particular, Kant’s example 7 + 5 = 12 becomes analytic when we read it
as s7(0) + s5(0) = s12(0) and assume the non-necessary, synthetic, aprioristic axioms x + 0 = x
and x + s(y) = s(x + y).
Cf. [Frege, 1884, § 89].
28“a priori” is the opposite of “a posteriori” and means that a statement does not depend on
any form of experience. For instance, all necessary [Kant, 1787, p. 3] and all analytic [Kant, 1787,
p.11] statements are a priori. Finally, Kant additionally assumes that all aprioristic statements
are necessary [Kant, 1787, p. 219], which seems to be wrong, cf. Note 27.
29Cf. [Hilbert, 1926, p.170f., modernized orthography].
“Kant already taught—and indeed it is part and parcel of his doctrine—that mathematics has
at its disposal a content secured independently of all logic and hence can never be provided
with a foundation by means of logic alone; that is why the eﬀorts of Frege and Dedekind were
bound to fail.
Rather, as a condition for the use of logical inferences and the performance
of logical operations, something must already be given to our faculty of representation, certain
extra-logical concrete objects that are intuitively present as immediate conceptions prior to all
thought.”
[Heijenoort, 1971a, p. 376, translation by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg, modiﬁed30]
30We have replaced “extralogical” with “extra-logical”, and — more importantly — “experi-
ence” with “conception”, for the following reason: Contrary to “Erfahrung” (experience), the
German word “Erlebnis” does not suggest an aposterioristic intention, which would contradict
the obviously aprioristic intention of Hilbert’s sentence.

202
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
Kant and Hilbert follow Plato in using the word “ideal” to refer to those things
in themselves (Dinge an sich selbst) which are not material, but intellectual con-
cepts. Ideal objects and methods in mathematics (as opposed to contentual ones)
may involve the actual inﬁnite, such as quantiﬁcation, ε-binding, set theory, and
non-terminating computations.
According to both [Kant, 1787] and [Hilbert,
1926], the only possible criteria for the acceptance of ideal notions are consistency
and usefulness.
Contrary to Kant,31 however, Hilbert is willing to accept useful
ideal theories, provided that their consistency can be shown with contentual and
intuitively clear methods — i.e. “simple means”.
These “simple means” that may be admitted here must be, on the one hand,
suﬃciently expressive and powerful to show the consistency of arithmetic, but, on
the other hand, simple, i.e. intuitively clear and contentually reliable. The notion
of Hilbert’s ﬁnitism was born out of the conﬂict of these two goals.
Moreover, Hilbert expresses the hope that the new proof theory, primarily devel-
oped to show the consistency of ideal mathematics with contentual means, would
also admit (possibly ideal, i.e. non-ﬁnitistic) proofs of completeness32 for certain
mathematical theories.
If this goal of Hilbert’s programme had been achieved,
then ideal proofs would have been justiﬁed as convenient short-cuts for construc-
tive, contentual, and intuitively clear proofs, so that — even under the threat of
Russell’s Paradox and others — there would be no reason to give up the paradise
of axiomatic mathematics and abstract set theory.
And these basic convictions of the Hilbert school constituted the most important
inﬂuence on the young student of mathematics Jacques Herbrand.
As G¨odel showed with his famous incompleteness theorems in 1930–1931,19
however, the consistency of any (reasonably conceivable) recursively enumerable
mathematical theory that includes arithmetic excludes both its completeness and
the existence of a ﬁnitistic consistency proof.
Nevertheless, the contributions of Wilhelm Ackermann (1896–1962), Bernays,
Herbrand, and Gentzen within Hilbert’s programme gave proof theory a new mean-
ing as a ﬁeld in which proofs are the objects and their properties and constructive
transformations are the ﬁeld of mathematical study, just as in arithmetic the num-
bers are the objects and their properties and algorithms are the ﬁeld of study.
31Kant considers ideal notions to be problematic, because they transcend what he considers
to be the area of objective reality; cf. Note 26. For notions that are consistent, useful, and ideal,
Kant actually introduces the technical term problematic (problematisch):
“Ich nenne einen Begriﬀproblematisch, der keinen Widerspruch enth¨alt, der auch
als eine Begrenzung gegebener Begriﬀe mit anderen Erkenntnissen zusammenh¨angt,
dessen objektive Realit¨at aber auf keine Weise erkannt werden kann.”
[Kant, 1787, p. 310, modernized orthography]
32A theory is complete if for any formula A without free variables (i.e. any closed formula in
the given language) which is not part of this theory, its negation ¬A is part of this theory.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
203
3.2
Herbrand’s Contributions and his Notion of Intuitionism
The essential works of Herbrand on logic are his Ph.D. thesis [Herbrand, 1930] and
the subsequent journal article [Herbrand, 1932a], both to be found in [Herbrand,
1971].33
The main contribution is captured in what is called today Herbrand’s Funda-
mental Theorem.
Sometimes it is simply called “Herbrand’s Theorem”, but the
longer name is preferable as there are other important “Herbrand theorems”, such
as the Herbrand–Ribet Theorem. Moreover, Herbrand himself calls it “Th´eor`eme
fondamental”.
The subject of Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem is the eﬀective reduction of
(the semi-decision problem of) provability in ﬁrst-order logic to provability in
sentential logic.
Here we use the distinction well-known to Herbrand and his contemporaries
between ﬁrst-order logic (where quantiﬁers bind variables ranging over objects of
the universe, i.e. of the domain of reasoning or discourse) and sentential logic
without any quantiﬁers.
Validity of a formula in sentential logic is eﬀectively
decidable, for instance with the truth-table method.
Although Herbrand spends Chapter 1 of his thesis on the subject, he actually
“shows no interest for the sentential work” [Heijenoort, 1986c, p.120], and takes it
for granted.
A. Contrary to Gentzen’s Hauptsatz [Gentzen, 1935], Herbrand’s Fundamental
Theorem starts right with a single sentential tautology (cf. § 3.7). He treats
this property as given and does not ﬁx a concrete method for establishing it.
B. The way Herbrand presents his sentential logic in terms of ‘¬’ and ‘∨’ indi-
cates that he is not concerned with intuitionistic logic as we understand the
term today.34
Contrary to Gentzen’s sequent calculus LK [Gentzen, 1935], in Herbrand’s calculi
we do not ﬁnd something like a sub-calculus LJ for intuitionistic logic.
More-
over, there is no way to generalize Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem to include
intuitionistic logic:
Contrary to the Cut elimination in Gentzen’s Hauptsatz,
the elimination of modus ponens according to Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem
does not hold for intuitionistic logic.
33This book is still the best source on Herbrand’s writings today.
It is not just an English
translation of Herbrand’s complete works on logic (all of Herbrand’s work in logic was written
in French, cf. [Herbrand, 1968]), but contains additional annotation, brief introductions, and
extended notes by Jean van Heijenoort, Burton Dreben, and Warren Goldfarb.
Besides mi-
nor translational corrections, possible addenda for future editions would be the original texts
in French; Herbrand’s mathematical writings outside of logic; some remarks on the two cor-
rections of Herbrand’s False Lemma by G¨odel and Heijenoort, respectively, cf. §§ 3.9 and 3.10
below; and Herbrand’s correspondence. The correspondence with G¨odel is published in [G¨odel,
1986ﬀ., Vol. V, pp. 14–25].
Herbrand’s letters to Hasse are still in private possession according
to [Roquette, 2007].
The whereabouts of the rest of his correspondence is unknown.
34Cf. e.g. [Heyting, 1930a; 1971], [Gentzen, 1935].

204
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
“All the attempts to generalize Herbrand’s theorem in that direction
have only led to partial and unhandy results (see [Heijenoort, 1971b]).”
[Heijenoort, 1986c, p.120f.]
When Herbrand uses the term “intuitionism”, this typically should be understood
as referring to something closer to the ﬁnitism of Hilbert than to the intuitionism
of Brouwer.35 This ambiguous usage of the term “intuitionism” — centered around
the partial rejection of the Law of the Excluded Middle, the actual inﬁnite, as well
as quantiﬁers and other binders — was common in the Hilbert school at Herbrand’s
time.36 Herbrand’s view on what he calls “intuitionism” is best captured in the
following quote:
“Nous entendons par raisonnement intuitionniste, un raisonnement qui
satisfait aux conditions suivantes: on n’y consid`ere jamais qu’un nom-
bre ﬁni d´etermin´e d’objets et de fonctions; celles-ci sont bien d´eﬁnies,
leur d´eﬁnition permettant de calculer leur valeur d’une mani`ere uni-
voque; on n’aﬃrme jamais l’existence d’un objet sans donner le moyen
de le construire; on n’y consid`ere jamais l’ensemble de tous les ob-
jets x d’une collection inﬁnie; et quand on dit qu’un raisonnement (ou
un th´eor`eme) est vrai pour tous ces x, cela signiﬁe que pour chaque x
pris en particulier, il est possible de r´ep´eter le raisonnement g´en´eral
en question qui ne doit ˆetre consid´er´e que comme le prototype de ces
raisonnements particuliers.”37
Contrary to today’s precise meaning of the term “intuitionistic logic”, the terms
“intuitionism” and “ﬁnitism” denote slightly diﬀerent concepts, which are re-
lated to the philosophical background, diﬀer from person to person, and vary
over times.38
35G¨odel, however, expressed a diﬀerent opinion in a letter to Heijenoort of Sept. 18, 1964:
“In Note 3 of [Herbrand, 1932a] he does not require the enumerability of mathe-
matical objects, and gives a deﬁnition which ﬁts Brouwer’s intuitionism very well”
[G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. V, p. 319f.]
36Cf. e.g. [Herbrand, 1971, p. 283f.], [Tait, 2006, p. 82ﬀ.].
37Cf. [Herbrand, 1932a, p. 3, Note 3].
Without the comma after “intuitionniste”, but with an
additional comma after “question” also in: [Herbrand, 1968, p. 225, Note 3].
“By an intuitionistic argument we understand an argument satisfying the following conditions: in
it we never consider anything but a given ﬁnite number of objects and of functions; these functions
are well-deﬁned, their deﬁnition allowing the computation of their value in a univocal way; we
never state that an object exists without giving the means of constructing it; we never consider
the totality of all the objects x of an inﬁnite collection; and when we say that an argument (or a
theorem) is true for all these x, we mean that, for each x taken by itself, it is possible to repeat
the general argument in question, which should be considered to be merely the prototype of the
particular arguments.”
[Herbrand, 1971, Note 5, p. 288f., translation by Heijenoort]
38Regarding intuitionism, besides Brouwer, Weyl, and Hilbert, we may count Leopold Kro-
necker (1823–1891) and Henri Poincar´e (1854–1912) among the ancestors, and have to mention
Arend Heyting (1898–1980) for his major diﬀering view, cf. e.g. [Heyting, 1930a; 1930b; 1971].
Deeper discussions of Herbrand’s notion of “intuitionism” can be found in [Heijenoort, 1986c,
pp. 113–118] and in [Tait, 2006, p. 82ﬀ.]. Moreover, we brieﬂy discuss it in Note 123. For more on
ﬁnitism cf. e.g. [Parsons, 1998], [Tait, 1981], [Zach, 2001].
For more on Herbrand’s background
in philosophy of mathematics, cf. [Chevalley, 1935], [Dubucs and ´Egr´e, 2006].

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
205
While Herbrand is not concerned with intuitionistic logic, he is a ﬁnitist with
respect to the following two aspects:
1. Herbrand’s work is strictly contained within Hilbert’s ﬁnitistic programme
and he puts ample emphasis on his ﬁnitistic standpoint and the ﬁnitistic
character of his theorems.
2. Herbrand does not accept any model-theoretic semantics unless the models
are ﬁnite.
In this respect, Herbrand is more ﬁnitistic than Hilbert, who
demanded ﬁnitism only for consistency proofs.
“Herbrand’s negative view of set theory leads him to take, on
certain questions, a stricter attitude than Hilbert and his collabo-
rators.
He is more royalist than the king.
Hilbert’s metamathe-
matics has as its main goal to establish the consistency of certain
branches of mathematics and thus to justify them; there, one had
to restrict himself to ﬁnitistic methods.
But in logical investiga-
tions other than the consistency problem of mathematical theories
the Hilbert school was ready to work with set-theoretic notions.”
[Heijenoort, 1986c, p.118]
3.3
The Context of Herbrand’s Work
Let us now have a look at what was known in Herbrand’s time and at the papers
that inﬂuenced his work on logic.
Stanislaw Zaremba (1863–1942) is mentioned in [Herbrand, 1928], where he
cites Zaremba’s textbook on mathematical logic [Zaremba, 1926], which clearly
inﬂuenced Herbrand’s notation.39
Herbrand’s subject, ﬁrst-order logic, became a ﬁeld of special interest not least
because of the seminal paper [L¨owenheim, 1915], which singled out ﬁrst-order
logic in the Theory of Relatives developed by Peirce and Schr¨oder.40 With this
paper, ﬁrst-order logic became an area of special interest, due to the surprising
meta-mathematical properties of this logic, which was intended to be an especially
useful tool with a restricted area of application.41
As the presentation in [L¨owenheim, 1915] is opaque, Thoralf Skolem (1887–
1963) wrote ﬁve clarifying papers contributing to the substance of L¨owenheim’s
Satz 2, the now famous L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem [Skolem, 1920; 1923b; 1928;
39Cf. Goldfarb’s Note to [Herbrand, 1928] on p. 32ﬀ. in [Herbrand, 1971].
Zaremba was one
of the leading Polish mathematicians in the 1920s.
He had close connections to Paris, but we
do not know whether Herbrand ever met him.
40For the heritage of Peirce cf. [Peirce, 1885], [Brady, 2000]; for that of Schr¨oder cf. [Schr¨oder,
1895], [Brady, 2000].
41Without set theory, ﬁrst-order logic was too poor to serve as such a single universal logic as
the ones for which Frege, Peano, and Russell had been searching; cf. [Heijenoort, 1986a].
For
the suggestion of ﬁrst-order logic as the basis for set theory, we should mention [Skolem, 1923b],
which is sometimes cited as of the year 1922, and therefore easily confused with [Skolem, 1923a].
For the emergence of ﬁrst-order logic as the basis for mathematics see [Moore, 1987].

206
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
1929; 1941].
From these papers, Herbrand cites [L¨owenheim, 1915] and [Skolem,
1920], and the controversy pro and contra Herbrand’s reading of [Skolem, 1923b]
and [Skolem, 1928] will be presented in § 3.12 below.
While Herbrand neither cites Peano nor mentions Frege, the Principia Mathe-
matica [Whitehead and Russell, 1910–1913] were inﬂuential at his time, and he was
well aware of it. Herbrand cites all editions of the Principia and there are indica-
tions that he studied parts of it carefully.42 But Russell’s inﬂuence is comparatively
minor compared to Hilbert’s, as, indeed, Herbrand was most interested in prov-
ing consistency, decidability, and completeness. Jean van Heijenoort (1912–1986)
notes on Herbrand:
“The diﬃculties provoked by the Russell Paradox, stratiﬁcation, rami-
ﬁcation, the problems connected with the axiom of inﬁnity or the axiom
of reducibility, nothing of that seems to retain his attention.
The reason for this attitude is that Herbrand does not share Russell’s
conception concerning the relation between logic and mathematics, but
had adopted Hilbert’s. In 1930 Herbrand indicates quite well where he
sees the limits of Russell’s accomplishment: ‘So far we have only re-
placed ordinary language with another more convenient one, but this
does not help us at all with respect to the problems regarding the
principles of mathematics.’
[Herbrand, 1930a, p. 248; 1971, p. 208].
And the sentence that follows indicates the way to be followed: ‘Hil-
bert sought to resolve the questions which can be raised by applying
himself to the study of collections of signs which are translations of
propositions true in a determinate theory.’ ”43
As Herbrand’s major orientation was toward the Hilbert school, it is not surprising
that the majority of his citations44 refer to mathematicians related either to the
Hilbert school or to G¨ottingen, which was the Mecca of mathematicians until its
intellectual and organizational destruction by the Nazis in 1933.
By the title of his thesis Recherches sur la th´eorie de la d´emonstration, Herbrand
clearly commits himself to King Hilbert’s following, and being the ﬁrst contributor
to Hilbert’s ﬁnitistic programme in France, he was given the opportunity to write
on Hilbert’s logic in a French review journal, and this paper [Herbrand, 1930a] is
historically interesting because it captures Herbrand’s personal view of Hilbert’s
ﬁnitistic programme.
42Herbrand seems to have studied ∗9 and ∗10 of [Whitehead and Russell, 1910–1913, Vol. I]
carefully, leaving traces in Herbrand’s Property A and in Chapter 2 of Herbrand’s Ph.D. thesis,
cf. [Heijenoort, 1986c, pp. 102–106].
43Cf. [Heijenoort, 1986c, p.105].
44In his thesis [Herbrand, 1930], Herbrand cites [Ackermann, 1925], [Artin and Schreier, 1927],
[Behmann, 1922], [Bernays, 1928], [Bernays and Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1928], [Hilbert, 1922; 1926; 1928],
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928], and [Neumann, 1925; 1927; 1928]. Furthermore, Herbrand cites
[Nicod, 1917] in [Herbrand, 1930], [Ackermann, 1928] in [Herbrand, 1931], and [Hilbert, 1931]
and [G¨odel, 1931] in [Herbrand, 1932a].

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
207
3.4
A Genius with some Flaws
On the one hand, Herbrand was a creative mathematician whose ideas were truly
outstanding, not only for his time.
Besides logic, he also contributed to class-
ﬁeld theory and to the theory of algebraic number ﬁelds.
Although this is not
our subject here, we should keep in mind that Herbrand’s contributions to alge-
bra are as important from a mathematical point of view and as numerous as his
contributions to logic.45 Among the many statements about Herbrand’s abilities
as a mathematician is Weil’s letter to Hasse in August 1931 where he writes that
he would not need to tell him what a loss Herbrand’s death means especially for
number theory.46 As Peter B. Andrews put it: “Herbrand was by all accounts a
brilliant mathematician.”47
On the other hand, Herbrand neither had the education nor the supervision to
present his results in proof theory with the technical rigor and standard, say, of
the Hilbert school in the 1920s, let alone today’s emphasis on formal precision.48
Finitistic proof theory demands the disambiguation of form and content and a
higher degree of precision than most other mathematical ﬁelds.
Moreover, the
ﬁeld was novel at Herbrand’s time and probably hardly anybody in France was
able to advise Herbrand competently.
Therefore, Herbrand, a g´enie cr´eateur,
as Heijenoort called him,49 was apt to make undetected errors.
Well known
today is a serious ﬂaw in his thesis which stayed unnoticed by its reviewers at the
time. Moreover, several theorems are in fact conceptually correct, but incorrectly
formulated.
Let us have a look at three ﬂaws in § 3.3 of the Chapters 2, 3 and 5, respectively:
45Cf.
[Herbrand, 1930b; 1931e; 1931f; 1932b; 1932c; 1932d; 1932e; 1932f; 1933; 1936]
and
[Herbrand and Chevalley, 1931], as well as [Dieudonn´e, 1982].
46Cf. [Lemmermeyer and Roquette, 2006, p.119, Note 6].
47Cf. [Andrews, 2003, p.171].
48Heijenoort writes in his well-known “source book”:
“Herbrand’s thesis bears the marks of hasty writing; this is especially true of Chap-
ter 5.
Some sentences are poorly constructed, and the punctuation is haphazard.
Herbrand’s thoughts are not nebulous, but they are so hurriedly expressed that
many a passage is ambiguous or obscure. To bring out the proper meaning of the
text the translators had to depart from a literal rendering, and more rewriting
has been allowed in this translation than in any other translation included in the
present volume.”
[Heijenoort, 1971a, p. 525]
Similarly, Goldfarb, the translator and editor of Herbrand’s logical writings, writes:
“Herbrand also tended to express himself rather hastily, resulting in many obscu-
rities; in these translations an attempt has been made to balance the demands of
literalness and clarity.”
[Herbrand, 1971, p.V]
49Cf. [Herbrand, 1968, p.1].

208
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
Chapter 2, § 3.3:
A typical instance for an incorrectly formulated theorem
which is conceptually correct can be found in Chapter 2, § 3.3, on deep inference:
From
⊢B ⇒C we can conclude
⊢A[B] ⇒A[C], provided that [· · ·] denotes
only positive positions50 in A.
Herbrand, however, states
⊢(B ⇒C) ⇒(A[B] ⇒A[C])
which is not valid; to wit51 apply the substitution
{ A[. . .] →∀x. [. . .], B →true, C →P(x) }.
Chapter 3, § 3.3:
Incorrectly formulated is also Herbrand’s theorem on the
relativization of quantiﬁers.52 This error was recognized later by Herbrand him-
self.53
Moreover, notice that in this context, Herbrand discusses the many-sorted ﬁrst-
order logic related to the restriction to the language where all quantiﬁers are
relativized, extending a similar discussion found already in [Peirce, 1885].
All of this is not terribly interesting, except that it gives us some clues on
how Herbrand developed his theorems: It seems that he started, like any mathe-
matician, with a strong intuition of the semantics and used it to formulate the
theorem.
Then he had a careful look at those parts of the proof that might
violate the ﬁnitistic standpoint.
The ﬁnal critical check of minor details of the
formalism in the actual proof,54 however, hardly played a rˆole in this work.
Chapter 5, § 3.3:
The drawback of his intuitive style of work manifests itself
in a serious mistake, which concerns a lemma that has crucial applications in the
proof of the Fundamental Theorem, namely the “lemma” of Chapter 5, § 3.3, which
we will call Herbrand’s False Lemma. Before we discuss this in § 3.9, however, we
have to deﬁne some notions.
3.5
Champs Finis, Herbrand Universe, and Herbrand Expansion
Most students of logic or computer science know Herbrand’s name in the form
of Herbrand universe or Herbrand expansion.
Today, the Herbrand universe is
usually deﬁned as the set of all terms over a given signature, and the Herbrand
expansion of a set of formulas results from a systematic replacement of all variables
in that set of formulas with terms from the Herbrand universe.
50Note that a position in a formula (seen as a tree built-up from logical operators ‘∧’, ‘∨’, ‘¬’,
‘∀’, and ‘∃’) is positive if the number of ¬-operators preceeding it on the path from the root
position is even, and negative if it is uneven.
51Cf. also [Herbrand, 1971, Goldfarb’s Notes 6 (p.78) and A (p. 98)].
52Relativization of quantiﬁers was ﬁrst discussed in the elaboration of ﬁrst-order logic in [Peirce,
1885]. Roughly speaking, it means to restrict quantiﬁers to a predicate P by replacing any ∀x. A
with ∀x. (P(x) ⇒A), and, dually, ∃x. A with ∃x. (P(x) ∧A).
53In Note 1 of [Herbrand, 1932a].
54Cf. [Hadamard, 1949, Chapter V] for a nice account of this mode of mathematical creativity.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
209
Historically, however, this is not quite correct. First of all, Herbrand does not
use term structures for two reasons:
1. Herbrand typically equates terms with objects of the universe, and thereby
avoids working explicitly with term structures.55
2. As a ﬁnitist more royal than King Hilbert, Herbrand does not accept struc-
tures with inﬁnite universes.
As a ﬁnite substitute for a typically inﬁnite full term universe, Herbrand uses what
he calls a champ ﬁni of order n, which we will denote with Tn.
Such a champ
ﬁni diﬀers from a full term universe in containing only the terms t with
|t| < n .
We use |t| to denote the height of the term t, which is given by
|f(t1, . . . , tm)|
=
1 + max{0, |t1| , . . . , |tm| }.
The terms of Tn are constructed from the function symbols and constant symbols
(which we will tacitly subsume under the function symbols in the following) of a
ﬁnite signature and from a ﬁnite set of variables. We will assume that an additional
variable l, the lexicon, is included in this construction, if necessary to have Tn ̸= ∅.
Herbrand prefers to treat all logical symbols besides ‘¬’, ‘∨’, and ‘∃’ as deﬁned.
In prenex forms, the universal quantiﬁer ‘∀’ is also treated as a primitive symbol.
Herbrand expansion was implicitly given already in the ﬁrst elaborate descrip-
tion of ﬁrst-order logic in [Peirce, 1885], under the name “ﬁrst-intentional logic of
relatives”, following the invention of quantiﬁers in [Frege, 1879]. Herbrand speaks
of “reduction” (r´eduite) instead of “Herbrand expansion”.
DEFINITION 1
Herbrand Expansion, AT . For a ﬁnite set of terms T ,
the
expansion AT of a formula A is deﬁned as follows: AT = A if A does not have a
quantiﬁer, (¬A)T = ¬AT ,
(A ∨B)T = AT ∨BT , (∃x. A)T = 
t∈T AT{x→t},
and (∀x. A)T = 
t∈T AT{x→t}, where AT{x→t} denotes the result of applying
the substitution {x→t} to AT .
□
EXAMPLE 2 Herbrand Expansion, AT .
For example, for T
:= { 3, z + 2 },
and for A being the arithmetic formula
∀x. (x = 0
∨
∃y. x = y + 1),
the expansion AT is
⎛
⎝
3 = 0
∨
3 = 3 + 1
∨
3 = (z + 2) + 1
⎞
⎠
∧
⎛
⎝
z + 2 = 0
∨
z + 2 = 3 + 1
∨
z + 2 = (z + 2) + 1
⎞
⎠.
□
The Herbrand expansion reduces a ﬁrst-order formula to sentential logic in such
a way that a sentential formula is reduced to itself, and that the semantics is
invariant if the terms in T range over the whole universe. If, however, this is not
the case — such as in our above example and for all inﬁnite universes —, then
Herbrand expansion changes the semantics by relativization of the quantiﬁers52 to
range only over those elements of the universe to which the elements of T evaluate.
55As this equating of terms has no essential function in Herbrand’s works, but only adds extra
complication to Herbrand’s subjects, we will completely ignore it here and exclusively use free
term structures in what follows.

210
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
3.6
Skolemization, Uniform Notation, γ- and δ-quantiﬁcation
A ﬁrst-order formula may contain existential as well as universal quantiﬁers. Can
we make it more uniform by replacing either of them?
Consider the formula ∀x. ∃y. Q(x, y). These two quantiﬁers express a functional
dependence between the values for x and y, which could also be expressed by a
(new) function, say g, such that ∀x. Q(x, g(x)), i.e. this function g chooses for
each x the correct value for y, provided that it exists. In other words, we can
replace any existentially quantiﬁed variable x which occurs in the scope of universal
quantiﬁers for y1, . . . , yn with the new Skolem term g(y1, . . . , yn).
This replacement, carried out for all existential quantiﬁers, results in a formula
having only universal quantiﬁers. Using the convention that all free variables are
universally quantiﬁed, we may then just drop these quantiﬁers as well. Roughly
speaking, this transformation, Skolemization as we call it today, leaves satisﬁability
invariant. It occurs for the ﬁrst time explicitly in [Skolem, 1928], but was already
used in an awkward formulation in [Schr¨oder, 1895] and [L¨owenheim, 1915].
For reasons that will become apparent later, Herbrand employs a form of Sko-
lemization that is dual to the one above. Now the universal variables are removed
ﬁrst, so that all remaining variables are existentially quantiﬁed. How can this be
done?
Well, if the universally quantiﬁed variable x occurs in the scope of the
existentially quantiﬁed variables y1, . . . , ym, we can replace x with the Skolem
term xδ(y1, . . . , ym).
The second-order variable or ﬁrst-order function symbol xδ
in this Skolem term stands for any function with arguments y1, . . . , ym. Roughly
speaking, this dual form of Skolemization leaves validity invariant.
For example, let us consider the formula ∃y. ∀x. Q(x, y). Assuming the axiom
of choice and the standard interpretation of (higher-order) quantiﬁcation, all of
the following statements are logically equivalent:
• ∃y. ∀x. Q(x, y) holds.
• There is an object y such that Q(x, y) holds for every object x.
• ∃y. Q(xδ(y), y) holds for every function xδ.
• ∀f. ∃y. Q(f(y), y) holds.
Now ∃y. Q(xδ(y), y) is called the (validity) Skolemized form of
∃y. ∀x. Q(x, y).
The variable or function symbols xδ of increased logical order are called Skolem
functions.56 The Skolemized form is also called functional form (with several ad-
denda specifying the dualities), because Skolemization turns the object variable x
into a function variable or function symbol xδ(· · ·).
56Herbrand calls Skolem functions index functions, translated according to [Herbrand, 1971].
Moreover, in [Dreben and Denton, 1970],
[Scanlon Jr., 1973],
and [Goldfarb and Scanlon Jr.,
1974],
we ﬁnd the term indicial functions instead of “index functions”.
The name “Skolem
function” was used in [G¨odel, 1939], probably for the ﬁrst time, cf. [Anellis, 2006].

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
211
Note that A⇒B and ¬A ∨B and ¬(A ∧¬B) are equivalent in two-valued
logic. So are ¬∀x. A and ∃x. ¬A, as well as ¬∃x. A and ∀x. ¬A.
Accordingly, the uniform notation (as introduced in [Smullyan, 1968]) is a
modern classiﬁcation of formulas into only four categories: α, β, γ, and δ.
More important than the classiﬁcation of formulas is the associated classiﬁcation
of the reductive inference rules applicable to them as principal formulas.
According to [Gentzen, 1935], but viewed under the aspect of reduction (i.e. the
converse of deduction), the principal formula of an inference rule is the one which
is (partly) replaced by its immediate “sub”-formulas, depending on its topmost
operator.
• An α-formula is one whose validity reduces to the validity of a single operand
of its topmost operator. For example, A ∨B may be reduced either to A
or to B, and A ⇒B may be reduced either to ¬A or to B.
• A β-formula is one whose validity reduces to the validity of both operands of
its topmost binary operator, introducing two cases of proof (β = branching).
For example, A ∧B reduces to both A and B, and ¬(A ⇒B) reduces
to both A and ¬B.
• A γ-formula is one whose validity reduces to the validity of alternative in-
stances of its topmost quantiﬁer. For example, ∃y. A reduces to A{y→yγ}
in addition to
∃y. A,
for a fresh free γ-variable yγ.
Similarly,
¬∀y. A
reduces to ¬A{y→yγ} in addition to ¬∀y. A.
Free γ-variables may be
globally instantiated at any time in a reduction proof.
• A δ-formula is one whose validity reduces to the validity of the instance of
its topmost quantiﬁer with its Skolem term.
For example, ∀x. A reduces
to A{x→xδ(y
γ
1, . . . , yγ
m)}, where y
γ
1, . . . , yγ
m are the free γ-variables already
in use.57
For a more elaborate introduction into free γ- and δ-variables see [Wirth, 2008a].
Herbrand considers validity and Skolemized form as above in his thesis.
In a
similar context, which we will have to discuss below, Skolem considers unsatis-
ﬁability, a dual of validity, and Skolem normal form in addition to Skolemized
form. As it was standard at his time, Herbrand called the two kinds of quantiﬁers
— i.e. for γ- and δ-formulas58 — restricted and general quantiﬁers, respectively.
To avoid the problem of getting lost in several dualities in what follows, we pre-
fer to speak of γ-quantiﬁers and δ-quantiﬁers instead.
The variables bound by
δ-quantiﬁers will be called bound δ-variables. The variables bound by γ-quantiﬁers
will be called bound γ-variables.
57In the game-theoretic semantics of ﬁrst-order logic, the δ-variables (such as xδ in the above
example) stand for the unknown choices by our opponent in the game, whereas, for showing
validity, we have to specify a winning strategy by describing a ﬁnite number of ﬁrst-order terms
as alternative solutions for the γ-variables (such as yγ
i above), cf. e.g. [Hintikka, 1996].
58Notice that it is obvious how to generalize the deﬁnition of α-, β-, γ- and δ-formulas from top
positions to inner occurrences according to the category into which they would fall in a stepwise
reduction. Therefore, we can speak of α-, β-, γ- and δ-formulas also for the case of subformulas
and classify their quantiﬁers accordingly.

212
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
For a ﬁrst-order formula A in which any bound variable is bound exactly once
and does not occur again free, we deﬁne:
The outer 59 Skolemized form of A results from A by removing any δ-quantiﬁer
and replacing its bound variable x with xδ(y1, . . . , ym),
where xδ is a new
symbol and y1, . . . , ym, in this order,60 are the variables of the γ-quantiﬁers in
whose scope the δ-quantiﬁer occurs.
3.7
Axioms and Rules of Inference
In the following we will present the calculi of Herbrand’s thesis (i.e. the axioms and
rules of inference) as required for our presentation of the Fundamental Theorem.
When we speak of a term, a formula, or a structure, we refer to ﬁrst-order
terminology without mentioning this explicitly.
When we explicitly speak of
“ﬁrst order”, however, it is to emphasize the contrast to sentential logic.
Sentential Tautology:
Let B be a ﬁrst-order formula. B is a sentential tauto-
logy if it is quantiﬁer-free and truth-functionally valid, provided its atomic
subformulas are read as atomic sentential variables.61
Modus Ponens:
A
A ⇒B
B
.
Generalized Rule of γ-Quantiﬁcation:
A[B{x →t}]
A[γx. B]
, where the free vari-
ables of the term t must not be bound by quantiﬁers in B, and γ stands
for ∃if [. . .] denotes a positive position50 in A[. . .], and γ stands for ∀if
this position is negative.
Moreover, we require that [. . .] does not occur in
the scope of any quantiﬁer in A[. . .].
This requirement is not necessary for
59Herbrand has no name for the outer Skolemized form and he does not use the inner Skolem-
ized form, which is the current standard in two-valued ﬁrst-order logic and which is required for
our discussion in Note 75.
The inner Skolemized form of A results from A by repeating the fol-
lowing until all δ-quantiﬁers have been removed: Remove an outermost δ-quantiﬁer and replace
its bound variable
x
with
xδ(y1, . . . , ym),
where
xδ is a new symbol and
y1, . . . , ym,
in
this order, are the variables of the γ-quantiﬁers in whose scope the δ-quantiﬁer occurs and which
actually occur in the scope of the δ-quantiﬁer.
The inner Skolemized form is closely related
to the liberalized δ-rule (also called δ+-rule) in reductive calculi, such as sequent, tableau, or
matrix calculi; cf. e.g. [Baaz and Ferm¨uller, 1995], [Nonnengart, 1996], [Wirth, 2004, §§ 1.2.3
and 2.1.5], [Wirth, 2006], [Wirth, 2008a, § 4].
60Contrary to our ﬁxation of the order of the variables as arguments to the Skolem functions
(to achieve uniqueness of the notion), Herbrand does not care for the order in his deﬁnition of
the outer Skolemized form.
Whenever he takes the order into account, however, he orders by
occurrence from left to right or else by the height of the terms w.r.t. a substitution, but not by
the names of the variables.
61Notice that this notion is more restrictive than the following, which is only initially used
by Herbrand in his thesis, but which is standard for the predicate calculi of the Hilbert school
and the Principia Mathematica;
cf. [Hilbert and Bernays, 1968/70, Vol. II, Supplement I D],
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910–1913, *10].
B is a substitutional sentential tautology if there
is a truth-functionally valid sentential formula A and a substitution σ mapping any sentential
variable in A to a ﬁrst-order formula such that B is Aσ. For example, both P(x) ∨¬P(x) and
∃x. P(x) ∨¬∃x. P(x) are substitutional sentential tautologies, related to the truth-functionally
valid sentential formula p ∨¬p, but only the ﬁrst one is a sentential tautology.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
213
soundness, but for the constructions in the proof of Herbrand’s Fundamental
Theorem.
E.g., with the meta-level substitution
{ A[...] →(t ≺t) ∨[...],
B →¬(x ≺t) }
we get
(t ≺t) ∨¬(t ≺t)
(t ≺t) ∨∃x. ¬(x ≺t) , and with
{ A[...] →(t ≺t) ∨¬[...],
B →(x ≺t) }
we get
(t ≺t) ∨¬(t ≺t)
(t ≺t) ∨¬∀x. (x ≺t) .
Note that Herbrand considers equality of formulas only up to renaming of
bound variables and often implicitly assumes that a bound variable is bound
only once and does not occur free.
Thus, if a free variable y of the term t
is bound by quantiﬁers in B, an implicit renaming of the bound occurrences
of y in B is admitted to enable backward application of the inference rule.
Generalized Rule of δ-Quantiﬁcation:
A[B]
A[δx. B], where the variable x must
not occur in the context A[. . .], and δ stands for ∀if [. . .] denotes a positive
position in A[. . .], and δ stands for ∃if this position is negative. Moreover,
both for soundness and for the reason mentioned above, we require that
[. . .] does not occur in the scope of any quantiﬁer in A[. . .].
Again, if x occurs in the context A[. . .], an implicit renaming of the bound
occurrences of x in δx. B is admitted to enable backward application.
Generalized Rule of Simpliﬁcation:
A[B ◦B]
A[B]
,
where ◦stands for ∨if
[. . .] denotes a positive position in A[. . .],
and ◦stands for ∧if this po-
sition is negative.
To enable a forward application of the inference rule, the bound variables
may be renamed such that the two occurrences of B become equal.
Moreover, the Generalized Rule of γ-Simpliﬁcation is the sub-rule for the
case that B is of the form ∃y.C if [. . .] denotes a positive position in A[. . .],
and of the form ∀y.C if this position is negative.
To avoid the complication of quantiﬁers within a formula, where it is hard to keep
track of the scope of each individual quantiﬁcation, all quantiﬁers can be moved to
the front, provided some caution is taken with the renaming of quantiﬁed variables.
This is called the prenex form of a formula.
The anti-prenex form results from
the opposite transformation, i.e. from moving the quantiﬁers inwards as much as
possible. Herbrand achieves these transformations with his Rules of Passage.
Rules of Passage:
The following six logical equivalences may be used for rewrit-
ing from left to right (prenex direction) and from right to left (anti-prenex
direction), resulting in twelve deep inference rules:
(1)
¬∀x.A
⇔
∃x.¬A
(2)
¬∃x.A
⇔
∀x.¬A
(3)
(∀x.A) ∨B
⇔
∀x. (A ∨B)
(4)
B ∨∀x.A
⇔
∀x. (B ∨A)
(5)
(∃x.A) ∨B
⇔
∃x. (A ∨B)
(6)
B ∨∃x.A
⇔
∃x. (B ∨A)

214
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
Here, B is a formula in which the variable x does not occur.
As explained
above, if x occurs free in B, an implicit renaming of the bound occurrences
of x in A is admitted to enable rewriting in prenex direction.
If we restrict the “Generalized” rules to outermost applications only (i.e. restrict A
to be the empty context), we obtain the rules without the attribute “Generalized”,
i.e. the Rules of γ- and δ-Quantiﬁcation and the Rule of Simpliﬁcation.62
3.8
Normal Identities, Properties A, B, and C, and Herbrand Dis-
junction and Complexity
Key notions of Herbrand’s thesis are normal identity, Property A, Property B, and
Property C. Property C is the most important and the only one we need in this
account.63
Herbrand’s Property C was implicitly used already in [L¨owenheim, 1915] and
[Skolem, 1928], but as an explicit notion, it was ﬁrst formulated in Herbrand’s
thesis.
It is the main property of Herbrand’s work and may well be called the
central property of ﬁrst-order logic, for reasons to be explained in the following.
In essence, Property C captures the following intuition taken from [L¨owenheim,
1915]: Assuming the axiom of choice, the validity of a formula A is equivalent to the
validity of its Skolemized form F. Moreover, the validity of F would be equivalent
to the validity of the Herbrand expansion F U for a universe U, provided only that
this expansion were a ﬁnite formula and did not vary over diﬀerent universes. To
provide this, we replace the semantical objects of the universe U with syntactical
objects, namely the countable set of all terms, used as “place holders” or names.
To get a ﬁnite formula, we again replace this set of terms, which is inﬁnite in
general, with the champ ﬁni Tn, as deﬁned in § 3.5.
If we can show F Tn to be a
62The Generalized Rules of Quantiﬁcation are introduced (under varying names) in [Heijenoort,
1968; Heijenoort, 1975; Heijenoort, 1982; Heijenoort, 1986c] and under the names (μ∗) and (ν∗)
in [Hilbert and Bernays, 1968/70, Vol. II, p.166], but only in the second edition of 1970, not
in the ﬁrst edition of 1939.
Herbrand had only the non-generalized versions of the Rules of
Quantiﬁcation and named them “First and Second Rule of Generalization”, translated according
to [Herbrand, 1971].
Note that the restrictions of the Generalized Rules of Quantiﬁcation
guarantee the equivalence of the generalized and the non-generalized versions by the Rules of
Passage; cf. [Heijenoort, 1968, p. 6]. Herbrand’s name for modus ponens is “Rule of Implication”.
Moreover, “(Generalized) Rule of Simpliﬁcation” and “Rules of Passage” are Herbrand’s names.
All other names introduced in § 3.7 are our own invention to simplify our following presentation.
63The following are the deﬁnitions for the omitted notions normal identity, Property A, and
Property B for a formula D.
D is a normal identity if D has a linear proof starting with a
sentential tautology, possibly followed by applications of the Rules of Quantiﬁcation, and ﬁnally
possibly followed by applications of the Rules of Passage.
D has Property A if D has a linear
proof starting with a sentential tautology, possibly followed by applications of the Rules of
Quantiﬁcation, and ﬁnally possibly followed by applications of the Rules of Passage and the
Generalized Rule of Simpliﬁcation.
Herbrand’s original deﬁnition of Property A is technically
more complicated, but extensionally deﬁnes the same property and is also intensionally very
similar.
Finally, D has Property B of order n if E has Property C of order n, where E results
from possibly repeated application of the Rules of Passage to D, in anti-prenex direction as long
as possible.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
215
sentential tautology for some positive natural number n, then we know that the
γ-quantiﬁcations in F have solutions in any structure, so that F and A are valid.64
Otherwise, the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem says that A is invalid.
DEFINITION 3 Property C, Herbrand Disjunction, Herbrand Complexity.
Let A be a ﬁrst-order formula, in which, without loss of generality, any bound
variable is bound exactly once and does not occur again free, neither as a variable
nor as a function symbol. Let F be the outer Skolemized form of A. Let n be a
positive natural number. Let the champ ﬁni Tn be formed over the function and
free variable symbols occurring in F.
A has Property C of order n if the Herbrand expansion F Tn is a sentential tauto-
logy.
The Herbrand expansion F Tn is sententially equivalent to the so-called Her-
brand disjunction of A of order n, which is the ﬁnite disjunction 
σ:Y→Tn Eσ,
where Y is the set of bound (γ-) variables of F, and E results from F by removing
all (γ-) quantiﬁers.
This form of representation can be used to deﬁne the Herbrand complexity of A,
which is the minimal number of instances of E whose disjunction is a sentential
tautology.65
□
EXAMPLE 4 Property C, Herbrand Disjunction, Herbrand Complexity.
Let A be the following formula, which says that if we have transitivity and an upper
bound of two elements, then we also have an upper bound of three elements:
∀a, b, c. (a ≺b ∧b ≺c ⇒a ≺c)
∧
∀x, y. ∃m. (x ≺m ∧y ≺m)
⇒
∀u, v, w. ∃n. (u ≺n ∧v ≺n ∧w ≺n)
(A)
The outer Skolemized form F of A is
∀a, b, c. (a ≺b ∧b ≺c ⇒a ≺c)
∧
∀x, y. (x ≺mδ(x, y) ∧y ≺mδ(x, y))
⇒
∃n. (uδ ≺n ∧vδ≺n ∧wδ ≺n)
(F)
The result of removing the quantiﬁers from F is the formula E:
(a ≺b ∧b ≺c ⇒a ≺c)
∧
x ≺mδ(x, y) ∧y ≺mδ(x, y)
⇒
uδ ≺n ∧vδ ≺n ∧wδ ≺n
(E)
By semantical considerations it is obvious that a solution for n is mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)).
This is a term of height 3, which suggests that A has Property C of order 4. Let
us show that this is indeed the case and that the Herbrand complexity of A is 2.
To wit: Consider the following 2 substitutions:
64We have F Tn ⊢A, cf. Theorem 4 in [Heijenoort, 1975], which roughly is our Lemma 6.
65Herbrand has no name for Herbrand disjunction and does not use the notion of Herbrand
complexity, which, however, is closely related to Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem, which says
that the Herbrand complexity of A is always deﬁned as a positive natural number, provided that
⊢A holds. More formally, the Herbrand complexity of A is deﬁned as the minimal cardinality |S|
such that, for some positive natural number m and some S
⊆
Y →Tm,
the ﬁnite disjunction
W
σ∈S Eσ is a sentential tautology.
It is useful in the comparison of logical calculi w.r.t. their
smallest proofs for certain generic sets of formulas, cf. e.g. [Baaz and Ferm¨uller, 1995].

216
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
{
a→vδ,
b→mδ(vδ, wδ),
c →mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)),
x→vδ,
y→wδ,
n→mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ))
};
{
a→wδ,
b→mδ(vδ, wδ),
c →mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)),
x→uδ,
y→mδ(vδ, wδ),
n→mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ))
}.
Indeed, if we normalize the Herbrand disjunction generated by these two substi-
tutions to a disjunctive normal form (i.e. a disjunctive set of conjunctions) we get
the following sentential tautology.
{vδ ≺mδ(vδ, wδ) ∧mδ(vδ, wδ) ≺mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)) ∧vδ ⊀mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)),
wδ ≺mδ(vδ, wδ) ∧mδ(vδ, wδ) ≺mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)) ∧wδ ⊀mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)),
vδ ⊀mδ(vδ, wδ), wδ ⊀mδ(vδ, wδ),
uδ ⊀mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)), mδ(vδ, wδ) ⊀mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)),
uδ ≺mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)) ∧vδ ≺mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)) ∧wδ ≺mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ))}
(C)
□
The diﬀerent treatment of δ-quantiﬁers and γ-quantiﬁers in Property C, namely
by Skolemization and Herbrand expansion, respectively, as found in [Skolem, 1928]
and [Herbrand, 1930], rendered the reduction to sentential logic by hand (or actu-
ally today, on a computer) practically executable for the ﬁrst time.66 This diﬀerent
treatment of the two kinds of quantiﬁcation is inherited from the Peirce–Schr¨oder
tradition40 which came on Herbrand via L¨owenheim and Skolem.
Russell and
Hilbert had already merged that tradition with the one of Frege, sometimes em-
phasizing their Frege heritage over one of Peirce and Schr¨oder.67 It was Herbrand
who completed the bridge between these two traditions with his Fundamental
Theorem, as depicted in § 3.10 below.
3.9
Herbrand’s False Lemma
For a given positive natural number n,
Herbrand’s (False) Lemma
says that
Property C of order n is invariant under the application of the Rules of Passage.
The basic function of Herbrand’s False Lemma in the proof of Herbrand’s Funda-
mental Theorem is to establish the logical equivalence of Property C of a formula A
with Property C of the prenex and anti-prenex forms of A, cf. § 3.7.
Herbrand’s Lemma is wrong because the Rules of Passage may change the outer
Skolemized form. This happens whenever a γ-quantiﬁer binding x is moved over
a binary operator whose unchanged operand B contains a δ-quantiﬁer.68
To ﬁnd a counterexample for Herbrand’s Lemma for the case of Property C of
order 2, let us consider moving out the γ-quantiﬁer “∃x.” in the valid formula
66For instance, the elimination of both γ- and δ-quantiﬁers with the help of Hilbert’s ε-operator
suﬀers from an exponential complexity in formula size. As a result, already small formulas grow
so large that the mere size makes them inaccessible to human inspection; and this is still the
case for the term-sharing representation of ε-terms of [Wirth, 2008a].
67While this emphasis on Frege will be understood by everybody who ever had the fascinating
experience of reading Frege, it put some unjustiﬁed bias to the historiography of modern logic,
still present in the selection of the famous source book [Heijenoort, 1971a], cf. e.g. [Anellis, 1992,
Chapter 3].
68Here we use the same meta variables as in our description of the Rules of Passage in § 3.7
and assume that x does not occur free in B.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
217
(∃x. P(x)) ∨¬∃y. P(y).
The (outer) Skolemized form of this formula is
(∃x. P(x)) ∨¬P(yδ).
The Herbrand disjunction over the single substitution {x→yδ} is a sentential tauto-
logy. The outer Skolemized form after moving out the “∃x.” is
∃x.

P(x) ∨¬P(yδ(x))
	
.
To get a sentential tautology again, we now have to take the Herbrand disjunction
over both {x→yδ(l)} and {x→l} (instead of the single {x→yδ}), for the lexicon l.
This, however, is not really a counterexample for Herbrand’s Lemma because
Herbrand treated the lexicon l as a variable and deﬁned the height of a Skolem
constant to be 1, and the height of a variable to be 0, so that
|yδ| = 1 = |yδ(l)| .
As free variables and Skolem constants play exactly the same rˆole, this deﬁnition
of height is a bit unintuitive and was possibly introduced to avoid this counter-
example. But now for the similar formula

(∃x. P(x)) ∧∀y. Q(y)
	
∨¬(∃x. P(x)) ∨¬∀y. Q(y)
after moving the γ-quantiﬁer “∃x.” out, we have to apply
instead of
{ x →xδ,
y →yδ(xδ) }
{ x →xδ,
y →yδ }
to get a sentential tautology, and we have |yδ| = 1
and |yδ(xδ)| = 2,
and thus
yδ ∈T2,
but yδ(xδ) /∈T2.
This means that Property C of order 2 varies under a
single application of a Rule of Passage, and thus we have a proper counterexample
for Herbrand’s False Lemma here.
In 1939, Bernays remarked that Herbrand’s proof is hard to follow69 and — for
the ﬁrst time — published a sound proof of a version of Herbrand’s Fundamental
Theorem which is restricted to prenex form, but more eﬃcient in the number of
terms that have to be considered in a Herbrand disjunction than Herbrand’s quite
global limitation to all terms t with
|t| < n,
related to Property C of order n.70
According to a conversation with Heijenoort in autumn 1963,71 G¨odel noticed
the lacuna in the proof of Herbrand’s False Lemma in 1943 and wrote a private
note, but did not publish it. While G¨odel’s documented attempts to construct
a counterexample to Herbrand’s False Lemma failed, he had actually worked out
a correction of Herbrand’s False Lemma, which is suﬃcient for the proof of Her-
brand’s Fundamental Theorem.72
In 1962, when G¨odel’s correction was still unknown, a young student, Peter
B. Andrews, had the audacity to tell his advisor Alonzo Church (1903–1995) that
there seemed to be a gap in the proof of Herbrand’s False Lemma. Church sent An-
drews to Burton Dreben (1927–1999), who ﬁnally came up with a counterexample.
And then Andrews constructed a simpler counterexample (essentially the one we
presented above) and joint work found a correction similar to G¨odel’s,73 to which
69In [Hilbert and Bernays, 1968/70, Vol. II], in Note 1 on p.158 of the 1939 edition (p.161 of
the 1970 edition), we read:
“Die Herbrandsche Beweisf¨uhrung ist schwer zu verfolgen”
70Cf. § 3.3 of the 1939 edition of [Hilbert and Bernays, 1968/70, Vol. II].
In the 1970 edition,
Bernays also indicates how to remove the restriction to prenex formulas.
71Cf. [Herbrand, 1968, p. 8, Note j].
72Cf. [Goldfarb, 1993].

218
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
we will refer to as G¨odel’s and Dreben’s correction in § 3.11.
Roughly speaking, the corrected lemma says that — to keep Property C of A
invariant under (a single application of) a Rule of Passage — we may have to
step from order n to order n (N r+1)n.
Here r is the number of γ-quantiﬁers
in whose scope the Rule of Passage is applied and N is the cardinality of Tn for
the function symbols in the outer Skolemized form of A.74
This correction is
not particularly elegant because — iterated several times until a prenex form is
reached — it can lead to pretty high orders. Thus, although this correction serves
well for soundness and ﬁnitism, it results in a complexity that is unacceptable in
practice (e.g. in automated reasoning) already for small non-prenex formulas.
The problems with Herbrand’s False Lemma in the step from Property C to a
proof without modus ponens in his Fundamental Theorem (cf. § 3.11) result pri-
marily75 from a detour over prenex form, which was standard at Herbrand’s time.
L¨owenheim and Skolem had always reduced their problems to prenex forms of var-
ious kinds. The reduction of a proof task to prenex form has several disadvantages,
however, such as serious negative eﬀects on proof complexity.76 If Jacques Her-
brand had known of his ﬂaw, he would probably have avoided the whole detour over
prenex forms here, namely in the form of what we will call Heijenoort’s correction,
which avoids an intractable and unintuitive77 rise in complexity, cf. § 3.11.78
73Cf. [Andrews, 2003], [Dreben et al., 1963], [Dreben and Denton, 1963].
74Cf. [Dreben and Denton, 1963, p. 393].
75Secondarily, the ﬂaw in Herbrand’s False Lemma is a peculiarity of the outer Skolemized
form.
For the inner Skolemized form (cf. Note 59), moving γ-quantiﬁers with the Rules of
Passage cannot change the number of arguments of the Skolem functions. This does not help,
however, because, for the inner Skolemized form, moving a δ-quantiﬁer may change the number
of arguments of its Skolem function if the Rule of Passage is applied within the scope of a
γ-quantiﬁer whose bound variable occurs in B but not in A.68 The inner Skolemized form of
∃y1. ∀z1. Q(y1, z1) ∨∃y2. ∀z2. Q(y2, z2)
is
∃y1. Q(y1, zδ
1(y1)) ∨∃y2. Q(y2, zδ
2(y2)), but the
inner Skolemized form of any prenex form has a binary Skolem function, unless we use Henkin
quantiﬁers as found in Hintikka’s ﬁrst-order logic, cf. [Hintikka, 1966].
76Cf. e.g. [Baaz and Ferm¨uller, 1995]; [Baaz and Leitsch, 1995].
77Unintuitive e.g. in the sense of [Tait, 2006].
78The ﬁrst published hints on Heijenoort’s correction are [Heijenoort, 1971a, Note 77, p. 555]
and [Herbrand, 1971, Note 60, p.171].
On page 99 of [Heijenoort, 1986c], without giving a deﬁ-
nition, Heijenoort speaks of generalized versions (which Herbrand did not have) of the rules of
“existentialization and universalization”, which we have formalized in our Generalized Rules of
Quantiﬁcation in § 3.7. Having studied Herbrand’s Ph.D. thesis [Herbrand, 1930] and [Heijenoort,
1968; Heijenoort, 1975], what Heijenoort’s generalized rules must look like can be inferred from
the following two facts: Herbrand has a generalized version of his Rule of Simpliﬁcation in addi-
tion to a non-generalized one. Rewriting with the Generalized Rule of γ-Quantiﬁcation within
the scope of quantiﬁers would not permit Herbrand’s constructive proof of his Fundamental
Theorem.
Note that Heijenoort’s correction avoids the detour over the Extended First ε-Theorem of
the proof of Bernays mentioned above.
Moreover, Heijenoort gets along without Herbrand’s
complicated prenex forms with raised γ-multiplicity, which are required for Herbrand’s deﬁnition
of Property A.
Notice, however, that G¨odel’s and Dreben’s correction is still needed for the step from a proof
with modus ponens to Property C, i.e. from Statement 4 to Statement 1 in Theorem 5.
As the
example on top of page 201 in [Herbrand, 1971] shows, an intractable increase of the order of
Property C cannot be avoided in general for an inference step by modus ponens.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
219
3.10
The Fundamental Theorem
The Fundamental Theorem of Jacques Herbrand is not easy to comprehend at
ﬁrst, because of its technical nature, but it rests upon a basic intuitive idea, which
turned out to be one of the most profound insights in the history of logic.
We know — and so did Herbrand — that sentential logic is decidable: for
any given sentential formula, we could, for instance, use truth-tables to decide its
validity. But what about a ﬁrst-order formula with quantiﬁers?
There is L¨owenheim’s and Skolem’s observation that ∀x. P(x) in the context
of the existentially quantiﬁed variables y1, . . . , yn stands for P(xδ(y1, . . . , yn)) for
an arbitrary Skolem function xδ(· · ·), as outlined in § 3.6. This gives us a formula
with existential quantiﬁers only.
Now, taking the Herbrand disjunction, an ex-
istentially quantiﬁed formula can be shown to be valid, if we ﬁnd a ﬁnite set of
names denoting elements from the domain to be substituted for the existentially
quantiﬁed variables, such that the resulting sentential formula is truth-functionally
valid. Thus, we have a model-theoretic argumentation how to reduce a given ﬁrst-
order formula to a sentential one.
The semantical elaboration of this idea is due
to L¨owenheim and Skolem, and this was known to Herbrand.
But what about an actual proof within a given calculus for a given formula?
The aﬃrmative answer to this question is the essence of Herbrand’s Fundamental
Theorem and the technical device, by which we can eliminate a switch of quantiﬁers
(such as ∃y. ∀x. Q(x, y) of § 3.6) is captured in his Property C.
Thus, if we want to cross the river that divides the land of valid ﬁrst-order
formulas from the land of provable ones, it is the sentential Property C that stands
ﬁrm in the middle of that river and holds the bridge, whose ﬁrst half was built by
L¨owenheim and Skolem and the other by Herbrand:

220
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem shows that if a formula A has Property C of
some order n — i.e., by the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem, if A is a valid (|= A) —
then we not only know of the existence of a proof in any of the standard proof
calculi (⊢A), but we can actually construct a proof for A in Herbrand’s calculus
from a given n.
The proof construction process is guided by the champ ﬁni
of order n, whose size determines the multiplicities of γ-quantiﬁers and whose
elements are the terms substituted as witnesses in the γ-Quantiﬁcation steps.
That proof begins with a sentential tautology and may use the Rules of γ- and
δ-Quantiﬁcation, the Generalized Rule of Simpliﬁcation, and the Rules of Passage.
Contrary to what Herbrand’s False Lemma implies, a detour over a prenex form
of A dramatically increases the order of Property C and thus the length of that
proof, cf. § 3.9.
Heijenoort, however, observed that this rise of proof length can
be overcome by avoiding the problematic Rules of Passage with the help of deep
(or Generalized) quantiﬁcation rules, which may introduce quantiﬁers deep within
formulas (“Heijenoort’s correction”). We have included these considerations into
our statement of Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem.
THEOREM 5 Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem.
Let A be a ﬁrst-order formula in which each bound variable is bound by a single
quantiﬁer and does not occur free.
The following ﬁve statements are logically
equivalent. Moreover, we can construct a witness for any statement from a witness
of any other statement.
1. A has Property C of order n for some positive natural number n.
2. We can derive A from a sentential tautology, starting possibly with applica-
tions of the Generalized Rules of γ- and δ-Quantiﬁcation, which are then
possibly followed by applications of the Generalized Rule of γ-Simpliﬁcation.
3. We can derive A from a sentential tautology, starting possibly with appli-
cations of the Rules of γ- and δ-Quantiﬁcation, which are then possibly
followed by applications of the Generalized Rule of γ-Simpliﬁcation and the
Rules of Passage.
4. We can derive A from a sentential tautology with the Rules of γ- and δ-
Quantiﬁcation, the Rule of Simpliﬁcation, the Rules of Passage, and Modus
Ponens.
5. We can derive A in one of the standard ﬁrst-order calculi of Principia Mathe-
matica or of the Hilbert school.79
□
The following deserves emphasis: The derivations in the above Statements 2 to 5
as well as the number n of Statement 1 can be constructed from each other; and
this construction is ﬁnitistic in the spirit of Herbrand’s basic beliefs in the nature
of proof theory and meta-mathematics.
Statement 3 and Herbrand’s Property A
are extensionally equal and intensionally very close to each other. Statement 2 is
due to Heijenoort’s correction, cf. §§ 3.9 and 3.11.
79Cf. [Whitehead and Russell, 1910–1913, *10], [Hilbert and Bernays, 1968/70, Vol. II, Sup-
plement I D], respectively.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
221
3.11
Modus Ponens Elimination
The following lemma provides the step from Statement 1 to Statement 2 of Theo-
rem 5 with additional details exhibiting an elimination of modus ponens similar to
the Cut elimination in Gentzen’s Hauptsatz.
We present the lemma in parallel both in the version of G¨odel’s and Dreben’s
correction and of Heijenoort’s correction.80
To melt these two versions into one,
we underline the parts that are just part of Heijenoort’s correction and overline
the parts that result from G¨odel’s and Dreben’s.
Thus, the lemma stays valid if
we omit either the underlined or else the overlined part of it, but not both.
LEMMA 6 Modus Ponens Elimination.
Let A be a ﬁrst-order formula in prenex form in which each bound variable is bound
by a single quantiﬁer and does not occur free. Let F be the outer Skolemized form
of A.
Let Y be the set of bound (γ-) variables of F.
Let E result from F by
removing all (γ-) quantiﬁers. Let n be a positive natural number. Let the champ
ﬁni Tn be formed over the function and free variable symbols occurring in F.
If A has Property C of order n, then we can construct a derivation of A of the
following form, in which we read any term starting with a Skolem function as an
atomic variable:
Step 1:
We start with a sentential tautology whose disjunctive normal form is a
re-ordering of a disjunctive normal form of the sentential tautology

σ:Y→Tn
Eσ.
Step 2:
Then we may repeatedly apply the Generalized Rules of γ- and δ-Quanti-
ﬁcation.
Step 3:
Then, (after renaming all bound δ-variables) we may repeatedly apply
the Generalized Rule of γ-Simpliﬁcation.
□
Obviously, there is no use of modus ponens in such a proof, and thus, it is linear,
i.e. written as a tree, it has no branching.
Moreover, all function and predicate
symbols within this proof occur already in A, and all formulas in the proof are
similar to A in the sense that they have the so-called “sub”-formula property.
EXAMPLE 7 Modus Ponens Elimination.
(continuing Example 4)
Let us derive the formula A of Example 4 in § 3.8. As A is not in prenex form we
have to apply the version of Lemma 6 without the overlined part.
As explained
in Example 4, A has Property C of order n for n = 4, and the result of removing
the quantiﬁers from the outer Skolemized form of A is the formula E:
(a ≺b ∧b ≺c ⇒a ≺c)
∧
x ≺mδ(x, y) ∧y ≺mδ(x, y)
⇒
uδ ≺n ∧vδ ≺n ∧wδ ≺n
(E)
80Cf. § 3.9. We present Heijenoort’s correction actually in form of Theorem 4 in [Heijenoort,
1975] with a slight change, which becomes necessary for our use of Herbrand disjunction instead
of the Herbrand expansion, namely the addition of the underlined part of Step 1 in Lemma 6.

222
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
Let N denote the cardinality of Tn.
Let Tn = {t1, . . . , tN}.
For the case of n = 4,
we have
N = 3 + 32 + (3 + 32)
2 = 156,
and,
for
Y := {a, b, c, n, x, y},
the Herbrand disjunction

σ:Y→T4 Eσ
has
N |Y | ele-
ments, i.e. more than 1013.
Thus, we had better try a reduction proof here,81
applying the inference rules backwards, and be content with arriving at a senten-
tial tautology which is a sub-disjunction of a re-ordering of a disjunctive normal
form of 
σ:Y→T4 Eσ.
As the backwards application of the Generalized Rule of γ-Quantiﬁcation admits
only a single (i.e. linear) application of each γ-quantiﬁer (or each “lemma”), and
as we will have to apply both the ﬁrst and the second line of A twice, we ﬁrst
increase the γ-multiplicity of the top γ-quantiﬁers of these two lines to two. This
is achieved by applying the Generalized Rule of γ-Simpliﬁcation twice backwards
to A, resulting in:82
∀a, b, c. (a ≺b ∧b ≺c ⇒a ≺c)
∧
∀a, b, c. (a ≺b ∧b ≺c ⇒a ≺c)
∧
∀x, y. ∃m. (x ≺m ∧y ≺m)
∧
∀x, y. ∃m. (x ≺m ∧y ≺m)
⇒
∀u, v, w. ∃n. (u ≺n ∧v ≺n ∧w ≺n)
Renaming the bound δ-variables to some terms from Tn, and applying the Gener-
alized Rule of δ-Quantiﬁcation three times backwards in the last line, we get:
∀a, b, c. (a ≺b ∧b ≺c ⇒a ≺c)
∧
∀a, b, c. (a ≺b ∧b ≺c ⇒a ≺c)
∧
∀x, y. ∃mδ(vδ, wδ) . (x ≺mδ(vδ, wδ) ∧y ≺mδ(vδ, wδ) )
∧
∀x, y. ∃mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)) .
⎛
⎝
x ≺mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ))
∧
y ≺mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ))
⎞
⎠
⇒
∃n. ( uδ ≺n ∧vδ ≺n ∧wδ ≺n)
The boxes indicate that the enclosed term actually denotes an atomic variable
whose structure cannot be changed by a substitution. By this nice trick of taking
outermost Skolem terms as names for variables, Herbrand avoids the hard task of
giving semantics to Skolem functions, cf. § 3.12.83
81As Herbrand’s proof [Herbrand, 1971, p.170] proceeds reductively too, we explain the proof
in parallel to the development of our example, in footnotes. This proof is interesting by itself
and similar to the later proof of the Second ε-Theorem in § 3.1 of [Hilbert and Bernays, 1968/70,
Vol. II].
82To arrive at the full Herbrand disjunction
W
σ:Y→Tn Eσ,
Herbrand’s proof requires us to
apply the Rule of Simpliﬁcation top-down at any occurrence of a γ-quantiﬁer N times, and the
idea is to substitute ti for the ith occurrence of this γ-quantiﬁer on any branch.
83According to Herbrand’s proof we would have to replace any bound δ-variable x with
its Skolem term xδ(ti0, . . . , tik), provided that i0, . . . , ik denotes the branch on which this
δ-quantiﬁer occurs w.r.t. the previous step of raising each γ-multiplicity to N, described in
Note 82.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
223
We apply the Generalized Rule of γ-Quantiﬁcation four times backwards, resulting
in application of
{x →vδ , y →wδ }
to the third line and
{x →uδ , y →mδ(vδ, wδ) }
to the fourth line. This yields:84
∀a, b, c. (a ≺b ∧b ≺c ⇒a ≺c)
∧
∀a, b, c. (a ≺b ∧b ≺c ⇒a ≺c)
∧
∃mδ(vδ, wδ) . ( vδ ≺mδ(vδ, wδ) ∧wδ ≺mδ(vδ, wδ) )
∧
∃mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ)) .
⎛
⎝
uδ ≺mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ))
∧
mδ(vδ, wδ) ≺mδ(uδ, mδ(vδ, wδ))
⎞
⎠
⇒
∃n. ( uδ ≺n ∧vδ ≺n ∧wδ ≺n)
Applying (always backwards) the Generalized Rule of δ-Quantiﬁcation twice and
the Generalized Rule of γ-Quantiﬁcation seven times, and then dropping the boxes
(as they are irrelevant for sentential reasoning without substitution) and rewriting
it all into a disjunctive list of conjunctions, we arrive at the disjunctive set C of
Example 4, which is a sentential tautology.
Moreover, as a list, C is obviously a
re-ordered sublist of a disjunctive normal form of 
σ:Y→T4 Eσ.
□
In the time before Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem, a calculus was basically a
means to describe a set of theorems in a semi-decidable and theoretical fashion.
In Hilbert’s calculi, for instance, the search for concrete proofs is very hard. Con-
trary to most other Hilbert-style calculi, the normal form of proofs given in State-
ment 2 of Theorem 5, however, supports the search for reductive proofs: Methods
of human85 and automatic86 proof search may help us to ﬁnd simple proofs in this
84Note that the terms to be substituted for a bound γ-variable, say y, in such a reduction
step can always be read out from any bound δ-variable in its scope:
If there are j γ-quantiﬁers
between the quantiﬁer for y inclusively and the quantiﬁer for the δ-variable, the value for y is
the jth argument of the bound δ-variable, counting from the last argument backwards.
For instance, in the previous reduction step, the variable y in the third line was replaced with
wδ , the last argument of the bound δ-variable mδ(vδ, wδ) , being ﬁrst in the scope of y.
This property is obvious from Herbrand’s proof but hard to express as a property of proof
normalization.
Moreover, this property is useful in Herbrand’s proof for showing that the side condition of the
Rule of γ-Quantiﬁcation
B{x→t}
∃x. B
is always satisﬁed, even for a certain prenex form.
Indeed,
γ-variables never occur in the replacement t and the height of t is strictly smaller than the height
of all bound δ-variables in the scope B, so that no free variable in t can be bound by quantiﬁers
in B; cf. § 3.7.
85Roughly speaking, we may do a proof by hand, count the lemma applications and remember
their instantiations, and then try to construct a formal normal form proof accordingly, just as
we have done in Example 7.
See [Wirth, 2004] for more on this.
86Roughly speaking, we may compute the connections and search for a reductive proof in
the style of say [Wallen, 1990], which we then transform into a proof in the normal form of
Statement 2 of Theorem 5.

224
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
normal form. Lemma 6 gives us the means to search successfully for simple proofs
in a formal calculus by hand (or actually today, on a computer), just as we have
done in Example 7.87
The normal form of proofs — as given by Lemma 6 — eliminates detours via
modus ponens in a similar fashion as Gentzen’s Hauptsatz eliminates the Cut.
It is remarkable not only because it establishes a connection between Skolem terms
and free variables without using any semantics for Skolem functions (and thereby,
without using the axiom of choice).
It also seems to be the ﬁrst time that a
normal form of proofs is shown to exist in which diﬀerent phases are considered.
Even with Gentzen’s Versch¨arfter Hauptsatz following Herbrand in this aspect
some years later, the concrete form of Herbrand’s normal form of proofs remains
important to this day, especially in the form of Heijenoort’s correction, cf. § 3.9.
The manner in which modern sequent, tableau, and matrix calculi organize proof
search88 does not follow the Hilbert school and their ε-elimination theorems, but
Gentzen’s and Herbrand’s calculi. Moreover, regarding their Skolemization, their
deep inference,89 and their focus on γ-quantiﬁers and their multiplicity, these mod-
ern proof-search calculi are even more in Herbrand’s tradition than in Gentzen’s.
3.12
The L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem and Herbrand’s Finitistic
Notion of Falsehood in an Inﬁnite Domain
Let A be a ﬁrst-order formula whose terms have a height not greater than m. Her-
brand deﬁnes that A is false in an inﬁnite domain if A does not have Property C
of order p for any positive natural number p.
If, for a given positive natural number p, the formula A does not have Prop-
erty C of order p, then we can construct a ﬁnite structure over the domain Tp+m
which falsiﬁes ATp; cf. § 3.5. Thus, instead of requiring a single inﬁnite structure
in which ATp is false for any positive natural number p, Herbrand’s notion of
falsehood in an inﬁnite domain only provides us, for each p, with a ﬁnite struc-
ture in which ATp is false.
Herbrand explicitly points out that these structures
do not have to be extensions of each other.
From a given falsifying structure for
some p one can, of course, generate falsifying structures for each p′ < p by restric-
tion to Tp′+m.
Herbrand thinks, however, that to require an inﬁnite sequence of
structures to be a sequence of extensions would necessarily include some form of
the axiom of choice, which he rejects out of principle. Moreover, he writes that
the basic prerequisites of the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem are generally misunder-
stood, but does not make this point clear.
87Even without the avoidance of the detour over prenex forms due to Heijenoort’s correction,
this already holds for the normal form given by Statement 3 of Theorem 5, which is extensionally
equal to Herbrand’s original Property A.
The next further steps to improve this support for
proof search would be sequents and free γ- and δ-variables; cf. e.g. [Wirth, 2004; 2008a].
88Cf. e.g. [Wallen, 1990], [Wirth, 2004], [Autexier, 2005].
89Note that although the deep inference rules of Generalized Quantiﬁcation are an extension
of Herbrand’s calculi by Heijenoort, the deep inference rules of Passage and of Generalized
Simpliﬁcation are Herbrand’s original contributions.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
225
It seems that Herbrand reads [L¨owenheim, 1915] as if it would be a paper on
provability instead of validity, i.e. that Herbrand confuses L¨owenheim’s ‘|=’ with
his ‘⊢’.
All in all, this is, on the one hand, so peculiar and, on the other hand, so relevant
for Herbrand’s ﬁnitistic views of logic and proof theory that some quotations may
illuminate the controversy.
“(On remarquera que cette d´eﬁnition diﬀ`ere de la d´eﬁnition qu’on pour-
rait croire la plus naturelle seulement par le fait que, quand le nombre p
augmente, le nouveau champ C′ et les nouvelles valeurs ne peuvent
pas forc´ement ˆetre consid´er´es comme un ‘prolongement’ des anciens;
mais cependant, la connaissance de C′ et des valeurs pour un nombre p
d´etermin´e, entraˆıne celle d’un champ et de valeurs convenant pour tout
nombre inf´erieur; seul donc un ‘principe de choix’ pourrait conduire `a
prendre un syst`eme de valeurs ﬁxe dans un champ inﬁni).”90
And after deﬁning the dual notion for unsatisﬁability instead of validity, Herbrand
continues:
“Il est absolument n´ecessaire de prendre de telles d´eﬁnitions, pour don-
ner un sens pr´ecis aux mots: ‘vrai dans un champ inﬁni’, qui ont
souvent ´et´e employ´es sans explication suﬃsante, et pour justiﬁer une
proposition `a laquelle on fait souvent allusion, d´emontr´ee par L¨owen-
heim,1 sans bien remarquer que cette proposition n’a aucun sens pr´ecis
sans d´eﬁnition pr´ealable, et que la d´emonstration de L¨owenheim est
au surplus totalement insuﬃsante pour notre but (voir 6.4).”91
90Cf. [Herbrand, 1930, p.109]. Without the comma after “d´etermin´e” also in: [Herbrand, 1968,
p.135f.]
“We observe that this deﬁnition diﬀers from the deﬁnition that would seem the most natural
only in that, as the number p increases, the new domain C′ and the new values need not be
regarded as forming an ‘extension’ of the previous ones. Clearly, if we know C′ and the values
for a given number p, then for each smaller number we know a domain and values that answer
to the number; but only a ‘principle of choice’ could lead us to take a ﬁxed system of values in
an inﬁnite domain.”
[Herbrand, 1971, p.165, translation by Dreben and Heijenoort]
91Cf. [Herbrand, 1930, p.110].
Without the signs after “d´eﬁnitions”, “mots”, and “pr´ealable”
and the emphasis on “L¨owenheim ”, but with the correct “6.2” instead of the misprint “6.4” also
in: [Herbrand, 1968, p.136f.]
“It is absolutely necessary to adopt such deﬁnitions if we want to give a precise sense to the words
‘true in an inﬁnite domain’, words that have frequently been used without suﬃcient explanation,
and also if we want to justify a proposition proved by L¨owenheim, a proposition to which many
refer without clearly seeing that L¨owenheim’s proof is totally inadequate for our purposes (see 6.4)
and that, indeed, the proposition has no precise sense until such a deﬁnition has been given.”
[Herbrand, 1971, p.166, translated by Dreben and Heijenoort]

226
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem equates provability with Property C, whereas
the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem equates validity with Property C. Thus, it is not
the case that Herbrand somehow corrected L¨owenheim. Instead, the L¨owenheim–
Skolem Theorem and Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem had better be looked
upon as a bridge from validity to provability with two arcs and Property C as
the eminent pillar in the middle of the river, oﬀering a magniﬁcent view from
the bridge on properties of ﬁrst-order logic; as depicted in § 3.10.
And this was
probably also Herbrand’s view when he correctly wrote:
“Nous pouvons dire que la d´emonstration de L¨owenheim ´etait sufﬁ-
sante en Math´ematiques; mais il nous a fallu, dans ce travail, la rendre
‘m´etamath´ematique’ (voir l’introduction), pour qu’elle nous soit de
quelque utilit´e.”92
Moreover, Herbrand criticizes L¨owenheim for not showing the consistency of ﬁrst-
order logic, but this, of course, was never L¨owenheim’s concern.
The mathematically substantial part of Herbrand’s critique of L¨owenheim refers
to the use of the axiom of choice in L¨owenheim’s proof of the L¨owenheim–Skolem
Theorem.
The L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem as found in many textbooks, such as [Ender-
ton, 1972, p.141], says that any satisﬁable set of ﬁrst-order formulas is satisﬁable
in a countable structure.
In [L¨owenheim, 1915], however, we only ﬁnd a dual
statement, namely that any invalid ﬁrst-order formula has a denumerable counter-
model.
Moreover, what is actually proved, read charitably,93 is the following
stronger theorem:
THEOREM 8 L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem `a la L¨owenheim [1915].
Let us assume the axiom of choice.
Let A be a ﬁrst-order formula.
1. If A has Property C of order p for some positive natural number p,
then |= A.
2. If A does not have Property C of order p for any positive natural number p,
then we can construct a sequence of partial structures Si that converges to a
structure S′ with a denumerable universe such that
̸|=S′ A.
□
92Cf. [Herbrand, 1930, p.118].
Without the emphasis on “L¨owenheim ” and with “math´e-
matiques” instead of “Math´ematiques” and “l’Introduction)” instead of “l’introduction),” also
in: [Herbrand, 1968, p.144].
“We could say that L¨owenheim’s proof was suﬃcient in mathematics; but, in the present work,
we had to make it ‘metamathematical’ (see Introduction) so that it would be of some use to us.”
[Herbrand, 1971, p.176, translated by Dreben and Heijenoort]
93As L¨owenheim’s paper lacks some minor details, there is an ongoing discussion whether its
proof of the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem is complete and what is actually shown. Our reading
of the proof of the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem in [L¨owenheim, 1915] is a standard one. Only in
[Skolem, 1941, p. 26ﬀ.] and [Badesa, 2004, § 6.3.4] we found an incompatible reading, namely that
— to construct S′ of Item 2 of Theorem 8 — L¨owenheim’s proof requires an additional falsifying
structure of arbitrary cardinality to be given in advance.
The similarity of our presentation
with Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem, however, is in accordance with [Skolem, 1941, p. 30],
but not with [Badesa, 2004, p.145].
The relation of Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem to the
L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem is further discussed in [Anellis, 1991].
Cf. also our Note 98.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
227
As Property C of order p can be eﬀectively tested for p = 1, 2, 3, . . ., L¨owenheim’s
proof provides us with a complete proof procedure which went unnoticed by Skolem
as well as the Hilbert school. Indeed, there is no mention in the discussion of the
completeness problem for ﬁrst-order logic in [Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928, p. 68],
where it is considered as an open problem.94
Thus, for validity instead of provability, G¨odel’s Completeness Theorem95 is
contained already in [L¨owenheim, 1915]. G¨odel has actually acknowledged this for
the version of the proof of the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem in [Skolem, 1923b].96
Note that the convergence of the structures Si against S′ in Theorem 8 is hy-
pothetical in two aspects: First, as validity is not co-semi-decidable, in general we
can never positively know that we are actually in Case 2 of Theorem 8, i.e. that
a convergence toward S′ exists.
Second, even if we knew about the convergence
toward S′, we would have no general procedure to ﬁnd out which parts of Si will be
actually found in S′. This makes it hard to get an intuition for S′ and may be the
philosophical reason for Herbrand’s rejection of “falsehood in S′ ” as a meaningful
notion.
Mathematically, however, we see no justiﬁcation in Herbrand’s rejection
of this notion and will explain this in the following.
Herbrand’s critical remark concerning the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem is jus-
tiﬁed, however, as L¨owenheim needs the axiom of choice at two steps in his proof
without mentioning this.
1st Step:
To show the equivalence of a formula to its outer Skolemized form,
L¨owenheim’s proof requires the full axiom of choice.
2nd Step:
For constructing the structure S′, L¨owenheim would need K¨onig’s
Lemma, which is a weak form of the axiom of choice.97
Contrary to the general perception,98 there are no essential gaps in L¨owenheim’s
proof, with the exception of the implicit application of the axiom of choice, which
was no exception at his time. Indeed, ﬁfteen years later, G¨odel still applies the
94Actually, the completeness problem is slightly ill deﬁned in [Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928].
Cf. e.g. [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. I, pp. 44–48].
95Cf. [G¨odel, 1930].
96Letter of G¨odel to Heijenoort, dated Aug. 14, 1964.
Cf. [Heijenoort, 1971a, p. 510, Note i],
[G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. I, p. 51; Vol. V, pp. 315–317].
97K¨onig’s Lemma is Form 10 in [Howard and Rubin, 1998].
This form is even weaker than
the well-known Principle of Dependent Choice, namely Form 43 in [Howard and Rubin, 1998];
cf. also [Rubin and Rubin, 1985].
98This perception is partly based on the unjustiﬁed criticism of Skolem, Herbrand, and Hei-
jenoort.
We are not aware of any negative critique against [L¨owenheim, 1915] at the time of publication.
[Wang, 1970, p. 27ﬀ.], proof-read by Bernays and G¨odel, after being most critical with the proof
in [Skolem, 1923b], sees no gaps in L¨owenheim’s proof, besides the applications of the axiom of
choice. The same holds for [Brady, 2000, § 8], sharing expertise in the Peirce–Schr¨oder tradition40
with L¨owenheim.
Let us have a look at the criticism of Skolem, Herbrand, and Heijenoort in detail:
The following statement of Skolem on [L¨owenheim, 1915] is conﬁrmed in [Heijenoort, 1971a,
p. 230]:
(continued on following page)

228
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
axiom of choice tacitly in the proof of his Completeness Theorem.99 Moreover, as
none of these theorems state any consistency properties, from the point of view
of Hilbert’s ﬁnitism there was no reason to avoid the application of the axiom of
choice. Indeed, in the proof of his Completeness Theorem, G¨odel “is not interested
in avoiding an appeal to the axiom of choice.”100 Thus, again, as we already noted
in Item 2 of § 3.1, regarding ﬁnitism, Herbrand is more royalist than King Hilbert.
(Note 98, continued from previous page)
“Er muss also sozusagen einen Umweg ¨uber das Nichtabz¨ahlbare machen.”
[Skolem, 1923b, p. 220]
“Thus he must make a detour, so to speak, through the non-denumerable.”
[Heijenoort, 1971a, p. 293, translation by by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg]
That detour, however, is not an essential part of the proof, but serves for the purpose of illustra-
tion only. This is clear from the original paper and also the conclusion of [Badesa, 2004, §§ 3.2
and 3.3].
When Herbrand criticizes L¨owenheim’s proof, he actually does not criticize the proof as such,
but only L¨owenheim’s semantical notions; even though Herbrand’s verbalization suggests the
opposite, especially in [Herbrand, 1931, Chapter 2], where Herbrand repeats L¨owenheim’s re-
ducibility results in ﬁnitistic style:
“L¨owenheim [1915] a publi´e du r´esultat ´enonc´e dans ce paragraphe une d´emon-
stration dont nous avons montr´e les graves lacunes dans notre travail d´ej`a cit´e
(Chapter 5, § 6.2).”
[Herbrand, 1968, p. 187, Note 29]
“L¨owenheim [1915] published a proof of the result stated in this section. In [Her-
brand, 1930, Chapter 5, § 6.2], we pointed out that there are serious gaps in his
proof.”
[Herbrand, 1971, p. 237, Note 33, translation by Dreben and Heijenoort]
Heijenoort realized that there is a missing step in L¨owenheim’s proof:
“What has to be proved is that, from the assignments thus obtained for all i, there
can be formed one assignment such that ΠF is true, that is,
ΠF = 0
is false.
This L¨owenheim does not do.”
[Heijenoort, 1971a, p. 231]
Except for the principle of choice, however, the missing step is trivial because in L¨owenheim’s
presentation the already ﬁxed part of the assignment is irrelevant for the extension.
Indeed,
in the “Note to the Second Printing”, in the preface of the 2nd printing, Heijenoort partially
corrected himself:
“I am now inclined to think that L¨owenheim came closer to K¨onig’s Lemma than
his paper, on the surface, suggests. But a rewriting of my introductory note on that
point (p. 231) will have to wait for another occasion.”
[Heijenoort, 1971a, p. ix]
This correction is easily overlooked because no note was inserted into the actual text.
99Cf. [G¨odel, 1930].
100Cf. [Wang, 1970, p. 24].

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
229
The proof of the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem in [Skolem, 1920] already avoids
the axiom of choice in the 1st Step by using Skolem normal form instead of Skolem-
ized form.101
Moreover, in [Skolem, 1923b], the choices in the 2nd Step of the proof become
deterministic, so that no form of the axiom of choice, such as K¨onig’s Lemma is
needed anymore. This is achieved by taking the universe of the structure S′ to be
the natural numbers and using the well-ordering of the natural numbers.
THEOREM 9 L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem `a la [Skolem, 1923b].
Let Γ be a (ﬁnite of inﬁnite) denumerable set of ﬁrst-order formulas. Assume ̸|= Γ.
Without assuming any form of the axiom of choice we can construct a sequence
of partial structures Si that converges to a structure S′ with a universe which is a
subset of the natural numbers such that
̸|=S′ Γ.
□
Note that Herbrand does not need any form of the axiom of choice for the follow-
ing reason:
In the 1st Step, Herbrand does not use the semantics of Skolemized
forms at all, because Herbrand’s Skolem terms are just names for free variables,
cf. § 3.10. In the 2nd Step, Herbrand’s peculiar notion of “falsehood in an inﬁnite
domain” makes any choice superﬂuous.
This is a device which — contrary to
what Herbrand wrote — is not really necessary to avoid the axiom of choice, as
the above Theorem 9 shows.
In this way, Herbrand came close to proving the completeness of Russell’s and
Hilbert’s calculi for ﬁrst-order logic, but he did not trust the left arc of the bridge
depicted in § 3.10.
And thus G¨odel proved it ﬁrst when he submitted his thesis
in 1929, in the same year as Herbrand, and the theorem is now called G¨odel’s
Completeness Theorem in all textbooks on logic.102
It is also interesting to note that Herbrand does not know how to construct
a counter-model without using the axiom of choice, as explicitly described in
[Skolem, 1923b].
This is — on the one hand — a strong indication that Her-
brand was not aware of [Skolem, 1923b].103 On the other hand, Herbrand names
Skolem’s Paradox several times and [Skolem, 1923b; 1929] seem to be the only
written sources of this at Herbrand’s time.104
101To achieve Skolem normal form, Skolem deﬁnes predicates for the subformulas starting with
a γ-quantiﬁer, and then rewrites the formula into a prenex form with a ﬁrst-order γ∗δ∗-preﬁx.
Indeed, for the proofs of the versions of the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem, the Skolemized form
(which is used in [L¨owenheim, 1915], [Skolem, 1928], and [Herbrand, 1930])
is used neither in
[Skolem, 1920] nor in [Skolem, 1923b], which use Skolem normal form instead.
By deﬁnition, Skolemized forms have a δ∗γ∗-preﬁx with an implicit higher-order δ∗, and raising
is the dual of Skolemization which produces a γ∗δ∗-preﬁx with a higher-order γ∗, cf. [Miller,
1992].
The Skolem normal form, however, has a γ∗δ∗-preﬁx with ﬁrst-order γ∗.
102Cf. [G¨odel, 1930].
103Cf. p.12 of Goldfarb’s introduction in [Herbrand, 1971].
104Skolem’s Paradox is also brieﬂy mentioned in [Neumann, 1925], not as a paradox, however,
but as unfavorable conclusions on set theory drawn by Skolem, who wrote about a “peculiar and
apparently paradoxical state of aﬀairs”, cf. [Heijenoort, 1971a, p. 295].

230
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
As Herbrand’s Property C and its use of the outer Skolemized form are most
similar to the treatment in [Skolem, 1928], it seems likely that Herbrand had read
[Skolem, 1928].105
3.13
Herbrand’s First Proof of the Consistency of Arithmetic
Consider a signature of arithmetic that consists only of zero ‘0’, the successor
function ‘s’, and the equality predicate ‘=’.
Besides the axioms of equality (equi-
valence and substitutability), Herbrand considers several subsets of the following
axioms:106
(S)
P(0) ∧∀y.

P(y) ⇒P(s(y))
	
⇒
∀x. P(x)
(nat1)
x = 0
∨
∃y. x = s(y)
(nat2)
s(x) ̸= 0
(nat3)
s(x) = s(y) ⇒x = y
(nat4+i)
si+1(x) ̸= x
Axiom (nat1) together with the well-foundedness of the successor relation ‘s’ speci-
ﬁes the natural numbers up to isomorphism.107 So do the Dedekind–Peano axioms
(nat2) and (nat3) together with the Dedekind–Peano axiom of Structural Induc-
tion (S), provided that the meta variable P is seen as a universally quantiﬁed
second-order variable with the standard interpretation.108
Of course, Herbrand, the ﬁnitist, does not even mention these second-order
properties.
His discussion is restricted to decidable ﬁrst-order axiom sets, some
of which are inﬁnite due to the inclusion of the inﬁnite sequence (nat4), (nat5),
(nat6), . . .
As Herbrand’s axiom sets are ﬁrst order, they cannot specify the natural num-
bers up to isomorphism.109 But as the model of arithmetic is inﬁnite, Herbrand,
the ﬁnitist, cannot accept it as part of his proof theory.
Actually, he never even
mentions the model of arithmetic.
Herbrand shows that (for the poor signature of 0, s, and =)
the ﬁrst-order
theory of the axioms (nati)i≥1 (i.e. (nati) for any positive natural number i) is
consistent, complete, and decidable.
His constructive proof is elegant, provides
a lucid operative understanding of basic arithmetic, and has been included inter
105Without giving any justiﬁcation, Heijenoort assumes, however, that
“He was not acquainted either, certainly, with [Skolem, 1928].”
[Heijenoort, 1986c, p.112]
106The labels are ours, not Herbrand’s.
Herbrand writes ‘x+1’ instead of ‘s(x)’.
To save the
axiom of substitutability, Herbrand actually uses the biconditional in (nat3).
107Cf. [Wirth, 2004, § 1.1.3].
This idea goes back to [Pieri, 1907/8].
108Cf. e.g. [Andrews, 2002].
109For instance, due to the Upward L¨owenheim–Skolem–Tarski Theorem.
Cf. e.g. [Enderton,
1972].

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
231
alia into § 3.1 of [Enderton, 1972], one of the most widely used textbooks on logic.
Herbrand’s proof has two constructive steps:
1st Step:
He shows how to rewrite any formula into an equivalent quantiﬁer-free
formula without additional free variables. He proceeds by a special form of
quantiﬁer elimination, a technique in the Peirce–Schr¨oder tradition40 with
its ﬁrst explicit occurrence in [Skolem, 1919].110
2nd Step:
He shows that the quantiﬁer-free fragment is consistent and decidable
and does not depend on the axiom (nat1).
This is achieved with a procedure
which rewrites a quantiﬁer-free formula into an equivalent disjunctive normal
form without additional free variables.
For any quantiﬁer-free formula B,
this normal-form procedure satisﬁes:
(nati)i≥2 ⊢B
iﬀ
the normal form of ¬B is 0 ̸= 0.
This elegant work of Herbrand is hardly discussed in the secondary literature,
probably because — as a decidability result — it became obsolete before it was
published, due to the analogous result for this theory extended with addition, the
so-called Presburger Arithmetic, as it is known today. Moj˙zesz Presburger (1904–
1943?)111 gave his talk on the decidability of his theory with similar techniques
on Sept. 24, 1929,112 ﬁve months after Herbrand ﬁnished his Ph.D. thesis.
As
Tarski’s work on decision methods developed in his 1927/8 lectures in Warszawa
also did not appear in print until after World War II,113 we have to consider this
contribution of Herbrand as completely original. Indeed:
“Dieses gelingt nach einer Methode, welche unabh¨angig voneinander
J. Herbrand and M. Presburger ausgebildet haben.
Diese Methode
besteht darin, dass man Formeln, welche gebundene Variablen enthal-
ten, ’Reduzierte‘ zuordnet, in denen keine gebundenen Variablen mehr
auftreten und welche im Sinne der inhaltlichen Deutung jenen Formeln
gleichwertig sind.”114
110More precisely, cf. [Skolem, 1919, § 4].
For more information on the subject of quantiﬁer
elimination in this context, cf. [Anellis, 1992, p.120f., Note 33], [Wang, 1970, p. 33].
111Presburger’s true name is Prezburger.
He was a student of Alfred Tarski, Jan Lucasiewicz
(1878–1956), Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz (1890–1963), and Kazimierz Kuratowski (1896–1980) in
Warszawa. He was awarded a master (not a Ph.D.) in mathematics on Oct. 7, 1930. As he was
of Jewish origin, it is likely that he died in the Holocaust (Shoah), maybe in 1943. Cf. [Zygmunt,
1991].
112Moreover, note that [Presburger, 1930] did not appear in print before 1930.
Some citations
date [Presburger, 1930] at 1927, 1928, and 1929.
There is evidence, however, that these earlier
datings are wrong, cf. [Stanisfer, 1984], [Zygmunt, 1991].
113Cf. [Stanisfer, 1984], [Tarski, 1951].
114Cf. [Hilbert and Bernays, 1968/70, Vol. I, p. 233, note-mark omitted, orthography modern-
ized].
“This is achieved by a method developed independently by J. Herbrand and M. Presburger. The
method consists in associating ‘reduced forms’ to formulas with bound variables, in which no
bound variables occur anymore and which are semantically equivalent to the original formulas.”

232
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
In addition, Herbrand gives a constructive proof that the ﬁrst-order theories given
by the following two axiom sets are identical:
• (nati)i≥1
• (nat2), (nat3), and the ﬁrst-order instances of (S), provided that (S) is taken
as a ﬁrst-order axiom scheme instead of a second-order axiom.
3.14
Herbrand’s Second Proof of the Consistency of Arithmetic
Herbrand’s contributions to logic discussed sofar are all published in Herbrand’s
thesis.
In this section, we consider his journal publication [Herbrand, 1932a] as
well as some material from Chapter 4 of his thesis.
First, the signature is now enriched to include the recursive functions, cf. § 3.15.
Second, the axiom scheme (S) is restricted to just those instances which result
from replacing the meta variable P with quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order formulas.
For
this setting, Herbrand again gives a constructive proof of consistency. This proof
consists of the following two steps:
1st Step:
Herbrand deﬁnes recursive functions fP such that fP (x) is the least
natural number y ≤x such that ¬P(y) holds, provided that such a y exists,
and 0 otherwise.
The functions fP are primitive recursive unless the terms
substituted for P contain a non-primitive recursive function. These functions
imply the instances of (S), rendering them redundant.
This is similar to the eﬀect of Hilbert’s 2nd ε-formula:115
εx.¬P(x) = s(y)
⇒
P(y),
Herbrand’s procedure, however, is much simpler but only applicable to quan-
tiﬁer-free P.
2nd Step:
Consider the universal closures of the axioms of equality, the axioms
(nat2) and (nat3), and an arbitrary ﬁnite subset of the axioms for recursive
functions. Take the negation of the conjunction of all these formulas. As all
quantiﬁed variables of the resulting formula are γ-variables, this is already in
Skolemized form. Moreover, for any positive natural number n, it is easy to
show that this formula does not have Property C of order n: Indeed, we just
have to construct a proper ﬁnite substructure of arithmetic which satisﬁes
all the considered axioms for the elements of Tn.
Thus, by Herbrand’s
Fundamental Theorem, consistency is immediate.
115Cf. [Hilbert and Bernays, 1968/70, Vol. II, § 2.3, p. 82ﬀ.; Vol. II, Supplement V B, p. 535ﬀ.].

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
233
The 2nd step is a prototypical example to demonstrate how Herbrand’s Funda-
mental Theorem helps to answer seemingly non-ﬁnitistic semantical questions on
inﬁnite structures with the help of inﬁnitely many ﬁnite sub-structures.
Notice
that such a semantical argumentation is ﬁnitistically acceptable if and only if the
structures are all ﬁnite and eﬀectively constructible. And the latter is always the
case for Herbrand’s work on logic.
As the theory of all recursive functions is suﬃciently expressive, there is the
question why Herbrand’s 2nd consistency proof does not imply the inconsistency
of arithmetic by G¨odel’s second incompleteness theorem? Herbrand explains that
we cannot have the theory of all total recursive functions because they are not
recursively enumerable.
More precisely, an evaluation function for an enumer-
able set of recursive functions cannot be contained in this set by the standard
diagonalization argument.
Hilbert’s school had failed to prove the consistency of arithmetic, except for the
special case that for the axiom (S), the variable x does not occur within the scope
of any binder in P(x).116 But this fragment of arithmetic is actually equivalent to
the one considered by Herbrand here.117 In this sense, Herbrand’s result on the
consistency of arithmetic was just as strong as the one of the Hilbert school by
ε-substitution. Herbrand’s means, however, are much simpler.118
116Cf. [Hilbert and Bernays, 1968/70, Vol. II, § 2.4].
More precisely, Hilbert’s school had failed to prove the termination of their ﬁrst algorithm for
computing a valuation of the ε-terms in the 1st and 2nd ε-formulas.
This de facto failure was
less spectacular but internally more discouraging for Hilbert’s programme than G¨odel’s second
incompleteness theorem with its restricted area of application, cf. [G¨odel, 1931].
Only after developing a deeper understanding of the notion of a basic typus of an ε-term
(Grundtypus; introduced in [Neumann, 1927]; called ε-matrix in [Scanlon Jr., 1973]) and es-
pecially of the independence of its valuation of the valuations of its sub-ordinate ε-expressions,
has the problem been resolved: The termination problem was cured in [Ackermann, 1940] with
the help of a second algorithm of ε-valuation, terminating within the ordinal number ϵ0, just as
Gentzen’s consistency proof for full arithmetic in [Gentzen, 1936; 1938; 1943].
117Cf. [Kleene, 1952, p. 474].
118Herbrand’s results on the consistency of arithmetic have little importance, however, for
today’s inductive theorem proving because the restrictions on (S) can usually not be met in
practice.
Herbrand’s restrictions on (S) require us to avoid the occurrence of x in the scope
of quantiﬁers in P(x).
In practice of inductive theorem proving, this is hardly a problem for
the γ-quantiﬁers, whose bound variables tend to be easily replaceable with witnessing terms.
There is a problem, however, with the δ-quantiﬁers. If we remove the δ-quantiﬁers, letting their
bound δ-variables become free δ-variables, the induction hypothesis typically becomes too weak
for proving the induction step.
This is because the now free δ-variables do not admit diﬀerent
instantiation in the induction hypotheses and the induction conclusion.

234
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
3.15
Foreshadowing Recursive Functions
Herbrand’s notion of a recursive function is quite abstract:
A recursive function is given by any new ni-ary function symbol fi plus a set of
quantiﬁer-free formulas for its speciﬁcation (which Herbrand calls the hypotheses),
such that, for any natural numbers k1, . . . , kni, there is a constructive proof of the
unique existence of a natural number l such that ⊢fi(sk1(0), . . . , skni (0)) = sl(0).
“On pourra aussi introduire un nombre quelconque de
fonctions fix1x2 · · · xni avec des hypoth`eses telles que:
a) Elles ne contiennent pas de variables apparentes.
b) Consid´er´ees intuitionnistiquement,5 elles permettent de faire eﬀec-
tivement le calcul de fix1x2 · · · xni, pour tout syst`eme particulier
de nombres; et l’on puisse d´emontrer intuitionnistiquement que
l’on obtient un r´esultat bien d´etermin´e. (Groupe C.)
5Cette expression signiﬁe: traduites en language ordinaire, consid´er´ees comme une
propri´et´e des entiers, et non comme un pur symbole.”
[Herbrand, 1932a, p. 5]119
In the letter to G¨odel dated April 7, 1931, mentioned already in § 2, Herbrand
added the requirement that the hypotheses deﬁning fi contain only function sym-
bols fj with j≤i, for natural numbers i and j.120
G¨odel’s version of Herbrand’s notion of a recursive function is a little diﬀer-
ent: He speaks of quantiﬁer-free equations instead of quantiﬁer-free formulas and
explicitly lists the already known functions, but omits the computability of the
functions.
“If φ denotes an unknown function and ψ1, . . . , ψk are known func-
tions, and if the ψ’s and the φ are substituted in one another in the
most general fashions and certain pairs of the resulting expressions are
equated, then, if the resulting set of functional equations has one and
only one solution for φ,
φ is a recursive function.”121
119Without the colon after “que” and the comma after “fix1x2 · · · xni”, with a semi-colon
instead of a fullstop after “apparentes”, and with “langage” instead of “language” also in: [Her-
brand, 1968, p. 226f.]
“We can also introduce any number of functions
fi(x1, x2, . . . , xni)
together with
some hypotheses such that
(a) The hypotheses contain no bound variables.
(b) Considered intuitionistically,5
they make the eﬀective computation of the
fi(x1, x2, . . . , xni) possible for every given set of numbers, and it is possible
to prove intuitionistically that we obtain a well-deﬁned result.
(Group C.)
5This expression means: translated into ordinary language, considered as a property
of integers and not as a mere symbol.”
120Cf. [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. V, pp. 14–21], [Sieg, 2005].
121Cf. [G¨odel, 1934, p. 26], also in: [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. I, p. 368].

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
235
G¨odel took this paragraph on page 26 of his 1934 Princeton lectures from the
above-mentioned letter from Herbrand to G¨odel, which G¨odel considered to be
lost, but which was rediscovered in February 1986.122
In 1963, G¨odel wrote to
Heijenoort:
“I have never met Herbrand. His suggestion was made in a letter in
1931, and it was formulated exactly as on p. 26 of my lecture notes, that
is, without any reference to computability.
However, since Herbrand
was an intuitionist, this deﬁnition for him evidently meant that there
is a constructive proof for the existence and uniqueness of φ.”123
As we have seen, however, G¨odel’s memory was wrong insofar as he had added
the restriction to equations and omitted the computability requirement.
Obviously, Herbrand had a clear idea of our current notion of a total recursive
function.
Herbrand’s characterization, however, just transfers the recursiveness
of the meta level to the object level.
Such a transfer is of little epistemological
value.
While there seems to be no way to do much more than such a transfer
for consistency of arithmetic in G¨odelizable systems (due to G¨odel’s second in-
completeness theorem), it is well possible to do more than that for the notion of
recursive functions. Indeed, in the later developments of the theory of term rewrit-
ing systems and the today standard recursion theory for total and partial recursive
functions, we ﬁnd constructive deﬁnitions and consistency proofs practically useful
in programming and inductive theorem proving.124
Thus, as suggested by G¨odel,125 we may say that Herbrand foreshadowed the
notion of a recursive function, although he did not introduce it.126
122Cf. [Dawson Jr., 1993].
123Letter of G¨odel dated April 23, 1963.
Cf. [Herbrand, 1971, p. 283],
also in: [Heijenoort,
1986c, p.115f.], also in: [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. V, p. 308].
It is not clear whether G¨odel refers to Brouwer’s intuitionism or Hilbert’s ﬁnitism when he
calls Herbrand an “intuitionist” here; cf. § 3.1.
And there is more confusion regarding the meaning of two occurrences of the word “intuitionis-
tically” on the page of the above quotation from [Herbrand, 1932a]. Both occurrences carry the
same note-mark, probably because Herbrand realized that this time he uses the word with even
a another meaning, diﬀerent from his own standard and diﬀerent from its meaning for the other
occurrence in the same quotation:
It neither refers to Brouwer’s intuitionism nor to Hilbert’s
ﬁnitism, but actually to the working mathematician’s meta level as opposed to the object level
of his studies; cf. e.g. [Neumann, 1927, p. 2f.].
124Partial recursive functions were introduced in [Kleene, 1938].
For consistency proofs and
admissibility conditions for the practical speciﬁcation of partial recursive functions with posi-
tive/negative-conditional term rewriting systems cf. [Wirth, 2008b].
125Letter of G¨odel to Heijenoort, dated Aug. 14, 1964.
Cf. [Heijenoort, 1986c, p.115f.].
126Cf. [Heijenoort, 1986c, p.115ﬀ.] for more on this.
Moreover, note that a general deﬁnition
of (total) recursive functions was not required for Herbrand’s second consistency proof because
Herbrand’s function fP of § 3.14 is actually a primitive recursive one, unless P contains a non-
primitive recursive function.

236
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
4
INFLUENCE
Despite his very short life, Herbrand’s contributions were of great signiﬁcance at
his time and they had a strong impact on the work by others later in mathematics,
proof theory, computer science, and artiﬁcial intelligence.
Even today the name
“Herbrand” can be found astonishingly often in research papers in ﬁelds that did
not even exist at his time.127
We sketch a list of topics that were inﬂuenced by Herbrand’s work.
4.1
Proof Theory
Dirk van Dalen (born 1932) begins his review on [Herbrand, 1971] as follows:
“Much of the logical activity in the ﬁrst half of this century was in-
spired by Hilbert’s programme, which contained, besides fundamen-
tal reﬂections on the nature of mathematics, a number of clear-cut
problems for technically gifted people.
In particular the quest for
so-called “consistency proofs” was taken up by quite a number of lo-
gicians.
Among those, two men can be singled out for their imagina-
tive approach to logic and mathematics:
Jacques Herbrand and Ger-
hard Gentzen. Their contributions to this speciﬁc area of logic, called
“proof theory” (Beweistheorie) following Hilbert, are so fundamental
that one easily recognizes their stamp in modern proof theory.”128
Dalen continues:
“When we realize that Herbrand’s activity in logic took place in just a
few years, we cannot but recognize him as a giant of proof theory. He
discovered an extremely powerful theorem and experimented with it in
proof theory.
It is fruitless to speculate on the possible course Her-
brand would have chosen, had he not died prematurely; a consistency
proof for full arithmetic would have been within his reach.”129
127To wit, the search in any online library (e.g. citeseer) reveals that astonishingly many authors
dedicate parts of their work directly to Jacques Herbrand.
A “Google Scholar” search gives a
little less than ten thousand hits and the phrases we ﬁnd by such an experiment include: Herbrand
agent language, Herbrand analyses, Herbrand automata, Herbrand base, Herbrand complexity,
Herbrand constraints, Herbrand disjunctions, Herbrand entailment, Herbrand equalities, Her-
brand expansion, Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem, Herbrand functions, Herbrand–Gentzen
theorem, Herbrand interpretation, Herbrand–Kleene universe, Herbrand model, Herbrand nor-
mal forms, Herbrand procedures, Herbrand quotient, Herbrand realizations, Herbrand semantics,
Herbrand strategies, Herbrand terms, Herbrand–Ribet theorem, Herbrand’s theorem, Herbrand
theory, Herbrand universe. Whether and to what extend these references to Herbrand are justi-
ﬁed is sometimes open for debate. This list shows, however, that in addition to the foundational
importance of his work at the time, his insights still have an impact on research even at the
present time.
Herbrand’s name is therefore not only frequently mentioned among the most im-
portant mathematicians and logicians of the 20th century but also among the pioneers of modern
computer science and artiﬁcial intelligence.
128Cf. [Dalen, 1974, p. 544].
129Cf. [Dalen, 1974, p. 548].

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
237
The major thesis of [Anellis, 1991] is that, building on the L¨owenheim–Skolem
Theorem, it was Herbrand’s work in elaborating Hilbert’s concept of “being a
proof” that gave rise to the development of the variety of ﬁrst-order calculi in the
1930s, such as the ones of the Hilbert school, and such as Natural Deduction and
Sequent calculi in [Gentzen, 1935].
As already indicated in § 3.9, Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem has directly
inﬂuenced Bernays’ work on proof theory.
The main inspiration in the unwinding programme,130 which — to save the
merits of proof theory — Georg Kreisel (born 1923) suggested as a replacement
for Hilbert’s failed programme, is Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem, especially for
Kreisel’s notion of a recursive interpretation of a logic calculus in another one,131
such as given by Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem for his ﬁrst-order calculus in
the sentential tautologies over the language enriched with Skolem functions.
Herbrand’s approach to consistency proofs, as we have sketched in §§ 3.13
and 3.14, has a semantical ﬂavor and is inspired by Hilbert’s evaluation method
of ε-substitution, whereas it avoids the dependence on Hilbert’s ε-calculus.
The
main idea (cf. § 3.14) is to replace the induction axiom by recursive functions of
ﬁnitistic character.
Herbrand’s approach is in contrast to the purely syntactical
style of Gentzen132 and Sch¨utte133 in which semantical interpretation plays no
rˆole.
So-called Herbrand-style consistency proofs follow Herbrand’s idea of construct-
ing ﬁnite sub-models to imply consistency by Herbrand’s Fundamental Theo-
rem.
During the early 1970s, this technique was used by Thomas M. Scanlon
Jr. (born 1940) in collaboration with Dreben and Goldfarb.134 These consistency
proofs for arithmetic roughly follow Ackermann’s previous proof,135 but they ap-
ply Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem in advance and consider Skolemized form
instead of Hilbert’s ε-terms.136
130Cf. [Kreisel, 1951; 1952; 1958; 1982], and do not miss the discussion in [Feferman, 1996]!
“To determine the constructive (recursive) content or the constructive equivalent
of the non-constructive concepts and theorems used in mathematics, particularly
arithmetic and analysis.”
[Kreisel, 1958, p. 155]
131Cf. [Kreisel, 1958, p. 160] and [Feferman, 1996, p. 259f.].
132Cf. [Gentzen, 1936; 1938; 1943].
133Cf. [Sch¨utte, 1960].
134Cf. [Dreben and Denton, 1970], [Scanlon Jr., 1973], [Goldfarb and Scanlon Jr., 1974].
135Cf. [Ackermann, 1940].
136Contrary to the proofs of [Dreben and Denton, 1970] and [Ackermann, 1940], the proof of
[Scanlon Jr., 1973], which is otherwise similar to the proof of [Dreben and Denton, 1970], admits
the inclusion of induction axioms over any recursive well-ordering on the natural numbers:
By an application of Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem, from a given derivation of an incon-
sistency, we can compute a positive natural number n such that Property C of order n holds.
Therefore, in his analog of Hilbert’s and Ackermann’s ε-substitution method, Scanlon can eﬀec-
tively pick a minimal counterexample on the champ ﬁni Tn from a given critical counterexample,
even if this neither has a direct predecessor nor a ﬁnite initial segment.
This result was then further generalized in [Goldfarb and Scanlon Jr., 1974] to ω-consistency
of arithmetic.

238
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
Gentzen’s and Herbrand’s insight on Cut and modus ponens elimination and
the existence of normal form derivations with mid-sequents had a strong inﬂuence
on William Craig’s work on interpolation.137 The impact of Craig’s Interpolation
Theorem to various disciplines in turn has recently been discussed at the Interpo-
lations Conference in Honor of William Craig in May 2007.138
4.2
Recursive Functions and G¨odel’s Second Incompleteness Theo-
rem
As already discussed in detail in § 3.15, in his 1934 Princeton lectures, G¨odel
introduced the notion of (general) recursive functions and mentioned that this
notion had been proposed to him in the letter from Herbrand mentioned already
in § 2. This letter, however, seems to have had more inﬂuence on G¨odel’s thinking,
namely on the consequences of G¨odel’s second incompleteness theorem:
“Nowhere in the correspondence does the issue of general computabil-
ity arise.
Herbrand’s discussion, in particular, is solely trying to ex-
plore the limits of consistency proofs that are imposed by the second
theorem.
G¨odel’s response also focuses on that very topic.
It seems
that he subsequently developed a more critical perspective on the very
character and generality of this theorem.”
[Sieg, 2005, p. 180]
Sieg [2005] argues that the letter of Herbrand to G¨odel caused a change of G¨odel’s
perception of the impact of his own second incompleteness theorem on Hilbert’s
programme: Initially G¨odel did assert that it would not contradict Hilbert’s view-
point.
Inﬂuenced by Herbrand’s letter, however, he accepted the more critical
opinion of Herbrand on this matter.
4.3
Algebra and Ring Theory
In 1930–1931, within a few months, Herbrand wrote several papers on algebra
and ring theory.
During his visit to Germany he met and brieﬂy worked on
this topic with Noether, Hasse, and Artin; cf. § 2.
He contributed several new
theorems of his own and simpliﬁed proofs of results by Leopold Kronecker (1823–
1891), Heinrich Weber (1842–1913), Teiji Takagi (1875–1960), Hilbert, and Artin,
thereby generalizing some of these results.
The Herbrand–Ribet Theorem is a
result on the class number of certain number ﬁelds and it strengthens Kummer’s
convergence criterion; cf. Figure 1.
There is no direct connection between Herbrand’s work on logic and his work on
algebra. Useful applications of proof theory to mathematics are very rare. Kreisel’s
“unwinding” of Artin’s proof of Artin’s Theorem into a constructive proof seems
to be one of the few exceptions.139
137Cf. [Craig, 1957a; Craig, 1957b].
138Cf. http://sophos.berkeley.edu/interpolations/.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
239
“An odd prime p is called irregular if the class number of the ﬁeld Q(μp) is divisible by p
(μp being, as usual, the group of p-th roots of unity). According to Kummer’s criterion,
p is irregular if and only if there exists an even integer k with 2 ≤k ≤p −3 such that p
divides (the numerator of) k-th Bernoulli number Bk, given by the expansion
t
et −1 + t
2 −1 =
X
n≥2
Bn
n! tn.
The purpose of this paper is to strengthen Kummer’s criterion.
Let A be the ideal class group of Q(μp), and let C be the Fp-vector space A/Ap. The
Galois group Gal(Q/Q) acts on C through its quotient Δ = Gal(Q(μp)/Q). Since all
characters of Δ with values in F
∗
p are powers of the standard character
χ : Gal(Q/Q) →Δ ˜
−→F∗
p
giving the action of Gal(Q/Q) on μp, the vector space C has a canonical decomposition
C =
M
i mod (p−1)
C(χi),
where
C(χi) = {c ∈C|σc = χi(σ) c for all σ ∈Δ}.
(1.1) Main Theorem.
Let k be even, 2 ≤k ≤p −3.
Then p|Bk if and only if C(χ1−k) ̸= 0
In fact, the statement that C(χ1−k) ̸= 0 implies p|Bk is well known [Herbrand, 1932b,
Th. 3]”
[Ribet, 1976, Theorem 1.1, p. 151]
Figure 1. Herbrand–Ribet Theorem
139With Artin’s Theorem we mean:
“Eine rationale Funktion F(x1, x2, · · · , xn) von n Ver¨anderlichen heiße deﬁnit, wenn
sie f¨ur kein reelles Wertsystem der xi negative Werte annimmt.”
[Artin, 1927, p. 100]
“Satz 4: Es sei R ein reeller Zahlk¨orper, der sich nur auf eine Weise ordnen l¨asst, wie
zum Beispiel der K¨orper der rationalen Zahlen, oder der aller reellen algebraischen
Zahlen oder der aller reellen Zahlen.
Dann ist jede rationale deﬁnite Funktion von x1, x2, · · · , xn mit Ko¨eﬃzienten aus R
Summe von Quadraten von rationalen Funktionen der xi mit Ko¨eﬃzienten aus R.”
[Artin, 1927, p. 109, modernized orthography]
Cf. [Delzell, 1996] for the unwinding of Artin’s proof of Artin’s Theorem.
Cf. [Feferman, 1996] for a discussion of the application of proof theory to mathematics in general.

240
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
4.4
Automated Deduction
In the last ﬁfty years the ﬁeld of automated deduction, or automated reasoning as
it is more generally called today, has come a long way: modern deduction systems
are among the most sophisticated and complex human artefacts we have, they
can routinely search spaces of several million formulas to ﬁnd a proof. Automa-
ted theorem proving systems have solved open mathematical problems and these
deduction engines are used nowadays in many subareas of computer science and
artiﬁcial intelligence, including software development and veriﬁcation as well as
security analysis. The application in industrial software and hardware develop-
ment is now standard practice in most high quality products. The two volume
handbook [Robinson and Voronkow, 2001] gives a good impression of the state of
the art today.
Herbrand’s work inspired the development of the ﬁrst computer programs for
automated deduction and mechanical theorem proving, for the following reason:
The actual test for Herbrand’s Property C is very mechanical in nature and thus
can be carried out on a computer, resulting in a mechanical semi-decision proce-
dure for any mathematical theorem!
This insight, ﬁrst articulated in the 1950s,
turned out to be most inﬂuential in automated reasoning, artiﬁcial intelligence,
and computer science.
Let us recapitulate the general idea as it is common now in most monographs
and introductory textbooks on automated theorem proving.
Suppose we are given a conjecture A. Let F be its (validity) Skolemized form.
We then eliminate all quantiﬁers in F, and the result is a quantiﬁer-free formula E.
We now have to show that the Herbrand disjunction over some possible values of
the free variables of E is valid. See also Example 4 in § 3.8.
How do we ﬁnd these values?
Well, we do not actually have these “objects in
the domain”, but we can use their names, i.e. we take all terms from the Herbrand
universe and substitute them in a systematic way into the variables and wait what
happens: every substituted formula obtained that way is sentential, so we can just
check whether their disjunction is valid or not with one of the many available
decision procedures for sentential logic.
If it is valid, we are done: the original
formula A must be valid by Herbrand’s Fundamental Theorem. If the disjunction
of instantiated sentential formulas turns out to be invalid, well, then bad luck and
we continue the process of substituting terms from the Herbrand universe.
This process must terminate, if indeed the original theorem is valid. But what
happens if the given conjecture is in fact not a theorem?
Well, in that case the
process will either run forever or sometimes, if we are lucky, we can nevertheless
show this to be the case.
In the following we will present these general ideas a little more technically.140
140Standard textbooks covering the early period of automated deduction are [Chang and Lee,
1973] and [Loveland, 1978].
Chang and Lee [1973] present this and other algorithms in more
detail and rigor.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
241
Arithmetic provided a testbed for the ﬁrst automated theorem proving program:
In 1954 the program of Martin Davis (born 1928) proved the exciting theorem
that the sum of two even numbers is again even.
This date is still considered a
hallmark and was used as the date for the 50th anniversary of automated reasoning
in 2004. The system that proved this and other theorems was based on Presburger
Arithmetic, a decidable fragment of ﬁrst-order logic, mentioned already in § 3.13.
Another approach, based directly on Herbrand’s ideas, was tried by Paul C.
Gilmore (born 1925).141 His program worked as follows: A preprocessor generated
the Herbrand disjunction in the following sense. The formula E contains ﬁnitely
many constant and function symbols, which are used to systematically generate
the Herbrand universe for this set; say
a, b, f(a, a), f(a, b), f(b, a), f(b, b), g(a, a), g(a, b), g(b, a), g(b, b), f(a, f(a, a)), . . .
for the constants a, b and the binary function symbols f, g. The terms of this uni-
verse were enumerated and systematically substituted for the variables in E such
that the program generates a sequence of propositional formulas Eσ1, Eσ2, . . .
where σ1, σ2 are the substitutions.
Now each of these sets can be checked for
truth-functional validity, for which Gilmore used the “multiplication method”.
This method computes the conjunctive normal form142 and checks the individ-
ual elements of this conjunction in turn:
If any element contains the disjunction
of an atom and its negation, it must be true and hence can be removed from the
overall conjunction.
As soon as all disjunctions have been removed, the theorem
is proved — else it goes on forever.
This method is not particularly eﬃcient and served to prove a few very simple
theorems only.
Such algorithms became known as British Museum Algorithms.
That name was originally justiﬁed as follows:
“Thus we reﬂect the basic nature of theorem proving; that is, its na-
ture prior to building up sophisticated proof techniques. We will call
this algorithm the British Museum Algorithm, in recognition of the
supposed originators of this type.”
[Newell et al., 1957]
The name has found several more poplular explanations since. The nicest is the
following: If monkeys are placed in front of typewriters and they type in a guaran-
teed random fashion, they will reproduce all the books of the library of the British
Museum, provided they could type long enough.
141Cf. [Gilmore, 1960].
The idea is actually due to L¨owenheim and Skolem besides Herbrand,
as discussed in detail in § 3.
142Actually, the historic development of automated theorem proving did not follow Herbrand
but Skolem in choosing the duality validity–unsatisﬁablity. Thus, instead of proving validity of
a conjecture, the task was to show unsatisﬁablity of the negated conjecture. For this reason,
Gilmore actually used the disjunctive normal form here.

242
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
A few months later Martin Davis and Hilary Putnam (born 1926) experimented
with a better idea, where the multiplication method is replaced by what is now
known as the Davis–Putnam procedure.143
It works as follows: the initial for-
mula E is transformed (once and for all) into disjunctive normal form and then
the variables are systematically replaced by terms from the Herbrand universe as
before. But now the truth-functional check is replaced with a very eﬀective proce-
dure, which constituted a huge improvement and is still used today in many appli-
cations involving propositional logic.144 However, the most cumbersome aspect
remained: the systematic but blind replacement of variables by terms from the
Herbrand universe. Could we not ﬁnd these replacements in a more goal-directed
and intelligent way?
The ﬁrst step in that direction was done by Davis [1963] in a method called
linked conjuncts, where the substitution was cleverly chosen, so that it generated
the desired tautologies more directly.
And this idea ﬁnally led to the seminal
resolution principle discovered by J. Alan Robinson (born 1930), which dominated
the ﬁeld ever since.145
This technique — called a machine-oriented logic by Robinson — dispenses
with the systematic replacement from the Herbrand universe altogether and ﬁnds
the proper substitutions more directly by an ingenious combination of Cut and
a uniﬁcation algorithm. It works as follows: ﬁrst transform the formula E into
disjunctive normal form, i.e. into a disjunctive set of conjunctions. Now suppose
that the following elements are in this disjunctive set:
K1 ∧. . . ∧Km ∧L
and
¬L ∧M1 ∧. . . ∧Mn.
Then we can add their resolvent
K1 ∧. . . ∧Km ∧M1 ∧. . . ∧Mn
to this disjunction, simply because one of the previous two must be true if the
resolvent is true.
Now suppose that the literals L and ¬L are not already complementary because
they still contain variables, for example such as P(x, f(a, y)) and ¬P(a, f(z, b)).
It is easy to see, that these two atoms can be made equal, if we substitute a for
the variables x and z and the constant b for the variable y. The most important
aspect of the resolution principle is that this substitution can be computed by an
algorithm, which is called uniﬁcation. Moreover, there is always at most one (up
to renaming) most general substitution which uniﬁes two atoms, and this single
uniﬁer stands for the potentially inﬁnitely many instances from the Herbrand
universe that would be generated otherwise.
Robinson’s original uniﬁcation algorithm is exponential in time and space. The
race for the fastest uniﬁcation algorithm lasted more than a quarter of a century
and resulted in a linear algorithm and uniﬁcation theory became a (small) subﬁeld
of computer science, artiﬁcial intelligence, logic, and universal algebra.146
143Cf. [Davis and Putnam, 1960].
144Cf. The international SAT Competitions web page http://www.satcompetition.org/.
145Cf. [Robinson, 1965].
146Cf. [Siekmann, 1989] for a survey.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
243
Uniﬁcation theory had its heyday in the late 1980s, when the Japanese chal-
lenged the Western economies with the “Fifth Generation Computer Programme”
which was based among others on logical programming languages. The processors
of these machines realized an ultrafast uniﬁcation algorithm cast in silicon, whose
performance was measured not in MIPS (machine instructions per second), as with
standard computers, but in LIPS (logical inferences per second, which amounts to
the number of uniﬁcations per second).
A myriad of computing machinery was
built in special hardware or software on these new concepts and most industrial
countries even founded their own research laboratories to counteract the Japanese
challenge.147
Interestingly, Jacques Herbrand had seen the concept of a unifying substitution
and an algorithm already in his thesis in 1929. Here is his account in the original
French idiom:
“10. Si une des ´egalit´es `a satisfaire ´egale une variable restreinte x `a
un autre individu; ou bien cet individu contient x, et on ne peut
y satisfaire; ou bien il ne contient pas x; cette ´egalit´e sera alors
une des ´egalit´es normales cherch´ees; et on remplacera x par cette
fonction dans les autres ´egalit´es `a satisfaire.
20. Si une des ´egalit´es `a satisfaire ´egale une variable g´en´erale `a un
autre individu, qui ne soit pas une variable restreinte, il est im-
possible d’y satisfaire.
30. Si une des ´egalit´es `a satisfaire ´egale
f1(ϕ1, ϕ2, . . . , ϕn) `a f2(ψ1, ψ2, . . . , ψm),
ou bien les fonctions ´el´ementaires f1 et f2 sont diﬀ´erentes, auquel
cas il es impossible d’y satisfaire; ou bien les fonctions f1 et f2 sont
les mˆemes; auquel cas on remplace l’´egalit´e par celles obtenues en
´egalant ϕi `a ψi.”148
147Such as the European Computer-Industry Research Center (ECRC), which was supported
by the French company Bull, the German Siemens company, and the British company ICL.
148Cf. [Herbrand, 1930, p. 96f.]. Note that the reprint in [Herbrand, 1968, p.124] has “associ´ees”
instead of “normales”, which is not an improvement, and the English translation of [Herbrand,
1971, p.148] is based on this contorted version.
“1. If one of the equations to be satisﬁed equates a γ-variable xγ to another term; either this
term contains xγ, and then the equation cannot be satisﬁed; or else the term does not
contain xγ, and then the equation will be one of the normal-form equations we are looking
for, and we replace xγ by the term in the other equations to be satisﬁed.
2. If one of the equations to be satisﬁed equates a δ-variable to another term that is not a
γ-variable, the equation cannot be satisﬁed.
3. If one of the equations to be satisﬁed equates f1(ϕ1, ϕ2, . . . , ϕn) to f2(ψ1, ψ2, . . . , ψm);
either the function symbols f1 and f2 are diﬀerent, and then the equation cannot be satisﬁed;
or they are the same, and then we replace this equation with those that equate ϕi to ψi.”

244
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
ACKNOWLEGDGEMENTS
We would like to thank our second readers Irving H. Anellis, Paolo Bussotti, and
Lawrence C. Paulson for their numerous, extensive, deep, and most valuable and
helpful suggestions for improvement of previous versions of this paper. As always,
the second readers are, of course, not responsible for the remaining weaknesses.
Furthermore, we would like to thank John W. Dawson Jr., Christian G. Fer-
m¨uller, Bernhard Gramlich, Andreas Hallmann, Georg Ch. Moser, Peter Roquette,
Andrea Sattler-Klein, James T. Smith, and Magdalena Wolska for substantial help.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
245
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF JACQUES HERBRAND
To our best knowledge, the following bibliography of Jacques Herbrand (Jr.) is complete, with
the exception of his letters in [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. V, pp. 3–25] and [Roquette, 2008].
Note that for labels of the form [Herbrand . . . ], we have maintained the standard labeling
as introduced by Jean van Heijenoort in [Herbrand, 1968; 1971] and [Heijenoort, 1971a] as
far as appropriate.
For instance, Herbrand’s thesis is cited as [Herbrand, 1930] and not as
[Herbrand, 1930a], which would be the standard style of this handbook and which is in general
preferable due to the additional redundancy.
[Herbrand and Chevalley, 1931] Jacques Herbrand and Claude Chevalley. Nouvelle d´emonstra-
tion du th´eor`eme d’existence en th´eorie du corps de classes. Comptes rendus hebdomadaires
des s´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences (Paris), 193:814–815, 1931.
[Herbrand, 1928] Jacques Herbrand. Sur la th´eorie de la d´emonstration. Comptes rendus heb-
domadaires des s´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences (Paris), 186:1274–1276, 1928. Also in
[Herbrand, 1968, pp. 21–23].
Annotated English translation On Proof Theory by Warren
Goldfarb with an extended note by Burton Dreben and Goldfarb in [Herbrand, 1971, pp. 29–
34].
[Herbrand, 1929] Jacques Herbrand. Non-contradiction des axiomes arithm´etiques. Comptes
rendus hebdomadaires des s´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences (Paris), 188:303–304, 1929.
Also in [Herbrand, 1968, pp. 25–26]. Annotated English translation The Consistency of the
Axioms of Arithmetic by Warren Goldfarb in [Herbrand, 1971, pp. 35–37]. (An abstract of
[Herbrand, 1930, Chapter 4]).
[Herbrand, 1929a] Jacques Herbrand. Sur quelques propri´et´es des propositions vraies et leurs
applications. Comptes rendus hebdomadaires des s´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences (Paris),
188:1076–1078, 1929. Also in [Herbrand, 1968, pp. 27–29]. Annotated English translation On
several properties of true propositions and their applications by Warren Goldfarb in [Her-
brand, 1971, pp. 38–40]. (An abstract of [Herbrand, 1930, Chapter 5, § 6]).
[Herbrand, 1929b] Jacques Herbrand.
Sur le probl´eme fondamental des math´ematiques.
Comptes rendus hebdomadaires des s´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences (Paris), 189:554–556,
1929. Also in [Herbrand, 1968, pp. 31–33]. Annotated English translation On the Fundamen-
tal Problem of Mathematics by Warren Goldfarb in [Herbrand, 1971, pp. 41–43]. (An abstract
of [Herbrand, 1931]).
[Herbrand, 1930] Jacques Herbrand.
Recherches sur la Th´eorie de la D´emonstration.
PhD
thesis, Universit´e de Paris, 1930. Th`eses pr´esent´ees `a la facult´e des Sciences de Paris pour
obtenir le grade de docteur `es sciences math´ematiques — 1re th`ese: Recherches sur la th´eorie
de la d´emonstration — 2me th`ese: Propositions donn´ees par la facult´e, Les ´equations de
Fredholm — Soutenues le 1930 devant la commission d’examen — Pr´esident: M. Vessiot,
Examinateurs: MM. Denjoy, Frechet — Vu et approuv´e, Paris, le 20 Juin 1929, Le doyen de
la facult´e des Sciences, C. Maurain — Vu et permis d’imprimer, Paris, le 20 Juin 1929, Le
recteur de l’Academie de Paris, S. Charlety — No. d’ordre 2121, S´erie A, No. de S´erie 1252 —
Imprimerie J. Dziewulski, Varsovie — Univ. de Paris. Also in Prace Towarzystwa Naukowego
Warszawskiego, Wydzial III Nauk Matematyczno-Fizychnych, Nr. 33, Warszawa.
Also in
[Herbrand, 1968, pp. 35–153]. Annotated English translation Investigations in Proof Theory
by Warren Goldfarb (Chapters 1–4) and Burton Dreben and Jean van Heijenoort (Chapter 5)
with a brief introduction by Goldfarb and extended notes by Goldfarb (Notes A–C, K–M, O),
Dreben (Notes F–I), Dreben and Goldfarb (Notes D, J, and N), and Dreben, George Huﬀ, and
Theodore Hailperin (Note E) in [Herbrand, 1971, pp. 44–202]. English translation of § 5 with
a diﬀerent introduction by Heijenoort and some additional extended notes by Dreben also in
[Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 525–581].
(Herbrand’s Ph.D. thesis, his cardinal work, dated April 14,
1929; submitted at the Univ. of Paris; defended at the Sorbonne June 11, 1930; printed in
Warsaw, 1930.)
[Herbrand, 1930a] Jacques Herbrand.
Les bases de la logique hilbertienne.
Revue de M´eta-
physique et de Morale, 37:243–255, 1930. Also in [Herbrand, 1968, pp. 155–166]. Annotated
English translation The Principles of Hilbert’s Logic in [Herbrand, 1971, pp. 203–214].
(Her-
brand’s personal view on meta-mathematics and Hilbert’s programme).

246
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
[Herbrand, 1930b] Jacques Herbrand. Nouvelle d´emonstration et g´en´eralisation d’un th´eor`eme
de Minkowski.
Comptes rendus hebdomadaires des s´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences
(Paris), 191:1282–1285, 1930.
[Herbrand, 1931] Jacques Herbrand. Sur le probl`eme fondamental de la logique math´ematique.
Revue de M´etaphysique et de Morale, 24:12–56, 1931.
Also in [Herbrand, 1968, pp. 167–
207]. Annotated English translation On the Fundamental Problem of Mathematical Logic in
[Herbrand, 1971, pp. 215–271].
[Herbrand, 1931a] Jacques Herbrand.
Note non signe´e sur [Herbrand, 1930].
Annales de
l’Universit´e de Paris, 6:186–189, 1931. Also in [Herbrand, 1968, pp. 209–214]. English trans-
lation Unsigned Note on Herbrand’s Thesis written by Herbrand himself in [Herbrand, 1971,
pp. 272–276].
(The philosophy of metamathematics in the Hilbert school (roughly following
[Hilbert, 1928]) and the positioning of [Herbrand, 1930] in it are sketched for non-experts).
[Herbrand, 1931b] Inconsistent label replaced with [Herbrand, 1931d] or [Herbrand, 1932a].
[Herbrand, 1931c] Inconsistent label replaced with [Herbrand, 1932a].
[Herbrand, 1931d] Jacques Herbrand. Notice pour Jacques Hadamard. 1931. In [Herbrand, 1968,
pp. 215–219].
With annotations and a brief introduction by Jean van Heijenoort.
English
translation Note for Jacques Hadamard by Warren Goldfarb in [Herbrand, 1971, pp. 277–
281].
(Abstracts for non-experts of Herbrand’s mathematical contributions addressed to his
presenter to the Academy of Sciences).
[Herbrand, 1931e] Jacques Herbrand.
Sur la th´eorie des corps de nombres de degr´e inﬁni.
Comptes rendus hebdomadaires des s´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences (Paris), 193:594,
1931.
(Abstract of [Herbrand, 1932d; 1933]).
[Herbrand, 1931f] Jacques Herbrand. Sur la th´eorie des groupes de d´ecomposition, d’inertie et
de ramication. J. de Math. Pures et Appliqu´ees (J. Liouville), 9:481–498, 1931.
[Herbrand, 1932a] Jacques Herbrand. Sur la non-contradiction de l’Arithmetique. J. f¨ur die
reine und angewandte Mathematik (Crellesches J.), 166:1–8, 1932. Received July 27, 1931.
Without Hasse’s obituary also in [Herbrand, 1968, pp. 221–232]. Annotated English transla-
tion On the Consistency of Arithmetic in [Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 618–628]. Annotated English
translation also in [Herbrand, 1971], pp. 282–298.
(Consistency of arithmetic, foreshadowing
of (total) recursive functions, discussion of [G¨odel, 1931]).
[Herbrand, 1932b] Jacques Herbrand. Sur les classes des corps circulaires. J. de Math. Pures et
Appliqu´ees (J. Liouville), 9:417–441, 1932.
[Herbrand, 1932c] Jacques Herbrand. Sur les th´eor`emes du genre principal et des id´eaux princi-
paux. Abhandlungen aus dem mathematischen Seminar der Univ. Hamburg, 9:84–92, 1932.
[Herbrand, 1932d] Jacques Herbrand. Th´eorie arithm´etique des corps de nombres de degr´e inﬁni
— I. Extensions alg´ebriques ﬁnies de corps inﬁnis.
Mathematische Annalen, 106:473–501,
1932.
[Herbrand, 1932e] Jacques Herbrand. Une propri´et´e du discriminant des corps alg´ebriques. An-
nales Scientiﬁques d l’ ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure, 49:105–112, 1932.
[Herbrand, 1932f] Jacques Herbrand. Zur Theorie der algebraischen Funktionen. Mathematische
Annalen, 106:502, 1932.
[Herbrand, 1933] Jacques Herbrand. Th´eorie arithm´etique des corps de nombres de degr´e inﬁni
— II. Extensions alg´ebriques de degr´e inﬁni. Mathematische Annalen, 108:699–717, 1933. Ed.
and with a last paragraph by Claude Chevalley.
[Herbrand, 1936] Jacques Herbrand.
Le D´eveloppement Moderne de la Th´eorie des Corps
Alg´ebriques — Corps de classes et lois de r´eciprocit´e. M´emorial des Sciences Math´ematiques,
Fascicule LXXV. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1936. Ed. and with an appendix by Claude Cheval-
ley.
[Herbrand, 1968] Jacques Herbrand. ´Ecrits Logiques. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris,
1968. Ed. by Jean van Heijenoort. English translation is [Herbrand, 1971].
[Herbrand, 1971] Jacques Herbrand. Logical Writings. Harvard Univ. Press, 1971. Ed. by War-
ren Goldfarb. Translation of [Herbrand, 1968] with additional annotations, brief introductions,
and extended notes by Goldfarb, Burton Dreben, and Jean van Heijenoort.
(Still the best
source on Herbrand’s logical writings today).

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
247
REFERENCES
[Ackermann, 1925] Wilhelm Ackermann. Begr¨undung des ’tertium non datur‘ mittels der Hil-
bertschen Theorie der Widerspruchsfreiheit. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 93:1–36, 1925. Re-
ceived March 30, 1924.
[Ackermann, 1928] Wilhelm Ackermann. ¨Uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit gewisser Z¨ahlausdr¨ucke. Mathe-
matische Annalen, 100:638–649, 1928. Received Feb. 9, 1928.
[Ackermann, 1940] Wilhelm Ackermann. Zur Widerspruchsfreiheit der Zahlentheorie. Mathe-
matische Annalen, 117:163–194, 1940. Received Aug. 15, 1939.
[Andrews, 2002] Peter B. Andrews. An Introduction to Mathematical Logic and Type Theory:
To Truth Through Proof. Academic Press (Elsevier), 2002. 2nd ed. (1st ed. 1986).
[Andrews, 2003] Peter B. Andrews. Herbrand Award acceptance speech. J. Automated Reason-
ing, 31:169–187, 2003.
[Anellis, 1991] Irving H. Anellis. The L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem, theories of quantiﬁcation,
and proof theory. 1991. In [Drucker, 1991, pp. 71–83].
[Anellis, 1992] Irving H. Anellis. Logic and Its History in the Work and Writings of Jean van
Heijenoort. Modern Logic Publ., Ames (IA), 1992.
[Anellis, 2006] Irving H. Anellis.
G¨odel and the naming of Skolem functions.
In Sovremen-
naja logika: problemy teorii, istorii i primenenija v nauke. Materialy IX Obshcherossijskoj
nauchnoj konferencii. Sankt-Peterburg, June 22–24, 2006, pages 410–413. Izdatel´stvo Sankt
Peterburgskogo Universiteta, St. Peterburg, 2006. ISBN 5-288-03998-4.
[Artin and Schreier, 1927] Emil Artin and Otto Schreier.
Algebraische Konstruktion reeller
K¨orper. Abhandlungen aus dem mathematischen Seminar der Univ. Hamburg, 5:85–99, 1927.
Hamburg, Mathematisches Seminar, June 1926. Facsimile also in [Artin, 1965, pp. 258–272].
[Artin, 1927] Emil Artin. ¨Uber die Zerlegung deﬁniter Funktionen in Quadrate. Abhandlungen
aus dem mathematischen Seminar der Univ. Hamburg, 5:100–115, 1927. Hamburg, Mathe-
matisches Seminar, June 1926. Facsimile also in [Artin, 1965, pp. 273–288].
[Artin, 1965] Emil Artin. Collected Papers. Addison-Wesley, 1965. Ed. by Serge Lang and John
T. Tate. Reprinted 1982 by Springer.
[Autexier, 2005] Serge Autexier. The core calculus. In 20th Int. Conf. on Automated Deduction,
Tallinn, 2005, number 3632 in Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 84–98. Springer,
2005.
[Baaz and Ferm¨uller, 1995] Matthias Baaz and Christian G. Ferm¨uller.
Non-elementary
speedups between diﬀerent versions of tableaux. In Int. Conf. on Tableaus and Related Meth-
ods, TABLEAUX’95, number 918 in Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 217–230.
Springer, 1995.
[Baaz and Leitsch, 1995] Matthias Baaz and Alexander Leitsch. Methods of functional exten-
sion. Collegium Logicum — Annals of the Kurt G¨odel Society, 1:87–122, 1995.
[Badesa, 2004] Calixto Badesa. The Birth of Model Theory — L¨owenheim’s Theorem in the
Frame of the Theory of Relatives.
Princeton Univ. Press, 2004.
Translated by Micha¨el
Maudsley.
[Behmann, 1922] Heinrich Behmann.
Beitr¨age zur Algebra der Logik, insbesondere zum
Entscheidungsproblem. Mathematische Annalen, 86:163–229, 1922.
[Berka and Kreiser, 1973] Karel Berka and Lothar Kreiser, editors. Logik-Texte – Kommentierte
Auswahl zur Geschichte der modernen Logik.
Akademie-Verlag, Berlin, 1973.
2nd rev. ed.
(1st ed. 1971; 4th rev. rev. ed. 1986).
[Bernays and Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1928] Paul Bernays and Moses Sch¨onﬁnkel.
Zum Entscheidungs-
problem der mathematischen Logik. Mathematische Annalen, 99:342–372, 1928.
[Bernays, 1928] Paul Bernays. Zusatz zu Hilberts Vortrag ”Die Grundlagen der Mathematik“.
Abhandlungen aus dem mathematischen Seminar der Univ. Hamburg, 6:89–92, 1928. English
translation On the Consistency of Arithmetic in [Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 485–489].
[Bitbol and Gayon, 2006] Michel Bitbol and Jean Gayon, editors.
L’´epist´emologie fran¸caise,
1830–1970. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, 2006.
[Brady, 2000] Geraldine Brady. From Peirce to Skolem: A Neglected Chapter in the History of
Logic. North-Holland (Elsevier), 2000.

248
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
[Brouwer, 1925a] Luitzen Brouwer. Zur Begr¨undung der intutionistischen Mathematik I. Mathe-
matische Annalen, 93:244–257, 1925.
[Brouwer, 1925b] Luitzen Brouwer.
Zur Begr¨undung der intutionistischen Mathematik II.
Mathematische Annalen, 95:453–472, 1925.
[Brouwer, 1926] Luitzen Brouwer.
Zur Begr¨undung der intutionistischen Mathematik III.
Mathematische Annalen, 96:451–488, 1926.
[Cantor, 1932] Georg Cantor. Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen
Inhalts. Springer, 1932. Ed. by Ernst F. E. Zermelo, reprinted by Georg Olms Verlag, Hildes-
heim, 1962.
[Cartwright, 1965] Mary L. Cartwright. Jacques Hadamard (1865–1963). Biographical Memoirs
of Fellows of the Royal Society, 11:75–99, 1965.
[Chang and Lee, 1973] Chin-Liang Chang and Richard Char-Tung Lee. Symbolic logic and me-
chanical theorem proving. Academic Press (Elsevier), 1973.
[Chevalley and Lautman, 1931] Claude Chevalley and Albert Lautman. Notice biographique sur
Herbrand. Annuaire de l’Association amicale de secours des anciens ´el`eves de l’´Ecole Nor-
male Sup´erieure, 1931:13–15, 1931. Also in [Herbrand, 1968, pp. 13–15]. English translation
Biographical Note on Herbrand in [Herbrand, 1971, pp. 25–28].
[Chevalley, 1935] Claude Chevalley.
Sur la pens´ee de Jacques Herbrand.
L’Enseignement
Math´ematique, 34:97–102, 1935.
Also in [Herbrand, 1968, pp. 17–20].
English translation
On Herbrand’s Thought in [Herbrand, 1971, pp. 25–28].
[Chevalley, 1982] Claude Chevalley. Jacques Herbrand. 1982. In [Stern, 1982, pp. 1–2].
[Craig, 1957a] William Craig. Linear reasoning — a new form of the Herbrand–Gentzen Theo-
rem. J. Symbolic Logic, 22:250–268, 1957.
[Craig, 1957b] William Craig. Three uses of the Herbrand–Gentzen Theorem in relating model
theory and proof theory. J. Symbolic Logic, 22:269–285, 1957.
[Dalen, 1974] Dirk van Dalen. Review: Jacques Herbrand: Logical writings by Warren Goldfarb.
The Journal of Philosophy, 71:544–549, 1974.
[Davis and Putnam, 1960] Martin Davis and Hilary Putnam. A computing procedure for quan-
tiﬁcation theory. J. of the ACM, 7:201–215, 1960.
[Davis, 1963] Martin Davis. Eliminating the irrelevant from mechanical proofs. In Proceedings
of Symposia in Applied Mathematics, volume 15, pages 15–30, 1963. Also in [Siekmann and
Wrightson, 1983, Vol. 1, pp. 315–330].
[Dawson Jr., 1991] John W. Dawson Jr.
The reception of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems.
1991. In [Drucker, 1991, pp. 84–100].
[Dawson Jr., 1993] John W. Dawson Jr.
Prelude to recursion theory:
the G¨odel–Herbrand
correspondence. 1993. In [Wolkowski, 1993, pp. 1–13].
[Delzell, 1996] Charles N. Delzell. Kreisel’s unwinding of Artin’s proof. 1996. In [Odifreddi,
1996, pp. 113–246].
[Dieudonn´e, 1982] Jean Dieudonn´e.
Jacques Herbrand et la th´eorie des nombres.
1982.
In
[Stern, 1982, pp. 3–7].
[Dieudonn´e, 1999] Jean Dieudonn´e.
Claude Chevalley.
Transformation Groups, 4:103–113,
1999. Dedicated to the memory of Claude Chevalley.
[Dreben and Denton, 1963] Burton Dreben and John Denton. A supplement to Herbrand. J.
Symbolic Logic, 31(3):393–398, 1963.
[Dreben and Denton, 1970] Burton Dreben and John Denton.
Herbrand-style consistency
proofs. 1970. In [Myhill et al., 1970, pp. 419–433].
[Dreben et al., 1963] Burton Dreben, Peter B. Andrews, and St˚al Aanderaa. False lemmas in
Herbrand. Bull. AMS, 69:699–706, 1963.
[Drucker, 1991] Thomas Drucker, editor. Perspectives on the History of Mathematical Logic.
Birkh¨auser (Springer), 1991.
[Dubreil, 1983] Paul Dubreil.
Souvenirs d’un boursier Rockefeller 1929–1931.
Cahiers du
s´eminaire d’histoire des math´ematiques, 4:61–73, 1983.
[Dubucs and ´Egr´e, 2006] Jacques Dubucs and Paul ´Egr´e. Jacques Herbrand. 2006. In [Bitbol
and Gayon, 2006, pp. 301–322].

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
249
[Enderton, 1972] Herbert B. Enderton. A Mathematical Introduction to Logic. Academic Press
(Elsevier), 1972.
[Feferman, 1996] Sol(omon) Feferman. Kreisel’s “unwinding” program. 1996. In [Odifreddi,
1996, pp. 247–273].
[Feigenbaum and Feldman, 1963] Edward A. Feigenbaum and J. Feldman, editors. Computers
and Thought. McGraw-Hill, 1963.
[Frege, 1879] Gottlob Frege.
Begriﬀsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formel-
sprache des reinen Denkens. Verlag von L. Nebert, Halle an der Saale, 1879. pp. III–VIII and
pp. 1–54 also in [Berka and Kreiser, 1973, pp. 48–106].
English translation in: [Heijenoort,
1971a], pp. 1–82.
[Frege, 1884] Gottlob Frege.
Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik.
Verlag von M. & H. Marcus,
Breslau, 1884. Reprinted 1934, as facsimile: Georg Olms Verlag, Hildesheim, 1990.
[Frege, 1893/1903] Gottlob Frege. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik – Begriﬀsschriftlich abgeleitet.
Verlag von Hermann Pohle, Jena, 1893/1903. As facsimile with corrigenda by Christian Thiel:
Georg Olms Verlag, Hildesheim, 1998.
[Gentzen, 1935] Gerhard Gentzen. Untersuchungen ¨uber das logische Schließen. Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 39:176–210, 405–431, 1935. Also in [Berka and Kreiser, 1973, pp. 192–253]. English
translation in [Gentzen, 1969].
[Gentzen, 1936] Gerhard Gentzen. Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie. Mathe-
matische Annalen, 112:493–565, 1936. English translation in [Gentzen, 1969].
[Gentzen, 1938] Gerhard Gentzen. Die gegenw¨artige Lage in der mathematischen Grundlagen-
forschung – Neue Fassung des Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweises f¨ur die reine Zahlentheorie.
Forschungen zur Logik und zur Grundlegung der exakten Wissenschaften, Neue Folge, 4:3–
44, 1938. Reprinted as facsimile by Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, Verlag
von S. Hirzel, Stuttgart. English translation in [Gentzen, 1969].
[Gentzen, 1943] Gerhard Gentzen. Beweisbarkeit und Unbeweisbarkeit von Anfangsf¨allen der
transﬁniten Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie.
Mathematische Annalen, 119:140–161,
1943. Received July 9, 1942. English translation in [Gentzen, 1969].
[Gentzen, 1969] Gerhard Gentzen. The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen. North-Holland
(Elsevier), 1969. Ed. by Manfred E. Szabo.
[Gilmore, 1960] Paul C. Gilmore. A proof method for quantiﬁcation theory: Its justiﬁcation
and realization. IBM Journal Research and Development, 4:28–35, 1960. Also in [Siekmann
and Wrightson, 1983, Vol. I, pp. 151–161].
[G¨odel, 1930] Kurt G¨odel.
Die Vollst¨andigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalk¨uls.
Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 37:349–360, 1930. With English translation also in
[G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. I, pp. 102–123].
[G¨odel, 1931] Kurt G¨odel. ¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I.
Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 38:173–198, 1931.
With
English translation also in [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. I, pp. 145–195]. English translation also in
[Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 596–616].
[G¨odel, 1934] Kurt G¨odel. On Undecidable Propositions of Formal Mathematical Systems. The
Inst. for Advanced Study, 1934. Lecture notes by Stephen C. Kleene and J. Barkley Rosser.
With English translation also in [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ., Vol. I, pp. 346–372].
[G¨odel, 1939] Kurt G¨odel. Consistency proof for the generalized continuum hypothesis. In Proc.
of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 25, pages 220–224, 1939. Also in [G¨odel, 1986ﬀ.,
Vol. II, pp. 28–32].
[G¨odel, 1986ﬀ.] Kurt G¨odel. Collected Works. Oxford Univ. Press, 1986ﬀ. Ed. by Sol(omon)
Feferman, John W. Dawson Jr., Jean van Heijenoort, Stephen C. Kleene, et al..
[Goldfarb and Scanlon Jr., 1974] Warren Goldfarb and Thomas M. Scanlon Jr.
The ω-
consistency of number theory via Herbrand’s theorem. J. Symbolic Logic, 39:678–692, 1974.
[Goldfarb, 1993] Warren Goldfarb.
Herbrand’s error and G¨odel’s correction.
Modern Logic,
3:103–118, 1993.
[Gonseth, 1941] Ferdinand Gonseth, editor. Les Entretiens de Zurich sur les Fondements et la
M´ethode des Sciences Math´ematiques, Dec. 6–9, 1938. S. A. Leemann fr`eres & Cie., Z¨urich,
1941.

250
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
[Hadamard, 1949] Jacques S. Hadamard.
The Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical
Field. Princeton Univ. Press, 1949. 2nd rev. ed. (1st ed. 1945).
[Hasse and Herbrand Sr., 1931] Helmut Hasse and Jacques Herbrand Sr..
Letters exchanged
between Helmut Hasse and Jacques Herbrand Sr.. Available from the Nieders¨achsische Staats-
und Universit¨atsbibliothek – Abteilung f¨ur Handschriften und seltene Drucke, G¨ottingen,
Germany, 1931.
[Heijenoort, 1968] Jean van Heijenoort. On the relation between the falsiﬁability tree method
and the Herbrand method in quantiﬁcation theory. Unpublished typescript, Nov. 20, 1968,
12 pp.; Jean van Heijenoort Papers, 1946–1988, Archives of American Mathematics, Center
for American History, Univ. of Texas at Austin, Box 3.8/86-33/1. Copy in Anellis Archives,
1968.
[Heijenoort, 1971a] Jean van Heijenoort. From Frege to G¨odel: A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press, 1971. 2nd rev. ed. (1st ed. 1967).
[Heijenoort, 1971b] Jean van Heijenoort. Reviews of articles by G. E. Mints. J. Symbolic Logic,
36:524–528, 1971.
[Heijenoort, 1975] Jean van Heijenoort.
Herbrand.
Unpublished typescript, May 18, 1975,
15 pp.; Jean van Heijenoort Papers, 1946–1988, Archives of American Mathematics, Center
for American History, Univ. of Texas at Austin, Box 3.8/86-33/1. Copy in Anellis Archives,
1975.
[Heijenoort, 1982] Jean van Heijenoort. L’œuvre logique de Herbrand et son contexte historique.
1982. In [Stern, 1982, pp. 57–85].
[Heijenoort, 1986a] Jean van Heijenoort. Absolutism and relativism in logic. 1986. In [Hei-
jenoort, 1986b, pp. 75–83].
[Heijenoort, 1986b] Jean van Heijenoort. Selected Essays. Bibliopolis, Napoli, copyright 1985.
Also published by Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, Paris, 1986, 1986.
[Heijenoort, 1986c] Jean van Heijenoort. Herbrand’s work in logic and its historical context.
1986. In [Heijenoort, 1986b, pp. 99–121].
[Herbrand . . . , . . . ] Please search for labels on Herbrand in the bibliography preceeding this list
of references!
[Heyting, 1930a] Arend Heyting. Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik. Sitzungs-
berichte der Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin, Physikalisch-mathematische
Klasse II, 1930:42–56, 1930. Short version also in [Berka and Kreiser, 1973], pp. 173–178.
[Heyting, 1930b] Arend Heyting.
Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Mathematik.
Sitzungsberichte der Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Berlin,
Physikalisch-
mathematische Klasse II, 1930:57–71, 158–169, 1930.
[Heyting, 1971] Arend Heyting.
Intuitionism — An Introduction.
North-Holland (Elsevier),
1971. 3rd rev. ed. (1st ed. 1956).
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] David Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der theore-
tischen Logik. Springer, 1928.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1968/70] David Hilbert and Paul Bernays. Die Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik. Springer, 1968/70. 2nd rev. ed. (1st ed. 1934/39).
[Hilbert, 1922] David Hilbert. Neubegr¨undung der Mathematik (Erste Mitteilung). Abhandlun-
gen aus dem mathematischen Seminar der Univ. Hamburg, 1:157–177, 1922. Reprinted with
notes in [Hilbert, 1932ﬀ., Vol. 3, pp. 157–177].
[Hilbert, 1926] David Hilbert.
¨Uber das Unendliche.
Mathematische Annalen, 88(151–165),
1926. Received June 24, 1925. English translation On the inﬁnite by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg
with an introduction by Jean van Heijenoort in [Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 367–392].
[Hilbert, 1928] David Hilbert. Die Grundlagen der Mathematik – Vortrag, gehalten auf Ein-
ladung des Mathematischen Seminars im Juli 1927 in Hamburg.
Abhandlungen aus dem
mathematischen Seminar der Univ. Hamburg, 6:65–85, 1928. English translation The foun-
dations of mathematics by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg and Dagﬁnn Føllesdal with a short in-
troduction by Jean van Heijenoort in [Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 464–479].
[Hilbert, 1931] David Hilbert. Die Grundlegung der elementaren Zahlenlehre. Mathematische
Annalen, 104(485–494), 1931.
[Hilbert, 1932ﬀ.] David Hilbert. Gesammelte Abhandlungen. Springer, 1932ﬀ..
[Hintikka, 1996] K. Jaakko J. Hintikka. The Principles of Mathematics Revisited. Cambridge
Univ. Press, 1996.

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
251
[Howard and Rubin, 1998] Paul Howard and Jean E. Rubin.
Consequences of the Axiom of
Choice. American Math. Society, 1998.
[Kant, 1787] Immanu¨el Kant. Critik der reinen Vernunft. Johann Friedrich Hartknoch, Riga,
1787. 2nd rev. ed. (1st ed. 1781).
[Kleene, 1938] Stephen Cole Kleene.
On notation for ordinal numbers.
J. Symbolic Logic,
3(150–155), 1938.
[Kleene, 1952] Stephen Cole Kleene. Introduction to Metamathematics. North-Holland (Else-
vier), 1952.
[Kreisel, 1951] Georg Kreisel. On the interpretation of non-ﬁnitist proofs — Part I. J. Symbolic
Logic, 16:241–267, 1951.
[Kreisel, 1952] Georg Kreisel. On the interpretation of non-ﬁnitist proofs — Part II. J. Symbolic
Logic, 17:43–58, iv, 1952.
[Kreisel, 1958] Georg Kreisel.
Mathematical signiﬁcance of consistency proofs.
J. Symbolic
Logic, 23:155–182, 1958.
[Kreisel, 1982] Georg Kreisel. Finiteness theorems in arithmetic: an application of Herbrand’s
theorem for Σ2-formulas. 1982. In [Stern, 1982, pp. 39–55].
[Lemmermeyer and Roquette, 2006] Franz Lemmermeyer and Peter Roquette. Helmut Hasse–
Emmy Noether — Die Korrespondenz 1925–1935. Universit¨atsverlag G¨ottingen, 2006.
[L¨owenheim, 1915] Leopold L¨owenheim. ¨Uber M¨oglichkeiten im Relativkalk¨ul. Mathematische
Annalen, 76:228–251, 1915. English translation On Possibilities in the Calculus of Relatives
by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg with an introduction by Jean van Heijenoort in [Heijenoort,
1971a, pp. 228–251].
[Loveland, 1978] Donald W. Loveland. Automated Theorem Proving: A Logical Basis. North-
Holland (Elsevier), 1978.
[Marchisotto and Smith, 2007] Elena Anne Marchisotto and James T. Smith. The Legacy of
Mario Pieri in Geometry and Arithmetic. Birkh¨auser (Springer), 2007.
[Miller, 1992] Dale A. Miller.
Uniﬁcation under a mixed preﬁx.
J. Symbolic Computation,
14(321–358), 1992.
[Moore, 1987] Gregory H. Moore. A house divided against itself: The emergence of ﬁrst-order
logic as the basis for mathematics. 1987. In [Phillips, 1987, pp. 98–136].
[Myhill et al., 1970] John Myhill, Akiko Kino, and Richard Vesley, editors. Intuitionism and
Proof Theory. Proceedings of the International Conference Intuitionism and Proof Theory,
Buﬀalo, 1968. North-Holland (Elsevier), 1970.
[Neumann, 1925] John von Neumann. Eine Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre. J. f¨ur die reine
und angewandte Mathematik (Crellesches J.), 154:219–240, 1925. Correction in [Neumann,
1926].
English translation An Axiomatization of Set Theory by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg
with an introduction by Jean van Heijenoort in [Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 393–413].
[Neumann, 1926] John von Neumann. Berichtigung zu der Arbeit ”Eine Axiomatisierung der
Mengenlehre“. J. f¨ur die reine und angewandte Mathematik (Crellesches J.), 155:128, 1926.
Correction of [Neumann, 1925].
[Neumann, 1927] John von Neumann.
Zur Hilbertschen Beweistheorie.
Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 26:1–46, 1927. Received July 29, 1925.
(First occurrence of the notion of basic
typus (Grundtypus), the cardinal notion in the theory of ε-substitution. Clariﬁcation that the
consitency proof of [Ackermann, 1925] does not include second order with comprehension.)
[Neumann, 1928] John von Neumann. Die Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre. Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 27(669–752), 1928.
[Newell et al., 1957] Allen Newell, J. C. Shaw, and Herbert A. Simon. Empirical explorations
with the Logic Theory Machine: A case study in heuristics. In Proc. Western Joint Computer
Conf., pages 218–230. The Institute of Radio Engineers, New York, 1957. Also in [Feigenbaum
and Feldman, 1963, pp. 109–133]. Also in [Siekmann and Wrightson, 1983, Vol. I, pp. 49–73].
[Nicod, 1917] Jean Nicod. A reduction in the number of primitive propositions of logic. Proc.
Cambridge Philosophical Soc., 19:32–44, 1917.
[Nonnengart, 1996] Andreas Nonnengart. Strong skolemization. Research Report MPI-I-96-2-
010, Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Informatik, Im Stadtwald, D–66123 Saarbr¨ucken, 1996.

252
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
[Odifreddi, 1996] Piergiorgio Odifreddi, editor. Kreiseliana — About and Around Georg Kreisel.
A K Peters, Wellesley (MA), 1996.
[Parsons, 1998] Charles Parsons.
Finitism and intuitive knowledge.
1998.
In [Schirn, 1998,
pp. 249–270].
[Peirce, 1885] Charles S. Peirce. On the algebra of logic: A contribution to the philosophy of
notation. American J. of Mathematics, 7:180–202, 1885. Also in [Peirce, 1993, pp. 162–190].
[Peirce, 1993] Charles S. Peirce.
Writings of Charles S. Peirce — A Chronological Edition,
Vol. 5, 1884–1886. 1993. Ed. by Christian J. W. Kloesel.
[Phillips, 1987] Esther R. Phillips, editor. Studies in the History of Mathematics. Mathematics
Association of America, Washington (DC), 1987.
[Pieri, 1907/8] Mario Pieri. Sopra gli assiomi aritmetici. Il Bollettino delle seduta della Ac-
cademia Gioenia di Scienze Naturali in Catania, Series 2, 1–2:26–30, 1907/8. English trans-
lation On the Axioms of Arithmetic in [Marchisotto and Smith, 2007, § 4.2, pp. 308–313].
[Presburger, 1930] Moj˙zesz Presburger.
¨Uber die Vollst¨andigkeit eines gewissen Systems der
Arithmetik ganzer Zahlen, in welchem die Addition als einzige Operation hervortritt. In Spra-
wozdanie z I Kongresu metematyk´ow kraj´ow slowianskich, Warszawa 1929, (Comptes-rendus
du 1re Congr`es des Math´ematiciens des Pays Slaves, Varsovie 1929), pages 92–101+395, 1930.
Remarks and English translation: [Stanisfer, 1984].
[Reid, 1970] Constance Reid. Hilbert. Springer, 1970.
[Ribet, 1976] Kenneth A. Ribet. A modular construction of unramiﬁed p-extensions of Q(μp).
Inventiones mathematicae, 34:151–162, 1976.
[Robinson and Voronkow, 2001] Alan Robinson and Andrei Voronkow, editors.
Handbook of
Automated Reasoning. Elsevier, 2001.
[Robinson, 1965] J. Alan Robinson. A machine-oriented logic based on the resolution principle.
J. of the ACM, 12:23–41, 1965. Also in [Siekmann and Wrightson, 1983, Vol. 1, pp. 397–415].
[Roquette, 2000] Peter Roquette. On the history of Artins L-functions and conductors — seven
letters from Artin to Hasse in the year 1930. Mitteilungen der Mathematischen Gesellschaft
in Hamburg, 19:5–50, 2000. Web version updated July 23, 2003.
[Roquette, 2007] Peter Roquette. The correspondence Helmut Hasse–Jacques Herbrand. Per-
sonal e-mail communications with Peter Roquette. Cf. also [Roquette, 2008], 2007.
[Roquette, 2008] Peter Roquette, editor.
Helmut Hasse–Jacques Herbrand — The complete
correspondence, including the six letters of Herbrand to Hasse, dated from May 11 to July 23,
1931, and a letter from Joseph H. M. Wedderburn to Hasse on Herbrand’s planned visit to
Princeton, dated May 25, 1931. To appear.
[Rosser, 1936] J. Barkley Rosser. Extensions of some theorems of G¨odel and Church. J. Symbolic
Logic, 1:87–91, 1936.
[Rubin and Rubin, 1985] Herman Rubin and Jean E. Rubin.
Equivalents of the Axiom of
Choice. North-Holland (Elsevier), 1985. 2nd rev. ed. (1st ed. 1963).
[Scanlon Jr., 1973] Thomas M. Scanlon Jr. The consistency of number theory via Herbrand’s
Theorem. J. Symbolic Logic, 38:29–58, 1973.
[Schirn, 1998] Matthias Schirn, editor. The Philosophy of Mathematics Today. Oxford Univ.
Press, 1998.
[Schr¨oder, 1895] Ernst Schr¨oder. Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik, Vol. 3, Algebra der
Logik und der Relative, Vorlesungen I-XII. B. G. Teubner Verlagsgesellschaft, Leipzig, 1895.
English translation of some parts in [Brady, 2000].
[Sch¨utte, 1960] Kurt Sch¨utte. Beweistheorie. Springer, 1960.
[Sieg, 2005] Wilfried Sieg. Only two letters: The correspondence between Herbrand and G¨odel.
The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 11(2):172–184, 2005.
[Siekmann and Wrightson, 1983] J¨org Siekmann and Graham Wrightson, editors. Automation
of Reasoning. Springer, 1983.
[Siekmann, 1989] J¨org Siekmann. Uniﬁcation theory. J. Symbolic Logic, 7:207–274, 1989.
[Skolem, 1919] Thoralf Skolem. Untersuchungen ¨uber die Axiome des Klassenkalk¨uls und ¨uber
Produktations- und Summationsprobleme, welche gewisse Klassen von Aussagen betreffen.
Skrifter, Norske Videnskaps-Akademi i Oslo (= Videnskapsselskapet i Kristiania), Matema-
tisk-Naturvidenskapelig Klasse, J. Dybwad, Oslo, 1919/3:1–37, 1919. Dated May 26, 1917.
Also in [Skolem, 1970, pp. 67–101].
(First explicit occurrence of quantiﬁer elimination).

Jacques Herbrand: Life, Logic and Automated Deduction
253
[Skolem, 1920] Thoralf Skolem. Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen ¨uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit
und Beweisbarkeit mathematischer S¨atze nebst einem Theorem ¨uber dichte Mengen. Skrifter,
Norske Videnskaps-Akademi i Oslo (= Videnskapsselskapet i Kristiania), Matematisk-Natur-
videnskapelig Klasse, J. Dybwad, Oslo, 1920/4:1–36, 1920. Also in [Skolem, 1970, pp. 103–
136].
English translation of § 1 Logico-Combinatorial Investigations in the Satisﬁability or
Provability of Mathematical Propositions: A simpliﬁed proof of a theorem by Leopold L¨owen-
heim and generalizations of the theorem by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg with an introduction
by Jean van Heijenoort in [Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 252–263].
(L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem
via Skolem normal form and choice of a sub-model).
[Skolem, 1923a] Thoralf Skolem.
Begr¨undung der elementaren Arithmetik durch die rekur-
rierende Denkweise ohne Anwendung scheinbarer Ver¨anderlichen mit unendlichem Aus-
dehnungsbereich. Skrifter, Norske Videnskaps-Akademi i Oslo (= Videnskapsselskapet i Kris-
tiania), Matematisk-Naturvidenskapelig Klasse, J. Dybwad, Oslo, 1923/6:1–38, 1923. Written
1919. Also in [Skolem, 1970, pp. 153–188]. English translation The foundations of elementary
arithmetic established by means of the recursive mode of thought, without the use of apparent
variables ranging over inﬁnite domains by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg with an introduction by
Jean van Heijenoort in [Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 302–333].
[Skolem, 1923b] Thoralf Skolem. Einige Bemerkungen zur axiomatischen Begr¨undung der Men-
genlehre.
In Proc. 5th Scandinaviska Matematikerkongressen, Helsingfors, July 4–7, 1922,
pages 217–232, Helsingfors, 1923. Akademiska Bokhandeln. Also in [Skolem, 1970, pp. 137–
152].
English translation Some remarks on Axiomatized Set Theory by Stefan Bauer-
Mengelberg with an introduction by Jean van Heijenoort in [Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 290–301].
(The best written and, together with [Skolem, 1920], the most relevant publication on the
L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem; although there is some minor gap in the proof according to
Wang [1970], cured in [Skolem, 1929]. Includes Skolem’s Paradox and a proof of the L¨owen-
heim–Skolem Theorem which does not require any weak forms of the Axiom of Choice, via
Skolem normal form and construction of a model without assuming the previous existence of
another one).
[Skolem, 1928] Thoralf Skolem. ¨Uber die mathematische Logik (Nach einem Vortrag gehalten im
Norwegischen Mathematischen Verein am 22. Oktober 1928). Nordisk Matematisk Tidskrift,
10:125–142, 1928. Also in [Skolem, 1970, pp. 189–206]. English translation On Mathematical
Logic by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg and Dagﬁnn Føllesdal with an introduction by Burton
Dreben and Jean van Heijenoort in [Heijenoort, 1971a, pp. 508–524].
(First explicit occur-
rence of Skolemization and Skolem functions).
[Skolem, 1929] Thoralf Skolem. ¨Uber einige Grundlagenfragen der Mathematik. Skrifter, Norske
Videnskaps-Akademi i Oslo (= Videnskapsselskapet i Kristiania), Matematisk-Naturviden-
skapelig Klasse, J. Dybwad, Oslo, 1929/4:1–49, 1929. Also in [Skolem, 1970, pp. 227–273].
(Detailed discussion of Skolem’s Paradox and the L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem).
[Skolem, 1941] Thoralf Skolem. Sur la port´ee du th´eor`eme de L¨owenheim–Skolem. 1941. In
[Gonseth, 1941, pp. 25–52]. Also in [Skolem, 1970, pp. 455–482].
[Skolem, 1970] Thoralf Skolem. Selected Works in Logic. Universitetsforlaget Oslo, 1970. Ed.
by Jens E. Fenstad. (Without index, but with most funny spellings in the newly set titles).
[Smullyan, 1968] Raymond M. Smullyan. First-Order Logic. Springer, 1968.
[Stanisfer, 1984] Ryan Stanisfer.
Presburger’s Article on Integer Arithmetic:
Remarks and
Translation. Dept. of Computer Science, Cornell Univ., Ithaca, NY, 1984.
[Stern, 1982] Jacques Stern, editor. Proc. of the Herbrand Symposium, Logic Colloquium’81,
Marseilles, France, July 1981. North-Holland (Elsevier), 1982.
[Tait, 1981] William W. Tait. Finitism. J. of Philosophy, 78:524–546, 1981.
[Tait, 2006] William W. Tait. G¨odel’s correspondence on proof theory and constructive mathe-
matics. Philosophia Mathematica (III), 14:76–111, 2006.
[Tarski, 1951] Alfred Tarski. A Decision Method for Elementary Algebra and Geometry. Univ.
of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1951. 2nd rev. ed. (1st ed.: Rand Corporation,
Santa Monica (CA), 1948).

254
Claus-Peter Wirth, J¨org Siekmann, Christoph Benzm¨uller, Serge Autexier
[Vihan, 1995] Pˇremysl Vihan.
The last months of Gerhard Gentzen in Prague.
Collegium
Logicum — Annals of the Kurt G¨odel Society, 1:1–7, 1995.
[Wallen, 1990] Lincoln A. Wallen. Automated Proof Search in Non-Classical Logics. MIT Press,
1990.
[Wang, 1970] Hao Wang. A survey of Skolem’s work in logic. In [Skolem, 1970], pages 17–52,
1970.
[Weyl, 1921] Hermann Weyl. ¨Uber die neue Grundlagenkrise der Mathematik. Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 14:39–79, 1921.
[Weyl, 1928] Hermann Weyl.
Diskussionsbemerkungen zu dem zweiten Hilbertschen Vortrag
¨uber die Grundlagen der Mathematik. Abhandlungen aus dem mathematischen Seminar der
Univ. Hamburg, 6:86–88, 1928.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910–1913] Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell. Principia
Mathematica. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1910–1913. 1st ed. (2nd rev. ed. 1925ﬀ.).
[Wirth, 2004] Claus-Peter Wirth. Descente Inﬁnie + Deduction. Logic J. of the IGPL, 12:1–96,
2004.
[Wirth, 2006] Claus-Peter Wirth. lim+, δ+, and Non-Permutability of β-Steps. SEKI-Report
SR–2005–01 (ISSN 1437–4447). SEKI Publications, Saarland Univ., 2006. rev. ed. of July 30,
2006. http://www.ags.uni-sb.de/∼cp/p/nonpermut.
[Wirth, 2008a] Claus-Peter Wirth.
Hilbert’s epsilon as an operator of indeﬁnite committed
choice. J. Applied Logic, 2008. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jal.2007.07.009.
[Wirth, 2008b] Claus-Peter Wirth. Shallow conﬂuence of conditional term rewriting systems.
J. Symbolic Computation. To appear. http://www.ags.uni-sb.de/∼cp/p/shallow.
[Wittgenstein, 1939] Ludwig Wittgenstein. Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics, Cam-
bridge. Univ. of Chicago Press, copyright 1989, 1939. Cora Diamond (ed.), from the notes of
R. G. Bosanquet, Norman Malcolm, Rush Rhees, and Yorick Smythies.
[Wolkowski, 1993] Zbigniew Wolkowski, editor. 1st Int. Symposium on G¨odel’s Theorem, Paris,
May 27–29, 1991. World Scientiﬁc Publishing, 1993.
[Zach, 2001] Richard Zach. Hilbert’s Finitism: Historical, Philosophical, and Metamathematical
Perspectives. PhD thesis, Univ. of California, Berkeley, 2001.
[Zaremba, 1926] Stanislaw Zaremba. La Logique des Math´ematiques. M´emorial des Sciences
Math´ematiques, Fascicule XV. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1926.
[Zygmunt, 1991] Jan Zygmunt. Moj˙zesz Presburger: Life and work. History and Philosophy of
Logic, 12:211–223, 1991.

THE LOGIC OF THE TRACTATUS
Michael Potter
Most of the attention that has been paid to the Tractatus since it was published
in the early 1920s has focused on the metaphysical picture it paints of the world
and our role in it. Indeed, one recently inﬂuential school interprets the book as an
extended reductio of the attempt to paint any such picture at all. Whether or not
this is so, what is plain is that the book’s pretensions extend far beyond matters
of pure logic.
Nevertheless, it is a treatise in logic as well as a treatise in metaphysics — a
‘logico-philosophical treatise’, as its full title describes it — and in this handbook
we shall concentrate on the account it gives of logic. Notice, though, that I say
‘as well’, and for this reason it is not possible to give proper consideration to the
logical aspects of the work without considering the metaphysical ones too: the
method of the Tractatus is neither to deduce the structure of our language from
that of the world of which it attempts to speak nor, conversely, to deduce the
structure of the world from that of language, but rather to deduce the structure
of both from the necessary representing relationship between them.
Wittgenstein composed the Tractatus while serving in the Austrian army during
the First World War. It is possible to trace its genesis through the notebooks in
which he worked out many of its ideas between 1914 and the beginning of 1917,
and through the so-called Prototractatus, the ﬁrst draft of the work thought to
have been composed between 1915 and 1917. Two earlier sets of notes, dictated to
Russell in 1913 and Moore in 1914, also help to indicate the order of discovery, but
their usefulness as exegetical tools in interpreting the Tractatus itself is limited
by the fact that some of Wittgenstein’s logical views changed somewhat in the
meantime.
The principal inﬂuences on the logic of the Tractatus were Frege, with whom
Wittgenstein discussed logical matters on a handful of occasions before the war
and corresponded ﬁtfully (although not philosophically) during it; and Russell,
who supervised Wittgenstein’s work on logic in Cambridge between 1911 and 1913.
It is as well to bear these inﬂuences in mind throughout one’s reading of the work:
Wittgenstein’s method is frequently to explain his own view only by opposition to
Frege’s or Russell’s.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

256
Michael Potter
1
OBJECTS
Wittgenstein’s dependence on the previous work of Frege and Russell is evident
straightaway in what he says about the twin problems of how singular terms refer
to objects and how propositions express things about these objects that can be
either true or false. By drawing elements from each of their accounts Wittgenstein
aimed to avoid the diﬃculties of both.
The solution he came to involves a conception of the world as consisting of
objects standing in various combinations with one another: the ways objects may
stand in combination are called states of aﬀairs. The sum total of the ways they
do stand is the world. And so a complete description of the world would amount
to no more than a way of specifying which states of aﬀairs occur and which do
not.
The picture the Tractatus paints of the world is thus extremely austere. Its
simplicity is deceptive, however: a very large part of the book is taken up with
working out the consequences of this picture. Here, though, we shall concentrate
on the narrower task of explaining what the view amounts to and why Wittgenstein
was led to adopt it.
The ﬁrst point on which Wittgenstein had to adjudicate between Frege and
Russell was whether in the explanation of how singular terms refer there has
always to be a mediating element — what Frege called the ‘sense’ of the term —
serving to present in some particular fashion the object referred to, or whether
there is at least a subclass of the singular terms — what Russell called ‘logically
proper names’ — which refer to their objects directly without any intermediary.
Frege had adopted his ‘two-step’ semantics for singular terms in order to explain
the diﬀerence between ‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’, which is informative, and ‘Hespe-
rus is Hesperus’, which is not. The diﬀerence could not simply be a matter of the
ideas which I associate with the words ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’, since these
are private to me. Frege believed that when I utter a sentence, what I express —
he called it the ‘thought’ — occupies an inter-subjectively accessible ‘third realm’
of entities that are neither physical nor mental. What he sought was an account
which made the thought expressed diﬀerent in the two cases. He thought he could
achieve this only by associating with the two singular terms diﬀerent senses, i.e.
items lying in this same third realm that explain why the thoughts expressed by
the two sentences are diﬀerent.
Russell, on the other hand, while he shared Frege’s view that what the two
sentences express are diﬀerent, thought from 1905 onwards that this diﬀerence
could be explained by treating ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’ not as logically proper
names but as disguised deﬁnite descriptions. The diﬀerence in what is expressed
would then emerge through a diﬀerence in logical analysis.
But what was Russell’s reason for rejecting Frege’s two-step view?
In ‘On
denoting’ itself the reason he gives is the famous ‘Gray’s Elegy argument’ (so
called because one of the central examples he uses to explain the ﬂaw he sees in
the two-step view involves the singular term ‘The ﬁrst line of Gray’s Elegy’). But

The Logic of the Tractatus
257
in truth Russell seems to have designed the Gray’s Elegy argument to wield not
against Frege but against mixed theories such as the one he himself had advanced
in the Principles of Mathematics. According to that theory some singular terms
have both what he called a meaning and a denotation (or, in Fregean terms, a
sense and a reference), but there remain also logically proper names, which have
only a denotation. Although the Gray’s Elegy argument seems eﬀective against
this target, it is far from clear that it also works against a theory such as Frege’s
which makes every instance of reference go by way of an intermediate sense.
What seems most plausible as an explanation of this lacuna in Russell’s ar-
gument is that the one-step view was by the time he wrote ‘On denoting’ too
ingrained in Russell’s conception to require any argument. It had been one of the
cornerstones of his revolt against idealism in 1898 to suppose that propositions
succeed in being about the world only by containing parts of that very world. At
that time he had not yet come across Frege’s two-step semantic theory, but when
he did so a couple of years later, it would have seemed to him to fall into the old
idealism by making sentences be about the third realm of senses rather than about
the world itself.
Wittgenstein sided decisively with Russell’s one-step view, describing Russell’s
theory of descriptions as ‘quite certainly correct’. [Wittgenstein, 1995, p61] And
Wittgenstein’s reason was something like the one we have just ascribed to Russell,
namely that Frege’s theory does not correctly capture how sentences are expressive
of the way the world is. However, Wittgenstein’s formulation of his reason is not
easy to understand:
If the world had no substance, then whether a proposition had sense
would depend on whether another proposition was true. In that case we
could not sketch any picture of the world (true or false). [Wittgenstein,
1961, 2.0211–2.0212]
Not only is this passage highly compressed, but it makes use of notions —
substance, sense — which have not yet been deﬁned and, worse, whose precise
deﬁnitions depend on the very argument we are currently trying to understand.
Nevertheless, this is one of the central arguments of the Tractatus, and there is
little in the book that does not depend in some way on its conclusion, so we need
to do what we can to break into its argumentative circle. The best way to do this,
I think, is to adopt at this stage only a schematic understanding of the notions of
substance and sense. Let us assume at this stage, therefore, no more than that
our propositions express something about how the world is or could be: what
a propositions expresses is called its sense, and substance consists of the simple
objects whose existence Wittgenstein’s argument is intended to prove.
The basis of the argument for substance is Wittgenstein’s claim that the sense
of one proposition — what it expresses — cannot always be dependent on the
truth of another proposition. For if it were, he says, ‘it would then be impossible
to form a picture of the world (true or false).’ Wittgenstein seems to be appealing
here to a regress argument: in order that sense should be determinate, it should

258
Michael Potter
not, ultimately, depend on how the world is.
But we are in some danger at this point of returning to the explanatory circle
we have only just exited from. For it is not obvious why the regress should be
thought vicious unless we give the notion of sense the speciﬁc technical meaning
it has in the Tractatus. There the sense of a proposition consists in a division of
all the ways the world could be into two classes in such a way that the proposition
is true if the way the world is lies in one of the classes, false if it lies in the other.
This notion of sense would plainly be incoherent in the case of a proposition whose
sense depended on the truth of another proposition, since that other proposition
could be false (even if in fact it is not), and in that case the ﬁrst proposition would
not have a sense at all. So its sense would not divide all worlds into two classes as
required. But the notion of sense in the Tractatus has, as we have said, particular
features which belong to the same circle of ideas as the notion of substance he
is here trying to justify. Shorn of these features, it is not immediately clear why
sense should not be determinate despite depending on how the world is.
If, however, we grant Wittgenstein his claim that whether propositions have
sense must be independent of how the world is, how does it follow that the world
has substance — is made up, that is to say, out of simple objects?
Elizabeth
Anscombe [Anscombe, 1967, ch4] has suggested an argument roughly as follows.
Consider the sentence ‘A is tall’. There are two sorts of circumstance that would
make this sentence false: it might be that there is no person A, tall or not; or it
might be, on the other hand, that there is an A, but he is not tall. In this way,
the sentence is capable of two sorts of falsity: we may distinguish these by calling
them, respectively, external and internal falsity. Is it possible that all propositions
are capable of both kinds of falsity? Wittgenstein’s view is that it is not. His
reason is that in order to understand what it would be for ‘A is tall’ to have the
external kind of falsity, we should have to know what it would be for ‘A exists’
to be false. The latter sentence says that the constituents of A are arranged in
the right way; so in order to grasp its sense we should have to know the truth
of a certain proposition describing the construction of A from his constituents
and saying that they are conﬁgured in such a way as to form A. Plainly, if every
sentence were capable of external falsity, we should have to know the truth of some
proposition in order to know the sense of another [Wittgenstein, 1961, 2.0211]. But
for Wittgenstein that would, as already noted, be absurd. He inferred that there
must be propositions that admit of only one kind of negation.
Now Russell’s theory provides a way of analysing the distinction between inter-
nal and external negation. A sentence will have both sorts of negation just in case
its correct logical analysis contains a deﬁnite description. If, in our present exam-
ple, ‘A’ is really an abbreviation for ‘John’s only son’, Russell’s analysis allows us
to distinguish the external negation, ‘it is not the case that John has just one son
who is tall’, from the internal one, ‘John has just one son and he is not tall’. So if
there are, in the ﬁnal logical analysis, to be sentences with only one negation, and
therefore only one sort of truth or falsity, the singular terms they contain must be
not disguised deﬁnite descriptions but logically proper names. Thus if we accept

The Logic of the Tractatus
259
Russell’s theory of descriptions, we do indeed have an argument that determinacy
of sense requires there to be logically proper names.
Notice, though, that this argument, like Russell’s in ‘On denoting’, still does
not seem to give us a reason to adopt the distinction between deﬁnite descriptions
and logically proper names in the ﬁrst place.
For that we need to return to
the idea that what a proposition expresses (i.e. its sense) should determine a
division of ways the world could be (more brieﬂy, possible worlds) into those that
make the proposition true and those that make it false. Wittgenstein’s idea seems
to have been that it is incoherent to conceive of some aspects of the world as
varying without correspondingly conceiving of other aspects as remaining ﬁxed.
If everything varies, that is to say, we lose our grip on the very idea of variation.
Our notion of variability is inherently relative: something varies in relation to
something else; it does not simply vary on its own.
In order for sense to be determinate, then, there need to be ﬁxed elements,
hinges, so to speak, around which the possibilities turn.
These ﬁxed elements
are what Wittgenstein calls objects. They are, that is to say, the substance of
the world. What will vary between worlds, on this conception, will not be the
objects, which are by deﬁnition constant between diﬀerent possible worlds, but
the ways in which the objects are arranged. The word Wittgenstein uses for a
way objects could be arranged is Sachverhalt, which is rendered ‘atomic fact’ in
the ﬁrst English translation of the Tractatus [Wittgenstein, 1922], ‘state of aﬀairs’
in the second [Wittgenstein, 1961]: here we shall conform with the second and
translate Sachverhalt as state of aﬀairs.
Now I cautioned at the outset against reading the argument of the Tractatus
as being conducted either within logic or within metaphysics exclusively, and here
we have an instance of this duality being played out. For although it might seem
at ﬁrst as if the argument we have just given for conceiving of the world as made
up out of simple objects is purely metaphysical, closer inspection reveals that it is
not. The world in question here is a world represented in language. If we dropped
that assumption, we could conceive of the world as varying continuously like a
ﬂuid: that would allow us to retain our conception of variation as relative but not
commit us to simple objects around which the variation is to hinge. Wittgenstein’s
atomism is therefore essentially dependent on his conception of language as lying
in a harmonious representing relation to the world.
Notice, too, how by treating the notion of an object as simply a building block
in his construction of the notion of possibility Wittgenstein makes it trivially the
case that any two possible worlds have the same objects. If something might not
have existed, what that reveals, for Wittgenstein, is that the thing in question is
actually complex, since for something not to exist is itself a sort of complexity.
And if there were two ways a world could be with no objects at all in common,
it would not be correct to describe them as ways the same world could be; but
rather they would be wholly distinct worlds with nothing whatever to do with one
another.
Our argument for simple objects, then, is linguistic as well as metaphysical.

260
Michael Potter
And its conclusion, too, is played out in language as well as in the world. For the
way in which simple objects are represented in language is by the simple items
which Russell had called logically proper names but which Wittgenstein calls just
names. And the way in which states of aﬀairs are represented is by concatenations
of names called elementary propositions.
2
STATES OF AFFAIRS
2.1
Picturing
The fundamental unit in language, we have just noted, is a concatenation of names,
which is supposed to correspond to a state of aﬀairs in the world. But how does
a concatenation of names correspond to a state of aﬀairs?
We have seen that
Wittgenstein had a choice between Frege’s and Russell’s theories of how a name
refers to an object, and chose Russell’s. At this point he once more had a choice,
this time between their accounts of the structure of propositions, but now he chose
something much more like Frege’s account.
Russell’s theory had been that a proposition is a sort of complex entity com-
posed of the things it is about. But just as Russell’s old theory of denoting faced
a diﬃculty over explaining the connexion between a denoting complex and its
denotation, so his old conception of a proposition as a complex faces a diﬃculty
when it comes to explaining the connexion between this complex and the puta-
tive fact it expresses. The complex cannot express a fact on its own, so we are
naturally tempted to posit a third thing — propositionally expressive glue, so to
speak — which combines the elements in the complex in such a way as to make
them expressive of the fact. But this is only to postpone the problem, not to solve
it, since we are now owed a corresponding explanation of the expressiveness of a
new proposition, namely the one which says that the original proposition asserts
a fact.
This is known as ‘Bradley’s regress’, and versions of it dogged Russell’s attempts
to explain the expressive unity of the proposition until he adopted a theory (the
multiple relation theory of judgment) which abandoned the idea that the propo-
sition is an entity of any kind at all. Now the multiple relation theory is rejected
in the Tractatus, but we shall come to Wittgenstein’s reasons for this later. In the
meantime let us merely contrast Russell with Frege, who avoided the diﬃculty of
Bradley’s regress by supposing that what makes a proposition expressive is the
unsaturatedness of the predicate or relation symbol it contains. Thus he analysed
the sentence ‘aRb’, for example, as formed by substituting the names ‘a’ and ‘b’
into the argument places in the expression ‘xRy’. Writing the relational expres-
sion as ‘xRy’ rather than just ‘R’ is a way of reminding us that it is unsaturated,
requiring the addition of two names if it is to form a complete expression (a sen-
tence). Frege does not posit a further element, the ‘copula’ of traditional logic,
gluing ‘a’, ‘b’ and ‘R’ together to form ‘aRb’, because the relational expression
‘xRy’ already contains, through its unsaturatedness, the requisite glue.

The Logic of the Tractatus
261
But how does this explain the expressiveness of ‘aRb’? Frege’s view was that
the unsaturated relation symbol ‘xRy’ has corresponding to it something which,
although not an object, is nevertheless objective: he called it a relation.
The
relation is unsaturated in just the same way that the relation symbol is. So if it is
determinate what relation ‘xRy’ expresses and what objects ‘a’ and ‘b’ refer to, no
further resources are needed to determine the thought expressed by the sentence
‘aRb’.
What Wittgenstein’s picture theory does is to extract this insight from its
Fregean context and transpose it to a Tractarian key. What is lost in the trans-
position is Frege’s division of the objective items into two types, unsaturated ones
called concepts and relations, and saturated ones called objects.
Wittgenstein
saw that it is arbitrary to regard the concept as unsaturated and the object as
saturated, and hence abolished this way of distinguishing between them. When
it comes to considering the range of possibilities that are expressible in language,
simple concepts and relations are just as much constant elements around which
the possibilities hinge as Fregean objects are: both, therefore, have equal title to
be regarded as objects in the sense of the Tractatus.
It is important to realize, though, that what Wittgenstein was doing was not to
abolish the distinction between objects and concepts, but only to deny that it is a
binary distinction based on saturatedness. It remains as important for Wittgen-
stein as it was for Frege to recognize that the predicate ‘xRy’ has a diﬀerent form
from the name ‘a’. But for Wittgenstein that diﬀerence is to be expressed not in
terms of saturatedness but rather in terms of the possibilities that exist for combin-
ing these expressions with others to form propositions. Thus a Fregean language
containing relation symbols and names can be straightforwardly redescribed as a
Wittgensteinian language in which the Fregean names are now Tractarian names
of a certain form and the Fregean relation symbols are Tractarian names of another
form. What Wittgenstein’s account leaves open that Frege’s does not, however, is
that there might be further forms of object that cannot be described in Fregean
terms.
2.2
States of aﬀairs
Objects are permanent; what varies between possible worlds is not them but how
they are conﬁgured to form states of aﬀairs. These conﬁgurations are represented
linguistically by names concatenated to form elementary propositions. And the
objects are conﬁgured in the state of aﬀairs in just the same way as the names are
in the elementary proposition. What can we deduce from this conception about
the structure of the states of aﬀairs?
The ﬁrst thing to note is that objects need not be substitutable for one another:
if a occurs in a state of aﬀairs, there need not be another state of aﬀairs obtain-
able by substituting b for a in this state of aﬀairs. The range of possibilities of
occurrence of a in states of aﬀairs is its form. So what we have just noted is that
there may be more than one form of object.

262
Michael Potter
Since objects are unchanging, the number of objects of any one form is ﬁxed.
But the system does not tell us what that number is: nothing prevents there
being only one object of a certain form, for example. The forms themselves, on
the other hand, are rather more heavily constrained. Wittgenstein ﬁrst rules out
a form which involved no possibilities of combination at all, not because it is
absurd but because it is pointless. An object of such a form would not belong to
any states of aﬀairs at all, even non-occurring ones, and the corresponding name
would not belong to any elementary propositions, true or false. So there would be
no conceivable way of using the name, and hence the name would not really be
meaningful. ‘If a sign is useless, it is meaningless. That is the point of Occam’s
maxim.’ [Wittgenstein, 1961, 3.328].
In the last section we mentioned Wittgenstein’s use of the picturing metaphor
to explain the way in which an elementary proposition succeeds in expressing
a state of aﬀairs. Some commentators have been misled by this metaphor into
supposing that the way in which objects combine is to be thought of as itself a
substantive item capable of varying even though the objects remain ﬁxed. They
have supposed, for instance, that there might be various ways of conﬁguring the
same objects a and b to form a state of aﬀairs, ways which we might represent
linguistically by putting the name ‘a’ in various spatial relationships — to the left,
above, diagonally to the right — to the name ‘b’:
ab
a
b
ab.
Now we can see straightaway that there is no symbolic necessity to represent these
states of aﬀairs in this way. We could more conventionally (and with rather greater
typographical convenience) represent them, for instance,
aLb
aAb
aEb,
using the relation symbols ‘xLy’, ‘xAy’ and ‘xEy’ to play the role of the spatial
relationships — to the left, above, diagonally to the right — in the previous no-
tation. In this new notation the states of aﬀairs are now represented as having
a third dimension of variability, and the various conﬁgurations of a and b have
apparently been transformed into objects lying in this third position.
So far, though, we have only produced another means of representation: we
have not yet shown that the previous means could not be for Wittgenstein an
equally acceptable alternative. To show that it could not, we have to see how it
contravenes Wittgenstein’s conception of how the symbolism represents.
If I know an object I also know all its possible occurrences in states of
aﬀairs. (Every one of these possibilities must be part of the nature of
the object.) A new possibility cannot be discovered later. [Wittgen-
stein, 1961, 2.0123]
The spatial conﬁgurations we considered earlier contravene this constraint, since
they allow that I might know a and b as occurring in the state of aﬀairs ab and

The Logic of the Tractatus
263
yet be wholly unaware of the alternative possibility that they combine to form the
state of aﬀairs ab.
But if 2.0123 shows that Wittgenstein wished his symbolism to rule out these
conﬁgurations, it does not really explain why. This is because his reason is essen-
tially symbolic in origin. If we think of the form of a name as playing the role
in Tractarian symbolism that a part of speech plays in ordinary language, then
what we are rejecting as incoherent can be thought of as a language in which the
same word functions as two diﬀerent parts of speech. Wittgenstein’s point is that
any case we are tempted to describe in this way should rather be described as a
case of two diﬀerent words with only a verbal similarity connecting them. You
cannot grasp a word without grasping which part of speech it is; and equally once
you have grasped a word as a particular part of speech, you cannot subsequently
discover that the very same word also functions as a diﬀerent part of speech.
It is as important to be clear about what this does not show as about what it
does. It does not show that it would be in some way incorrect to represent spatial
relations between objects by means of corresponding spatial relations between
names. Quite the reverse: as Wittgenstein’s choice of the metaphor of picturing
strongly suggests, such a means of representation would be for him a paradigm case
of representation. The mistake is only to treat the diﬀerent spatial relationships
logically as diﬀerent grammatical forms rather than as diﬀerent objects capable of
participating in one form.
We can also show by similar means that a single object on its own cannot
constitute a state of aﬀairs: every proposition is composite [Wittgenstein, 1961,
5.5261]. For the diﬃculty with supposing that a single object a occurs as a state
of aﬀairs is that our symbolism bars us from conceiving of this state of aﬀairs as
not obtaining: the object cannot fail to exist, and hence neither can the state of
aﬀairs.
But how can a single word be true or false? At any rate it cannot
express the thought that agrees or does not agree with reality. That
must be articulated.
A single word cannot be true or false in this sense: it cannot agree
with reality, or the opposite. [Wittgenstein, 1979, 5 Oct. 1914]
There is, in other words, no such thing as an unarticulated state of aﬀairs. The
situation in which all there seems to be is a single object is not correctly repre-
sentable as such. It ought instead to be described by positing another object — a
logical spirit level, if you like — against which a either stands or does not stand.
2.3
Logical and epistemological atomism
According to Wittgenstein, then, we inevitably represent the world as made up
from simple entities which he calls objects and which are represented in language
by names. He may thus be described as an advocate of atomism. So too was
Russell, at least during the period that concerns us here.
And it was of the

264
Michael Potter
essence of the conception they shared that the link between a name and its object,
once established, should be unbreakable. My representation of the world cannot
allow for the possibility that a name I use should fail to refer to an object, since
to allow for such a possibility is to represent the object as complex and hence to
deny that it is what I was representing it as. Where Russell and Wittgenstein
diﬀered, and diﬀered radically, was in the conclusions they drew from this need
for an unbreakable link between name and object.
Russell interpreted the constraint epistemologically as the requirement that an
object I can name should be one about whose existence and identity I cannot be
mistaken, and hence one with which I have immediate acquaintance. His paradigm
examples of such objects were sense data. Although I may be mistaken about
whether I see a tree outside my window — it might, I suppose, be a trick of the
light — it is incontrovertible that I am experiencing a tree-like sense datum. But
the diﬃculty with this is that however unmistakable the sense datum, I seem to
be able to represent the possibility that it might not have existed.
And yet if I treat sense data as logically simple, I cannot really represent such
a possibility. I am forced to conclude that the possibility I appear to be able to
represent is illusory. All I can truly represent is the world of my experience, and
talk of other diﬀerent experiences I could have had but didn’t is really a misleading
way of talking about the experiences I have actually had.
For Wittgenstein, by contrast, the argument moves in the opposite direction.
He takes the very notion of representation to involve that of possibility, since to
represent the world as being a certain way is to represent it as being that way as
opposed to other ways it could have been. Since nothing can be both contingent
and simple, it follows in particular that our experience, which we represent as
contingent, is not simple. To interpret objects as sense data would therefore be to
restrict severely the applicability of the Tractatus. Tractarian objects cannot be
anything we normally represent as items of experience, since we represent all such
things as contingent. This is not to say, of course, that a sense-datum language
— a language in which the names refer to sense data — would be unTractar-
ian, but merely that our representational practices, which represent sense data as
contingent, give us reason to deny that our language is a sense-datum language.
Russell coined the phrase ‘logical atomism’ in 1911 to describe his own position,
but a brief way to put the contrast might be to describe Russell’s atomism rather
as epistemological, and reserve the term logical atomism for Wittgenstein’s. It is
a contrast that runs deep in their philosophies of the period and is implicated
in almost every other diﬀerence between them, but a failure to appreciate it has
nevertheless been one of the most common misreadings of the Tractatus.
The
reason for this misreading cannot be traced to the inﬂuence of Russell’s atomistic
writings alone, however. It is due also to the espousal of the Tractatus by the
logical positivists of the Vienna Circle, whose scientiﬁc empiricism made it hard
for them to read the work any other way.
The tendency to read the Tractatus as committed to an identiﬁcation of objects
with sense data is exacerbated by the fact that Wittgenstein himself had some

The Logic of the Tractatus
265
sympathy with this idea both before he wrote it and afterwards.
Thus in the
Notebooks as late as 1915 we ﬁnd him identifying the concept of the object with
the concept ‘this’; and two days later he grants that it seems
perfectly possible that patches in our visual ﬁeld are simple objects . . . ;
the visual appearances of stars even seem certainly to be so. [Wittgen-
stein, 1979, 18 June 1915]
And when he admits a decade after the Tractatus that ‘I do not now have phe-
nomenological language, or “primary language” as I used to call it, in mind as my
goal’, [Wittgenstein, 1975, I, sn1] it is hard not to interpret him as implying that
he at one time believed the correct analysis of language to be phenomenological.
But whatever his views before and after he wrote the Tractatus, in the book
itself Wittgenstein remains non-committal as to the identity of the objects. He
goes as far as to say that space, time and colour are forms of objects, but it is a
little surprising to ﬁnd him saying even this, since it is an isolated remark that
does not lead anywhere. And aside from this one remark he simply ignores the
question as being outside the remit of the logician.
What we have seen, then, is that Wittgenstein is not concerned in the Tractatus
with studying parochial features of the epistemology of the language we happen
to ﬁnd ourselves using. That is not to say, though, that it is a work in which
epistemology does not feature. Indeed where epistemology occurs it can be located
quite precisely. Among the possible worlds which our language allows for, there
is one which is privileged by virtue of being the actual world. But this privilege
cannot be a feature of the representational scheme itself: once the scheme has
been ﬁxed, there is no logical diﬀerence between the actual world and any of the
others. What distinguishes the actual world, therefore, is only that it is the one
we experience. We shall see later how this distinction impacts on Wittgenstein’s
account of the self.
2.4
Realism in the Tractatus
The Philosophical Investigations, largely composed during the Second World War,
was the ﬁrst of Wittgenstein’s later (post-1930) works to be published, and it
encouraged the notion that his later position was opposed to, and represented a
clean break from, that of the Tractatus. A feature of this characterisation was
the attribution to the Tractatus of a certain kind of realism, namely the view
that the facts of the world are wholly independent of the subject.
That this
misconstrues the Tractatus is clear from Wittgenstein’s equation of realism with
solipsism [Wittgenstein, 1961, 5.64]. His realism, if that is what it is, was intended
to avoid the perspective from which the self and the world are separate entities.
Instead, and solipsistically, he regarded the self, not as a part of the world, but
as constituting its limits. This is plainly not realism in the traditional sense in
which it is opposed to idealism. Indeed Wittgenstein once remarked that realism,
idealism and solipsism coincide. The reason is that once we have adopted the

266
Michael Potter
conception Wittgenstein is recommending, according to which the self (i.e. the
representing relation between language and the world) shrinks to an extensionless
point, all that is left is language or, equally, the world. We were tempted at ﬁrst
to see the gap between these two — the gap on either side of which realism and
idealism stand — as being bridged by the self, which represents one by means of
the other. But now the gap has simply disappeared.
Perhaps, though, Wittgenstein’s realism was of another sort: perhaps it says
something, not about the relation between the subject and the world, but about
that between our representations and the world they are supposed to represent.
Perhaps it says that the world is independent of our attempts to depict it in
language. We can assess this proposal by considering the Tractarian doctrine of
internal properties. The internal properties of an object are those it could not
but have: it is unthinkable that this object should not possess those properties
[Wittgenstein, 1961, 4.123, 2.012]. Its external properties, on the other hand, are
given by those conﬁgurations into which it actually does enter [Wittgenstein, 1961,
2.0123-2.01231].
Now the form of an object consists in its possibilities of occurrences in states of
aﬀairs, i.e. the ways in which it can hang together with other objects to form a state
of aﬀairs. But it might be that two objects had the same form. It would then be
the case that they possessed certain essential features that had no bearing on their
possibilities of occurrence in states of aﬀairs. In that case, such features would fail
to ﬁnd expression within language in the syntactic rules governing names standing
for the objects, since these are determined only by the possible states of aﬀairs
into which the corresponding objects can enter. So if there are two objects with
the same possibilities of conﬁguration but divergent essential properties, there will
be nothing in the signs themselves or in their possibilities of combination in virtue
of which, of two names ‘a’ and ‘b’, one refers to one of these objects and one to the
other. It cannot be said, because we can only say things about external properties.
But could it be shown? After all, there would be nothing in the logical rules of
language to show it: for any context
x
, ‘
a
’ would make sense just in case
‘
b
’ made sense. The answer must presumably be that ‘a’ is shown to mean a
rather than b by our use of ‘a’ to mean a.
Notice, though, that what is involved in showing this need not be especially mys-
terious. How it comes about is by means of what Wittgenstein calls ‘elucidations’.
These constitute the one point at which Wittgenstein’s system makes contact with
epistemology, and hence (arguably) with realism. Elucidations succeed in picking
out a and not b because a and b have, in the actual world, diﬀerent (external)
properties. This point is therefore coeval with the adoption of a stance regarding
the relation of language and world that is, after a fashion, realistic. If ‘a’ and ‘b’
are names of the same form, my use of ‘a’ means a rather than b only because
I am acquainted with a and hence can distinguish it from b. In explaining this
point Wittgenstein uses the German kennen: perhaps he intends this as a trans-
lation of Russell’s notion of acquaintance. Elucidations, Wittgenstein is therefore
saying, [Wittgenstein, 1961, 3.263] can only be understood by acquaintance with

The Logic of the Tractatus
267
the objects in question.
3
PROPOSITIONS
3.1
Sense
We have now seen how Wittgenstein conceived of the world, as consisting of all the
occurrent states of aﬀairs. Let us turn now to his conception of how we represent
this world. The fundamental idea is that this is not a matter merely of describing
the world — listing, that is to say, all the states of aﬀairs that occur. If we are to
represent the world, it is essential that we encompass not only how the world is but
also how it could be but isn’t. What is expressive, in other words, is not simply
saying that the world is a certain way, but saying that it is this way in contrast
to some other way it could have been. The purpose of this chapter will be to
explain this idea of representation in more detail and to sketch how Wittgenstein
conceived of the structure of languages fashioned to achieve it.
For each way that objects could be arranged, they may or may not actually be
arranged that way: each state of aﬀairs, that is to say, may or may not occur.
The world, Wittgenstein says, is just the totality of those states of aﬀairs that do
occur [Wittgenstein, 1961, 2.04]. So if there are N states of aﬀairs, there are 2N
possible worlds, one for each possibility of existence and non-existence of states of
aﬀairs [Wittgenstein, 1961, 4.27]. A propositional sense consists in agreement or
disagreement with possibilities of existence and non-existence of states of aﬀairs:
[Wittgenstein, 1961, 4.2] in other words, it divides all possible worlds into two
classes and agrees with all those in one class, disagrees with all those in the other.
For N states of aﬀairs, there are 22N such divisions [Wittgenstein, 1961, 4.42].
Notice, though, that among these divisions there are two that are somewhat trivial:
that of agreement with all possible worlds, which Wittgenstein calls tautological;
and that of disagreement with all, which he calls contradictory. However, their
very triviality — they are not really divisions at all since each leaves one of the
two classes of worlds empty — leads Wittgenstein to say that they are not, strictly
speaking, senses: in recognition of this we shall call them empty senses. If there
are N states of aﬀairs, this leaves 22N −2 genuine senses.
This sort of thing looks so familiar to the modern eye that it is easy to miss
the signiﬁcance of Wittgenstein’s deﬁnition of sense. The key point is that the
range of possible senses is determined once the range of elementary propositions is
determined: there is no further reference to the symbolism in specifying the range.
This is in contrast with Russell, whose notion of a proposition had originally been
tied to the symbolism. The signiﬁcance of this is that Wittgenstein’s account can
avoid the paradoxes by means of a simple theory of types: propositional functions
have to stand in hierarchies, so that a function of a function of individuals is of
a diﬀerent type from a function of individuals; but there is no need to stratify
functions any more than this, or to stratify propositions at all.

268
Michael Potter
3.2
Expressing sense
At the outset I said that Wittgenstein took the purpose of propositions to be the
expression of what is or could be the case. We are now in a position to make
this rough schema more precise: the purpose of a proposition is the expression of
a sense, i.e. the expression of agreement or disagreement with truth-possibilities
of elementary propositions. Every elementary proposition is thus a proposition:
it expresses agreement with just those possible worlds in which the state of af-
fairs which it pictures actually occurs. But, as we have seen, even if there are
only ﬁnitely many states of aﬀairs, there are far more senses than the elementary
propositions could express. Wittgenstein’s task now is thus to provide a means
for expressing these other senses.
The procedure Wittgenstein adopts is to break the task down into two parts.
The ﬁrst part is to devise a symbol whose purpose is to pick out some class of
propositions. Wittgenstein calls this symbol a variable and typically denotes it ξ.
He then uses the notation (ξ) for the class of propositions which the variable picks
out. Then he posits an operator N which can be combined with any such symbol
for a class of propositions to obtain a symbol N(ξ) expressing the joint denial of
all the propositions in the class. The sense of N(ξ), in other words, is such that it
is true in just those worlds in which all the propositions in (ξ) are false.
So far, though, Wittgenstein’s description of his formal language is merely pro-
grammatic. The question how expressive it is, i.e. which of the possible senses are
expressible by means of propositions in the language, depends entirely on which
variables he permits for specifying classes of propositions. Wittgenstein sometimes
talks as if his system will be able to express all possible senses, [Wittgenstein, 1922,
4.5] And indeed if there are only ﬁnitely many elementary propositions, then ev-
ery sense is a ﬁnite truth-function of the senses of elementary propositions, and
hence, as we shall see in a moment, expressible in Wittgenstein’s notation using
the simplest and most obvious method, direct enumeration. But in the case when
there are inﬁnitely many elementary propositions this will plainly not be possible,
at least if we restrict ourselves to the use of ﬁnite symbols, since there will be
uncountably many possible senses but only countably many ﬁnite symbols in the
formal language. What this shows is, roughly speaking, that the expressive power
of the system is determined not by the N operator but by the range of classes of
propositions that the variable notation permits us to pick out.
Wittgenstein speciﬁes three types of variable explicitly, and evidently supposes
that they will be adequate for all the practical purposes that will normally arise
within the language. They are
1. Direct enumeration. . . .
2. Giving a function fx, whose values for all values of x are the
propositions to be described.
3. Giving a formal law that governs the construction of the propo-
sitions. [Wittgenstein, 1961, 5.501]

The Logic of the Tractatus
269
In the next few sections we shall consider these types in turn, and then address the
question whether there are any other types of variable that Wittgenstein needs.
3.3
Direct enumeration
One way of picking out a class of propositions, at least if the class is ﬁnite, is
simply to list them. If p1, p2, . . . , pn are propositions, Wittgenstein uses the no-
tation (p1, p2, . . . , pn) for the class whose members are just these propositions.
When we combine this symbol with the N operator, we obtain the expression
N(p1, p2, . . . , pn): it represents the truth-function of p1, p2, . . . , pn which is true
just in case all of p1, p2, . . . , pn are false, so it would be expressed in Russell’s
notation as ∼p1· ∼p2 · . . .· ∼pn.
Note in particular that when the class has two members this reduces to
N(p, q) =∼p· ∼q = p|q,
where | is the truth-function sometimes referred to as the ‘Sheﬀer stroke’. The
reason this is important is that, as Sheﬀer had proved in 1913, the stroke is ade-
quate to express every ﬁnite truth-function. (In fact, Sheﬀer proved that there are
two binary truth functions each of which is adequate: the other one — also some-
times called the ‘Sheﬀer stroke’ — is ∼p∨∼q.) Since the stroke is expressible
using the N operator together with the notation for direct enumeration, it follows
straightaway that Wittgenstein’s notation is also adequate to express every ﬁnite
truth-function.
3.4
Functions
As we have seen, in the ﬁnite case the method of direct enumeration enables us to
express every sense, since it gives us all the expressive power of the propositional
calculus. But it is a familiar fact that in the inﬁnite case the propositional calculus
is not only inadequate to express every possible sense but, more importantly,
inadequate even to express every sense that we have a use for. What we need
if the symbolism is to be adequate for practical purposes is to eﬀect the same
extension of the expressive power of the system that Frege and Russell achieved
by adding a notation for quantiﬁcation. The way Wittgenstein achieved this was
by allowing a propositional function to count as a variable picking out the class of
propositions that is its range.
The idea is in essence very simple. Take some sign expressing a proposition
and single out part of the sign. Now keep this part ﬁxed and let the rest of the
sign vary. All the propositions that can be obtained by varying the sign in this
way form a class. The variable used to pick out this class is called a propositional
function, but Wittgenstein invariably refers to it simply as a function.
The part of the proposition that is taken as ﬁxed in forming a propositional
function plainly cannot be arbitrary. It would not make much sense, for example,
to treat ‘quickly into’ as ﬁxed in the proposition ‘John walked quickly into the

270
Michael Potter
room’. The part that is ﬁxed has to be a unit that contributes signiﬁcantly to the
way in which the sign as a whole expresses a proposition. The most familiar exam-
ple is the case of a propositional sign in which a name ‘a’ occurs. From such a sign
we can obtain a function ‘f(x)’ whose instances are all the propositions obtained
by substituting various names in the position where ‘a’ occurred originally.
Wittgenstein does not introduce an explicit notation for the class of all such
propositions: here I shall write it xf(x), cf. [Geach, 1981]. With this notation we
can obtain, for instance,
N(xfx)
=
∼(∃x)fx
N(N(xfx)
=
(∃x)fx
N(xN(fx))
=
(x)fx.
The notation takes care of multiple generality. For instance,
(x)(∃y)xRy
=
∼(∃x) ∼(∃y)xRy
=
N(xN(yxRy)).
The fact that Wittgenstein does not explicitly introduce any notation for the
range of a propositional function has perhaps contributed towards a belief among
some commentators that his system cannot express multiple generality, but as we
have seen, this is wrong. (If it were indeed the case that the system did not suﬃce
to express multiple generality, it would be at the very least surprising that neither
Russell nor Ramsey noticed it.)
The sort of propositional function we have been considering so far is not the
only one that is possible, though. Wittgenstein’s system also permits higher order
quantiﬁcation. In a proposition in which a name ‘a’ occurs, instead of keeping the
rest of the proposition ﬁxed as we did before, we can keep a ﬁxed and let the rest
vary. That way we obtain a variable φ(a) specifying a class of propositions in the
expression of which the name ‘a’ occurs.
At this point things becomes less clear, however. Suppose, for instance, that
f(a) is elementary. When we kept the remainder of the proposition ﬁxed in order
to form the function f(x), it was clear what the range of x was — namely all those
names which can meaningfully be substituted for x. But now that we are keeping
a ﬁxed and letting the remainder vary to form φ(a), it is less clear what the range
of variation is. One possibility is that φ(a) should range over all the elementary
propositions of the same form as f(a). Another, at ﬁrst sight anyway, is that
φ(a) range over all the propositions in which ‘a’ occurs. The diﬃculty is that this
includes propositions in the expression of which this very variable φ occurs. Can
Wittgenstein allow this without falling into paradox? This is a complex issue and
we shall postpone discussion of it to a later section.

The Logic of the Tractatus
271
3.5
Formal series
Consider the following series of propositions:
aRb
(∃x) : aRx · xRb
(∃x, y) : aRx · txRy · yRb
...
(∗)
For various purposes it is useful to have a variable which ranges over all the
propositions in such a series. For instance, if ξ is such a variable then N(N(ξ)) will
express the weak ancestral of R, i.e. the relation between a and b which holds if
at least one of the propositions in the formal series obtains.
Now the conventional method of achieving this is to write aRnb as an abbrevi-
ation for the nth term of the formal series, i.e. for
(∃x1, . . . , xn−1) : aRx1 · x1Rx2 · . . . · xn−1Rb.
If we do this, then in the notation introduced in the previous section y aRyb is the
variable we require. But is the transition from the proposition aRnb to the variable
y aRyb permissible? For it to be so, the ‘n’ in aRnb has to contribute signiﬁcantly
to the way in which this symbol expresses its sense. But in Wittgenstein’s view it
does not do so: indeed natural numbers never occur in propositions as arguments
of propositional functions.
Wittgenstein does not give an explicit argument for this in the text, though,
or even state it distinctly, so enunciating his reason for holding it involves some
reconstruction. If it were not so — if, in other words, we could form a function
f(n) with a natural number variable — then 0, 1, 2, etc. would all have to be
expressions of the same type. It would not follow from this that the numbers
would themselves have to be Tractarian objects: one could envisage, for instance,
an account on which numerals were complex expressions analysable into something
simpler. But whatever occurred at the ultimate level in this analysis would be
Tractarian objects. These, which we could reasonably call mathematical objects,
would constitute in a sense the subject matter of mathematics.
But Wittgenstein did not think that mathematics can have a subject matter in
this sense any more than logic can.
If there were mathematical objects — logical constants — the propo-
sition ‘I am eating ﬁve plums’ would be a proposition of mathematics.
And it is not even a proposition of applied mathematics. [Wittgenstein,
1979, 14 Feb. 1915]
We can see that it is ‘not even a proposition of applied mathematics’ simply by
rewriting it so that ‘ﬁve’ does not occur in it. So nothing characterizes propositions
in which number words occur. It follows that mathematics does not have a subject
matter in the sense required.

272
Michael Potter
So the method considered above of forming a variable to pick out the propo-
sitions occurring in a formal series is not available. Wittgenstein was therefore
forced to introduce a new kind of variable to do this job. His notation depends on
the observation that a formal series is determined by two things, an initial class
of propositions already ﬁxed by a variable ξ, and an operation O, that is to say
a method of obtaining new propositions from old. Wittgenstein then combines
these materials to form the notation [ξ, x, Ox] to express a variable ranging over
all the propositions in the class (ξ) together with those obtainable from them by
repeated application of the operation O. Thus, for example, the formal series is
expressed by the variable
[aRb, aχb, (∃x) : aRx · xχb].
As Wittgenstein himself emphasizes, operations and functions must not be con-
fused with one another. The key diﬀerence is that an operation, unlike a function,
is repeatable. This repeatability is evidently central, since it is what enables the
variable [ξ, x, Ox] to generate successively more propositions.
Now the reason a function is not repeatable is, roughly speaking, that the
argument of the function occurs as a symbol in the symbol for its value. Thus
if the function is fx, the symbol ‘fa’ for the value contains the symbol ‘a’ for
the argument. Nothing corresponding occurs in the case of an operation, as is
especially obvious in the example we considered above of the operation which
generate successive terms of the formal series: it is plain, for instance, that the
symbol aRb does not occur in the symbol (∃x) : aRx · xRb.
This last point is of considerable signiﬁcance because there are other examples,
for which it is much less obvious. It would be easy, for example, to be fooled into
thinking that ‘p’ occurs in the symbol ‘∼p’, so that ∼p is a function of p. If this
were so, negation would not be repeatable. We shall return later to the signiﬁcance
of this observation for Wittgenstein’s system.
3.6
The general form of proposition
At the extreme it is possible to regard a single proposition p as a variable, even if a
rather trivial one. [Wittgenstein, 1961, 3.313] Indeed this can be done using each
of the three methods considered so far: we can directly enumerate the class (p)
whose only member is p; we can regard p as a propositional function in which the
whole proposition is held constant and no part of it varies, so as to obtain the class
xp; or we can take the variable [p, x, x], which expresses the formal series obtained
from p by repeatedly applying the trivial operation that takes any proposition to
itself.
It is natural to ask, then, whether at the other extreme there is a variable
ranging over all propositions. If there were only ﬁnitely many states of aﬀairs,
of course, we could list expressions for all possible senses by direct enumeration.
This is worth noting, because if there is a variable ranging over all propositions
in the ﬁnite case, there cannot be a general theoretical ban on such a variable.

The Logic of the Tractatus
273
Nevertheless it does nothing to help us construct one in general. In the inﬁnite
case direct enumeration obviously will not work, so let us consider instead the
propositional function method.
To do it by this method we would need to be able to form a propositional
function that could take any proposition at all as its value. Notice that for this
it is not suﬃcient merely to be able to let every part of a proposition vary and
keep no part ﬁxed. If, for example, we let every part of the proposition Fa ∨aRb
vary, we could obtain a variable, which we might write Xx ∨yY z, ranging over
propositions expressible as disjunctions of propositions of the same form as Fa
and aRb, but it is not at all clear how we could obtain all propositions by this
means.
What, then, of Wittgenstein’s third method?
This gives us the expression
[p, ξ, N(ξ)] for the general form of proposition, where p is a variable ranging over
the elementary propositions. So we have now reduced the problem from that of
ﬁnding a variable that ranges over all propositions to that of ﬁnding one that
ranges over the elementary ones. But is this problem any easier? We still have
the same diﬃculty over the variability of form. If we take a particular elementary
proposition a1a2 . . . an and turn every name in it into a variable, we get x1x2 . . . xn,
which is a prototype for all elementary propositions of this type. But there may
very well be other elementary propositions of some other type, such as b1b2 . . . bm.
The prototype for this would be y1y2 . . . ym, which is not the same. So how do we
get one variable to range over both types?
We could just enumerate the prototypes, which would at any rate work if there
are only ﬁnitely many types, but this appears rather too accidental. We seem
forced to say that a variable ranging over all elementary propositions could not
conform to any of the three kinds we have yet considered, and hence that if there is
to be such a variable, ‘elementary proposition’ must be a distinct formal concept.
4
THE LIMITS OF LANGUAGE
4.1
Sign and symbol
In the course of our discussions we have had cause to mention various linguistic
items.
But there are several things we might have been referring to in these
discussions. First, of course, there is a particular string of ink marks on a page,
i.e. the token: and it is a logical commonplace to distinguish this from the type of
which all similar strings of marks are tokens. For Wittgenstein a sign is the type,
not the token: hence the wonderfully compressed remark in the Tractatus that
‘ “A” is the same sign as “A”.’[Wittgenstein, 1961, 3.203] Notice, though, that in
order to identify the type, we need a criterion to settle which inscriptions count
as similar, and such a criterion is applicable only to facts, not complexes. Thus a
complex sign ‘abc’ is for Wittgenstein not the complex entity made up out of the
individual signs ‘a’, ‘b’ and ‘c’; it is the fact that these signs are arranged in this
way. Signs, in other words, are to be individuated not merely according to the

274
Michael Potter
objects they are made up of, but according to the relationships that hold between
those objects. A sign is thus an inscription parsed in such a way as to exhibit
its grammatical structure. But the grammatical structure here consists only in
what can be expressed purely in terms of rules for signs without bringing in any
considerations of meaning.
As soon as we read the sign as having a meaning
— as having one meaning rather than another — we have turned it into what
Wittgenstein calls a symbol; we have placed it in a relationship not merely to
other linguistic items but to the world.
The distinction between sign and symbol is thus nicely placed to help explain
the confusions that arise in natural languages when the same sign should properly
be read in diﬀerent occurrences as a diﬀerent symbol. Such confusions would be
avoided if we could adopt a ‘logically perfect’ language, since in such a language
each sign has a unique reading. But the distinction between sign and symbol is
of much greater signiﬁcance than this, for it is in the transition from one to the
other that Wittgenstein locates the self.
Establishing the plausibility of this claim will take us some time. Notice ﬁrst
that if it were not for the role that it plays in his account of the self, Wittgenstein
would have had no need to draw the distinction between sign and symbol in the
case of logically perfect languages. The evidence of the Prototractatus bears this
out, for we can identify quite precisely there the point at which Wittgenstein ﬁrst
introduces this terminological distinction. It occurs on page 53 of the manuscript
in Wittgenstein’s explanation of his remark that if what appears to be a proposi-
tional sign lacks sense, that can only be because we have failed to give a meaning
to one of its constituents. He illustrates this with a case where a sign symbolizes
in a diﬀerent way in two occurrences and introduces a distinction between signs
(Zeichen) and their visible part (ihren sichtbaren Teil) to explain this [Wittgen-
stein, 1971, 5.30641]. Then, in the very next remark on the page, he replaces
this with the distinction between Symbol and Zeichen that is now familiar. He
ﬁrst of all introduces it for the special case of simple signs: ‘Das einfache Zeichen
ist der wahrnehmbare Teil des Namens.’ Then he at once generalizes to signs in
general: ‘Das Zeichen ist der sinnlich wahrnehmbare Teil des Symbols.’ [Wittgen-
stein, 1971, 3.2013]. And once he has the distinction for signs in general he can
apply it in particular to distinguish the propositional sign (Satzzeichen) from the
proposition (Satz).
Wittgenstein’s use of these words before page 53 does not preﬁgure the termi-
nological distinction drawn there. Before that point he uses Zeichen indiﬀerently
for what he now distinguishes as Zeichen and Symbol, and Satzzeichen for what
he now distinguishes as Satzzeichen and Satz. We know that Wittgenstein did not
draw the terminological distinction before page 53 because some occurrences of
Zeichen before that point become Symbol in the ﬁnal version of the book and oth-
ers do not; in the same way most uses of Satzzeichen change to Satz but crucially
one — the remark that a propositional sign is a fact1 — remains unchanged.2
1[Wittgenstein, 1971, 3.16, 3.161], [Wittgenstein, 1922, 3.14, 3.143].
2So Sundholm’s claim in [Sundholm, 1992] that in the Prototractatus the word Satzzeichen

The Logic of the Tractatus
275
Wittgenstein did not make these changes at once, though: he did not immediately
work through the ﬁrst 53 pages of his manuscript looking for occurrences of Ze-
ichen to change to Symbol. With one exception he left these revisions to a later
draft of the book. The exception is pages 24 and 25, where he altered a series
of consecutive remarks[Wittgenstein, 1971, 3.20121, 3.20122, 3.22, 3.23 and 3.24]
to accord with his new terminology. The reason he changed only these remarks
is easy to see: when he wrote on page 53 the proposition introducing the Symbol
terminology he had to look back to page 24 to determine what its number ought to
be[Wittgenstein, 1971, 3.2013] and took the opportunity of revising the adjacent
propositions straightaway.
Until he came to the discussion of ambiguity, then, Wittgenstein did not in the
Prototractatus draw any terminological distinction between sign and symbol, using
Zeichen indiﬀerently for both notions. It is natural to wonder, therefore, whether
he was even aware of the diﬀerence before that. This is evidently important in
the present context: if he was not aware of the diﬀerence until half way through
writing the Prototractatus, that would be evidence against locating the self in the
gap between the two notions. In fact, though, Wittgenstein did have the distinction
much earlier: the remark that in the ﬁnal text is rendered, ‘Um das Symbol am
Zeichen zu erkennen, muss man auf den sinnvollen Gebrauch achten’ [Wittgenstein,
1922, 3.326] began life in the ﬁrst wartime notebook as ‘Um das Zeichen im Zeichen
zu erkennen, muss man auf den Gebrauch achten’,[Wittgenstein, 1979, 23 Oct.
1914] which is quite inexplicable unless Wittgenstein already attached two distinct
senses to the word ‘Zeichen’.
If, as McGuinness [1989] has conjectured, Wittgenstein wrote the ﬁrst 70 pages
of the Prototractatus after the second wartime notebook but before the third, we
should not expect the use of the word Symbol deﬁned on page 53 to occur in the ﬁrst
two notebooks. Nor do we. Indeed it does not occur in the third notebook either,
but this does not create an argument for a later dating of the Prototractatus than
McGuinness recommends, since none of the occurrences of Zeichen in the third
notebook are obviously in error once the distinction between Zeichen and Symbol
is in place.3 A potential source of confusion here is that in the two pre-war texts
dictated by Wittgenstein (to Russell and to Moore), both of which are in English,
the word used is ‘symbol’. This indicates no more than that at that time, without
any terminological distinction on the horizon, Wittgenstein was happy to license
‘symbol’ as an acceptable English translation of ‘Zeichen’ (which it is).
When he started writing the Prototractatus, then, Wittgenstein did not have
the terminology that later enabled him to distinguish between a propositional sign
(a species of sign) and a proposition (a species of symbol). But he did already
have another terminological distinction that could play a similar role, namely that
is used systematically for what in the Tractatus is called Satz is not accurate: it is in fact used
indiﬀerently for both notions.
3An argument could be mounted that Wittgenstein’s remark of 22nd November 1916 — ‘The
concept of the operation is quite generally that according to which signs can be constructed
according to a rule’ — would make more sense with ‘symbols’ rather than ‘signs’, but it is
probably not a strong enough argument to overturn McGuinness’ speculations.

276
Michael Potter
between what he then called a propositional sign and a proposition. ‘Satzzeichen’
in the terminology prior to page 53, let us recall, is ambiguous between what are
later called a propositional sign and a proposition: it is a sensibly perceptible fact
whose structure ﬁts it to the task of expressing a sense. A Satz, as the word is
used before page 53, is such a fact together with the manner of its depiction of
what it expresses, [Wittgenstein, 1971, 3.2] i.e. together with the projection that
maps its sense (if it has one) onto it.
It is this last notion of a proposition with its mode of depiction somehow at-
tached to it that drops out in the later terminology: what Wittgenstein’s discussion
of ambiguity seems to have shown him is that he simply did not need it. What
is it that we do when we recognize the symbol in a sign? If the sign is a propo-
sitional sign, we recognize the projection that maps its sense onto it (its mode
of depiction). The mode of depiction is thus implicit in the symbol. There is,
once Wittgenstein has made his new terminological distinction, no need for the
old one, and what was then called a Satz (a proposition together with its mode of
depiction) is henceforth simply dropped from the account.
4.2
Intensional contexts
Wittgenstein had to face the problem that our language apparently contains in-
tensional contexts like ‘A believes that p’. He analysed this as being of the form
‘ “p” says that p’. [Wittgenstein, 1961, 5.542] But what does that mean? Before
we answer this question, let us put it in context by examining the views held by
Russell on the same issue up to and during his interaction with Wittgenstein.
Until 1907 Russell thought that propositions were complexes actually contain
the things of which they spoke, so that the snow-covered peak itself is a constituent
of the proposition that Mont Blanc is the tallest mountain in Europe. The diﬃculty
with this is that it does not account for false propositions. The proposition that
Charles I died in bed cannot be identiﬁed with the fact of his doing so, because
there is no such fact.
And we cannot simply suppose that there are negative
facts as well as positive ones, since ‘this leaves the diﬀerence between truth and
falsehood quite inexplicable’. [Russell, 1910, p152] At this point Russell applied an
insight he had learnt from ‘On Denoting’, that the sentences of a language might
be superﬁcially misleading.
It might be that expressions occurring in English
sentences, for example, vanished on analysis, from which one could infer that they
do not correspond to anything in the world. Thus, for example, ‘The King of
France’ vanishes when you analyse ‘The King of France is bald’ in the familiar
Russellian manner. Applied to the present question, that insight amounts to this:
it might be that the term apparently denoting the proposition vanishes from the
correct analysis of statements attributing propositional attitudes.
So Russell tried to analyse a propositional attitude ascription as a relation
holding between the bearer of the attitude and the components of the (apparent)
proposition. Thus, for instance, one might as a ﬁrst attempt try to analyse ‘A
judges that b loves c’ as J(A, b, loving, c), where J is the judging relation, b and

The Logic of the Tractatus
277
c are the putative lovers, and loving is the universal, i.e. the abstract relation of
loving.
But this cannot be quite right.
A more reﬁned account states the analysis
as J(A, b, loving, c, xχy), where the last term denotes the general form of binary
relations and indicates that A judges b to be the lover and c the beloved.
There are two diﬃculties with this conception though. First, there is a diﬃculty
connected with the existence of logically complex judgments. Russell’s view was
that ‘A judges that p or q’ would have an analysis of the form J(A, p, ∨, q, F),
where F denotes the form of the proposition and we are ignoring for the moment
the fact that in a fuller analysis p and q would themselves be broken down into
their constituents. Russell also thought that a full analysis would display how the
proposition reaches right up to reality, that is, that it would only contain genuinely
denoting expressions. It is a consequence of this that the logical constants really
do denote objects in the world that can be known by acquaintance. (In fact for
Russell, though not for Wittgenstein, it was more complicated than this because
in his theory of types the logical constants display typical ambiguity: one would
have to say that there is a distinct ‘∨’ for each type.)
The problem, though, is that the logical constants are interdeﬁnable [Wittgen-
stein, 1961, 5.4–5.42]. For example p ∨q can be deﬁned as ∼(∼p. ∼q). Alter-
natively you could deﬁne p.q as ∼(∼p∨∼q). This shows that any particular
logical constant can be made to vanish through suitable analysis. There are no
grounds for saying that any one of them is more fundamental than any other — no
grounds, therefore, for determining which of them is logically simple and known to
us by acquaintance, which logically complex and known to us only by description.
Perhaps Russell could have met this objection. But a more serious objection
arises from the fact that by including the verb of the proposition judged as a
term in the judging relation, Russell had to turn it into a noun, therby removing
from it its ability to ensure the grammaticality of what is judged. Or, better, if J
can have arguments, it cannot have argument places. In particular, the analysis
of ‘A judges that the table is to the right of the book’ is such that the position
occupied therein by the relation term ‘right’ could equally sensibly be ﬁlled by the
predicate ‘penholder’. So it would make equally good sense to say ‘A judges that
the table penholders the book’ — be equally legitimate, that is, to ascribe to A
the judgment of a piece of nonsense to A. Wittgenstein inferred that the theory is
wrong, because ‘The correct explanation of the form of the proposition, “A makes
the judgment p”, must show that it is impossible for a judgment to be a piece of
nonsense’ and ‘Russell’s theory does not satisfy this requirement.’ [Wittgenstein,
1961, 5.5422].
Wittgenstein’s approach, by contrast, is a consequence of his picture theory
of meaning [Wittgenstein, 1961, 2.1 ﬀ.]. The idea behind this was, as we have
seen, that a proposition has the capacity to express a fact in virtue of its standing
in a pictorial relation to the world. In a picture, each element of the picture is
correlated with a thing, and that these elements are arranged in a certain way says
that the corresponding things are arranged in the same way. It is the same with

278
Michael Potter
a proposition: [Wittgenstein, 1961, 3.11, 4.032] the elements of the proposition
(the names) are correlated with things (the simple objects); that the names are
arranged in a certain way says that the correlated things are arranged in that way
[Wittgenstein, 1961, 3.14]. The only diﬀerence between a picture and a proposition
is that the pictorial form of the latter is more general.
When Wittgenstein says that ‘A believes that p’ is of the same form as ‘ “p”
says that p’, he is analysing it as: ‘p’ is a picture of p. A picture (or a proposition)
is itself a fact [Wittgenstein, 1961, 2.141]. Of course a picture can take many
forms without losing what is essential to its capacity to depict [Wittgenstein,
1961, 4.011–4.016] and among these forms are the mental states corresponding to
propositional attitudes. In particular, Wittgenstein regards A’s belief that p as a
picture, in a mental medium, of p; it is, that is to say, an arrangement of mental
objects, to which the expression ‘ “p” ’ refers.
For Wittgenstein, ‘ “p” says that p’ is therefore one of those things that can be
shown but cannot be said, because it cannot express something true and signiﬁcant.
It is trying to say, in language, how a bit of language is connected with the world.
That would be like trying to display, on a map, the method of projection whereby a
bit of the map depicted formations on the ground. Any attempt to depict it on the
map can never be informative, because to grasp it one would already have to grasp
the method of projection [Wittgenstein, 1961, 4.022]. There must be some formal
community between the system of signs and the things that are signiﬁed. (For
instance, a map symbolises a part of the surface of the Earth because they share
two-dimensional spatial form.) For it is essential to language that it can express
all the possibilities, and the form of a language determines what possibilities it
can express, whereas the form of the world determines the possibilities that there
are.
So world and language must share form [Wittgenstein, 1961, 2.18-2.203].
That is why one cannot represent a geometrically impossible conﬁguration on a
map [Wittgenstein, 1961, 3.032-3.0321]. But, as in the case of the map, this form
cannot itself be conveyed in the language, for an understanding of the language
presupposes a grasp of the form of language (which is also the form of the world);
and this can only be shown [Wittgenstein, 1961, 4.12–4.121]. It is a (surprising)
consequence of all this that you cannot really say that A believes that p.
4.3
The self, value and the will
This analysis, unlike Russell’s, makes no mention of the apparent judging subject
A: analysis has shown ‘A’ not to be a genuinely denoting term.
‘This shows
. . . that there is no such thing as the soul — the subject, etc. — as it is conceived
in the superﬁcial psychology of the present day.’
[Wittgenstein, 1961, 5.5421].
Wittgenstein’s analysis [Wittgenstein, 1961, 5.542] of ‘A believes that p’ shows that
there is no simple self that is the owner of some particular set of psychological states
among others, but distinct from any of them. But in the next remark Wittgenstein
also dismisses the idea of a composite soul. This amounts to rejecting the idea
that we could identify the self with any collection of mental states, and hence with

The Logic of the Tractatus
279
some complex of states of aﬀairs that might or might not obtain.
Wittgenstein explains his rejection of that idea by means of an analogy between
the self and the seeing eye [Wittgenstein, 1961, 5.6ﬀ]. Just as the eye is not part
of visual experience, neither can the self take part in expressible states of aﬀairs.
The eye that looks on the world is not a part of the visual world. Nothing in the
visual ﬁeld tells us that there is an eye that “has” the visual ﬁeld. It is true that
when you look in a mirror you see an eye. That is not the grammatical or seeing
eye, however, but merely a complex physical organ. Similarly you can attempt to
describe a part of the world of states of aﬀairs, but you can never put the I that
does the describing into that description. We should think of the self as a limit of
the world, not a part of it.
Here also [Wittgenstein, 1922, 5.64] Wittgenstein remarks that solipsism coin-
cides with ‘pure realism’. If we think of the self as outside the world, representing
it, then the sceptical and idealistic possibilities arise. Why, for example, should we
not suppose that there is no world at all, just the self and its representations? The
realist, on the other hand, subverts this picture and instead conceives of the self,
not indeed as part of the world, but as the limit of the world [Wittgenstein, 1961,
5.632]. Here ‘limit’ means the possibilities that are open to it, i.e. for Wittgenstein
the possible conﬁgurations of objects. But this picture is inevitably solipsistic too.
If the self is just the set of possibilities open to the world, then there can only be
one self, for there is only one set of possibilities open to the world. ‘The world is
my world: this is manifest in the fact that the limits of language (of that language
which alone I understand) mean the limits of my world.’ [Wittgenstein, 1961,
5.62].
There is a connection between Wittgenstein’s treatment of the self and his
treatment of aesthetic and ethical value (the two being identiﬁed at 6.421). The
diﬃculty is to see how value ﬁnds a place in the system of the Tractatus. Propo-
sitions can express only matters of fact; and whatever is expressed by saying that
a particular painting is beautiful, for instance it cannot be a mere matter of fact
[Wittgenstein, 1961, 6.41]. For if it were, we would thereby recognize the possibil-
ity that it is not beautiful, and then it would only be chance that the actual world
is one in which the object is beautiful.
This in turn is related to the question of agency. The metaphysical self has a
will, as Wittgenstein says, [Wittgenstein, 1922, 5.631] and yet is not part of the
world:[Wittgenstein, 1922, 5.632] how then can my willing bring about anything
in the world?
Wittgenstein distinguishes two kinds of will: the psychological phenomenon of
volition, and the will of the transcendental self, the latter being the locus of value
[Wittgenstein, 1961, 6.423]. He implies that in neither sense can the will bring
about anything else in the world [Wittgenstein, 1961, 6.37, 6.373–4]. The world
is a world of facts. Space and time are constructed from simple objects just as
everything else is. In the empirical sense our ascriptions of change to things will
just amount to certain situations being the case. But he thinks that good willing
(in the transcendental sense) changes the world in another way, that is, by altering

280
Michael Potter
the limits of the world. ‘The eﬀect must be that it becomes an altogether diﬀerent
world. It must, so to speak, wax and wane as a whole.’ [Wittgenstein, 1922, 6.43]
One might try explaining this remark as follows: good willing enriches the world
by adding new objects to the world as conceived by the subject; bad willing im-
poverishes it by removing some objects. That is, good willing reﬁnes the subject’s
language: its stock of simple names is enlarged. In view of Wittgenstein’s holism
with regard to fully analysed languages, this amounts to the subject’s acceding to
a wholly new language and correspondingly a wholly diﬀerent world. ‘The world
of the happy man is a diﬀerent one from that of the unhappy man.’ The world of
the former is open to more possibilities than that of the latter.
But this interpretation is in tension with Wittgenstein’s observation that ‘if
good or bad willing changes the world, it can alter only the limits of the world,
not the facts; not what can be expressed by means of language.’ This remark
suggests an alternative interpretation according to which good willing changes not
what there is in the world but what its signiﬁcance is. The world of the happy
(i.e. the good-willing) man is of greater importance than that of the unhappy
man: it glows more brightly, as it were. The fundamental activity of the self is
the infusion of dead signs with symbolic meaning, and thus the expression of the
world. For the happy man this activity is necessarily momentous; the unhappy
man, by contrast, could not care less whether his words mean anything. What is
striking now is how rich Wittgenstein’s conception of the limits of the world has
become. On this second interpretation the world of the happy man is expressed in
the same language as that of the unhappy, and hence allows for the same range of
possibilities; yet it is correct to describe it as ‘an altogether diﬀerent world’ since
its signiﬁcance is diﬀerent.
5
THE THEORY OF TYPES
5.1
Higher types
In 4.1 we went on a rather lengthy excursion through the origins of Wittgenstein’s
distinction between signs and symbols, and in particular between propositional
signs and propositions. What that excursion demonstrated was that there is noth-
ing in those origins to dissuade us from giving the sign-symbol distinction a central
role in Wittgenstein’s system. What we need to do now is to see how the distinc-
tion enters into Wittgenstein’s attempted resolution of the logical paradoxes.
A mention in David Pinsent’s diary on 25th October 1912 [von Wright, 1990,
p37] of Wittgenstein’s solution to ‘a problem which has puzzled Russell and Frege
for some years’ may well be a reference to Russell’s paradox, but even if it is,
there is no need to suppose that the solution we ﬁnd in the Tractatus is exactly
the one Wittgenstein had in 1912. (His letters to Russell from that period hint at
experiments with logical theories unrecognizable to a reader of the Tractatus.) On
the other hand, the solution in the Tractatus is not in its bare outlines particularly
original.

The Logic of the Tractatus
281
The reason why a function cannot be its own argument is that the sign
for a function already contains the prototype of its argument, and it
cannot contain itself.
For let us suppose that the function F(fx) could be its own argument:
in that case there would be a proposition ‘F(F(fx))’, in which the outer
function F and the inner function F must have diﬀerent meanings,
since the inner one has the form φ(fx) and the outer one has the form
ψ(φ(fx)). Only the letter ‘F’ is common to the two functions, but the
letter by itself signiﬁes nothing. . . . That disposes of Russell’s paradox.
[Wittgenstein, 1961, 3.333]
Suppose that we apply this explanation in the particular case when F(fx) says
that f does not hold of itself. Russell’s paradox results from asking whether or
not F is predicable of itself, whether F(F(fx)) in other words. But in asking this
question we use F in a diﬀerent sense from the old one: one sign occurs twice but
is a diﬀerent symbol each time. On this analysis Russell’s paradox is exposed as
no more than a bad pun.
The doctrine Wittgenstein is appealing to here is that how a sign for a function
symbolizes in some way presupposes the structure of the argument place of the
function. Wittgenstein draws the by now conventional conclusion that ‘functions
stand in hierarchies’, but of course this is not in itself enough to render the theory
secure. More needs to be said if his system is not to fall prey to what are nowadays
called the semantic paradoxes. Consider, for example, Grelling’s ‘heterological’
paradox, which is one of the best-known: an adjective is said to be heterological if
it does not apply to itself; the antinomy results from asking whether the adjective
‘heterological’ is itself heterological. The paradox is easily formulated in the simple
theory of types. Let us write ‘Het x’ for
(∃φ)(x means φz. ∼φx).
Now
‘Het’ means Het z,
and so
Het(‘Het’) ≡(∃φ)(‘Het’ means φz ˙∼φ(‘Het’))
≡∼Het(‘Het’),
since ‘Het’ cannot mean two diﬀerent things. What we need, therefore, is a way
of avoiding paradoxes of this sort.
5.2
Russell’s reasons for ramiﬁcation
Let us consider Russell’s way ﬁrst. Propositions (and hence propositional func-
tions) are stratiﬁed into orders. No variable is permitted to range over more than
one order of propositions (or propositional functions). This solves the heterological

282
Michael Potter
paradox by making it impossible to deﬁne the function Het x at all. The nearest
we can get to it is to deﬁne a whole hierarchy of functions Het1x, Het2x, etc. by
writing ‘Hetnx’ to mean
(∃φn−1)(x means φn−1z ˙∼φn−1x).
We can then deduce that
Hetn(‘Hetn−1’) ≡(∃φ)(‘Hetn−1’ means φz· ∼φ(‘Hetn−1’))
≡
∼Hetn−1(‘Hetn−1’),
but this is not contradictory. The derivation of the contradictory
Hetn(‘Hetn’) ≡
∼Hetn(‘Hetn’)
is blocked because the propositional function Hetnx is of order n and hence not
among the possible values of the variable φn−1x.
Now in Russell’s conception of logic the repository in which unexplained diﬃ-
culties were to be located had from the time of ‘On denoting’ been the variable. In
that paper he famously solved the diﬃculties of denoting phrases such as deﬁnite
descriptions by treating them as contextually deﬁned expressions that disappear
on analysis. The one exception to this was the variable, which remained as a denot-
ing concept that resisted analysis and had therefore to be logically simple. In 1906
Russell brieﬂy thought that he could solve all the paradoxes by means of a sub-
stitutional theory that treated propositional functions too as contextually deﬁned
expressions that disappear on analysis in much the same way as deﬁnite descrip-
tions. The virtue of this theory was that it allowed him to retain an unrestricted
conception of the variable as ranging over all entities. When he realized that the
theory did not avoid all the paradoxes, he was forced to adopt the hierarchy of
orders of proposition just described and to abandon ﬁnally a single unrestricted
variable. It then became the central challenge for his account to explain what
the relationship was between the various variables his theory now required. The
diﬃculty was that the various variables had all to be logically simple, so the dif-
ference between them could not be a feature of their internal structure and had
therefore to consist in a logical relation between them. But such a logical rela-
tion would have to involve an unrestricted variable, which is just what the theory
said was impossible. Now Russell’s conception of logic was thoroughly impersonal:
logic was not part of our apparatus for understanding the world, but part of the
world itself. In particular, Russell saw the variable not as part of our notation
for describing the world, but as a logical part of the world itself. So the diﬃculty
that the hierarchy of variables presented to him was not the fragmentation of our
relationship with the world, but the fragmentation of logic itself.
5.3
Wittgensteinian propositions
For Wittgenstein, on the other hand, the diﬃculty was one of conﬁguring the
self.
We represent the world by means of language.
Our representations are

The Logic of the Tractatus
283
constrained by the structure of the general form of proposition. If propositions
fall into a hierarchy of orders, there is not one general form of proposition but
inﬁnitely many.
It then becomes problematic how we can conceive of a single
ﬁnite intelligence as possessing such a structure.
Through most of the wartime notebooks Wittgenstein seems to have accepted
that propositions fall into orders, but at the end of 1916 he began to address
directly the diﬃculty this poses:
The fact that it is possible to erect the general form of proposition
means nothing but: every possible form of proposition must be fore-
seeable.
And that means: We can never come upon a form of proposition of
which we could say: it could not have been foreseen that there was
such a thing as this.
For that would mean that we had had a new experience, and that it
took that to make this form of proposition possible.
Thus it must be possible to erect the general form of proposition, be-
cause the possible forms of proposition must be a priori. Because the
possible forms of proposition are a priori, the general form of proposi-
tion exists.
In this connexion it does not matter at all whether the given fundamen-
tal operations, through which all propositions are supposed to arise,
change the logical level of the propositions, or whether they remain on
the same logical level.
If a sentence were ever going to be constructable it would already be
constructable. [Wittgenstein, 1979, 21 Nov. 1916]
Wittgenstein asserts here that it must be possible to erect the general form of
proposition, but he does not say what that general form is. As long as he adhered
to a theory which stratiﬁed propositions into orders to avoid paradox, he had to
assume that this general form is inexpressible. For if there is a single operation
‘N’ that generates all propositions, and if p represents the class of all elementary
propositions, then [p, ξ, N(ξ)] represents all propositions. But in that case quan-
tiﬁcation over all propositions is possible, which is just what we wanted to avoid.
If propositions are to remain stratiﬁed, we have to assume instead that there is a
series of operations N1, N2, N3, . . . which generate the propositions of orders 1, 2,
etc. successively from the elementary propositions.
Suppose that we agree to use one sign ‘N’ for all the operations N1, N2, etc.
In that case we have an example of just the sort of ambiguity Wittgenstein’s
distinction between signs and symbols was designed to help explain. The sign ‘N’
in its various occurrences can act as inﬁnitely many diﬀerent symbols. If N1, N2,
etc. are distinct operations with nothing in common, it follows that the way ‘N’
symbolizes in each of its occurrences is diﬀerent. In that case we cannot grasp

284
Michael Potter
all of these ways at once: each will be a new discovery and logic would not be
foreseeable. To avoid this Wittgenstein supposes that they are all instances of a
common form:
In the sense in which there is a hierarchy of propositions there is, of
course, also a hierarchy of truths and of negations, etc.
But in the sense in which there are, in the most general sense, such
things as propositions, there is only one truth and one negation.
The latter sense is obtained from the former by conceiving the propo-
sition in general as the result of the single operation which produces
all propositions from the ﬁrst level. Etc.
The lowest level and the operation can stand for the whole hierarchy.
[Wittgenstein, 1979, 7 Jan. 1917]
But if this is not to reintroduce the paradoxes, it seems that the operation that
generates the whole hierarchy of propositions must be inexpressible.
This is a
blatant fudge, however. Either ‘N’ symbolizes in the same way each time or it
does not. If it does, there is only one type of proposition and the paradoxes recur;
if it does not, I am not a single ﬁnite intelligence, since I am capable of reading
one sign in inﬁnitely many diﬀerent ways.
5.4
Ramsey’s simple theory
The diﬃculty was to explain how an operation — something you can do to a
proposition to yield another proposition — can be repeatable.
If propositions
are stratiﬁed into orders, so that applying an operation raises the order of the
proposition, the worry is that it might be a diﬀerent operation that is needed for
the next application. Wittgenstein was convinced that there must be a sense in
which a single operation could be repeated. Some time earlier he had referred to
‘an operation whose own result can be taken as its base’ [Wittgenstein, 1979, 23
Apr. 1916]. This notion of a single operation being repeatable was essential not
only to guarantee a single general form of proposition, but also in order to be able
to speak about the hierarchy of propositions.
In this way, and in this way alone, is it possible to proceed from one
type to another.
And we can say that all types stand in hierarchies.
And the hierarchy is only possible by being built up by means of op-
erations. [Wittgenstein, 1979, 26 Apr. 1916]
What Wittgenstein seems not to have seen by the time he ﬁnished the last of his
surviving notebooks in January 1917 was what this repeatable notion of operation
was. The diﬃculty was that if operations were conceived as similar to functions,
the vicious circle principle would ensure that they are not applicable to their own

The Logic of the Tractatus
285
results.
If, for instance, the operation of negation is thought of as a function
which takes a proposition p as argument and gives the proposition ∼p as result, it
presupposes a range of propositions which can serve as arguments to it and by the
vicious circle principle the result of applying the function cannot be in the original
range of arguments. It follows from this that in the proposition ∼∼p the two
occurrences of the sign ‘∼’ are diﬀerent symbols: in a logically perfect language
the proposition would be written ‘∼2∼1 p to indicate the diﬀerence between the
two symbols.
The solution to this problem lies in Wittgenstein’s notion of the sense of a propo-
sition, which consists in the agreement or disagreement the proposition expresses
with the truth-possibilities of elementary propositions. Although an operation will
typically be speciﬁed by means of a transformation of signs (such as that involved
in placing a ‘∼’ in front of any propositional sign ‘p’ to obtain the sign ‘∼p’), the
proposal is that we should think of the operation as individuated at the level not
of signs but of senses. The reason is that the structure of senses is wholly diﬀerent
from that of signs and the paradoxes do not arise for them. This obviates the need
to split senses into orders.
The threat of contradiction from the ‘heterological’ paradox remains, however.
Ramsey, who gave a detailed discussion of this account, used the device of a
hierarchy of meanings of ‘meaning’ to avoid it: the way in which a ﬁrst order sign
symbolizes is not the same as that in which a second order sign does. Suppose
that we write ‘means0’, ‘means1’, etc. for the various meanings of ‘means’. We
can then deﬁne Hetnz to mean
(∃φ)(x meansn−1 φz· ∼φx),
but the sense in which Hetnz has meaning cannot be the same as that in which
‘means’ is used in the deﬁnition. This blocks the paradox since the most we can
say about this meaning is that
‘Hetn’ meansn Hetnz,
which is not suﬃcient to deduce the contradiction.
What Ramsey had done is to restrict the scope of formal logic to extensional
functions by ﬁat, so that the need for the ramiﬁcation in the formal part of logic
is removed. But it does not disappear: the ramiﬁcation is merely relocated to the
metalanguage and emerges there as a hierarchy of meanings of ‘meaning’.
5.5
Strong inexpressibility
Ramsey’s solution is in fact a variant of Russell’s proposal in the Introduction to
the Tractatus of a hierarchy of ever more inclusive metalanguages. The diﬃculties
caused by inexpressibility suggested to Russell
that every language has, as Mr Wittgenstein says, a structure concern-
ing which, in the language, nothing can be said, but that there may be

286
Michael Potter
another language dealing with the structure of the ﬁrst language, and
having itself a new structure, and that to this hierarchy of languages
there may be no limit. Mr Wittgenstein would of course reply that his
whole theory is applicable unchanged to the totality of such languages
[i.e. languages I understand]. The only resort would be to deny that
there is any such totality. [Wittgenstein, 1961, p. xxii]
To regard meaning0, meaning1, etc.
as all being meanings of ‘meaning’ is to
concede that there is one concept, namely meaning, of which they are all special
cases, which is to dissolve the distinction Ramsey needed in order to block the
intensional paradoxes. If, on the other hand, we insist that meaning0, meaning1,
etc. are genuinely distinct concepts with only a verbal similarity to unite them,
then I seem to be speaking not one language but inﬁnitely many.
The dilemma Russell is brieﬂy considering here — whether to regard the hierar-
chy of metalanguages as having a union — corresponds rather closely to Wittgen-
stein’s dilemma considered earlier over whether to regard the series of N-operations
as instances of a single operation. To see why, we need to bear in mind Wittgen-
stein’s injunction to Russell that ‘whatever a sign may express it can express’.
Our formal language L0 does not have the resources to express its own semantics,
but that does not prevent us from conceiving of a more extensive language that
does. In that more extensive language L1 we can deﬁne a propositional function
Het1z. In a further extension L2 we can deﬁne Het2z. And so on. Since Hetn is
not part of Ln−1, its existence does not threaten a formal contradiction in Ln−1.
But let us now with intentional ambiguity use the sign Het in the language L1 to
mean the function Het1z. We know that when L1 is embedded in L2 there is a
function Het2z which the sign Het could also be taken to mean. But if the sign
Het is capable of meaning the same as Het2z when embedded in L2 it is already
capable of doing so in L1. We cannot restrict what a sign means by ﬁat. The fact
that the sign Het can be taken to mean Het2z when it is embedded in L2 shows
that it has the right shape for the task of representing this function in L2. But in
that case it must have the right shape to represent this function in L1. What a
sign is capable of meaning is not a matter of what it can be deﬁned to mean. We
give signs meanings by reading them, and the only constraint on that is precisely
what is unsayable, namely that the structure of the signs in question corresponds
appropriately to the possibilities that exist in the world.
What this shows is that Ramsey’s strategy of shifting intensional predicates to
the metalanguage does not remove the diﬃculty we faced earlier over reconciling
the ramiﬁed theory of types with the unity of the self: it merely relocates it. The
only way of avoiding the ramiﬁcation completely is not to take the very ﬁrst step
in its construction. We must insist that there is no meaning whatever of ‘meaning’
that allows us fully to say what ‘Het’ means. What we have arrived at is thus
unmistakably the strong reading of the inexpressibility thesis, not the weak one:
if we are to avoid the paradoxes and retain the unity of the self, we must insist
that the relationship between a language and the world is something inexpressible
not merely in that language but in any language.

The Logic of the Tractatus
287
It would be implausible to claim that the argument just given was Wittgen-
stein’s own route to the inexpressibility thesis. He formulated that thesis quite
early on — it occurs at the beginning of the notes dictated to Moore in April
1914,[Wittgenstein, 1979, p. 108] for instance — whereas the argument given here
depends on a consequence of Wittgenstein’s notion of sense that he himself seems
not to have drawn until quite late on. The reason I have nonetheless mentioned
the argument here is that it illuminates rather more clearly than Wittgenstein’s
own route to the conclusion the connection it has with the theory of types.
5.6
A Kantian theme
This is perhaps the point at which to mention an analogy between Wittgenstein’s
account and Kant’s. The connexion lies in the observation that the general form of
proposition plays the same role for Wittgenstein that the pure forms of intuition —
space and time — play for Kant. According to Wittgenstein, given what objects
there are for us to speak of, the structure of the general form of proposition deter-
mines what possibilities there are; if we could say what this range of possibilities
is, we would have said what the limits are of what we can say. Correspondingly
for Kant, given what objects-in-themselves there are for us to experience, the
structure of space and time determines what the range of possible experience is;
but we cannot coherently think through the limits of experience, for that is just
what the resources we obtain from our sensibility are inadequate to ground. So
the Tractarian diﬃculty of attempting to express the relationship between a sign
and the world corresponds to the Kantian diﬃculty of thought about objects-
in-themselves. Moreover, the diﬃculties in question are in both cases partially
surmountable: although we cannot express the relationship between a sign and
the world fully in a proposition, we can do so partially in a pseudo-proposition
(which fails to be a proposition because it does not — and, as we have shown,
cannot — participate fully in the logical structure of the language); this corre-
sponds to Kant’s claim that we can understand noumena only in a negative sense.
Kant requires a transcendental deduction to show that the pure concepts of the
understanding are applicable to experience, and that deduction takes as its central
premise the unity of consciousness. For Wittgenstein, on the other hand, what
would have to be transcendentally deduced is the relationship between language
and the world. The deduction, which would once again take as its central premise
the unity of the subject that is using the language, would leave us in equilibrium,
using language to conﬁgure the world but unable fully to express that relationship.
What I have said about this last comparison between Wittgenstein and Kant
does no more than suggest a loose analogy (although in truth it goes rather deeper
than I have been able to indicate here), and hence a serious tension in Wittgen-
stein’s account. The comparisons with Ramsey and Russell, on the other hand,
allow us to see quite plainly the diﬀerence between their views of logic. The prob-
lem which the paradoxes pose for logic is that of preventing it from fragmenting
into an inﬁnity of parts with nothing intrinsic to unite them. Russell, at least in

288
Michael Potter
the period leading up to Principia Mathematica, persistently sought the source of
uniﬁcation in an appropriate conception of the logical world. Ramsey, by contrast,
sought it in our grasp of the metalanguage, but seems merely to have replicated
the problem at that level. Wittgenstein solved the problem by the brutal method
of banning at the ﬁrst stage the sort of semantic reﬂection that is liable to generate
it.
5.7
Nonsense again
We have seen, then, that Wittgenstein asserted not merely the weak thesis that
there are features of my language which cannot be expressed within it, but the
much stronger thesis that these features are such as to be inexpressible in any
language whatever. They are, that is to say, literally unsayable. It has recently
been popular among some commentators to characterize this view that ‘nonsense is
nonsense’ as a resolute reading of the Tractatus in opposition to other, presumably
less resolute readings. But we have some work still to do if we are to understand
what this amounts to. If resolution amounted to no more than opposition to the
Russellian view that what is unsayable in one language may be expressed in a suit-
able metalanguage, it would scarcely deserve the title of a ‘reading’ since it has
been the interpretative orthodoxy for many years. (Even Russell himself explic-
itly regarded his view as an opposition to the main conclusion of the Tractatus.
‘I do not believe his main thesis,’ he wrote; ‘I escape from it by a hierarchy of
languages’ [Grattan-Guinness, 2000, p. 440]). It is clear, moreover, that Wittgen-
stein intended his thesis to have far-reaching conclusions. If nonsense is simply
nonsense, it follows, for instance, that logic in the ordinary sense is not applicable
to it. We cannot, that is to say, unreﬂectively apply to nonsense the canons of
reasoning that we normally apply to sense.
At the other extreme, though, it would be merely crass if the resolute view
were to claim that attempts to say what can only be shown are indistinguishable
from gibberish.
This is plainly false as a matter of observed psychology: we
evidently treat nonsense such as ‘ “a” refers to a’ diﬀerently from nonsense such
as ‘gfsdlhkjfsdh’ (even after we have read the Tractatus).
So if there is to be a genuine debate between resolute and irresolute readings of
the Tractatus, it must avoid these two uninteresting extremes. The interest of such
a debate lies in the importance of the sorts of statements that are in question: as
we have seen, Wittgenstein included in the nonsensical not only semantic claims
about the reference of words but arithmetical equations, the whole of ethics and
aesthetics, and the nature of the self.
Now of course the observed fact that we do distinguish between important and
unimportant nonsense is not itself philosophically signiﬁcant in the present context:
it might, after all, be a human failing to be persistently seduced by the misleading
analogy between the nonsensical case and other formations that do make sense,
but that would not show that we were right to do so. But Wittgenstein himself
not only did not regard such things as ethics as gibberish but was not advocating

The Logic of the Tractatus
289
that we should try. Indeed the world’s very signiﬁcance to us is, as we have seen,
one more instance of nonsense. So to treat all nonsense as gibberish would be to
render the world insigniﬁcant. This would be radically impossible, since someone
who succeeded in doing it would cease to be a willing subject at all.
6
THE THEORY OF CLASSES
6.1
The independence of elementary propositions
If the objects a and b have forms that permit them to be conﬁgured in the state
of aﬀairs ab, there is according to Wittgenstein nothing else — no ‘propositional
glue’ — that is required in order that they should be so conﬁgured. This, I said
earlier, is the nub of Wittgenstein’s objection to Russell’s theory of judgement.
But if nothing else is required for ab to occur, nothing else can prevent it either:
whether ab occurs is independent of whether any other state of aﬀairs occurs.
So, at any rate, Wittgenstein believed. And it is here that the diﬀerence between
his and Russell’s versions of atomism is at its most pronounced. For Russell, the
analysis of propositions to exhibit their underlying forms is in the end a practical
project, subject at every stage to the limits of our current knowledge. It is therefore
not absurd that there might be other aspects of the world, not encoded in our
current analysis of propositions into atoms (and perhaps not directly knowable by
us), that constrain the possibilities of combinations of objects to form states of
aﬀairs. Wittgenstein, on the other hand, simply assumed that there must be a
complete analysis: for possibilities of occurrence of states of aﬀairs in that analysis
to be dependent on one another would thus be for there to be another aspect of
the world not represented by those possibilities; and this would be for the analysis
in question not to be in fact complete.
Wittgenstein accepted that it is impossible for a point in the visual ﬁeld to
be both red and green. But whereas this would have been for Russell evidence
that elementary propositions need not be independent, Wittgenstein merely took
it to show that ‘This is red’ and ‘This is green’ are not elementary. [Wittgenstein,
1961, 6.3751] He supposed, in other words, that they can be analysed somehow as
truth-functional combinations of other, logically more basic propositions in such a
way that their conjunction emerges as a logical contradiction. But Wittgenstein’s
careful lack of interest in the practicalities of this project led him not to bother
with the question of how the analysis is actually done.
Notice, though, that Wittgenstein’s argument here is wholly negative. No ele-
ment in the system as so far described seemed to him to do the job of limiting the
possibilities of occurrence of states of aﬀairs. Moreover, the introduction of such
an element would have wrecked Wittgenstein’s account of logic by forcing there to
be propositions formable using the N operator which express a priori impossibili-
ties even though the way in which they are formed is incapable of revealing this.
Wittgenstein would, in short, have had Kant’s problem of the synthetic a priori
to contend with. But Wittgenstein had little more than wishful thinking to give

290
Michael Potter
as an argument against this.
It is therefore unsurprising that the doctrine of independence became the ﬁrst
part of the work to be publicly renounced by its author, perhaps because of his
exposure in the 1920s to the Vienna Circle, whose members were interested not
merely in abstract theory but in the details of its application. The diﬃculty lay
in the incapacity of elementary propositions to attribute degrees of qualities. It is
plain that ‘X shines at a brightness of 1 lux’ is incompatible with ‘X shines at 2
lux’; but how are we to analyse these to display their relation? If the ﬁrst is E(b),
we cannot, for example, analyse the second proposition as E(b)&E(b), since that
would say no more than E(b); and if we analyse it as E(b′)&E(b′′), the problem
will recur when we try to explain the relationship between b′ and b′′ which makes
them both instances of the same unit b, see [Wittgenstein, 1929].
6.2
Identity
There cannot be a genuine relation of identity between objects. For Wittgenstein
this is just part of what it is to conceive of objects as simple. For if there were a
genuine proposition saying that two objects are distinct, it would be possible for it
to be false, i.e. for the two objects to be equal, in which case one at least of them
would have to be a diﬀerent object from the one it is.
But if identities are not genuine propositions with sense, that is not yet to say
whether they are nonsense or senseless. So let us consider for a moment the idea
that they are merely senseless, i.e. that ‘a = a’ and ‘a ̸= b’ are tautologies. What
is wrong with this view emerges quickly if we try to imagine them false. If we
try to imagine a tautology being false, we ﬁnd ourselves trying to imagine the
simultaneous existence and non-existence of the same state of aﬀairs, whereas the
impossibility of a ̸= a is plainly of a diﬀerent kind: no state of aﬀairs is involved
at all.
So is there anything that we could mean by ‘a = a’? Well, we might mean by
this that a is the same object as a. But notice that when we regard this as a string
of signs, it is not yet clear that what it attempts to say is even correct: if the ﬁrst
and the second instances of the sign ‘a’ referred to diﬀerent things, it would be
wrong to say that a is the same object as a. So we are in the same position with
‘a = a’ as we were earlier with ‘ “p” says that p’: when they are read as signs, they
do not yet express anything, but when read as symbols they are correct without
expressing anything signiﬁcant.
If there is no genuine relation of identity that can hold between objects, we
plainly ought not have any sign in our logical language purporting to express
such a relation. Wittgenstein sketches how it is possible to do standard predicate
logic without such a sign by adopting the convention that diﬀerent names denote
diﬀerent objects. Moreover he proposes a corresponding convention for variables
occurring within the scope of the same quantiﬁer. To see how this operates in
practice, consider the standard Russellian unpacking of a deﬁnite description. In

The Logic of the Tractatus
291
Russell’s notation φ(the f) becomes some such expression as
(∃x) : φx · fx · fy ⊃y y = x.
But in Wittgenstein’s notation (which I shall write with a prime after the quantiﬁer
to distinguish it from Russell’s) it becomes
(∃x)′ : φx · fx· ∼(∃x, y)′ : fx · fy.
Wittgenstein’s notation is extremely tedious to use in practice, but that is scarcely
the point.
What matters is that the formulae which cannot be expressed in
Wittgenstein’s notation, such as the Russellian (∃x).x = a, turn out to be things
that we don’t want to be able to express anyway, because they do not really say
anything signiﬁcant.
But at this point there is a diﬃculty. Russell in Principia Mathematica had
simply deﬁned identity by treating x = y as an abbreviation for the claim that
x and y have all their properties in common. Wittgenstein evidently had to ﬁnd
an error in this deﬁnition if he was to maintain that there is no such relation as
identity.
What is wrong with Russell’s deﬁnition is that there are possible worlds in which
it incorrectly makes distinct objects come out equal. If we have two distinct objects
a and b of the same form, it is at least possible (by the independence of elementary
propositions) that they should have all their elementary properties in common, i.e.
that whenever an elementary proposition φ(a) is true, the corresponding proposi-
tion φ(b) is also true and vice versa. But if this holds for elementary properties,
it will hold for all properties, because Wittgenstein’s logic is truth-functional. So
in that case a and b will have all the same properties, and will therefore come out
as equal by Russell’s deﬁnition, which by hypothesis they are not.
It is worth noting, though, that the possible world in which a and b have all the
same external properties cannot be the actual world. If two things have all their
properties in common,
it is quite impossible to indicate one of them. For if there is nothing
to distinguish a thing, I cannot distinguish it, since otherwise it would
be distinguished after all. [Wittgenstein, 1961, 2.02331]
In other words, we have here a feature which distinguishes the actual world from
other possible worlds. A world in which two things have all the same properties,
although possible, could not be the actual world. Or rather, if it were the actual
world, we would represent it using a diﬀerent language containing fewer names.
6.3
Classes
We have seen that according to Wittgenstein there is not a genuine relation of
identity between objects.
But in that case there can be no genuine theory of
classes of the sort required by a Russellian reduction of mathematics. To see why,

292
Michael Potter
let us recall that Russell had in Principia adopted a ‘no-class’ theory according
to which class terms are incomplete symbols which should, strictly speaking, be
eliminated from contexts where they occur, in much the same manner as deﬁnite
descriptions.
So a statement which appears to be about the class {x : φx} is
rewritten so as to be about the propositional function φx. I shall call this an
accidental class term: that is to say, we are to conceive of the class {x : φ(x)} as
having as members in any world just those objects which satisfy φ in that world.
But consider now ‘{a, b}’; I shall call this class term essential, by which I mean
that it denotes a class whose members in any world are the same, no matter what
properties those objects have in that world. But how are we to talk about this
class? We should like to rewrite a sentence involving {a, b} so as to be about the
function x = a ∨x = b instead; but according to Wittgenstein we cannot, because
there is no such propositional function.
We have two types of class terms, then, accidental and essential. The diﬀerence
between them lies in how they track objects across possible worlds: the accidental
class has as its members in each world the objects which have in that world the
class’s deﬁning property; the essential class has the same members in each world,
no matter what properties those objects have in any world. Wittgenstein’s logic
allows us to talk about classes only in the accidental idiom, not the essential one.
But it is the essential idiom that we need if we are to achieve a Russellian
reduction of mathematics. If, for instance, we deﬁne the number one to be the
class of all single-element classes, this will work only on the essential understanding
of the notion. For if we try to use the accidental notion, we face the diﬃculty
that there is a possible world in which every object shares its properties with some
other object, in which case there are no one-membered classes and the number one
comes out as empty. This has the awkward consequence that simple numerical
inequalities such as 1 ̸= 2 come out as true only accidentally Hence Wittgenstein’s
remark:
The theory of classes is altogether superﬂuous in mathematics.
This is connected with the fact that the generality required in mathe-
matics is not accidental generality. [Wittgenstein, 1961, 6.031]
What Wittgenstein means is that the only sort of theory of classes that his logic
can generate is the accidental one, and any attempt to base mathematics on that
would make it hostage to accidents, whereas Wittgenstein takes it as evident that
mathematics must be independent of how the world happens to be.4
6.4
The number of things
How many objects are there of a particular type? It is clear that it cannot be a
signiﬁcant proposition in Wittgenstein’s system to say that there are n of them,
because if a1, a2, . . . , an are indeed all the objects of this type, then this could not
4Added weight is lent to the interpretation just outlined by the fact that Wittgenstein wrote
by this remark in Ramsey’s copy of the Tractatus the word ‘Identity’.

The Logic of the Tractatus
293
be otherwise. But — as in other such cases we have met before — we have further
work to do to determine whether it is in that case a tautology that there are n
objects of this type, or nonsense.
So let T x be a function that is true of everything of the type in question, e.g.
the function fx∨∼fx. Let qn be the sentence
(∃x1)′(∃x2)′ . . . (∃xn)′ : Tx1 · Tx2 . . . Txn
(1)
in Wittgenstein’s notation. It might seem at ﬁrst sight as if qn says that there are
at least n diﬀerent objects satisfying the propositional function T x, i.e. that there
are at least n objects of the type in question. If this were right, then of course
qn· ∼qn+1 would say that there are exactly n objects of the type. This would
then be either a tautology or a contradiction depending on the value of n.
But this is wrong. What is wrong with it is that although on Wittgenstein’s
account (1) is indeed true if there are at least n objects of this type, it is not
false but meaningless if there are fewer than n. To see why, consider for simplicity
the case where there are just three objects a1, a2, a3 of the given type. Then q3
expresses the tautology
Ta1 · Ta2 · Ta3
as desired. But what does q4 express? Our only resources at this point are the
three tautologies Ta1, Ta2, Ta3, and it is clear that no combination of them that
expresses contradiction could reasonably be seen as expressed by
(∃x1)′(∃x2)′(∃x3)′(∃x4)′ : Tx1 · Tx2 · Tx3 · Tx4.
Whether an existential quantiﬁer makes sense when interpreted according to Witt-
genstein’s symbolic convention thus depends on how many names there are in the
language that could be substituted for the variable of quantiﬁcation. Conﬁrmation
that this is the correct interpretation of Wittgenstein’s intentions is supplied by
one of the remarks he wrote in the margin of Ramsey’s copy of the Tractatus in
1923:
The prop[osition] ‘there are n things such that . . . ’ presupposes for its
signiﬁcance what we try to assert by saying ‘there are n things’. [Lewy,
1967, 421]
By extension the same thing applies to the axiom of inﬁnity, which tries to say
that there are ℵ0 things: this is signiﬁcant only if it is true. [Wittgenstein, 1961,
4.1272]
But if that is the case, we might think that the axiom of inﬁnity admits a
transcendental proof as follows. My language — ‘the language which I understand’
[Wittgenstein, 1922, corrected edn., 5.62] — is fashioned with the primary purpose
of saying how the world is and, correlatively, how it is not. And whether or not
there are in fact inﬁnitely many things, we can represent in language the possibility
that there are. But a language in which there were only ﬁnitely many names would

294
Michael Potter
not be able to represent this possibility. Hence there must be inﬁnitely many names
in our language.
Ramsey wrote down something like this argument shortly after his visit to
Wittgenstein:
I can say ‘There are an inﬁnite number of atoms’. This may be false,
but it is possibly true and therefore signiﬁcant. And for it to mean
anything there must be an inﬁnite number of things. These need not be
material objects because the proposition requires analysis to discover
its real form . . . . But roughly it involves the possibility of saying ‘Here
is an atom’ about an inﬁnity of ‘here’ ’s. [Ramsey, 1991, 175]
Ramsey never published this argument, presumably because he very soon after-
wards adopted a diﬀerent theory of identity according to which the axiom of inﬁnity
is either a tautology or a contradiction but always signiﬁcant, and on this view
the argument plainly does not work. But Wittgenstein strongly disagreed with
Ramsey’s account of identity (see below), so he never had Ramsey’s reason not
to pursue this transcendental argument for the axiom of inﬁnity. Whether the
argument would have appealed to him on its own merits is harder to judge. Later,
when he returned to philosophy at the end of the 1920s, he began to explore the
idea that our talk of the inﬁnite can be analysed in such a way that it is merely
part of the way we describe the ﬁnite and does not require there to be inﬁnitely
many objects: on that conception the argument once again fails, but there does
not seem to be any trace of this thought in the Tractatus. 5
6.5
Identity and propositional functions in extension
I have said in Section 6.2 that according to Wittgenstein a = a and a = b are
always nonsense if a and b are Tractarian objects.
What we did not examine
then was the idea of simply deﬁning a = a to be a tautology and a = b to be a
contradiction. More formally, suppose that we deﬁne a function Q of two objectual
variables by the prescription
Q(x, y) =

Taut
if x = y
Cont
otherwise
The idea is that the function Q is to take the place of identity in contexts where
it is required.
Thus, for instance, we immediately retrieve the essential notion of class by
replacing talk of any class A by talk of the logical sum of the functions Q(x, a)
for a ∈A.
This is in eﬀect what Ramsey proposed to do in his 1925 paper
‘The foundations of mathematics’. (I say ‘in eﬀect’ because he in fact adopted an
indirect procedure which makes his deﬁnition seem a little less circular than the
5For more on Ramsey’s transcendental argument, see [Potter, 2005].

The Logic of the Tractatus
295
one I have just given.) Ramsey thus claimed to show that the theory of classes
(essential classes) consists of tautologies in Wittgenstein’s sense.
As Ramsey observed straightaway, [Ramsey, 1990, p. 216] there are two impor-
tant issues to address concerning his proposal to introduce this new notation: is
it consistent? and is it legitimate? In his original article Ramsey correctly points
out that the answer to the ﬁrst question is yes: introducing a new symbol for
tautology or contradiction cannot create new senses, but will merely provide us
with further ways of expressing old ones; it therefore cannot result in the sort of
explosion of the domain of senses that leads to paradox.
On the other hand, to the second question — whether the notation is legitimate
— Ramsey answers in the aﬃrmative without giving any more reason for his answer
than the bald statement that ‘it is an intelligible notation, giving a deﬁnite meaning
to the symbols in which it is employed’. [Ramsey, 1990, p. 216] Wittgenstein’s
ﬁrst reaction to Ramsey’s procedure, in a letter he wrote in 1927, was to explain
why Ramsey’s function Q, although ‘a very interesting function’, could not be a
deﬁnition of identity. Ramsey’s response to this was to say in eﬀect that he and
Wittgenstein were talking past one another. Ramsey had not claimed that Q was
the identity function, since he agreed with Wittgenstein’s argument that there
could be no such function. All Ramsey claimed was that the function Q could be
used in quantiﬁed contexts to express correctly various senses that one wants to
be able to express. Take, for example, ‘something other than a is f’. This can be
expressed using Wittgenstein’s convention for variables as
fa. ⊃.(∃x, y)′ : fx · fy· :∼fa. ⊃.(∃x)′.fx.
But using the more usual Russellian convention for quantiﬁers together with Ram-
sey’s Q function we can also express it as
(∃x).fx· ∼Q(x, a).
As Ramsey says in his letter to Wittgenstein, ‘if you admit Q(x, y) as a legitimate
symbol at all it seems to me this must be all right’. [Wittgenstein, 1995, p. 220]
It was not until some time later, after Ramsey’s death, that Wittgenstein man-
aged to formulate a clear explanation of what was really wrong with Ramsey’s
notation. We can of course introduce the symbol Q(a, a) to mean tautology and
the symbol Q(a, b) to mean contradiction, but by doing so we do not license the
replacement of a with a variable to form a function Q(x, a). The symbol Q(a, a),
as we have now introduced it, is a word and does not have the sort of complex-
ity that would entitle us to decompose it for quantiﬁcational purposes. Treating
identity, so deﬁned, as a function would be like treating ‘coal’, ‘coat’ and ‘corn’ as
three values co(al), co(at), co(rn) of a single function ‘co’ [Wittgenstein, 1974, II,
Section 16].
6.6
Mathematics as tautological
That is clear enough, and plainly right as far as it goes, but it does not go very far:
Wittgenstein’s objection applies to Ramsey’s speciﬁc proposal, sure enough, but

296
Michael Potter
it does not seem to provide us with a general reason to reject the idea that math-
ematics consists of tautologies. At this stage in the debate, then, it seems correct
to conclude, as Sullivan did in his discussion of the correspondence,[Sullivan, 1995]
that the exchange between Wittgenstein and Ramsey is disappointingly localized,
a narrow matter of the correctness of a technical device which no-one any longer
proposes to use. Yet it seems clear from the fact that Wittgenstein returned to the
matter repeatedly, and evidently expended considerable eﬀort on puzzling out just
what was wrong with Ramsey’s proposal, that Wittgenstein saw it as a signiﬁcant
threat. If so, what Wittgenstein found threatening can only have been the general
claim that mathematics consists of tautologies. What, then, were Wittgenstein’s
general reasons, independent of the debate with Ramsey, for rejecting that?
What is striking is that Wittgenstein should have been so opposed to this idea
when he went out of his way to emphasize in the Tractatus how similar the equa-
tions of mathematics are to tautologies:
The logic of the world, which is shown in tautologies by the propositions
of logic is shown in equations by mathematics. [Wittgenstein, 1922,
6.22]
If this is the similarity, then, what is the diﬀerence? The fundamental diﬀerence
between tautologies and equations lies in how they can be applied. A tautology
such as p ∨∼p can be seen as a sort of limiting case of a genuine proposition.
Its component parts, such as p, have sense, and the ways in which those parts
are combined to form the whole are ways in which propositions with sense can be
formed. It is just that in this case the sense so formed turns out to be empty. What
happens when we try to form a parallel explanation of the equation 7 + 5 = 12?
The intended application is that this equation allows us to infer such facts as that
if there are 7 apples and 5 oranges then there are 12 pieces of fruit. In symbols,
Nφ = 7 · Nψ = 5 · Nx(φx · ψx) = 0 ⊃Nx(φx ∨ψx) = 12.
(2)
But this is now plainly not parallel to the tautology case. For no one instance of (2)
carries the import of the equation 7+5 = 12. And if we try to treat the equation as
meaning the universal generalization of (2), we run into the diﬃculty that we can
only generalize over one level in the hierarchy at a time, which is not what we want:
we ought to be able to count ﬁrst-level propositional functions by just the same
means as we count apples. But even if we prescind from this diﬃculty and focus
only on the case where what we are trying to count are Wittgensteinian objects,
we still do not get what we want: it is possible that no ﬁrst-level property has just
ﬁve instances, and in that case the equation 7 + 5 = 13, interpreted according to
the current proposal, would come out true, as would every other equation with the
number 5 on the left hand side (because the antecedent of the conditional would be
uninstantiated). This sort of accidental truth is plainly not what we were aiming
for, so the only thing left to us is to interpret 7 + 5 = 12 as meaning that (2) is
not merely always true but always tautological. This, though, plainly cannot itself
be a tautology since it is at the wrong semantic level for that.

The Logic of the Tractatus
297
If we wish to claim that mathematics consists of tautologies, then, it is no use
treating equations as merely abbreviated embodiments of their intended applica-
tions: the only course is to treat them as tautologies in their own right, their
tautologousness not being seen as derived from their applications. Ramsey’s ac-
count is evidently an instance of this general strategy. But if we do this, we shall
eventually have to explain how these tautologies nevertheless do get applied: we
shall have to establish a connection between the new ways of expressing senses thus
introduced and the old ones. But now our diﬃculty is that we have broken the link
with a crucial aspect of Wittgenstein’s account of tautologies, namely that they
can be seen as limiting cases of genuine propositions, i.e. as trivial cases of forms
capable of expressing non-trivial senses. Without that link mathematics ﬂoats free
of the rest of language and the account lapses into a version of formalism.
7
ARITHMETIC
7.1
Numbers
We have said what mathematics is not — tautologies.
Now we turn to what
it is. The only part of mathematics which Wittgenstein deals with explicitly is
elementary arithmetic, and although he does not give any explanation of this
restriction, he seems to have assumed that this was the only part of mathematics
which makes contact with reality — the only part, that is to say, which is directly
applicable.
The idea Wittgenstein fell on to explain the applicability of arithmetic takes as
its inspiration a treatment of numbers in terms of numerically deﬁnite quantiﬁers
that Frege had considered (but in the end rejected) in the Grundlagen.
That
treatment, when rewritten in Wittgenstein’s notation, involves deﬁning
(∃≥1x).fx =Df (∃x)′.fx
(∃≥2x).fx =Df (∃x, y)′.fx · fy
...
(∃≥n+1x).fx =Df (∃x)′(∃≥ny).fx · fy
...
If we deﬁne
(∃nx).fx =Df (∃≥nx).fx· ∼(∃≥n+1x).fx,
it is then straightforward to derive an account of the use of numerals in counting
things.
But for Wittgenstein’s purposes this account is too speciﬁc: it cannot explain
how numbers can also be used to count not just things but the terms of other

298
Michael Potter
formal series, such as the one we discussed earlier.
aR1b =Df aRb
aR2b =Df (∃x) : aRx · xRb
...
In order to achieve this Wittgenstein generalized Frege’s treatment so that numer-
als became now indices of the repetition of any operation whatever. If Ω is any
operation and p is any proposition, Wittgenstein lets
Ω0(p) =Df p
Ων+1(p) =Df Ω(Ων(p))
The numerals 0, 0 + 1, 0 + 1 + 1, . . . (which are of course normally abbreviated
0, 1, 2, . . . ) thus act, when occurring in exponent position, to count the number of
times the operation Ω has been applied to the proposition p.
7.2
Equations
In order that we should now be able to develop arithmetic, we might expect deﬁ-
nitions of the arithmetical functions by recursion, e.g.
Ωμ+0(p) =Df Ωμ(p)
Ωμ+(ν+1)(p) =Df Ωμ+ν(Ω(p)).
But instead Wittgenstein proposes to use more compact deﬁnitions of addition
and multiplication that exploit the direct links between these functions and com-
position.
Ωμ+ν(p) =Df Ωμ(Ων(p))
Ωμν(p) =Df (Ωμ)ν(p)
(At any rate, he states explicitly the deﬁnition of multiplication and leaves the
reader to work out the corresponding one for addition.) Wittgenstein does not say
explicitly whether he prefers these to the recursive deﬁnitions merely because they
are more compact or whether he has some objection to the method of recursive
deﬁnition. If the latter, it would of course make a signiﬁcant diﬀerence to his
system, since it is far from obvious how to give correspondingly compact deﬁnitions
of other arithmetical functions such as exponentiation.
With the deﬁnitions of addition and multiplication just given we can prove

The Logic of the Tractatus
299
explicit numerical equations such as 2 + 2 = 4 or 2 × 2 = 4. Thus, for example,
Ω2+2(p) = Ω2(Ω2(p))
= Ω(Ω(Ω2(p)))
= Ω(Ω2+1(p))
= Ω(2+1)+1(p)
= Ω3+1(p)
= Ω4(p).
The idea in general, then, is that an equation μ = ν is to mean that Ωμ(p) =
Ων(p). Elsewhere in the Tractatus Wittgenstein indicates by the gnomic remark
that ‘∼∼p = p’ that the identity sign here is to mean identity of sense.
So
Ωμ(p) = Ων(p) is to be interpreted as meaning that Ωμ(p) and Ωμ(p) have the
same sense, or equivalently that Ωμ(p) ≡Ων(p) is a tautology.
Now for this to give an extensionally correct account of the equation μ = ν we
must plainly mean to be asserting this for every operation Ω. (If it was suﬃcient
that it hold for some operation Ω, the case ∼∼p = p would show that 2 = 0.)
But we cannot achieve this eﬀect by genuine quantiﬁcation because that would
involve quantifying into the expression
that Ωμ(p) ≡Ων(p) is a tautology,
which is not a signiﬁcant proposition but nonsense. So if the account is to come out
right, we shall presumably have to regard Ω and p as schematic. As predicted in the
previous chapter, then, Wittgenstein’s account treats each arithmetical equation
as abbreviating not a tautology but a claim that all the symbols of a certain form
express tautologies.
It is evident even from the layout of the sections of the Tractatus that Wittgen-
stein intended to stress the parallels between logic and arithmetic.
What the
apparent propositions of logic and arithmetic share is that they do not themselves
express thoughts about the world, but are used to license inferences between gen-
uine propositions that do express thoughts.
Indeed in real life a mathematical proposition is never what we want.
Rather, we make use of mathematical propositions only in inferences
from propositions that do not belong to mathematics to others that
likewise do not belong to mathematics. [Wittgenstein, 1961, 6.211]
But despite these similarities we can now see that there is also a fundamental
diﬀerence between logic and arithmetic. A tautology and an arithmetical equation,
although both can be used in inference, are of diﬀerent semantic levels. A tautol-
ogy is on the same level as the propositions with sense but fails to say anything
signiﬁcant only through its vacuity. An equation, on the other hand, tries to say
that symbols of a certain form express tautologies. The diﬀerence, in other words,

300
Michael Potter
is the same as that between the vacuous proposition p ∨∼p, which expresses
tautology, and the pseudo-proposition that p ∨∼p is a tautology, which tries to
say what the former proposition shows.
7.3
Quantiﬁcation
In the account we have given of the meaning of the equation ‘μ = ν’ the letters
‘μ’ and ‘ν’ are schematic, standing not merely for arbitrary numerals (such as
‘4’ or ‘126’) but more generally for arbitrary number terms (such as ‘7 + 5’ or
‘4 × (6 + 2)’). This allows us to give a meaning to schematic general statements
about numbers. For example, the schema μ + 1 = 1 + μ means that
Ωμ+1(p) = Ω1+μ(p),
with μ, Ω, and p all schematic.
Nothing similar can be done with existential
generalizations about numbers, however.
If, for instance, we try to represent
(∃x).μ(x) = 0 as meaning that
(∃x)(Ωμ(x)(p) ≡p is a tautology),
we get the wrong meaning. To get the correct meaning we should have to write
(∃x)(Ω)(p)(Ωμ(x)(p) ≡p is a tautology),
but this is meaningless for the by now familiar reason that the expression
Ωμ(x)(p) ≡p is a tautology
is not a proposition but a pseudo-proposition and hence cannot meaningfully be
quantiﬁed.
We can thus coherently express universal but not, in general, existential gener-
alizations about numbers. To be able to express generalizations is not yet to be
able to prove them, though. The proof that in general μ + 1 = 1 + μ, for instance,
involves induction on μ, and nothing we have said so far licenses that. Indeed the
Tractatus makes no explicit mention of the principle of mathematical induction
at all. (The two references in the text to ‘induction’ seem to be to the law of
induction in physics.)
At an even more basic level, Wittgenstein’s deﬁnition of multiplication, for
example, does not give us any direct assurance that the product of two natural
numbers is a natural number, i.e. that if ‘μ’ and ‘ν’ are numerals there is a numeral
‘σ’ such that
Ωμ×ν(p) = Ωσ(p)
with Ω and p arbitrary. When we calculate μ × ν in any particular case (such as
Wittgenstein’s calculation of ‘2×2’), we of course ﬁnd that there is such a numeral
(in this case ‘4’), but what general reason do we have for thinking that there is
always one? The usual proof involves a double induction on μ and ν.

The Logic of the Tractatus
301
It may seem as though such appeals to induction would be a further step,
requiring a new argument. On the purely formal level this is undoubtedly so, but
not, I think, on a conceptual level. The reason is that in order to ask the question
whether μ × ν is in general a number we have already to suppose that μ × ν has
been deﬁned. And the deﬁnition, whose coherence is not at this point in question,
makes an implicit appeal to induction for its meaningfulness. This is because our
understanding of the numerals ‘μ’ and ‘ν’ occurring in the deﬁnition is in turn
inductive: numerals are, according to Wittgenstein’s deﬁnition, symbols which
can be obtained from zero inductively by adding one. We are tempted to deny
this dependence because it seems that for any particular numerals ‘μ’ and ‘ν’ no
appeal to induction is required: we merely apply the deﬁnition a ﬁnite number of
times. But what this overlooks is that each time we apply the deﬁnition we have
to understand it as the same multiplication function that is being calculated. And
for this we do require the general grasp of the number series that is given to us by
its inductive deﬁnition.
Wittgenstein’s deﬁnition of number thus commits him to the validity of argu-
ment by induction on the numerals.
That does not, however, explain how we
ground its validity. Wittgenstein’s answer to that lies in the remarks which head
the section of the Tractatus on arithmetic and logic:
The general form of a truth-function is [p, ξ, N(ξ)].
This is the general form of a proposition.
What this says is just that every proposition is a result of successive ap-
plications to elementary propositions of the operation N(ξ). [Wittgen-
stein, 1922, 6–6.001]
The point of making all the remarks on arithmetic subsidiary to this is that the
general form of proposition is recursive: propositions are obtained from elemen-
tary propositions by iterations of the N operation. Since all operations apply to
propositions, all operations are ultimately expressible in terms of the N opera-
tion. But numbers are merely a notation for expressing the repeated application
of operations. So our understanding of numbers in general is also based on our
understanding of the general form of proposition.
None of this, of course, amounts to an explanation of the validity of induction.
What it does, though, is to base that on an appeal to something Wittgenstein
takes to be fundamental, namely that grasp of language as a whole which we have
when we understand the general form of proposition. Wittgenstein sees this as
playing a central rˆole in his theory corresponding to the rˆole of intuition in Kant.
Kant talks here of the ‘limitlessness in the progression of intuition’; [Kant, 1781,
A25] Wittgenstein needs the general form of proposition to do the same thing.
The question whether intuition is needed for the solution of mathe-
matical problems must be given the answer that in this case language
itself provides the necessary intuition.

302
Michael Potter
The process of calculation serves to bring about that intuition. [Wittgen-
stein, 1922, 6.233]
7.4
Dependence on inﬁnity
Does Wittgenstein’s account rule out the possibility that the numbers are not all
distinct? If ‘μ’ and ‘ν’ are distinct numerals, can we conclude, in other words that
μ ̸= ν? In order to prove the corresponding result in their system, Whitehead and
Russell needed to assume an axiom of inﬁnity asserting that there are inﬁnitely
many individuals, but the axiom of inﬁnity cannot play the same rˆole in Wittgen-
stein’s account. The inﬁnitude of the world (if it is indeed inﬁnite) shows itself in
the language we use to describe it and cannot be expressed by any one proposition
in the language. However, there are two diﬀerent ways in which the world might
be inﬁnite corresponding to the two aspects it has, that of permanence and that of
possibility. For the world to be inﬁnite in its permanent aspect there would have
to be inﬁnitely many objects, and this would be shown by there being inﬁnitely
many names in the language. For there to be inﬁnitely many possibilities as to
how the world could be, on the other hand, there would have to be inﬁnitely many
states of aﬀairs in the world, and this would be shown by there being inﬁnitely
many elementary propositions in the language.
Now both these — the number of names and the number of elementary propo-
sitions — are ways in which language reﬂects the limits of empirical reality. ‘Em-
pirical reality is limited by the totality of objects.
The limit also makes itself
manifest in the totality of elementary propositions’ [Wittgenstein, 1922, 5.5561].
But the connection between the two sorts of limit is even closer than this suggests:
empirical reality is inﬁnite in the ﬁrst respect if and only if it is inﬁnite in the
second.
Suppose now for a moment that there is only a ﬁnite number of elementary
propositions. Then there are only ﬁnitely many propositional senses, and conse-
quently the set of all operations, i.e. functions from propositional senses to propo-
sitional senses, is ﬁnite too.
A straightforward group-theoretic argument then
shows that there must be numbers M, N with M < N such that for every oper-
ation Ω and every proposition p we have ΩM(p) = ΩN(p). But this is just what
we said was meant by M = N. Consequently there are no natural numbers other
than 0, 1, 2, . . . , N −1.
By contraposition it follows that if there are inﬁnitely
many numbers then there are inﬁnitely many elementary propositions, and hence
inﬁnitely many objects.
A further consequence is that subtraction cannot be deﬁned in Wittgenstein’s
system. For if it could, we would have N −M = 0, and so ΩN−M(p) = p for every
operation Ω and proposition p; in particular, if we apply this in the case where
Ω(p) = p0 for all p, where p0 is some ﬁxed proposition, we obtain p = p0 for all p,
i.e. all propositions have the same sense. Contradiction.
Although reality is limited by how many objects and elementary propositions
there are, this is not a limit we can express in our language. The possibilities

The Logic of the Tractatus
303
we can express are possibilities as to the ways the objects could be conﬁgured,
not possibilities as to how many objects there are. So if the form of arithmetic
is dependent on how many objects there are, that does not directly contradict
Wittgenstein’s injunction that ‘the generality that is required in mathematics is
not accidental generality’. The reason the dependence of arithmetic on the number
of objects nevertheless seems embarrassing to Wittgenstein is that there is plainly
another sense in which it is possible that the number of objects should be diﬀerent
from what it is, namely that logic allows for a diﬀerent number of objects even if
language as a whole does not. Language draws the limits of the world, the limits
of what is possible. But we can divide our grasp of language into two parts, the
elementary propositions on the one hand and the general form of proposition on
the other; and corresponding to this division we can detect two levels of possibility
that language as a whole allows for. ‘Mathematics’, Wittgenstein says, ‘is a logical
method’ [Wittgenstein, 1922, 6.2].
A consequence of this is that mathematics
should not limit the world any more than logic does. If mathematics is to lie at
the same level of generality as logic, it must be necessary not only with respect
to the level of contingency that our language expresses, namely contingency as to
which arrangements of objects into states of aﬀairs actually occur, but also with
respect to the higher level inexpressible in the language itself but represented by
the general form of proposition, namely contingency as to what objects there are.
So Wittgenstein does indeed seem to be in need of an argument to show that our
language is one that represents there to be inﬁnitely many objects.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Parts of this chater are based on notes of my lectures taken by Arif Ahmed. I am
grateful to Peter Sullivan for comments on an earlier draft.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Anscombe, 1967] G. E. M. Anscombe. An Introduction to Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, 3rd edn.
(London: Hutchison, 1967).
[Geach, 1981] P. T. Geach. Wittgenstein’s operator N. Analysis, 41 (1981), 168–71.
[Grattan-Guinness, 2000] I. Grattan-Guinness. The Search for Mathematical Roots:Logics, Set
Theories and the Foundations of Mathematics from Cantor through Russell to G¨odel (Prince-
ton University Press, 2000).
[Kant, 1781] I. Kant. Kritik der reinen Vernunft (Riga: Hartknoch, 1781; B edn. 1878) (trans.
as Critique of Pure Reason).
[Kant, 1929] I. Kant. Critique of Pure Reason, trans. by Norman Kemp Smith (London:
Macmillan, 1919).
[Lewy, 1967] C. Lewy. A note on the text of the Tractatus, Mind, 76 (1967), 416–23.
[McGuinness, 1989] B. McGuinness. Wittgenstein’s pre-Tratatus manuscripts. In Wittgenstein
in Focus — Im Brennpunkt: Wittgewnstein, ed. by Brian McGuinness and Rudolf Haller,
Grazer philosophische Studien (Amsterdam: Rodophi, 1989), pp. 35–47.
[Potter, 2005] M. Potter. Ramsey’s transcendental argument. In Ramsey’s Legacy, ed. by Hall-
vard Lillehammer and D. H. Mellor (Oxford University Press, 2005), pp. 71–82.
[Ramsey, 1991] F. P. Ramsey. Notes on Philosophy, Probability and Mathematics, ed. by Maria
Carla Galavotti, History of Logic, 7 (Naples: Bibliopolis, 1991).

304
Michael Potter
[Ramsey, 1990] F. P. Ramsey. Philosophical Papers, ed. by D. H. Mellor (Cambridge University
Press, 1990).
[Russell, 1910] B. Russell. Philosophical Essays (London: Longman Green, 1910).
[Sullivan, 1995] P. M. Sullivan. Wittgenstein on The Foundations of Mathematics, June 1927,
Theoria, 61 (1995), 105–42.
[Sundholm, 1992] G. Sundholm. The general form of the operation in Wittgenstein’s Tractatus,
in Criss-crossing a Philosophical Landscape, ed. by Joachim Schulte and G¨oran Sundholm,
Grazer philosophische Studien (Amsterdam: Rodophi, 1992), pp. 57–76.
[von Wright, 1990] G. H. von Wright. A Portrait of Wittgenstein as a Young Man: From the
Diary of David Hume Pinsent 1912–1914 (Oxford: Blackwell, 1990).
[Wittgenstein, 1922] L. Wittgenstein. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (London: Kegan Paul a&
Trubner, 1922; corrected edn. 1933).
[Wittgenstein, 1929] L. Wittgenstein. Some remarks on logical form. Proc. Arist. Soc., Supp.
Vol., 9 (1929), 162–71.
[Wittgenstein, 1961] L. Wittgenstein. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. by D. F. Pears and
B. F. McGuinness (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961).
[Wittgenstein, 1971] L. Wittgenstein. Prototractatus: An Early Version of Tractatus Logico-
Philosophicus, ed. by B. F. McGuinness, T. Nyberg and G. H. von Wright, trnas. by D. F.
Pears and B.F. McGuinness, intro. by G. H. von Wright (London: Routledge & Kegan paul,
1971).
[Wittgenstein, 1974] L. Wittgenstein. Philosophical Grammar, ed. by Rush Rees and trans. by
Anthony Kenny (Oxford: Blackwell, 1974).
[Wittgenstein, 1975] L. Wittgenstein. Philosophical Remarks, ed. by Rush Rees and trans. by
Raymond Hargeraves and Roger White (Oxford: Blackwell, 1975).
[Wittgenstein, 1979] L. Wittgenstein. Notebooks, 1914–1916, ed. by G. H. von Right and G. E.
M. Anscombe, 2nd edn (Oxford: Blackwell, 19740.
[Wittgenstein, 1995] L.
Wittgenstein.
Cambridge
Letters:
Correspondence
with
Russell,
Keynes, Moore, Ramsey and Sraﬀa, ed. by Brian McGuinness and G. H. von Wright (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1995).

LE´SNIEWSKI’S LOGIC
Peter M. Simons
1
LIFE
Stanislaw Le´sniewski was born on 30 March 1886 at Serpukhov in Russia, where
his father Izydor was an engineer engaged in building the Trans-Siberian railway.
He attended school in Irkutsk, before studying in Western Europe (Leipzig, Zurich,
Munich). He arrived at Lvov in Austrian Poland in 1910 to work on his Ph.D.
under Kazimierz Twardowski. In the years before World War I he wrote several
essays on the philosophy of language and logic. In 1911 he read Lukasiewicz’s
book On the Principle of Contradiction in Aristotle and in it he learnt about
symbolic logic and Russell’s Paradox. This set him on his life’s path of producing
an antinomy-free system of logical foundations for mathematics. He received his
doctorate in 1911 and married the following year, before travelling in France, Italy
and Russia. During World War I he lived and worked in Moscow, but in 1918
after the October Revolution he returned to Poland and after failing to gain his
habilitation in Lvov, obtained it in Warsaw. During the 1919–21 Polish–Bolshevik
War he worked as a codebreaker for the Polish General Staﬀ’s Cipher Bureau, con-
tributing in no small way to the defeat of the Red Army. In 1919 he was appointed
Professor of the Foundations of Mathematics in the Faculty of Natural Sciences at
Warsaw University. With Lukasiewicz also a professor, Warsaw at this time had
two more professors of mathematical logic than anywhere else in the world, and
they founded the Warsaw School of logic. Le´sniewski’s students included many of
Poland’s ﬁnest logicians, most notably Alfred Tarski, who was the only student to
complete a doctorate under him. Having at ﬁrst rejected symbolic logic, from 1920
he embraced it and began to formulate his systems with unprecedented precision.
Through the 1920s he developed and improved his system of foundations, and
began publishing results towards the end of the decade in two important series of
papers. In the 1930s he developed serious doctrinal disagreements with colleagues,
most notably over his vehement opposition to set theory, and he became person-
ally isolated as well as increasingly anti-Semitic in his views. He was diagnosed
with thyroid cancer and after an unsuccessful operation he died on 13 May 1939
at the age of 52. His papers, including an unﬁnished book on logical antinomies,
were destroyed in the 1944 Warsaw Uprising.
Le´sniewski’s logic was unortho-
dox, uncompromising and inconvenient, so did not become mainstream, but his
strictures on proper use of quotation, the distinction between object-language and
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

306
Peter M. Simons
metalanguage, his canons of acceptable deﬁnition, and his principles of mereology
(part-whole theory) passed into standard use. He was the ﬁrst logician clearly to
value Frege’s work above that of Whitehead and Russell. Le´sniewski left a small
coterie of devoted followers who after World War II reconstructed as much as they
could of his lost work and themselves went on to distinguished logical careers.
2
EARLY WRITINGS
In his early work Le´sniewski wrote about aspects of the philosophy of logic, in
particular the notion of truth and the status of the laws of logic. His work was
inﬂuenced by Mill, Marty, Husserl and Cornelius, and was especially concerned
with logical grammar. At this stage he worked with Mill’s distinction between
the objects a term denotes and the properties it connotes. In “A Contribution to
the Analysis of Existential Propositions” (1911), based on his dissertation, he held
that because all subject–predicate propositions can only be true if the subject term
denotes, all positive existential propositions such as ‘Lions exist’ are analytically
true, and all negative ones such as ‘Unicorns do not exist’ are contradictory. The
logically proper way to formulate the true proposition that there are no unicorns
is ‘No being is a unicorn’. In “An Attempt at a Proof of the Ontological Principle
of Contradiction” (1912) he argues that ‘No object is able to be both B and not-
B’ is true but disagrees with the equivalence (now generally accepted) that ‘No
A is B’ is equivalent to ‘If something is A then it is not B’. In “The Critique
of the Logical Principle of the Excluded Middle” (1913) he distinguishes between
an ontological principle — Every object is either A or not A — and a logical
principle — Of two contradictory propositions, at least one must be true.
He
rejects the latter because he takes ‘Every centaur has a tail’ and ‘Some centaur
does not have a tail’ to be contradictories but both false because the subject-term
‘centaur’ is empty. In the course of this paper he argues against Twardowski’s
theory of general objects and Meinong’s theory of impossible objects, as well as
oﬀering solutions to the paradoxes of Grelling and the Liar. This paper is the
richest of his early “logico-grammatical” works. In “Is truth only eternal or both
eternal and without a beginning?” (1913) he argues for timeless bivalence against
Kotarbi´nski’s contention that future contingent propositions lack a determinate
truth-value. In “Is the class of classes not subordinate to themselves subordinate
to itself?” (1914) he oﬀers an analysis of Russell’s Paradox, claiming that ‘the
class of As’ refers to the unique mereological sum of As, so that since every object
is subordinate to itself, no class of objects is not subordinate to itself, so Russell’s
Paradox fails to arise. During World War I, when Le´sniewski lived in Moscow, he
completed “Foundations of a General Theory of Sets” (1916). Despite the use of
the term ‘mnogo´s´c’ (set), this was a ﬁrst rigorous deductive presentation of the
theory of parts, wholes and concrete collections, for which, in order to diﬀerentiate
his view from “oﬃcial” set theory, Le´sniewski coined the term ‘mereology’. In this
paper the language is a highly regimented Polish supplemented with variables,
because at the time he did not trust symbolic methods.

Le´sniewski’s Logic
307
3
FORMALIZATION
In 1920 Leon Chwistek persuaded Le´sniewski to overcome the aversion to symbolic
methods in logic that he had acquired principally through reading Whitehead
and Russell’s Principia mathematica, which was careless about the distinction
between use and mention in a way which Le´sniewski instinctively was not. From his
very ﬁrst paper Le´sniewski made the distinction perfectly clearly, and he literally
failed to understand works where confusion reigned. By contrast Le´sniewski fully
appreciated the care Frege took with the metalinguistic description of his logic.
In the course of the 1920s Le´sniewski submitted his rigorous but unformalized
reasonings regarding propositions, objects, collections and parts to a process of
progressive formalization. The axioms of his 1916 mereology were rendered into
a formalized axiomatic mereology, where undeﬁned expressions meaning ‘part of’
and ‘collection of’ were taken as primitive. This rendering of mereology and its
immediate consequences suﬀered two drawbacks: the expression for ‘collection of’
needed to be deﬁned in terms of ‘part of’ before being inserted into the axioms;
and the logical principles governing names and name-forming functors were not
made explicit.
The former was easily remedied by a new axiomatization; the
latter required another logical system, one dealing with names, predicates, and
other functors.
This system, which picked up where the early papers left oﬀ,
but now ditched the notions of connotation and property, Le´sniewski came to call
‘ontology’, because he saw it as a general theory of objects in the sense of Aristotle.
But ontology had its own logical presuppositions, a logic of propositions or “theory
of deduction” as Whitehead and Russell had called it. This most basic theory of
logical ﬁrst principles Le´sniewski called ‘protothetic’. For him it included not just
the standard truth-functional connectives, but also higher functors and the basic
principles governing the logic of quantiﬁers.
Having established that the logical order of systems should be (1) protothetic (2)
ontology (3) mereology, Le´sniewski now set about giving each system an axiomatic
formulation. For protothetic he was aided by a discovery of Tarski that conjunc-
tion is deﬁnable in terms of material equivalence and universal quantiﬁcation, using
propositional functions. This enable Le´sniewski to base protothetic on just one
connective and one quantiﬁer. The advantage of having equivalence as primitive
was that it allowed the simple formulation of deﬁnitions, which Le´sniewski con-
strued as object-language equivalences rather than metalinguistic abbreviations.
For ontology he chose the singular ‘is’ (requiring no article in Polish) and found a
single axiom for ontology too. For mereology the original primitive ‘part of’ was
only one of many possible, and he experimented with diﬀerent primitives.
Because Le´sniewski’s logical terms had their origins in his careful vernacular
before he came to formalize them, he always conceived of his axioms and their
constituent expressions as having deﬁnite meanings, as being true of the actual
world, and the inference rules as truth-preserving. He steadfastly rejected all no-
tions of formalization as involving the manipulation of symbols without meaning,
and with deliberate irony called his approach “intuitionistic formalism”, because

308
Peter M. Simons
he was bent on rigorously formalizing reasoning with intuitively true axioms and
with rules intuitively preserving truth.
4
NOMINALISTIC METALOGIC
This did not stop Le´sniewski from exercising utmost rigour in formulating the
principles of his system. But in this too he was distinctly unorthodox. Because
he rejected platonism, Le´sniewski conceived of his logical systems not as sets of
abstract propositions or ideal sentence-types, but as concrete collections of physical
complexes, growing in time by the addition of new theses. Since no such system
is ever inﬁnite, yet the ways in which they might grow, consonant with logical
practice, are not given in advance, Le´sniewski was forced to give directives which
say when it is permitted to add a new thesis to a given system at any given stage.
This meant that he in eﬀect had to anticipate in advance and describe precisely
but schematically the general form that any thesis could take in relation to prior
theses. It was to the formulation of these metalogical directives that he gave his
greatest eﬀort.
In the course of formulating his directives, Le´sniewski introduced a rich meta-
logical vocabulary, the terms of which were linked by a series of metalogical def-
initions he called ‘Terminological Explanations’.
The complexity of these was
such that he was obliged to abbreviate them in the language of ontology, enriched
with a number of primitive metalinguistic terms such as ‘word’, ‘expression, ‘ﬁrst
word of expression’, ‘parenthesis symmetric to’, and more.
The terminological
explanations and directives for protothetic run to many pages, containing initial
explanations, 49 terminological explanations and ﬁve directives for extending the
system. The deﬁnition of ‘deﬁnition of protothetic’ alone runs to 18 clauses, and
was the single achievement of which Le´sniewski was proudest. It was the sloppi-
ness of previous accounts of deﬁnition, with the exception of Frege, that prompted
Le´sniewski to formulate directives for appropriate deﬁnitions. These include that
the expression deﬁned occur only once on one side of an equivalence, with univer-
sally quantiﬁed variables, that the deﬁniens employ only expressions previously
deﬁned, and so on. It sounds simple but in fact is not. In his advanced gradu-
ate seminars Le´sniewski typically took three semesters to present the directives,
proving by countermodels that every clause of every terminological explanation is
logically independent of every other. No logician before or since took such trou-
ble to be so scrupulously exact in their logic. The force of the directives is not
imperative or prescriptive. There is no injunction to extend any logical system.
Suppose a logical system (concrete collection of inscriptions) has been constructed
according to the directives, starting from an inscription of the axiom and proceed-
ing according to the directives up to a certain thesis. Now a logician takes it upon
herself to extend the system by adding a new inscription. What the directives
do is give the conditions under which any newly added inscription is a legitimate
extension. They do not tell the logician how she should extend the system, which
is a matter of will and ingenuity.
Assuming the axiom is true, it can be seen

Le´sniewski’s Logic
309
intuitively that any thesis added according to the directives will preserve truth if
all the preceding theses are true. In other words, the system is sound. Le´sniewski
strove (successfully) to achieve this, but did not prove it.
5
SEMANTIC CATEGORIES
The system of directives and terminological explanations for his systems forced
Le´sniewski to think about the ways in which expressions can be formed out of
others. In doing so he built on and modiﬁed Husserl’s concept of meaning cat-
egories and Whitehead and Russell’s theory of types. The result is that every
expression (token, always) except punctuation (brackets, dots, commas etc.) has
a particular semantic category. Categories are either basic or functorial. The basic
categories in Le´sniewski are sentence (in protothetic) or sentence and name
(in ontology and mereology). All other categorematic expressions are functors,
whose role is to combine with arguments of particular categories in sequence to
determine a complex of a given category. Le´sniewski’s practice is modelled on that
of Frege. It was later codiﬁed by Ajdukiewicz and formed the basis of categorial
grammar. In Le´sniewski’s system there is only one quantiﬁer, the universal, and it
is syncategorematic, being expressed merely by putting a string of variables within
special brackets (lower corners). He was unable to come up with general termino-
logical explanations and directives for introducing new quantiﬁers, and despite his
oﬀer of any degree whatever to any student able to do so, no one, not even Tarski,
succeeded.
While Le´sniewski was punctilious about the form of his logical systems, the
actual shape of the words was a matter of relative indiﬀerence provided no expres-
sion could be construed as compounded in two ways. He therefore laid down no
speciﬁcations as to what shape expressions should have after the axioms, except
for requiring symmetric brackets of diﬀerent shapes to help determine categories.
Unlike Church he did not require categorial indices for his variables.
The strictly regulated axiomatic systems speciﬁed by the directives were good
for developing inscriptional metalogic but too unwieldy for normal use, and in
everyday situations Le´sniewski used a kind of natural deduction, similar to sys-
tems later developed by Ja´skowski and others, but never explicitly formulated
by Le´sniewski, who considered such deductions as mere sketches indicating how
a full-dress axiomatic derivation should go. For metalogical purposes his formal
language has all functors preceding their arguments enclosed in categorially suit-
able parentheses, and quantiﬁer scope marked by upper corners, but again for
everyday purposes he is happy to use inﬁx notation, dots for parentheses, and a
quantiﬁer dual to the universal. Neither Le´sniewski nor anyone else has formalized
his implicit natural deduction rules nor shown in explicit detail how deductions
performed according to them can be translated into axiomatic deductions accord-
ing to the directives.
Le´sniewski has peculiarly stringent desiderata concerning the axiology of axiom
systems. A good axiom system should as far as possible have a single new primitive

310
Peter M. Simons
term, a single axiom for it, which should be organic, i.e. not be a conjunction of
parts which are themselves theorems, and ﬁnally it should be as short as possible.
The pursuit of perfection according to these desiderata, which he shared with
Lukasiewicz and which they passed on to their students, took up much energy
among interbellum Polish logicians.
At some time in the early 1920s Le´sniewski came to espouse extensionality.
This is not a single principle but a form of principles.
Two basic expressions
are coextensional when they denote the same objects if they are names or are
materially equivalent if they are sentences. Expressions of functor categories are
coextensional when they always yield coextensional output values for coextensional
input values, whatever these are. To guarantee that all expressions in the categorial
hierarchy are extensional Le´sniewski formulates a directive stating that once a
new category of expression is introduced it is legitimate to add a principle of
extensionality for that category. Expressions of new category are introduced by
deﬁnitions: the axioms of a system typically contain only very few categories of
expression.
6
MATURE WRITINGS
In the formative 1920s results, development, simpliﬁcations and other advances
came so thick and fast, and with the collaboration of so many logicians, most no-
tably Tarski, that Le´sniewski never managed to put together a deﬁnitive account of
his logical systems as a “systematic compendium”, although he had planned to do
so. To ensure that something was published and his results did not remain hearsay,
he instead elected to publish papers setting out his results as an “autobiographical
sketch”, giving the basics as lucidly as possible, and indicating how he and others
had chipped in with various results. The ﬁrst result was the six-article Polish se-
ries ‘O podstawach matematyki’, ‘On the foundations of mathematics’, published
1927–31 in Przegl¸ad Filozoﬁczny. The major part of this updates Le´sniewski’s
mereology from the 1916 article, in a similar style, but with a wider range of of-
ferings for possible primitives. It is prefaced by some autobiographical remarks
indicating how Le´sniewski came to mathematical logic, and adds a long, tedious
and pedantic rant against the use/mention confusions in Whitehead and Rus-
sell, which Le´sniewski says it took him four years to penetrate to give sense to
their formulas. There is a discussion of Russell’s Paradox and diﬀerent ways of
understanding the notion ‘class’, in which Le´sniewski takes issue with Zermelo,
Sierpi´nski, Hausdorﬀand other purveyors of “standard” set theory for embracing
the empty set, distinguishing a singleton set from its member, and supposing that
the only members (parts) of the set (mereological sum) of As must be As. A ﬁnal
Chapter on singular propositions of the type A is (a) b explains how Le´sniewski
arrived at his understanding of these propositions and came to the original axiom
of ontology in 1920. It ﬁnishes with a discussion of tensed propositions in which
Le´sniewski argues that the proper subjects of propositions with tensed copulas
are temporal parts of the whole things denoted by the unrestricted terms, so that

Le´sniewski’s Logic
311
‘Warsaw of 1930 is Warsaw of 1830’ is false because the two terms ‘Warsaw in
1930’ and ‘Warsaw in 1830’ denote diﬀerent objects, each of which is a diﬀerent
time-slice of the whole temporally extended object denoted by ‘Warsaw’. It is one
of Le´sniewski’s few excursions into metaphysical topics.
In 1929, Le´sniewski published the ﬁrst part of a long German article ‘Grundz¨uge
eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik’, ‘Fundamentals of a New
System of the Foundations of Mathematics’, dealing with protothetic. The ﬁrst
eleven sections appeared in Fundamenta mathematicae, then there was a hiatus
of nine years, because Le´sniewski withdrew the continuation after falling out with
Waclaw ´Sierpi´nski and the other mathematical editors of Fundamenta about his
attitude to set theory. A new journal Collecteana Logica allowed him to publish
the continuation in 1938, prefaced by a long sequence of introductory remarks
updating the results of 1929 and attacking Johann von Neumann (not for the ﬁrst
time) for sloppy metalogic. The ‘Grundz¨uge’ oﬀer the most complete published
vision of how Le´sniewski thought logic should be done. They contain an axioma-
tization in Whitehead–Russell notation account of the pure equivalential calculus
of propositions, in which Le´sniewski proves the metatheorem that a proposition
of this calculus is a theorem if and only if every variable occurs an even number
of times. Le´sniewski sketches the history of simpliﬁcations and improvements to
protothetic since its inception, then gives his Terminological Explanations and Di-
rectives for a system in his own notation. There the ﬁrst article ended. In 1938
there followed a typesetter’s nightmare: an unbroken sequence, scores of pages
long, of 12 deﬁnitions and 422 theorems in Le´sniewski’s own unconventional nota-
tion, with only terse marginal indications of the prior theses employed. In the face
of this uncompromising barrage there is little wonder that very few were prepared
to make the eﬀort needed to appreciate Le´sniewski’s work. Like Frege’s before
him, his notation has its merits, but it was documentation for the record, not an
advertisement for adherents.
Apart from these long works Le´sniewski published four shorter ones, also in
German: an almost undecipherably dense set of Terminological Explanations for
ontology, a more accessible investigation of the role of deﬁnitions in Lukasiewicz’s
propositional calculus, and two more dense results: single-axiom axiomatizations
for the theories of groups and Abelian groups. These grew out of Le´sniewski’s
teaching in Warsaw. Despite the loss of his posthumous manuscripts, some stu-
dent notes survived the Second World War and a collection of edited English
translations appeared as S. Le´sniewski’s Lecture Notes in Logic in 1988. Three
sets deal with each of the three basic systems and contain material not covered
in the published works, such as a sketch of an algorithmic calculus of truth-values
in protothetic, a long list of theses and deﬁnitions in ontology, and a similar list
for mereology. Other notes cover Peano arithmetic, inductive deﬁnitions, and a
critical comparison of Whitehead’s 1919 theory of events with mereology. The list
(published in the 1988 volume) of seminars and courses Le´sniewski held in War-
saw from 1919–39 show him ranging somewhat more widely, including courses on
semantic antinomies and on axioms of geometry.

312
Peter M. Simons
7
PROTOTHETIC
Protothetic is Le´sniewski’s propositional logic but it is much more than proposi-
tional calculus: it contains universal quantiﬁcation and functor categories, initially
of ﬁrst level, but potentially up to any level desired. The primitive functor ﬁrst
chosen by Le´sniewski is material equivalence, and he develops some of the pure
equivalential calculus, based on the axioms of transitivity and associativity of
equivalence
A1.
((p ↔r) ↔(q ↔p)) ↔(r ↔q)
A2.
(p ↔(q ↔r)) ↔((p ↔q) ↔r)
together with rules of substitution and detachment. But from the ﬁrst his interest
is in the whole calculus. Negation is deﬁned as
Def.∼∀p⌜∼p ↔(p ↔∀r⌜r⌝)⌝
while conjunction can be deﬁned, following Tarski, as
Def.∧∀pq⌜p ∧q ↔∀f⌜p ↔(f(p) ↔f(q))⌝⌝
By taking the universally quantiﬁed closures of the equivalential axioms A1 and
A2 and adding a third axiom
A3.
∀gp⌜∀f⌜g(pp) ↔(∀r⌜f(rr) ↔g(pp)⌝↔∀r⌜(f(rr) ↔g((p ↔∀⌜q⌝) ↔
p)⌝) ↔∀q⌜g(qp)⌝⌝⌝
Le´sniewski obtained an early basis for protothetic. Like all his logics, protothetic
was subject to successive simpliﬁcations, as hardly anyone could be expected to
understand the import of such a formula, still less the axioms of single-axiom sys-
tems into which Le´sniewski and his students poured eﬀort and ingenuity. Multiple-
axiom systems are more perspicuous. Here is one using the material conditional
as the basic connective
P1.
∀pq⌜p →(q →p)⌝
P2.
∀pqrf⌜f(rp) →(f(r∀s⌜s⌝) →f(rq))⌝
The directives obviously have to be reformulated for the conditional as basis.
In its logical force, protothetic is equivalent in potential to a theory of propo-
sitional types, such as described much later by Leon Henkin.
Because of the
extensionality of the system, there are only ﬁnitely many possible semantic values
for the constants of each type or semantic category, and every universal quan-
tiﬁcation is logically equivalent to a conjunction of formulas instantiating all the
possible combinations of values for the variables quantiﬁed. Because of this, the
chief role of the quantiﬁers is abbreviatory: they shorten formulas and obviate the
need to formulate new directives for each new category of functor introduced by
deﬁnition. Their introduction paves the way for their use in later systems, where
they are not ﬁnitely eliminable.

Le´sniewski’s Logic
313
8
ONTOLOGY
Ontology is the second of Le´sniewski’s logical systems and of greater philosophical
and logical interest. Le´sniewski describes it as a kind of amalgam of traditional
logic with Schr¨oder’s calculus of classes with individuals, informed throughout
however by the rigour of Frege. Ontology adds a new primitive category of name
to the sentence of protothetic, and the rules and directives for quantiﬁers, def-
initions and substitution are extended to cope with the new swathe of categories
made possible. The names of ontology need not be singular, but can be empty or
plural. This has implications for the interpretation of quantiﬁers: these cannot be
understood as standardly in predicate logic, about which more below.
Le´sniewski elected to formulate ontology in terms of the functor ‘ε’ of singular
inclusion. He followed Peano in selecting the ﬁrst letter of the Greek word ‘εστι’,
‘is’, and typically rendered sentences of the form ‘a ε b’ in Polish as ‘a jest b’. Since
Polish lacks articles, there is no unique best way in which to say this in English:
taking the options into account, one might cover several by ‘(the) a is (a) b’, but
for logical purposes a more honest rendering might be ‘(the) a is one of (the) bs’,
which makes it clear that it is inclusion of one object among one or more. The
truth-conditions of a formula ‘a ε b’ are straightforward: it is true if ‘a’ denotes a
single object and this object is one of the one or more objects denoted by ‘b’; in all
other cases the formula is false. But while the simplest rendering into English is ‘a
is a b’, it should not be thought that ‘ ε ’ is a mere copula. The mistake is sometimes
made of attributing to Le´sniewski a two-name account of predication, like that of
Ockham. This is wrong: Le´sniewski understood predication much as Frege did,
involving an unsaturated predicate and one or more names.
‘ε’ is not a mere
copula, but a two-place predicate out of the same syntactic and semantic category
as other relational predicates like ‘admires’: ‘John admires mountaineers’ and
‘John admires the Beatles’ are grammatically exactly like ‘John is a mountaineer’
and ‘John is one of the Beatles’. A one-place predication like ‘John smokes’ or
‘Lions roar’ both have the same form for Le´sniewski: f(a). The major diﬀerence
is that Le´sniewski, following the tradition from Aristotle to Schr¨oder, and unlike
post-Fregean orthodoxy, puts general terms in the same category as singular terms.
In view of the meaning of ‘a ε b’ Le´sniewski sought to spell out its logical force
in an axiom which he modelled on Russell’s analysis of deﬁnite descriptions: (the)
a is a b if and only if there is at least one a, there is at most one a, and every a
is a b. Putting the parts of this equivalence all in terms of ‘ε’ yields the following
axiom
AO
∀ab⌜a ε b ↔(∃c⌜c ε a⌝∧∀de⌜(d ε a ∧e ε a) →d ε e⌝∧∀f⌜f ε a →f ε b⌝)⌝.
The form of this, with the undeﬁned term occurring once on the left-hand side in
an atomic sentence, and used on the right-hand side, amounts to a kind of implicit
deﬁnition of ‘ε’. Notice how the term ‘a’ occurs in subject position on the left but
only in the complement position on the right. Subsequent investigations allowed
this 1920 axiom to be replaced by shorter ones, such as the pair

314
Peter M. Simons
AS1
∀ab⌜a ε b →a ε a⌝
AS2
∀abc⌜(a ε b ∧b ε c) →a ε c⌝
but these short axioms are less obviously explicative of the meaning of ‘ε’ than
the original long axiom.
In terms of singular inclusion a wide range of other logical predicates can be
deﬁned, involving existence and non-existence, inclusion, exclusion and overlap-
ping, singular identity (which is mutual singular inclusion), other equivalences,
including coextensiveness, and numerical predicates like ‘there are exactly seven’.
These are typically either generalized quantiﬁers or higher-order predicates in or-
dinary predicate logic, so that ontology already carries useful expressive power at
the ﬁrst-order or elementary level, where only nominal variables are quantiﬁed. In
fact it is equivalent in logical strength to monadic second-order predicate logic,
which is complete and decidable.
In addition to predicates and other propositive functors, ontology allows the
deﬁnition of names and other nominative functors, for which a special directive of
ontological deﬁnitions is required. To avoid antinomies like Russell’s, both sides
of an ontological deﬁnition have to be existence-implying. A case in point is the
ontological deﬁnition of the standard empty name ‘Λ’:
Def.Λ ∀a⌜a ε Λ ↔(a ε a∧∼(a ε a))⌝
Leaving out the ﬁrst conjunct in the deﬁniens would give a deﬁnition of a Russell-
like antinomic name, but the existence-implying ﬁrst conjunct ensures the name
deﬁned is consistent, merely necessarily empty.
Because of its traditional use of nominal terms, ontology makes a more elegant
and natural vehicle than predicate logic for the modern representation of reason-
ing in traditional syllogistic. It also ﬁts more neatly with much of 19th century
logic, from Boole and De Morgan through Jevons, Brentano and Lewis Carroll to
Schr¨oder.
Beyond elementary ontology, when predicate and other functors variables are
quantiﬁed, it becomes possible to deﬁne mathematically interesting notions such
as one–one correspondence or cardinal equality, cardinal less-than, ﬁnitude and
inﬁnitude, and cardinal number, as well as formulate principles of choice and
replacement, and continuum hypotheses. With some exceptions among the Notre
Dame school of Le´sniewski’s former pupil Soboci´nski however, such excursions into
higher types, or higher semantic categories, have been regrettably rare. Because
of the indeﬁnitely extensible nature of ontology, its potential matches that of a
simple theory of types, but unlike Whitehead and Russell, Le´sniewski did not
introduce schematic notation allowing the expression of type- or category-neutral
thesis schemata. Little of Le´sniewski’s published work concerns ontology, which is
a pity as it is in many ways his most original and interesting creation. Some idea
of what he could do with it can be gleaned from the packed but terse “Deﬁnitions
and Theses of Le´sniewski’s Ontology” in the 1988 Lecture Notes.

Le´sniewski’s Logic
315
9
MEREOLOGY
Of all Le´sniewski’s systems, it is mereology that is best known outside esoteric
circles, if only because he invented the name.
Its genesis as an antinomy-free
nominalistic alternative to Cantorian set theory not only left it with class-like ter-
minology, but also aﬀected the part–whole principles Le´sniewski embraced, which
are motivated mathematically rather than metaphysically. The mereology is ex-
tensional: things are identical if they have the same parts; and compositionally
universal: any (non-empty) collection of things composes another thing, their
mereological sum or fusion, which by extensionality is then unique. There is thus
a unique maximal thing, the sum of all things. The system is thus as generous
with individual things as it is possible to be, compatible with extensionality and
the lack of type-diﬀerence between things and sums.
More than in any other of his systems, Le´sniewski rung the changes in the
axioms and primitives of his mereology. The 1927-31 series ‘O podstawach’ in
particular runs through many alternatives, and looks for single axioms. But again
perspicuity is a virtue often incompatible with parsimony of primitives and ax-
ioms. The following four axioms give an idea of how mereology can be formulated
perspicuously. Rather than use a relational predicate of part–whole, Le´sniewski
uses a name-forming functor of one nominal argument, here written ‘pt[ ]’ and
naturally read as ‘part of’. It includes the limiting case of improper part, whereby
an individual is an improper part of itself. The second functor ‘Sm[ ]’ from the
same category means ‘(the) Sum of’, the capital letter indicating uniqueness:
M1
∀ab⌜a ε pt[b] →b ε b⌝
M2
∀abc⌜(a ε pt[b] ∧b ε pt[c]) →a ε pt[c]⌝
M3
∀ab⌜a ε Sm[b] ↔(a ε a ∧∀c⌜c ε b →c ε pt[a]⌝∧
∀d⌜d ε pt[a] →∃ef⌜e ε b ∧f ε pt[e] ∧f ε pt[d]⌝⌝)⌝
M4
∀ab⌜a ε b →Sm[b] ε Sm[b]⌝
Here M1 says that if a is a part of b then b is an individual, M2 says that parthood
is transitive, M3 deﬁnes the unique Sum of the bs as the smallest thing which
overlaps every b, and M4 says that if there is a b then the Sum of the bs exists and
is an individual.
The mereological sum of the bs diﬀers from the class of the bs in several ways.
If there is only one b, the Sum is that b. If the bs are concrete (which for the
nominalist Le´sniewski they always are) then so is the Sum. And not every part of
the Sum of the bs is necessarily a b. If the bs are books, for example, one part of
the Sum of all books is the Sum of all book spines, but this is no book. There is
no Sum of nothing, or null Sum. Finally, the Sum of the Sum of all bs is just the
Sum of bs again, since this is an individual, and the Sum of an individual is itself.
So no hierarchy of Sums can get started, which is very unlike the case for sets.

316
Peter M. Simons
For these reasons mereology is very diﬀerent from standard set theory. It has
ﬁnite models, for instance the model of a single atom (individual with no proper
part) object, and so is consistent. All its ﬁnite models have cardinalities of the form
2n −1, where n is the number of atoms in the model. Mathematically, mereology
is like Boolean algebra extended with inﬁnitary meet and join operators, except
that it lacks a zero or null element. Despite Le´sniewski’s original intention to use
mereology as part of a foundation for mathematics, it is far too weak a theory to
do as much work as for example Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory.
It is independent of general mereology whether or not there are atoms, and if
there are atoms, whether everything is composed of them or not. There are three
possible extensions of general mereology to account for these three possibilities.
Only atomistic mereology has ﬁnite models, but there may be inﬁnitely many
atoms even in an atomistic mereology.
Atomless mereology models a world of
“gunk” in which everything has a proper part.
10
PHILOSOPHICAL ASPECTS OF LE´SNIEWSKI’S SYSTEMS
Le´sniewski trained as a philosopher and many of the more awkward and inter-
esting aspects of his logic can be traced to his philosophical views. Le´sniewski’s
nominalism has been noted. It is a controversial position, but not one on which
he has anything very new to say. His argument against Twardowski’s theory of
general objects is no threat to a realist about universals. The general b is deﬁned
as that object which has all and only those properties had by all bs. Suppose there
are some bs which are cs and some which are not, as will always be the case for
some c if there is more than one b. The general b cannot have the property of being
a c since not all bs are cs, and it cannot have the property of not being a c since
not all bs are not cs. Hence by reductio there cannot be more than one b. A real-
ists about universals will simply reject the deﬁnition. Le´sniewski’s colleague and
friend Kotarbi´nski employed Le´sniewski’s logic in the service of his materialistic
reism, the view that all that exists are individual material things. Le´sniewski was
sympathetic but did not publicly subscribe to or support Kotarbi´nski, because he
could not work out how to ﬁt non-material phenomena like after-images into the
reistic picture.
Like nearly all students of Twardowski, Le´sniewski followed the master in sup-
porting a view of truth and falsity as absolute. He refused for example to relativize
truth to time. It is unclear whether he rejected the very idea of a deﬁnition of
truth, but he certainly rejected Tarski’s famous deﬁnition, because of its use of
the hated set theory. Le´sniewski’s vituperative objections to set theory aroused
opposition in his own lifetime: they are based in part on his nominalism and in
part on his occasionally idiosyncratic reading of Cantor and other set theorists.
He was seemingly unable to come to terms with set theory as an axiomatic theory
like any other in mathematics, and preferred to get by without it rather than sell
out, as he no doubt thought Tarski had, for the sake of metamathematical results.

Le´sniewski’s Logic
317
Le´sniewski’s understanding of quantiﬁers has come in for much commentary, be-
cause it is clearly diﬀerent from the standard “domain-and-values” account prac-
tised by Frege and Russell, formalized by Tarski and epitomized by Quine. In
terms of the deductive role of the quantiﬁers — while Le´sniewski oﬃcially only
has the universal quantiﬁer ‘∀’, in everyday deduction he also uses the other, the
particular quantiﬁer ‘∃’ — there is nothing untoward, no restrictions on instanti-
ation or generalization, in terms of meaning the variables cannot be understood
to be ranging over a domain of entities. The clearest proof of this is in ontol-
ogy. Through deﬁning the standard empty name ‘Λ’ we are entitled to infer the
following theorem
∃a⌜∼∃b⌜b ε a⌝⌝
which, if ‘∃’ meant ‘there exist’ would have to mean ‘there exists something that
doesn’t exist’, which would be absurd. It is not even right to read it as “Something
does not exist”, which would be the Meinongian view Le´sniewski rejects. Rather
we have to simply say “For some a, there exists no a”. This is not just true,
but a logical theorem, so cannot be absurd. The question is how to interpret the
quantiﬁer.
Further indication that Le´sniewski cannot understand the quantiﬁers standardly
comes from his attitude to ontology. A domain-and-values interpretation would
have Le´sniewski committed to truth-values and functions to them in protothetic,
to properties, relations and functions of any order in ontology. But when Quine
visited Warsaw in 1933 and tackled Le´sniewski about the ontology to which his
logic was committed, Le´sniewski denied any such commitment. Indeed the very
idea of ontological commitment may have originated in these discussions. Quine
came away from them convinced that Le´sniewski understood quantiﬁers substitu-
tionally, so that quantiﬁers ranged over expressions rather than what they denote.
But this cannot be right either. For the nominalist Le´sniewski all expressions are
concrete individuals, and there are fewer of them than there things in general. Of
course it is expressions that are substituted for variables when quantiﬁed sentences
are instantiated, but to replace or be replaced by a variable is not to be quantiﬁed
over by it. Le´sniewski indicated in his early writings that he understood a quan-
tiﬁed expression such as ‘∃a.f(a)’ as saying “for some meaning (signiﬁcation) of
the expression ‘a’, f(a)”, and attributes this reading, quite erroneously, to Peirce,
who in the context in question would have said rather “f is true of some one of
the individuals denoted by ‘a”’, which is just the orthodox understanding, with
a minor detour via a mention of the variable.
The fact is that for Le´sniewski
quantiﬁcation is sui generis and not to be explained either via substitution or by
domain and values. His own reading can be rendered adverbially as “Somehow
that ‘a’ signiﬁes, f(a)”. We have to take it that expressions may signify alike or
diﬀerently: sentences by being true or false, names by denoting these or those
individuals, and functors by combining the ways their inputs and outputs signify.
As an opponent of a semantics tacked onto a non-signifying language from the out-
side, Le´sniewski could not accept that the quantiﬁers acquire a meaning only from
a domain and interpretation, but there is still a gap in his explanation. Tarski’s

318
Peter M. Simons
use of inﬁnite sequences to interpret quantiﬁers did not meet with his approval,
because it employed abstract sets.
On another aspect of the philosophy of logic, Le´sniewski is easier to understand.
This is the view that logic should be ontologically neutral, that is, that no logical
thesis should commit us to the existence of anything. In other words, the theses
should be true even were there to be no individuals. This means all theses should be
valid for the empty universe, a condition not satisﬁed by standard predicate logic.
Of course for a nominalist the empty universe is empty of anything, including
higher-order or abstract entities.
For a platonist the empty universe is devoid
merely of concrete individuals.
Le´sniewski’s rabid extensionalism — in which he did not diﬀer from his Polish
contemporaries — meant that he could not accept intensional contexts or a Fregean
distinction between sense and reference. In the published works he says very little
about this: apparently in the 1930s, according to a 1935 letter to Twardowski,
he worked on intensional operators as well as paradoxes, but such work as he did
was incomplete and was lost with the rest of his Nachlass in 1944. The other
lost work of the 1930s is an examination and critique of Lukasiewicz’s systems of
many-valued logic.
11
LE´SNIEWSKI’S INFLUENCE AND SIGNIFICANCE
For many reasons — Le´sniewski’s early death, the loss of his manuscripts, the dev-
astation of his country, and the deaths and diaspora of Polish logicians in World
War II — the inﬂuence of Le´sniewski has been more muted than his originality
and brilliance would lead one to expect. In Poland, Jerzy Slupecki publicised and
continued his work, while abroad former pupils such as Soboci´nski and Lejewski
did likewise. But they were isolated and out of step with the times. For this
Le´sniewski himself is partly responsible. Some of the reasons were astutely sum-
marized by Grzegorczyk in 1955. Up until the late 1920s, the investigation and
improvement of logical systems “from the inside” was the way logic progressed,
but as the threat of antinomies gradually receded, attention shifted towards the
metamathematical investigation of systems and to model theory, in which Tarski
played a major part. Le´sniewski’s conception of logical systems as growing in time
and as always unﬁnished made them, as Tarski put it in a footnote to his 1933
paper on truth, “thoroughly unsuitable objects for metamathematical research”
(a passage omitted from the English translation of Tarski’s paper). Le´sniewski
however, through his hiatus in publishing and his intransigent opposition to set
theory as a tool of investigation, placed himself outside and indeed against these
developments. His inﬂuence with mathematicians was therefore nil. The limita-
tive theorems of G¨odel, which Le´sniewski initially found hard to believe, put paid
to the ideal of a once-and-for-all “true foundational system” that Le´sniewski had
been striving for. Axiomatic methods were replaced in elementary logic and its
pedagogy after 1945 by natural deduction, so Le´sniewski’s eﬀorts in axiomatics
appeared not just diﬃcult and old-fashioned but to some extent pointless. The

Le´sniewski’s Logic
319
utter rigour and obsession with detail that Le´sniewski brought to the formula-
tion of systems came to seem idiosyncratic and myopic by comparison with the
larger developments in logic and mathematics. The turning of the tide can be seen
clearly in Tarski’s famous long truth paper, whose early sections on antinomies
and quotation, object-language and metalanguage acknowledge indebtedness to
Le´sniewski; but while Tarski initially stayed within the bounds of ﬁnite types, he
then dissociated himself from the limitation and embraced a type-free approach
which gained wider recognition. Add to this Le´sniewski’s unfortunate knack for
alienating people and one gets the picture of a brilliant but grumpy eccentric left
behind by trends he was unwilling to follow.
There is some truth in this picture, but it is only partial. Logicians have always
had diﬃculty gaining recognition among mathematicians: even Tarski was less suc-
cessful in “selling” logic to mathematicians than he would have liked, and Frege’s
deeply unsuccessful career was in many ways much more startlingly at variance
with his genius than Le´sniewski’s. Le´sniewski’s life’s work was incomplete, but it
did not end in failure like Frege’s logicism, and unlike Frege he had good students
and saw several progress in their careers, in particular Tarski, of whom Le´sniewski
boasted “For doctoral students I have 100% geniuses.” Le´sniewski’s role in estab-
lishing Warsaw as the world centre for logic was acknowledged in his day and to
his face, and his achievements in the theory of deﬁnition, in mereology, in catego-
rial syntax and in anchoring the object-language/metalanguage and use/mention
distinctions are irreversible advances. While mereology is now absorbed into the
ontological mainstream, and protothetic is a mere historical curiosity, his most
interesting system, ontology, still remains well short of realizing its potential.
What value one places on Le´sniewski’s more idiosyncratic and less widely
adopted positions depends on one’s philosophical standpoint.
For a platonist,
Le´sniewski’s obsessions are merely whimsical, but for a nominalist they are a
devastatingly honest confrontation of the rigours of eschewing abstract comforts.
Le´sniewski was not a mathematical genius like Tarski, nor was he an urbane leader
and stylist like Lukasiewicz or a literate public diplomatist like Kotarbi´nski. He
was indeed an obsessive, with ultra-high standards of rigour, precisely the sort of
obsessive one would wish to have writing computer programs controlling nuclear
power stations, running space missions or encrypting internet payments. It is no
accident that Le´sniewski was an adept d´echiﬀreur of Soviet military code. Quine
— tellingly, a sincere admirer — wrote his epitaph when he said “Lesniewski was
notable for the degree of prolixity which he was willing to admit in the interest of
complete rigor and precision.” He was at the heart of the Warsaw School: without
him it would have been very diﬀerent and much less considerable. And as long
as there are nominalists, the ﬁnal word on Le´sniewski’s inﬂuence has yet to be
spoken.

320
Peter M. Simons
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Primary Literature
Le´sniewski published his work in Polish, Russian, and German, and it has mainly not been
republished. The only collected edition of his work is in English translation:
[Le´sniewski, 1992] S. Le´sniewski, Collected Works. In 2 volumes. Edited by Stanislaw J. Surma,
Jan T. Szrednicki and D. I. Barnett, with an annotated bibliography by V. Frederick Rickey.
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1992.
This collection contains all of Le´sniewski’s published works except book reviews. It does
contain a fair number of typographical errors. The bibliography lists the original sources from
which the translations are taken, as well as comprehensive secondary literature, but runs only
to 1978.
[Le´sniewski, 1988] Stanislaw Le´sniewski’s Lecture Notes in Logic. Edited by Jan T. J. Szrednicki
and Zbigniew Stachniak. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1988.
These were reconstructed from notes taken by Le´sniewski’s students.
Secondary Literature
Secondary literature is scattered across journals, but the most useful sources are two collections:
[Srzednicki and Stachniak, 1988] J. T. J. Srzednicki and Z. Stachniak, eds. Le´sniewski’s Sys-
tems: Protothetic. 92. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1998.
Contains essays by Rickey, Simons, Slupecki, Soboci´nski, and Tarski.
[Srzednicki and Rickey, 1984] J. T. Srzednicki and V. F. Rickey,
eds.,
assistant editor:
Czelakowski. Le´sniewski’s Systems: Ontology and Mereology. The Hague: Nijhoﬀ, 1984.
Contains essays by Clay, Iwanu´s, Kruszewski, Lejewski, Slupecki, and Soboci´nski.
[Luschei, 1962] E. C. Luschei, The Logical Systems of Lesniewski. North-Holland, 1962.
A detailed and militantly sympathetic exposition of Le´sniewski’s views, with emphasis on his
nominalism and the terminological explanations.
[Wole´nski, 1989] J. Wole´nski. Logic and Philosophy in the Lvov-Warsaw School. Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 1989.
This is an indispensable source for Le´sniewski’s position in the context of Polish logic and
philosophy.
Internet resource
The Polish Philosophy Page at http://www.fmag.unict.it/∼polphil/polphil/MainPhil.html
contains biographical and bibliographical background to Le´sniewski and his contemporaries, as
well as revealing and otherwise unpublished correspondence with Twardowski and excerpts from
others’ remarks on Le´sniewski.

HILBERT’S PROOF THEORY∗
Wilfried Sieg
¨Uberhaupt ist es ein wesentlicher Vorzug der Mathematik
gegen¨uber der Philosophie, dass sie sich mit ihrer Spekulation
niemals in phantasievolles mystisches Denken h¨ullt.1
1
CHANGING PERSPECTIVES
Hilbert gave lectures on the foundations of mathematics throughout his career.
Notes for many of them have been preserved and are remarkable treasures of
information; they allow us to reconstruct the circuitous path from Hilbert’s logicist
position, deeply inﬂuenced by Dedekind and presented in lectures starting around
1890, to the novel program of ﬁnitist proof theory in the 1920s.
The general
direction of this path in quite unchartered territory was determined by Hilbert’s
focus on the axiomatic method and the associated consistency problem. Thus, our
journey along that path begins with an analysis of the modern axiomatic method,
proceeds to a discussion of the role of consistency proofs, and ends with a sketch of
the content of Hilbert and Bernays’ magisterial work Grundlagen der Mathematik.
What a remarkable path it is: emerging as it does from the radical transformation
of mathematics in the second half of the 19th century, it leads to the new ﬁeld of
metamathematics or mathematical logic, with Hilbert insisting from the start that
∗This essay is dedicated to George Boolos. I got to know George in 1978 and treasured from
the very beginning his openness, support, and warmth. We shared logical interests (proof theory,
albeit working in quite diﬀerent parts) and historical/philosophical ones (emergence of modern
logic and related investigations in the foundations of mathematics, albeit focusing on diﬀerent
aspects and people). The latter shared interest reveals an undercurrent of greater commonality:
we were both fascinated by provably defunct programs, namely, Frege’s logicist and Hilbert’s
ﬁnitist one, and asked “What is still of contemporary systematic interest?”
An initial version of this essay was prepared for the Boolos Conference at Notre Dame and
delivered on April 16, 1998 under the title Hilbert’s Consistency Proofs. Parts of the talk were
expanded and published separately, for example, in Sieg 2002. On the other hand, parts of this
essay are based on work I have done since. In particular, section 2 is informed by work I did
for my seminar Structuralism and its historical roots, given at Carnegie Mellon in the spring of
2001, whereas sections 4 and 5 make use of parts 3, 4 and 5 of Sieg & Ravaglia.
My discussions with Mark Ravaglia during the years when he was working on his thesis,
Ravaglia 2003, were very fruitful; his mathematical and philosophical analysis of the ﬁrst volume
of Grundlagen der Mathematik is still the most thorough and nuanced.
1Hilbert, Mengenlehre, Summer 1917, p. 102. The English translation is: In fact, it is an
essential advantage of mathematics when compared to philosophy that it [mathematics] never
wraps itself with its speculation in fanciful mystical thinking.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

322
Wilfried Sieg
foundational problems be treated mathematically as far as possible. Examining
that path with Hilbert and later on also with Bernays allows us to appreciate
Hilbert’s changing perspectives on the wide-open mathematical landscape, but it
also enriches our perspective on Hilbert’s metamathematical work. Though this
essay sheds light on contemporary issues, it is intended to be mostly historical.
Thus, I will quote extensively in particular from the unpublished source material.
1.1
A pivotal essay
In some sense, the development towards Beweistheorie really begins in late 1917
when Hilbert gave a talk in Z¨urich, entitled Axiomatisches Denken. This talk is
rooted in the past and points to the future. Hilbert suggested in particular,
. . .
we must — that is my conviction — take the concept of the
speciﬁcally mathematical proof as an object of investigation, just as the
astronomer has to consider the movement of his position, the physicist
must study the theory of his apparatus, and the philosopher criticizes
reason itself.2
Hilbert recognized full well, in the very next sentence, that “the execution of this
program is at present, to be sure, still an unsolved problem.” And yet, initial steps
had been taken at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Heidelberg
(1904); Hilbert presented there a syntactic consistency proof for a purely equa-
tional fragment of number theory. His 1905-paper, on which the talk was based,
insisted programmatically on a simultaneous development of logic and number the-
ory. Hilbert expected that his proof could be extended to establish the consistency
for such a joint formalism.
Already four years earlier at the previous International Congress of Mathemati-
cians in Paris, Hilbert had articulated the need for a consistency proof as his
Second Problem. However, at that point the consistency of analysis was at stake,
and it was to be established by semantic techniques adopted from the theory of
real numbers. Neither in his Paris nor in his Heidelberg talk did Hilbert specify
a suitable logical calculus; that also holds for all the lectures he gave before the
2Ewald, p. 1115. Here is the German text from Hilbert 1918, p. 155: . . . [wir] m¨ussen —
das ist meine ¨Uberzeugung — den Begriﬀdes speziﬁsch mathematischen Beweises selbst zum
Gegenstand einer Untersuchung machen, gerade wie ja auch der Astronom die Bewegung seines
Standortes ber¨ucksichtigen, der Physiker sich um die Theorie seines Apparates k¨ummern muß
und der Philosoph die Vernunft selbst kritisiert.
This programmatic perspective is reiterated in Hilbert’s 1922, pp. 169-170: Um unser Ziel zu
erreichen, m¨ussen wir die Beweise als solche zum Gegenstande unserer Untersuchungen machen;
wir werden so zu einer Art Beweistheorie gedr¨angt, die von dem Operieren mit den Beweisen
selbst handelt. F¨ur die konkret-anschauliche Zahlentheorie, die wir zuerst betrieben, waren die
Zahlen das Gegenst¨andliche und Aufweisbare, und die Beweise der S¨atze ¨uber Zahlen ﬁelen
schon in das gedankliche Gebiet. Bei unserer jetzigen Untersuchung ist der Beweis selbst et-
was Konkretes und Aufweisbares; die inhaltlichen ¨Uberlegungen erfolgen erst an dem Beweise.
Wie der Physiker seinen Apparat, der Astronom seinen Standort untersucht, wie der Philosoph
Vernunftkritik ¨ubt, so hat meiner Meinung nach der Mathematiker seine S¨atze erst durch eine
Beweiskritik sicherzustellen, und dazu bedarf er dieser Beweistheorie.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
323
winter term 1917-18.
It is only then that the study of Principia Mathematica
bore fruit; the process of absorbing the core of Whitehead and Russell’s work had
begun in 1913. It provided a way of formulating joint formalisms with appropri-
ate logicist and inferential principles, thus transcending the restricted systems of
the Heidelberg talk. Hilbert had found the means to develop number theory and
analysis, strictly formally.
Proof theory, as we understand it, begins only in 1922 when the ﬁnitist stand-
point is providing the methodological grounding for consistency proofs, but the
developments between 1917 and 1922 are extremely important. First of all, what
was only alluded to at the end of the Z¨urich talk was actually carried out in
Hilbert’s remarkable 1917-18 lectures Prinzipien der Mathematik. Secondly, in his
lectures from the summer term of 1920, Hilbert goes back to the syntactic perspec-
tive of the Heidelberg talk and reproves the consistency result I mentioned — in a
slightly diﬀerent way. Last but certainly not least, Paul Bernays joined Hilbert in
the fall of 1917 as assistant for work on the foundations of mathematics. He not
only helped prepare Hilbert’s lectures on foundational issues and wrote the notes
for many of them, starting with those of the winter term 1917-18, but he became a
crucial collaborator in a joint enterprise and was seen by Hilbert in that light. It is
diﬃcult to imagine the evolution of proof theory without his mathematical acumen
and philosophical sophistication. Indeed, my systematic presentation of Hilbert’s
proof theory culminates in a discussion of the second volume of Grundlagen der
Mathematik, a volume that was written exclusively by Bernays.
The volumes of Hilbert & Bernays are milestones in the development of mathe-
matical logic, not just of proof theory. They were at the forefront of contemporane-
ous research and presented crucial metamathematical results that are still central:
from consistency proofs Hilbert and Bernays had obtained in weaker forms dur-
ing the 1920s, through theorems of Herbrand and G¨odel, to a sketch of Gentzen’s
consistency proof for number theory. The core material is expanded in the second
volume through a series of important supplements concerning particular topics.
One ﬁnds there, for example, an elegant development of analysis and an incisive
presentation of the undecidability of the decision problem for ﬁrst-order logic. In
short, the two volumes constitute an encyclopedic synthesis of metamathematical
work from the preceding two decades. What is most remarkable, however, is the
sheer intellectual force that structures the books: these are penetrating studies
concerned with and deeply connected to the foundations of modern mathematics
as it emerged in the second half of the 19th century.
1.2
Transformations
Do we have to go back that far in order to obtain a proper perspective on Hilbert’s
proof theory? Don’t we have an adequate grasp of its development in the 1920s?
Is there more to be said about the connection to the earlier foundational work
than what was indicated above, supplementing the standard view of the evolution
of proof theory? According to that common view, endorsed even by Bernays in

324
Wilfried Sieg
19353 and Weyl in 1944, the evolution is divided into two periods. During the ﬁrst
period, roughly from 1899 to 1904, Hilbert is seen as unsuccessfully addressing dif-
ﬁculties for the foundations of arithmetic that had been raised by the set theoretic
paradoxes. The second period begins around 1920, motivated again externally
by the emergence of Brouwer’s and Weyl’s intuitionism, and it is seen as lasting
either until 1931 (the publication of G¨odel’s incompleteness paper) or until 1939
(the publication of the second volume of Grundlagen der Mathematik). The initial
work of the second period is characterized as a reﬁnement of the earlier approach
and as leading to Hilbert’s ﬁnitist consistency program. Of course, it is recognized
that this reﬁnement involves a signiﬁcant methodological shift and requires novel
metamathematical investigations.
For both periods Hilbert’s proposals are, however, more than defensive ad-hoc
reactions against threats to “classical” mathematics and emerge out of long periods
of intense work on diﬃcult issues. The issues are connected in both cases to the
creative freedom in mathematics celebrated by Cantor, Dedekind, and Hilbert
himself, but seen as severely restricted by constructivity requirements that were
articulated ﬁrst by Kronecker and then by Brouwer. Thus, they are ultimately
grounded in the 19th century transformation of classical into modern abstract
mathematics. Hilbert’s problems and his metamathematical approaches are deeply
intertwined with this transformation, and we can better understand it by better
understanding Hilbert’s perspective on it.4
The need for historical study and conceptual analysis is thereby not exhausted,
as the precise character of Hilbert’s problems and his techniques for solving them
developed substantially and often dramatically. The complex evolution is chroni-
cled in the notes for lectures on mathematics and logic that were given by Hilbert
between 1890 and 1930. Toepell and Peckhaus have made clear how important
these notes are for the early part of this long period. Hallett and Majer have
strengthened that perspective through the ﬁrst volume of the edition of David
Hilbert’s Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematic and Physics, 1891-1933; that
volume presents and analyzes lectures on the foundations of geometry given be-
tween 1891 and 1902. My paper Hilbert’s Programs: 1917-1922 investigates the
progression from a Russellian logicist program articulated in 1917 to the ﬁnitist
3In Bernays 1935 there is a general smoothing of the developments between 1904/05 and
1917/22: Bernays does not mention that Hilbert gave lectures on the foundations of mathematics
during that period; the 1917-18 lectures are not even hinted at. Bernays eﬀectively creates the
impression that the period is one of inactivity; e.g. on p. 200 one ﬁnds: In diesem vorl¨auﬁgen
Stadium hat Hilbert seine Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Arithmetik f¨ur lange Zeit
unterbrochen. Ihre Wiederaufnahme ﬁnden wir angek¨undigt in dem 1917 gehaltenen Vortrage
Axiomatisches Denken. The impression is reinforced by a footnote attached to the ﬁrst sentence
in the above quote, where Bernays points to the work of others who pursued the research direction
stimulated by Hilbert’s 1905.
4Bernays emphasizes in his 1930 (on pp.
17-18 and pp.
19-20) that the changes in the
methodological perspective of mathematics during the second half of the 19th century had three
characteristic features, namely, the use of the concept of set for the rigorous foundation of
analysis, the emergence of existential axiomatics (“existentiale Axiomatik”), and building a closer
connection between mathematics and logic. Existential axiomatics, the central concept, will be
discussed extensively in section 2.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
325
program of 1922: such a study would have been impossible without access to the
lecture notes from those years. The historical evolution shows how deeply con-
nected Hilbert’s investigations are. Many fascinating aspects have been detailed
or re-examined, for example, by Avigad, Corry, Ewald, Feferman, Ferreiros, Gray,
Hallett, Kahle, Majer, Mancosu, Moore, Parsons, Ravaglia, Rowe, Tait, Tapp, and
Zach.
1.3
Immediate context & overview
Hilbert’s synthesizing perspective and the reasons for his insistence on formulating
sharp problems when confronting the foundations of mathematics come to life in
the long preamble to his Paris address. His account of mathematics emphasizes
the subtle and ever recurring interplay of rigorous abstract thought and concrete
experience. Turning his attention to the principles of analysis and geometry, he
asserts that the “most suggestive and notable achievements of the last century are
. . .
the arithmetical formulation of the concept of the continuum . . .
and the
discovery of non-Euclidean geometry . . . “. Then he states Cantor’s continuum
problem as his ﬁrst and the consistency issue for the arithmetical axioms as his
second problem:
. . . I wish to designate the following as the most important among the
numerous questions which can be asked with regard to the axioms: To
prove that they are not contradictory, that is, that a ﬁnite number of
logical steps based upon them can never lead to contradictory results.5
As to the arithmetical axioms, Hilbert points to his paper ¨Uber den Zahlbegriﬀ
delivered at the Munich meeting of the German Association of Mathematicians in
December of 1899. Its title indicates a part of its intellectual context, as Kronecker
had published only twelve years earlier a well-known paper with the very same title.
In his paper Kronecker sketched a way of introducing irrational numbers, without
accepting the general notion. It is precisely to this general concept Hilbert wants
to give a proper foundation – using the axiomatic method and following Dedekind.
Hilbert connected the consistency problem also to Cantorian issues. From his
correspondence with Cantor we know that he had been aware of Cantor’s “incon-
sistent multiplicities” since 1897. He recognized their eﬀect on Dedekind’s logical
grounding of analysis and tried to blunt it by a consistency proof for the arith-
metical axioms. Such a proof, he stated, provides “the proof of the existence of
the totality of real numbers, or – in the terminology of G. Cantor — the proof that
5Ewald, pp.
1102-03.
This is part of the German text from Hilbert 1901, p.
55:
Vor
allem m¨ochte ich unter den zahlreichen Fragen, welche hinsichtlich der Axiome gestellt werden
k¨onnen, dies als das wichtigste Problem bezeichnen, zu beweisen, daß dieselben unter einander
widerspruchslos sind, d.h., daß man auf Grund derselben mittels einer endlichen Anzahl von
logischen Schl¨ussen niemals zu Resultaten gelangen kann, die mit einander in Widerspruch
stehen.

326
Wilfried Sieg
the system of real numbers is a consistent (ﬁnished) set.”6 In the Paris Lecture
Hilbert re-emphasized and expanded this point by saying,
In the case before us, where we are concerned with the axioms of real
numbers in arithmetic, the proof of the consistency of the axioms is
at the same time the proof of the mathematical existence of the com-
plete system [“complete system” is Ewald’s translation for “Inbegriﬀ”,
WS] of real numbers or of the continuum. Indeed, when the proof for
the consistency of the axioms shall be fully accomplished, the doubts,
which have been expressed occasionally as to the existence of the com-
plete system of real numbers, will become totally groundless.7
He proposed then to extend this approach to the Cantorian Alephs. Consequently
and more generally, the consistency of appropriate axiom systems was to guarantee
the existence of sets or, as he put it in 1905, to provide an objective criterion for
the consistency of multiplicities.
The background for these foundational issues is explored in Part 2 under the
heading Existential axiomatics. Part 3 is concerned with Direct consistency proofs
for equational calculi.
Part 4 looks at Finitist proof theory and its problems,
namely, how ﬁrst to treat quantiﬁer-free systems of arithmetic and then to deal
with quantiﬁers via the ε-substitution method. Part 5 discusses Incompleteness
and related mathematical as well as philosophical problems; the essay ends with
a very brief outlook beyond 1939.
2
EXISTENTIAL AXIOMATICS
The axiom system Hilbert formulated for the real numbers in 1900 is not presented
in the contemporary logical style.
Rather, it is given in an algebraic way and
assumes that a structure exists whose elements satisfy the axiomatic conditions.
Hilbert points out that this axiomatic way of proceeding is quite diﬀerent from
the genetic method standardly used in arithmetic; it rather parallels the ways of
geometry.8
6Ewald, p.
1095.
This is part of the German paragraph in Hilbert 1900, p.
261:
Um
die Widerspruchslosigkeit der aufgestellten Axiome zu beweisen, bedarf es nur einer geeigneten
Modiﬁkation bekannter Schlußmethoden. In diesem Nachweis erblicke ich zugleich den Beweis
f¨ur die Existenz des Inbegriﬀs der reellen Zahlen oder — in der Ausdrucksweise G. Cantors —
den Beweis daf¨ur, daß das System der reellen Zahlen eine konsistente (fertige) Menge ist.
7Ewald, p. 1095. Here is the German text from Hilbert 1901, p. 56: In dem vorliegenden
Falle, wo es sich um die Axiome der reellen Zahlen in der Arithmetik handelt, ist der Nachweis
f¨ur die Widerspruchslosigkeit der Axiome zugleich der Beweis f¨ur die mathematische Existenz
des Inbegriﬀs der reellen Zahlen oder des Kontinuums. In der That, wenn der Nachweis f¨ur die
Widerspruchslosigkeit der Axiome v¨ollig gelungen sein wird, so verlieren die Bedenken, welche
bisweilen gegen die Existenz des Inbegriﬀs der reellen Zahlen gemacht worden sind, jede Berech-
tigung.
8In the 1905 Lecture Notes there is a detailed discussion of the genetic foundation (genetische
Begr¨undung) with references to textbooks by Lipschitz, Pasch, and Thomae. Hilbert formulates
there also the deeply problematic aspects of this method; see the beginning of section 2.2.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
327
Here [in geometry] one begins customarily by assuming the existence
of all the elements, i.e. one postulates at the outset three systems of
things (namely, the points, lines, and planes), and then — essentially
after the model of Euclid — brings these elements into relationship with
one another by means of certain axioms of linking, order, congruence,
and continuity.9
These geometric ways are taken over for arithmetic or rather, one might argue,
are re-introduced into arithmetic by Hilbert; after all, they do have their origin
in Dedekind’s work on arithmetic and algebra. In the 1920s, Hilbert and Bernays
called this methodological approach existential axiomatics, because it assumes the
existence of suitable systems of objects. The underlying ideas, however, go back
in Hilbert’s thinking to at least 1893.
Dedekind played a signiﬁcant role in their evolution not only directly through
his foundational essays and his mathematical work, but also indirectly, as his
collaborator and friend Heinrich Weber was one of Hilbert’s teachers in K¨onigsberg
and a marvelous interpreter of Dedekind’s perspective.
For example, Weber’s
Lehrbuch der Algebra and some of his expository papers are frequently referred
to in Hilbert’s lectures around the turn from the 19th to the 20th century.
It
is a slow evolution, which is impeded by the inﬂuence of Kronecker’s views as
to how irrational numbers are to be given. The axiomatic method is to overcome
the problematic issues Kronecker saw for the general concept of irrational number.
Hilbert’s retrospective remarks in 1904* make this quite clear: this general concept
created the “greatest diﬃculties”, and Kronecker represented this point of view
most sharply. Hilbert seemingly realized only in 1904* that the diﬃculties are
overcome, in a certain way, when the concept of natural number is secured. “The
further steps up to the irrational numbers,” he claims there, “are then taken
in a logically rigorous way and without further diﬃculties.”10 Let us look at the
details of this remarkable evolution, as far as it can be made out from the available
documents.
9Ewald, p. 1092. Here is the German text from Hilbert 1900, p. 257: Hier [in der Geometrie]
pﬂegt man mit der Annahme der Existenz von s¨amtlichen Elementen zu beginnen, d.h. man
setzt von vornherein drei Systeme von Dingen, n¨amlich die Punkte, die Geraden und die Ebenen,
und bringt sodann diese Elemente — wesentlich nach dem Vorbilde von Euklid — durch gewisse
Axiome, n¨amlich die Axiome der Verkn¨upfung, der Anordnung, der Kongruenz und der Stetigkeit,
miteinander in Beziehung. Hilbert obviously forgot to mention, between the axioms of order and
of congruence, the axiom of parallels.
10These matters are discussed in Hilbert 1904*, pp.
164-167.
One most interesting part
consists of these remarks on pp.
165-166:
Die Untersuchungen in dieser Richtung [founda-
tions for the real numbers] nahmen lange Zeit den breitesten Raum ein. Man kann den Stand-
punkt, von dem dieselben ausgingen, folgendermaßen charakterisieren: Die Gesetze der ganzen
Zahlen, der Anzahlen, nimmt man vorweg, begr¨undet sie nicht mehr; die Hauptschwiergkeit wird
in jenen Erweiterungen des Zahlbegriﬀs (irrationale und weiterhin komplexe Zahlen) gesehen.
Am sch¨arfsten wurde dieser Standpunkt von Kronecker vertreten. Dieser stellte geradezu die
Forderung auf: Wir m¨ussen in der Mathematik jede Tatsache, so verwickelt sie auch sein m¨oge,
auf Beziehungen zwischen ganzen rationalen Zahlen zur¨uckf¨uhren; die Gesetze dieser Zahlen an-
drerseits m¨ussen wir ohne weiteres hinnehmen. Kronecker sah in den Deﬁnitionen der irrationalen
Zahlen Schwierigkeiten und ging soweit, dieselben garnicht anzuerkennen.

328
Wilfried Sieg
2.1
Axioms for continuous systems
Hilbert introduces the axioms for the real numbers in 1900 as follows: “We think
of a system of things, and we call them numbers and denote them by a, b, c. . .
We think of these numbers in certain mutual relations, whose precise and com-
plete description is obtained through the following axioms.”11 Then the axioms
for an ordered ﬁeld are formulated and rounded out by the requirement of con-
tinuity via the Archimedean axiom and the axiom of completeness (Axiom der
Vollst¨andigkeit). This formulation is not only in the spirit of the geometric ways,
but actually mimics the contemporaneous and paradigmatically modern axiomatic
presentation of Grundlagen der Geometrie.
We think of three diﬀerent systems of things: we call the things of the
ﬁrst system points and denote them by A, B, C, . . .; we call the things
of the second system lines and denote them by a, b, c, . . .; we call the
things of the third system planes and denote them by α, β, γ, . . . ; . . .
We think of the points, lines, planes in certain mutual relations . . . ;
the precise and complete description of these relations is obtained by
the axioms of geometry.12
Five groups of geometric axioms follow and, in the ﬁrst German edition, the ﬁfth
group consists of just the Archimedean axiom. In the French edition of 1900 and
the second German edition of 1903, the completeness axiom is included. The latter
axiom requires in both the geometric and the arithmetic case that the assumed
structure is maximal, i.e., any extension satisfying all the remaining axioms must
already be contained in it. This formulation is frequently criticized as being meta-
mathematical and, to boot, of a peculiar sort.13 However, it is just an ordinary
mathematical formulation, if the algebraic character of the axiom system is kept in
mind. In the case of arithmetic we can proceed as follows: call a system A contin-
uous when its elements satisfy the axioms of an ordered ﬁeld and the Archimedean
axiom, and call it fully continuous if and only if A is continuous and for any sys-
tem B, if A ⊆B and B is continuous, then B ⊆A.14 Hilbert’s arithmetic axioms
11Hilbert 1900, pp.
257-258.
The German text is:
Wir denken ein System von Dingen;
wir nennen diese Dinge Zahlen und bezeichnen sie mit a, b, c, . . .
Wir denken diese Zahlen
in gewissen gegenseitigen Beziehungen, deren genaue und vollst¨andige Beschreibung durch die
folgenden Axiome geschieht.
12Hilbert 1899, p. 4; in LFMP1, p. 437. The German text is: Wir denken drei verschiedene
Systeme von Dingen: die Dinge des ersten Systems nennen wir Punkte und bezeichnen sie mit
A, B, C, . . .; die Dinge des zweiten Systems nennen wir Gerade und bezeichnen sie mit a, b, c, . . . ;
die Dinge des dritten Systems nennen wir Ebenen und bezeichnen sie mit α, β, γ, . . . ; . . . Wir
denken die Punkte, Geraden, Ebenen in gewissen gegenseitigen Beziehungen . . . ; die genaue und
vollst¨andige Beschreibung dieser Beziehungen erfolgt durch die Axiome der Geometrie.
13In Torretti, for example, one ﬁnds on p. 234 this observation: “. . . the completeness axiom
is what nowadays one would call a metamathematical statement, though one of a rather peculiar
sort, since the theory with which it is concerned includes Axiom V2 [i.e., the completeness axiom,
WS] itself.”
14This is dual to Dedekind’s deﬁnition of simply inﬁnite systems: here we are focusing on
maximal extensions, and there on minimal substructures. Indeed, the formulation in the above
text is to be taken in terms of substructures in the sense of contemporary model theory.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
329
characterize the fully continuous systems uniquely up to isomorphism.
Hilbert thought about axiom systems in this existential way already in Die
Grundlagen der Geometrie, his ﬁrst lectures on the foundations of geometry. He
had planned to give them in the summer term of 1893, but their presentation was
actually shifted to the following summer term. Using the notions “System” and
“Ding” so prominent in Dedekind’s 1888, he formulated the central question as
follows:
What are the necessary and suﬃcient and mutually independent condi-
tions a system of things has to satisfy, so that to each property of these
things a geometric fact corresponds and conversely, thereby making it
possible to completely describe and order all geometric facts by means
of the above system of things.15
At some later point, Hilbert inserted the remark that this axiomatically charac-
terized system of things is a “complete and simple image of geometric reality.”16
The image of “image” is attributed on the next page to Hertz and extended to
cover also logical consequences of the images; they are to coincide with images
of the consequences: “The axioms, as Hertz would say, are images or symbols in
our mind, such that consequences of the images are again images of the conse-
quences, i.e., what we derive logically from the images is true again in nature.” In
the Introduction to the Notes for the 1898-99 lectures Elemente der Euklidischen
Geometrie written by Hilbert’s student Hans von Schaper, this central question is
explicitly connected with Hertz’s 1894:
Using an expression of Hertz (in the introduction to the Prinzipien
der Mechanik) we can formulate our main question as follows: What
are the necessary and suﬃcient and mutually independent conditions
a system of things has to be subjected to, so that to each property
of these things a geometric fact corresponds and conversely, thereby
having these things provide a complete “image” of geometric reality.17
15Toepell, pp. 58-59 and LFMP1, pp. 72-73. The German text is: Welches sind die nothwendi-
gen und hinreichenden und unter sich unabh¨angigen Bedingungen, die man an ein System von
Dingen stellen muss, damit jeder Eigenschaft dieser Dinge eine geometrische Thatsache entspricht
und umgekehrt, so dass also mittelst obigen Systems von Dingen ein vollst¨andiges Beschreiben
und Ordnen aller geometrischen Thatsachen m¨oglich ist.
16In Toepell, p. 59 and LFMP1, pp. 73 and 74. The German text is: . . . so dass also unser
System ein vollst¨andiges und einfaches Bild der geometrischen Wirklichkeit werde. – The next
German text is: Die Axiome sind, wie Hertz sagen w¨urde, Bilder oder Symbole in unserem Geiste,
so dass Folgen der Bilder wieder Bilder der Folgen sind, d.h. was wir aus den Bildern logisch
ableiten, stimmt wieder in der Natur. On the very page of the last quotation, in note 7 of LFMP1,
the corresponding and much clearer remark from Hertz 1894 is quoted: Wir machen uns innere
Scheinbilder oder Symbole der ¨außeren Gegenst¨ande, und zwar machen wir sie von solcher Art,
daß die denknotwendigen Folgen der Bilder stets wieder die Bilder seien von naturnotwendigen
Folgen der abgebildeten Gegenst¨ande.
17Toepell, p. 204 and LFMP1, p. 303. The German text is: Mit Benutzung eines Ausdrucks
von Hertz (in der Einleitung zu den Prinzipien der Mechanik) k¨onnen wir unsere Hauptfrage
so formulieren: Welches sind die nothwendigen und hinreichenden und unter sich unabh¨angigen

330
Wilfried Sieg
One can see in these remarks the shape of a certain logical or set theoretic struc-
turalism (that is not to be equated with contemporary philosophical forms of such
a position) in the foundations of mathematics and of physics; geometry is viewed
as the most perfect natural science.18 How simple or how complex are these sys-
tems or structures supposed to be? What characteristics must they have in order
to be adequate for both the systematic internal development of the corresponding
theory and external applications? What are the things whose system is implic-
itly postulated? What is the mathematical connection, in particular, between the
arithmetic and geometric structures?
Dedekind gives in Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen a precise notion of continuity
for analysis; however, before doing so he shifts his considerations to the geometric
line. He observes that every point eﬀects a cut, but — and that he views as central
for the continuity or completeness of the line — every cut is eﬀected by a point.19
Transfering these reﬂections to cuts of rational numbers and, of course, having
established that there are inﬁnitely many cuts of rationals that are not eﬀected by
rationals, he “creates” a new, an irrational number α for any cut not eﬀected by a
rational: “We will say that this number α corresponds to that cut or that it eﬀects
this cut.”20 Dedekind then introduces an appropriate ordering between cuts and
establishes that the system of all cuts is indeed continuous. He shows that the
continuity principle has to be accepted, if one wants to have the least upper bound
principle for monotonically increasing, but bounded sequences of reals, as the two
principles are indeed equivalent. He writes:
This theorem is equivalent to the principle of continuity, i.e., it loses
its validity as soon as even just a single real number is viewed as not
being contained in the domain R; . . . 21
As it happens, Hilbert’s ﬁrst formulation of a geometric continuity principle in
1894* (p. 92 of LFMP1) is a least upper bound principle for bounded sequences
of geometric points.
Dedekind emphasizes in 1872 the necessity of rigorous arithmetic concepts for
analyzing the notion of space. He points out, reﬂecting the view of Gauss con-
cerning the fundamental diﬀerence between arithmetic and geometry, that space
Bedingungen, denen man ein System von Dingen unterwerfen muss, damit jeder Eigenschaft
dieser Dinge eine geometrische Thatsache entspreche und umgekehrt, damit also diese Dinge ein
vollst¨andiges und einfaches “Bild” der geometrischen Wirklichkeit seien.
18There is a complementary discussion on pp.
103-104 and 119-122 of LFMP1.
Hilbert’s
perspective is echoed in the views of Ernest Nagel and Patrick Suppes; cf. also van Fraassen,
The Scientiﬁc Image.
19Dedekind uses Stetigkeit and Vollst¨andigkeit interchangeably.
The reader should notice
the freedom with which Dedekind reinterprets in the following considerations an axiomatically
characterized concept, namely a certain order relation: it is interpreted for the rational numbers,
the geometric line, and the system of all cuts of rationals.
20Dedekind 1872, p. 13.
21Dedekind 1872, p. 20. The German text is: Dieser Satz ist ¨aquivalent mit dem Prinzip der
Stetigkeit, d.h. er verliert seine G¨ultigkeit, sobald man auch nur eine einzige reelle Zahl in dem
Gebiete R als nicht vorhanden ansieht; . . .

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
331
need not be continuous.22 The required arithmetization of analysis is established
in Dedekind’s thinking about the matter through three steps, namely, i) a logical
characterization of the natural numbers, ii) the extension of that number concept
to integers and rational numbers, and iii) the further extension to all real numbers
we just discussed. The ﬁrst objective is accomplished in 1888 via simply inﬁnite
systems, a notion that emerged in the 1870s after Dedekind had ﬁnished his essay
1872. (See Sieg & Schlimm; in that paper one ﬁnds also a discussion of Dedekind’s
approach to the second issue based on unpublished manuscripts.) Dedekind gives
his ﬁnal characterization in article 71 of 1888 in the existential, algebraic form
that is used later by Hilbert. But he avoids self-consciously the term axiom and
speaks only of conditions (Bedingungen), which are easily seen to amount in this
case to the well-known Peano axioms.
Dedekind sought the ultimate basis for arithmetic in logic, broadly conceived.
That view is formulated in the preface to 1888:
In calling arithmetic (algebra, analysis) merely a part of logic, I already
claim that I consider the number concept as entirely independent of
notions or intuitions of space and time, that I consider it rather as an
immediate product of the pure laws of thought.23
Important for our considerations is the fact that Dedekind had developed towards
the end of the 1870s not only the general concept of “system”, but also that
of a “mapping between systems”.
The latter notion corresponds for him to a
crucial capacity of our mind (pp. III-IV of the preface to 1888). He uses these
concepts to formulate and prove that all simply inﬁnite systems are isomorphic.
He concludes from this result, in contemporary model theoretic terms, that simply
inﬁnite systems are all elementarily equivalent and uses that fact to characterize
the science of arithmetic:
The relations or laws, which are solely derived from the conditions
α, β, γ, δ in 71 and are therefore in all ordered systems always the same
. . . form the next object of the science of numbers or of arithmetic.24
Natural numbers are not viewed as objects of a particular system, but are obtained
by free creation or what W.W. Tait has called “Dedekind abstraction”; that is
clearly articulated in article 73 of 1888.
Similar metamathematical investigations are adumbrated for real numbers in
Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen. Dedekind can be interpreted, in particular, as
22In Dedekind 1888, p. VII, a particular countable model of reals is described in which all of
Euclid’s construction can be interpreted.
23Dedekind 1888, p. III. The German text is: Indem ich die Arithmetik (Algebra, Analysis)
nur einen Teil der Logik nenne, spreche ich schon aus, daß ich den Zahlbegriﬀf¨ur g¨anzlich
unabh¨angig von den Vorstellungen oder Anschauungen des Raumes und der Zeit, daß ich ihn
vielmehr f¨ur einen unmittelbaren Ausﬂuß der reinen Denkgesetze halte.
24Dedekind 1888, p. 17. The German text is: Die Beziehungen oder Gesetze, welche ganz
allein aus den Bedingungen α, β, γ, δ in 71 abgeleitet werden und deshalb in allen geordneten
Systemen immer dieselben sind . . . bilden den n¨achsten Gegenstand der Wissenschaft von den
Zahlen oder der Arithmetik.

332
Wilfried Sieg
having characterized fully continuous systems as ordered ﬁelds that satisfy his
principle of continuity, i.e., the principle that every cut of such a system is eﬀected
by an element. The system of all cuts of rational numbers constitutes a model;
that is in modern terms the essential content of sections 5 and 6 of 1872, where
Dedekind veriﬁes that this system satisﬁes the continuity principle. In contempo-
raneous letters to Lipschitz, Dedekind emphasizes that real numbers should not
be identiﬁed with cuts, but rather viewed as newly created things corresponding
to cuts.
The informal comparison of the geometric line with the system of cuts of rational
numbers in sections 2 and 3 of 1872 contains almost all the ingredients for estab-
lishing rigorously that these two structures are isomorphic; missing is the concept
of mapping. As I mentioned, that concept was available to Dedekind in 1879 and
with it these considerations can be extended directly to show that arbitrary fully
continuous systems are isomorphic. Finally, the methodological remarks about the
arithmetic of natural numbers can now be extended to that of the real numbers.
As a matter of fact, Hilbert articulates Dedekind’s way of thinking of the system of
real numbers in his 1922, when describing the axiomatische Begr¨undungsmethode
for analysis:
The continuum of real numbers is a system of things that are connected
to each other by certain relations, so-called axioms. In particular the
deﬁnition of the real numbers by the Dedekind cut is replaced by two
continuity axioms, namely, the Archimedian axiom and the so-called
completeness axiom. In fact, Dedekind cuts can then serve to deter-
mine the individual real numbers, but they do not serve to deﬁne [the
concept of] real number. On the contrary, conceptually a real number
is just a thing of our system. . . . The standpoint just described is al-
together logically completely impeccable, and it only remains thereby
undecided, whether a system of the required kind can be thought, i.e.,
whether the axioms do not lead to a contradiction.25
That is fully in Dedekind’s spirit: Hilbert’s critical remarks about the deﬁnition of
real numbers as cuts do not apply to Dedekind, as should be clear from the above
discussion, and the issue of consistency had been an explicit part of Dedekind’s
logicist program.
25Hilbert 1922, pp.
158-159.
The German text is: Das Kontinuum der reellen Zahlen ist
ein System von Dingen, die durch bestimmte Beziehungen, sogenannte Axiome, miteinander
verkn¨upft sind.
Insbesondere treten an Stelle der Deﬁnition der reellen Zahlen durch den
Dedekindschen Schnitt die zwei Stetigkeitsaxiome, n¨amlich das Archimedische Axiom und das
sogenannte Vollst¨andigkeitsaxiom. Die Dedekindschen Schnitte k¨onnen dann zwar zur Festle-
gung der einzelnen reellen Zahlen dienen, aber sie dienen nicht zur Deﬁnition der reellen Zahl.
Vielmehr ist begriﬄich eine reelle Zahl eben ein Ding unseres Systems. . . .
Der geschilderte
Standpunkt ist vollends logisch vollkommen einwandfrei, und es bleibt nur dabei unentschieden,
ob ein System der verlangten Art denkbar ist, d.h. ob die Axiome nicht etwa auf einen Wider-
spruch f¨uhren.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
333
2.2
Consistency and logical models
Logicians in the 19th century viewed consistency of a notion from a semantic
perspective. In that tradition, Dedekind addressed the problem for his character-
ization of natural numbers via simply inﬁnite systems. The methodological need
for doing that is implicit in 1872, but is formulated most clearly in a letter to Ke-
ferstein written in 1889, a year after the publication of Was sind und was sollen
die Zahlen?
After the essential nature of the simply inﬁnite system, whose abstract
type is the number sequence N, had been recognized in my analysis
(71, 73) the question arose: does such a system exist at all in the
realm of our thoughts? Without a logical proof of existence, it would
always remain doubtful whether the notion of such a system might
not perhaps contain internal contradictions. Hence the need for such
a proof (articles 66 and 72 of my essay).26
Dedekind attempted in article 66 to prove the existence of an inﬁnite system and
to provide in article 72 an example of a simply inﬁnite system within logic. In
other words, he attempted to establish the existence of a logical model and to
guarantee in this way that the notion of a simply inﬁnite system indeed does not
contain internal contradictions.
Hilbert turned to considerations for natural numbers only around 1904. Until
then he had taken for granted their proper foundation and focused on the theory of
real numbers: as I reported earlier from his 1904*, Hilbert thought that the concept
of irrational numbers created the greatest diﬃculties. These diﬃculties have been
overcome, Hilbert claims in 1904*. When the concept of natural number is secured,
he continues there, the further steps towards the real numbers can be taken without
a problem. This dramatic change of viewpoint helps us to understand more clearly
some aspects of Hilbert’s earlier considerations related to the consistency of the
arithmetic of real numbers. What did Hilbert see as the “greatest diﬃculties” for
the general concept of irrational numbers? That question will be explored now.
In contrast to Dedekind, Hilbert had formulated a quasi-syntactic notion of
consistency in ¨Uber den Zahlbegriﬀand in Grundlagen der Geometrie, namely, no
ﬁnite number of logical steps leads from the axioms to a contradiction. This notion
is “quasi-syntactic”, as no deductive principles are explicitly provided. Hilbert did
not seek to prove consistency by syntactic methods. On the contrary, the relative
consistency proofs given in Grundlagen der Geometrie are all straightforwardly
semantic. To prove the consistency of arithmetic one needs, so Hilbert in ¨Uber
26In van Heijenoort, p. 101. The German text is: Nachdem in meiner Analyse der wesentliche
Charakter des einfach unendlichen Systems, deßen abstracter Typus die Zahlenreihe N ist,
erkannt war (71, 73), fragte es sich: existirt ¨uberhaupt ein solches System in unserer Gedanken-
welt?
Ohne den logischen Existenz-Beweis w¨urde es immer zweifelhaft bleiben, ob nicht der
Begriﬀeines solchen Systems vielleicht innere Widerspr¨uche enth¨alt. Daher die Nothwendigkeit
solcher Beweise (66, 72 meiner Schrift).

334
Wilfried Sieg
den Zahlbegriﬀ, “a suitable modiﬁcation of familiar methods of reasoning.” In the
Paris Lecture Hilbert suggests ﬁnding a direct proof and remarks more expansively:
I am convinced that it must be possible to ﬁnd a direct proof for
the consistency of the arithmetical axioms [as proposed in ¨Uber den
Zahlbegriﬀfor the real numbers; WS], by means of a careful study and
suitable modiﬁcation of the known methods of reasoning in the theory
of irrational numbers.27
Hilbert believed at this point, it seems to me, that the genetic build-up of the real
numbers could somehow be exploited to yield the blueprint for a consistency proof
in Dedekind’s logicist style. There are diﬃculties with the genetic method that
prevent it from providing directly a proper foundation for the general concept
of irrational numbers.
Hilbert’s concerns are formulated most clearly in these
retrospective remarks from 1905*:
It [the genetic method, WS] deﬁnes things by generative processes,
not by properties what really must appear to be desirable. Even if
there is no ojection to deﬁning fractions as systems of two integers, the
deﬁnition of irrational numbers as a sytem of inﬁnitely many numbers
must appear to be dubious. Must this number sequence be subject to
a law, and what is to be understood by a law? Is an irrational number
being deﬁned, if one determines a number sequence by throwing dice?
These are the kinds of questions with which the genetic perspective
has to be confronted.28
Precisely this issue was to be overcome (or to be sidestepped) by the axiomatic
method. In ¨Uber den ZahlbegriﬀHilbert writes:
Under the conception described above, the doubts which have been
raised against the existence of the totality of real numbers (and against
the existence of inﬁnite sets generally) lose all justiﬁcation; for by the
set of real numbers we do not have to imagine, say, the totality of
all possible laws according to which the elements of a fundamental
27Ewald, p. 1104. The German text from Hilbert 1901, p. 55 is: Ich bin nun ¨uberzeugt, daß es
gelingen muß, einen direkten Beweis f¨ur die Widerspruchslosigkeit der arithmetischen Axiome zu
ﬁnden, wenn man die bekannten Schlußmethoden in der Theorie der Irrationalzahlen im Hinblick
auf das bezeichnete Ziel genau durcharbeitet und in geeigneter Weise modiﬁziert. In Bernays
1935, pp. 198-9, this idea is reemphasized: Zur Durchf¨uhrung des Nachweises gedachte Hilbert
mit einer geeigneten Modiﬁkation der in der Theorie der reellen Zahlen angewandten Methoden
auszukommen.
28Hilbert 1905*, pp. 10-11. The German text is: Sie deﬁniert Dinge durch Erzeugungsprozesse,
nicht durch Eigenschaften, was doch eigentlich w¨unschenswert erscheinen muß.
Ist nun auch
gegen die Deﬁnition der Br¨uche als System zweier Zahlen nichts einzuwenden, so muß doch
die Deﬁnition der Irrationalzahlen als ein System von unendlich vielen Zahlen bedenklich er-
scheinen. Muß diese Zahlenreihe einem Gesetz unterliegen, und was hat man unter einem Gesetz
zu verstehen? Wird auch eine Irrationalzahl deﬁniert, wenn man eine Zahlenreihe durch W¨urfeln
feststellt? Dieser Art sind die Fragen, die man der genetischen Betrachtung entgegenhalten muß.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
335
sequence can proceed, but rather — as just described — a system of
things whose mutual relations are given by the ﬁnite and closed system
of axioms I–IV, . . . 29
He articulates in the Paris Lecture exactly the same point by re-emphasizing “the
continuum . . . is not the totality of all possible series in decimal fractions, or of
all possible laws according to which the elements of a fundamental sequence may
proceed.” Rather, it is a system of things whose mutual relations are governed by
the axioms. The completeness axiom can be plausibly interpreted as guarantee-
ing the continuity of the system without depending on any particular method of
generating real numbers.
Going back to the 1889–90 lectures Einf¨uhrung in das Studium der Mathematik,
one sees that Hilbert then shared a Kroneckerian perspective on irrationals. He
starts out with a brief summary of “Das Nothwendigste ¨uber den Zahlbegriﬀ” and
uses Dedekind cuts to deﬁne the notion of irrational number. He shifts for the
practical presentation of real numbers from cuts to fundamental sequences and
asserts, making the problematic aspect fully explicit, “It is absolutely necessary
to have a general method for the representation of irrational numbers.”30 The
need to have a method of representation is not bound to fundamental sequences.
Cuts are to be given by a rule that allows the partition of all rationals into smaller
and greater ones: the real number eﬀecting the cut is taken to be “the carrier
of that rule”. (This perspective is re-iterated in the later lectures, in particular,
in 1899–1900*, pp. 10-11.) So we have a sense of the diﬃculties as Hilbert saw
them. In order to support the claim that Hilbert thought, nevertheless, that the
genetic build-up of the real numbers could in some way be exploited to yield a
logicist consistency proof, we look closely at Hilbert’s treatment of arithmetic in
later lectures, in particular, 1894*, 1897–98*, and 1899–1900*.
Let me begin with some deeply programmatic, logicist statements found in the
Introduction to the notes for Elemente der Euklidischen Geometrie presented in
1898-99. Hilbert maintains there, “It is important to ﬁx precisely the starting-
point of our investigations: as given we consider the laws of pure logic and in
particular all of arithmetic.”31 He adds parenthetically, “On the relation between
29Ewald, p. 1095. Here is the German text from Hilbert 1900, p. 261: Die Bedenken, welche
gegen die Existenz des Inbegriﬀs aller reellen Zahlen und unendlicher Mengen ¨uberhaupt geltend
gemacht worden sind, verlieren bei der oben gekennzeichneten Auﬀassung jede Berechtigung:
unter der Menge der reellen Zahlen haben wir uns hiernach nicht etwa die Gesamtheit aller
m¨oglichen Gesetze zu denken, nach denen die Elemente einer Fundamentalreihe fortschreiten
k¨onnen, sondern vielmehr – wie eben dargelegt ist – ein System von Dingen, deren gegenseitige
Beziehungen durch das obige endliche und abgeschlossene System von Axiomen I-IV gegeben
sind, . . .
30Hilbert 1889–90*, p. 3. The German text is: Es ist unumg¨anglich n¨othig, eine allgemeine
Methode zur Darstellung der irrationalen Zahlen zu haben.
31Clearly, arithmetic is here taken in the narrower sense of the theory of natural numbers. The
German text is found in Toepell, pp. 203-4, and in LFMP1, p. 303: Es ist von Wichtigkeit,
den Ausgangspunkt unserer Untersuchungen genau zu ﬁxieren: Als gegeben betrachten wir die
Gesetze der reinen Logik und speciell die ganze Arithmetik.
(Ueber das Verh¨altnis zwischen
Logik und Arithmetik vgl. Dedekind, Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen?) Unsere Frage wird

336
Wilfried Sieg
logic and arithmetic cf. Dedekind, Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen?” Clearly,
for Dedekind arithmetic is a part of logic, and for Hilbert in 1899 that is not a novel
insight. On the contrary: Hilbert opens the lectures 1889–90 with the sentence,
“The theoretical foundation for the mathematical sciences is the concept of positive
integer, deﬁned as Anzahl.” This remark is deepened in the long introduction to
the lectures on Projektive Geometrie given in 1891, where Hilbert emphasizes that
the results of pure mathematics are obtained by pure thought (reines Denken). He
lists as parts of pure mathematics number theory, algebra, and complex analysis
(Funktionentheorie). Mirroring Dedekind’s perspective on the arithmetization of
analysis from the preface to 1888 (p. VI), Hilbert asserts that the results of pure
mathematics can and have to be reduced to relations between integers:
Nowadays a proposition is being considered as proved only, when it
ultimately expresses a relation between integers. Thus, the integer is
the element. We can obtain by pure thinking the concept of integer, for
example <by> counting thoughts themselves. Methods, foundations of
pure mathematics belong to the sphere of pure thought.32
This very paragraph ends with the striking assertion, “I don’t need anything but
purely logical thought, when dealing with number theory or algebra.”
Hilbert
expresses here very clearly a thoroughgoing Dedekindian logicism with respect to
natural numbers.33
Die Grundlagen der Geometrie from 1894 have a special section on “Die Einf¨uh-
rung der Zahl”. After all, Hilbert argues, “In all of the exact sciences one obtains
precise results only after the introduction of number. It is always of deep episte-
mological signiﬁcance to see in detail, how this measuring is done.”34 The number
concept discussed now is that of real numbers; it is absolutely central for the prob-
lems surrounding the quadrature of the circle treated in the winter term 1894-95.
The quadrature problem is the red thread for historically informed lectures en-
titled, not surprisingly, Quadratur des Kreises. Its solution requires the subtlest
mathematical speculations with considerations from geometry as well as from anal-
ysis and number theory. In the winter term 1897-98 Hilbert presents these topics
again, but this time in the second part of the course; its new ﬁrst part is devoted
dann sein: Welche S¨atze m¨ussen wir zu dem eben deﬁnierten Bereich “adjungieren”, um die
Euklidische Geometrie zu erhalten? In Toepell one ﬁnds additional remarks of interest for the
issues discussed here, namely, on pp. 195, 206, and 227-8.
32LFMP1, p. 22. The German text is: Es gilt heutzutage ein Satz erst dann als bewiesen,
wenn er eine Beziehung zwischen ganzen Zahlen in letzter Instanz zum Ausdruck bringt. Also
die ganze Zahl ist das Element.
Zum Begriﬀder ganzen Zahl k¨onnen wir auch durch reines
Denken gelangen, etwa <indem ich> die Gedanken selber z¨ahle.
Methoden, Grundlagen der
reinen Mathematik geh¨oren dem reinen Denken an.
33L.c., p.22. The German sentence is: Ich brauche weiter nichts als rein logisches Denken,
wenn ich mit Zahlentheorie oder Algebra mich besch¨aftige. In his extensive editorial note 6 on
p. 23 of LFMP1, Haubrich also points out the deep connection to Dedekind’s views.
34L.c., p. 85. The German text is: In allen exakten Wissenschaften gewinnt man erst dann
pr¨azise Resultate, wenn die Zahl eingef¨uhrt ist. Es ist stets von hoher erkenntnistheoretischer
Bedeutung zu verfolgen, wie dies Messen geschieht.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
337
entirely to a detailed discussion of the concept of number.
That expansion is
indicated by the new title of the lectures, Zahlbegriﬀund Quadratur des Kreises.
Hilbert remarks that the foundations of analysis have been examined through
the work of Weierstrass, Cantor, and Dedekind. He lists three important points:
Today [we take as a] principle: Reduction to the laws for the whole
rational numbers and purely logical operations.
1, 2, 3 . . . = Anzahl = natural number
How one gets from this number [concept] to the most general concept of
complex number, that is the foundation, i.e., the theory of the concept
of number.35
In the lectures 1897–98* the genetic build-up is to be captured axiomatically; that
I take to be the gist of the discussion of the third point in the above list, namely,
how one gets from the natural numbers to the most general concept of complex
number. The motivating focus lies on the solution of problems by an extension of
the axioms (L¨osung von Problemen durch Erweiterung der Axiome); the discussion
ends with the remark, “We have extended the number concept in such a way, or
to put it in a better way, we have enlarged the stock of axioms in such a way,
that we can solve all deﬁnite equations.”36 At each step in this extending process
consistency of the axioms is required, but Hilbert does not give arithmetical or
logical proofs, only geometric pictures.
In the winter term 1899-1900, Hilbert gave again the lectures Zahlbegriﬀund
Quadratur des Kreises and reﬁned the discussion of the axioms for the reals signiﬁ-
cantly; it is a transition to his paper ¨Uber den Zahlbegriﬀ. Pages 38-43 are added to
the notes from the previous lecture, and Hilbert extends on them the discussion of
“komplexe Zahlensysteme” from Grundlagen der Geometrie.37 He formulates the
continuity principle as “Bolzano’s Axiom”, i.e., every fundamental sequence has a
limit; he shows also that this axiom has the Archimedian one as a consequence.
Strikingly, he actually claims (on p. 42) that the full system is consistent! Before
completing his 1900, Hilbert obviously recognized i) that he could formulate the
second continuity principle in such a way that it did not imply the Archimedian
axiom, and ii) that the consistency of the system had not been established. So we
are back to the issue from the very beginning of this subsection. The long digres-
sion does not provide a clear answer, but a seemingly rhetorical question: How
35Hilbert 1897–98*, p.
2.
The German text is: Heute Grundsatz: Zur¨uckf¨uhrung auf die
Gesetze der ganzen rationalen Zahlen und rein logische Operationen.
1, 2, 3 . . . = Anzahl = nat¨urliche Zahl
Wie man von dieser Zahl zum allgemeinsten Begriﬀder komplexen Zahl kommt, das ist jenes
Fundament, d.h. die Lehre vom Zahlbegriﬀ.
36Hilbert 1897-98*, p. 23. The German text is: Wir haben den Zahlbegriﬀso erweitert, oder
besser gesagt, den Bestand der Axiome so vermehrt, dass wir alle deﬁniten Gleichungen l¨osen
k¨onnen. Hallett gives a complementary account of the completeness principle that emphasizes
its role in Hilbert’s work concerning geometry; that is presented in section 5 of his Introductory
Note to Hilbert 1899, pp. 426-435 of LFMP1.
37Indeed, pages 38 and 39 must be the page proofs of the Festschrift, pp. 26-28.

338
Wilfried Sieg
could Hilbert think about addressing the consistency problem by “a careful study
and suitable modiﬁcation of the known methods of resoning in the theory of irra-
tional numbers,” if he did not have in mind a programmatically guided reﬁnement
of the steps presented here, i.e., of the foundation they constitute?
2.3
Consistency and proofs
Hilbert knew about the diﬃculties in set theory through his correpondence with
Cantor, but he did not — as far as I can see — move away from this programmatic
position and the associated strategy for proving consistency until 1903 or, at the
latest, 1904. One reason for making this conjecture rests on the fact that Hilbert
gave his lectures on Zahlbegriﬀund Quadratur des Kreises again in 1901-02; we
have only the “Disposition” of those lectures, but it is very detailed and does not
contain any indication whatsoever of substantive changes. In the summer term
of 1904, Hilbert lectured again on Zahlbegriﬀund Quadratur des Kreises. In the
notes written by Max Born one ﬁnds a dramatic change: Hilbert discusses for the
ﬁrst time the paradoxes in detail and sketches various foundational approaches.38
These discussions are taken up in Hilbert’s talk at the Heidelberg Congress in
August of that year, where he presents a syntactic approach to the consistency
problem. The goal is still to guarantee the existence of a suitable system, and the
method seems inspired by one important aspect of the earlier investigations, as
the crucial new step is the simultaneous development of arithmetic and logic!
Hilbert’s view of the geometric axioms as characterizing a system of things
that presents a “complete and simple image of geometric reality” is, after all,
complemented by a traditional one: the axioms must allow to establish, purely
logically, all geometric facts and laws. This role of the axioms, though clearly
implicit in the formulation of the central question of 1894, is emphasized in the
notes Elemente der Euklidischen Geometrie and described in the Introduction to
the Festschrift in a methodologically reﬁned way:
The present investigation is a new attempt of formulating for geometry
a simple and complete system of mutually independent axioms; it is
also an attempt of deriving from them the most important geometric
propositions in such a way that the signiﬁcance of the diﬀerent groups
of axioms and the import of the consequences of the individual axioms
is brought to light as clearly as possible.39
38Peckhaus characterizes 1903 in his book 1990 as a “Z¨asurjahr” in G¨ottingen; see pp. 55–58.
Peckhaus also points out that Dedekind, in that very year, did not allow the republication of his
1888, because — as Dedekind put it in the preface to the third edition of 1911 — he had doubts
concerning some of the important foundations of his view. Further evidence for this conjecture
is presented at the beginning of section 3 below, in particular Hilbert’s own recollections and
remarks by Bernays.
39Hilbert 1899, Einleitung, p. 3, and LFMP1, p. 436. The German text is: Die vorliegende
Untersuchung ist ein neuer Versuch, f¨ur die Geometrie ein einfaches und vollst¨andiges System
von einander unabh¨angiger Axiome aufzustellen und aus denselben die wichtigsten geometrischen
S¨atze in der Weise abzuleiten, dass dabei die Bedeutung der verschiedenen Axiomgruppen und

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
339
This second important role of axioms is reﬂected also in the Paris Lecture, where
Hilbert states that the totality of real numbers is “. . . a system of things whose
mutual relations are governed by the axioms set up and for which all propositions,
and only those, are true which can be derived from the axioms by a ﬁnite number
of logical inferences.” As in Hilbert’s opinion “the concept of the continuum is
strictly logically tenable in this sense only,” the axiomatic method has to confront
two fundamental problems that are formulated in 1900 at ﬁrst for geometry and
then also for arithmetic:
The necessary task then arises of showing the consistency and the com-
pleteness of these axioms, i.e., it must be proved that the application
of the given axioms can never lead to contradictions, and, further, that
the system of axioms suﬃces to prove all geometric propositions.40
It is not clear, whether completeness of the respective axioms requires the proof
of all true geometric or arithmetic statements, or whether provability of those
that are part of the established corpora is suﬃcient; the latter would be a quasi-
empirical notion of completeness. It should be mentioned that Dedekind attended
in his 1888 consciously to the quasi-empirical completeness of the axiomatic con-
ditions characterizing simply inﬁnite systems.
Through the proof principle of
induction and the deﬁnition principle of recursion he provided the basic principles
needed for the actual development of elementary number theory. The same ob-
servation can be made for the principle of continuity and Dedekind’s treatment of
analysis in his 1872.
But what are the logical steps that are admitted in proofs? Frege criticized
Dedekind on that point in the Preface of his Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, claiming
that the brevity of Dedekind’s development of arithmetic in 1888 is only possible,
“because much of it is not really proved at all. “ Frege continues:
. . . nowhere is there a statement of the logical or other laws on which he
builds, and, even if there were, we could not possibly ﬁnd out whether
really no others were used – for to make that possible the proof must
be not merely indicated but completely carried out.41
Apart from making the logical principles explicit there is an additional aspect
that is hinted at in Frege’s critique (and detailed in other writings).
Though
Frege’s critique applies as well to Hilbert’s Grundlagen der Geometrie, Poincar´e’s
1902-review of that book brings out this additional aspect in a dramatic way,
namely, the idea of formalization as machine executability. Poincar´e writes: “M.
die Tragweite der aus den einzelnen Axiomen zu ziehenden Folgerungen m¨oglichst klar zu Tage
tritt.
40Ewald, pp. 1092-3. The German text from Hilbert 1900 is: Es entsteht dann die notwendige
Aufgabe, die Widerspruchslosigkeit und Vollst¨andigkeit dieser Axiome zu zeigen, d.h. es muß
bewiesen werden, daß die Anwendung der aufgestellten Axiome nie zu Widerspr¨uchen f¨uhren
kann, und ferner, daß das System der Axiome zum Nachweis aller geometrischen S¨atze ausreicht.
41Grundgestze der Arithmetik, p. 139 of Translations from the philosophical writings of Gottlob
Frege, Peter Geach and Max Black (eds.), Oxford 1977.

340
Wilfried Sieg
Hilbert has tried, so-to-speak, putting the axioms in such a form that they could
be applied by someone who doesn’t understand their meaning, because he has not
ever seen either a point, or a line, or a plane. It must be possible, according to him
[Hilbert, WS], to reduce reasoning to purely mechanical rules.” Indeed, Poincar´e
suggests giving the axioms to a reasoning machine, like Jevons’ logical piano,
and observing whether all of geometry would be obtained.
Such formalization
might seem “artiﬁcial and childish”, were it not for the important question of
completeness:
Is the list of axioms complete, or have some of them escaped us, namely
those we use unconsciously? . . . One has to ﬁnd out whether geometry
is a logical consequence of the explicitly stated axioms, or in other
words, whether the axioms, when given to the reasoning machine, will
make it possible to obtain the sequence of all theorems as- output [of
the machine, WS].42
At issue is, of course, what logical steps can the reasoning machine take?
In
Hilbert’s lectures one ﬁnds increasingly references to, and investigations of, logical
calculi. As to the character of these calculi, see Peckhaus’ contribution to this
volume. The calculi Hilbert considers remain very rudimentary until the lectures
1917–18*, where modern mathematical logic is all of a sudden being developed.
Back in the Heidelberg talk, the novel syntactic approach to consistency proofs is
suggested not for an axiom system concerning real numbers but rather concerning
natural numbers; that will be the central topic of the next section. The logical
calculus, if it can be called that, is extremely restricted — it is purely equational!
In late 1904, possibly even in early 1905, Hilbert sent a letter to his friend and
colleague Adolf Hurwitz. Clearly, he was not content with the proposal he had
detailed in Heidelberg:
It seems that various parties started again to investigate the founda-
tions of arithmetic. It has been my view for a long time that exactly
the most important and most interesting questions have not been set-
tled by Dedekind and Cantor (and a fortiori not by Weierstrass and
Kronecker). In order to be forced into the position to reﬂect on these
matters systematically, I announced a seminar on the “logical founda-
tions of mathematical thought” for next semester.43
42Poincar´e 1902, pp. 252-253
43Hilbert mentions in this letter that Zermelo 1904 had just been published. Zermelos’s paper
is an excerpt of a letter to Hilbert that was written on 24 September 1904. The German text is
from Dugac, p. 271: Die Besch¨aftigung mit den Grundlagen der Arithmetik wird jetzt, wie es
scheint, wieder von den verschiedensten Seiten aufgenommen. Dass gerade die wichtigsten u. in-
teressantesten Fragen von Dedekind und Cantor noch nicht (und erst recht nicht von Weierstrass
und Kronecker) erledigt worden sind, ist eine Ansicht, die ich schon lange hege und, um einmal
in die Notwendigkeit versetzt zu sein, dar¨uber im Zusammenhang nachzudenken, habe ich f¨ur
n¨achsten Sommer ein zweist¨undiges Colleg ¨uber die “logischen Grundlagen des math. Denkens”
angezeigt.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
341
The lectures from the summer term 1905, Logische Prinzipien des mathematischen
Denkens, are as special as those of 1904, but for a diﬀerent reason: one ﬁnds in
them a critical examination of logical principles and a realization that a broader
logical calculus is needed that captures, in particular, universal statements and
inferences. Hilbert discusses in some detail (on pp. 253–266) the shortcomings
of the approach he pursued in his Heidelberg address; see section 3.1 below. In
his subsequent lectures on the foundations of mathematics, Hilbert does not really
progress beyond the reﬂections presented in 1905*. In a letter from Hessenberg
to Nelson (dated 7 February 1906 and which I received through Peckhaus), one
ﬁnds not only a discussion of Russell’s early logicism, but strikingly, Dedekind and
Hilbert are both described as logicists. Hessenberg remarks:
Dedekind’s standpoint is also a logicist one, but altogether noble and
nowhere brazenly dogmatic. One sees and feels everywhere the strug-
gling, serious human being. But given all the superﬁcialities I have
found up to now in Russell, I can hardly assume that he is going to pro-
vide more than something witty. Zermelo believes that also Hilbert’s
logicism cannot be carried out, but considers Poincar´e’s objections as
unfounded.44
It is only in the Z¨urich talk Axiomatisches Denken that a new perspective emerges.
In that pivotal essay, Hilbert remarks that the consistency of the axioms for the
real numbers can be reduced, by employing set theoretic concepts, to the very
same question for integers; that result is attributed to the theory of irrational
numbers developed by Weierstrass und Dedekind. Hilbert continues, insisting on
a logicist approach:
In only two cases is this method of reduction to another more special
domain of knowledge clearly not available, namely, when it is a matter
of the axioms for the integers themselves, and when it is a matter of the
foundation of set theory; for here there is no other discipline besides
logic to which it were possible to appeal.
But since the examination of consistency is a task that cannot be
avoided, it appears necessary to axiomatize logic itself and to prove
that number theory as well as set theory are only parts of logic.45
44The German text is: Dedekinds Standpunkt ist ja auch logizistisch, aber durchaus vornehm
and nirgends unverfroren dogmatisch.
Man sieht und f¨uhlt ¨uberall den k¨ampfenden ernsten
Menschen. Aber bei den Oberﬂ¨achlichkeiten, die ich bis jetzt in Russell gefunden habe, kann ich
kaum annehmen, daß er mehr als geistreiches bringt. Zermelo ist der Ansicht, daß auch Hilberts
Logizismus undurchf¨uhrbar ist, h¨alt aber Poincar´es Einwendungen f¨ur unbegr¨undet.
45Ewald, p.
1113.
Here is the German text from Hilbert 1918, p.
153:
Nur in zwei
F¨allen n¨amlich, wenn es sich um die Axiome der ganzen Zahlen selbst und wenn es sich um
die Begr¨undung der Mengenlehre handelt, ist dieser Weg der Zur¨uckf¨uhrung auf ein anderes
spezielleres Wissensgebiet oﬀenbar nicht gangbar, weil es außer der Logik ¨uberhaupt keine Diszi-
plin mehr gibt, auf die alsdann eine Berufung m¨oglich w¨are.
Da aber die Pr¨ufung der Widerspruchslosigkeit eine unabweisbare Aufgabe ist, so scheint es
n¨otig, die Logik selbst zu axiomatisieren und nachzuweisen, daß Zahlentheorie sowie Mengenlehre
nur Teile der Logik sind.

342
Wilfried Sieg
Hilbert remarks that Russell and Frege provided the basis for this approach. Given
Hilbert’s closeness to Dedekind’s perspective, it is not surprising that he was at-
tracted by the logicist considerations of Principia Mathematica. In 1920, however,
Hilbert and Bernays reject the logicist program of the Russellian kind. The reason
is quite straightforward: for the development of mathematics the axiom of re-
ducibility is needed, and that is in essence a return to existential axiomatics with
all its associated problems. In particular, no reduction of epistemological interest
has been achieved.
I want to end this section by pointing out that Zermelo’s axiomatization of
set theory in 1908, inspired by both Dedekind and Hilbert, is another instance of
existential axiomatics. Points 1) through 4) in the ﬁrst section of Zermelo 1908
are structured in the same way as the axiomatic formulations in Hilbert’s 1899
and 1900. According to Ebbinghaus,46 Zermelo had intended to give a consistency
proof for his axiom system, but was encouraged by Hilbert to publish the axiomati-
zation ﬁrst and leave the consistency proof for another occasion. Clearly, as to the
nature of Zermelo’s considerations at that point I am not sure at all. Zermelo just
remarks in his paper, “I have not yet even been able to prove rigorously that my
axioms are consistent, though this is certainly very essential; instead I have had to
conﬁne myself to pointing out now and then that the antinomies discovered so far
vanish one and all if the principles here proposed are adopted as a basis.”47 His
later investigations on the foundations of set theory in Zermelo 1930 are parallel
to Dedekind’s metamathematical reﬂections described above.
3
DIRECT CONSISTENCY PROOFS
It seems then that Hilbert modiﬁed his basic attitude as a Dedekindian logicist
only after the discovery of Zermelo and Russell’s elementary contradiction. That
paradox — which had a “catastrophic eﬀect on the mathematical world when it
became known” — convinced him that there was a deep problem, that diﬃculties
appeared already at an earlier stage, and that the issue had to be addressed in
diﬀerent ways.48 The notes for the lectures Zahlbegriﬀund Quadratur des Kreises
from the summer term of 1904 contain, as we saw already, a detailed discussion of
the paradoxes. They examine also Dedekind’s contradictory system of all things,
46Ebbinghaus quotes in his book 2007, p. 78, from a letter of Zermelo to Hilbert, dated 25
March 1907 in which Zermelo writes: “According to your wish I will ﬁnish my set theory as soon
as possible, although actually I wanted to include a proof of consistency.”
47All the remarks from Zermelo 1908 are found in van Heijenoort, pp. 200-201.
48In ¨Uber das Unendliche, p. 169, Hilbert writes, retrospectively: Insbesondere war es ein von
Zermelo und Russell gefundener Widerspruch, dessen Bekanntwerden in der mathematischen
Welt geradezu von katastrophaler Wirkung war.
That this paradox played a special role is also conﬁrmed by Bernays, who reported to Constance
Reid: . . . Under the inﬂuence of the discovery of the antinomies in set theory, Hilbert temporarily
thought that Kronecker had probably be right there. But soon he changed his mind. Now it
became his goal, one might say, to do battle with Kronecker with his own weapons of ﬁniteness
by means of a modiﬁed conception of mathematics. (Reid, p. 173)

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
343
but both praise his epochal achievements and pointedly insist that fundamental
diﬃculties remain.
He [Dedekind] arrived at the view that the standpoint of consider-
ing the integers as obvious [selbstverst¨andlich] cannot be sustained; he
recognized that the diﬃculties Kronecker saw in the deﬁnition of ir-
rationals arise already for integers; furthermore, if they are removed
here, they disappear there. This work [Was sind und was sollen die
Zahlen?] was epochal, but it did not yet provide something deﬁnitive,
certain diﬃculties remain. These diﬃculties are connected, as for the
deﬁnition of the irrationals, above all to the concept of the inﬁnite;
...49
This set the stage for Hilbert’s Heidelberg talk in August of that year. Hilbert
indicates there a novel way of solving the consistency problem for arithmetic which
is taken now in a much more restricted sense, namely, as dealing with just the
natural numbers.
3.1
Heidelberg 1904
The shift from arithmetic as pertaining not to the real but to the natural num-
bers is crucial for Hilbert’s presentation in Heidelberg. The consistency of the
system considered there would guarantee, as Hilbert puts it, “the consistent exis-
tence of the so-called smallest inﬁnite.” Its axioms are those for identity extended
by Dedekind’s requirements for a simply inﬁnite system; the induction principle
(which follows from Dedekind’s minimality condition) is included, but neither for-
mulated properly nor treated in the consistency proof. Using modern notation the
axioms that are actually investigated can be given in this way:
1. x = x
2. x = y & W(x) →W(y)
3. x′ = y′ →x = y
4. x′ ̸= 1
W(x) stands for an arbitrary proposition containing the variable x. The rules,
implicit in Hilbert’s description of “consequence,” are modus ponens and a sub-
stitution rule that allows replacing variables by arbitrary sign combinations; other
“modes of logical inferences” are only alluded to. Finally, Hilbert most strongly
49Here is the German text from Hilbert 1904*, p. 166: Er drang zu der Ansicht durch, dass
der Standpunkt mit der Selbstverst¨andlichkeit der ganzen Zahlen nicht aufrecht zu erhalten ist;
er erkannte, dass die Schwierigkeiten, die Kronecker bei der Deﬁnition der irrationalen Zahlen
sah, schon bei den ganzen Zahlen auftreten und dass, wenn sie hier beseitigt sind, sie auch dort
wegfallen. Diese Arbeit war epochemachend, aber sie lieferte doch nichts deﬁnitives, es bleiben
gewisse Schwierigkeiten ¨ubrig. Diese bestehen hier, wie bei der Deﬁnition der irrationalen Zahlen,
vor allem im Begriﬀdes Unendlichen; . . .

344
Wilfried Sieg
emphasized that the problem for the reals is solved once matters are settled for
the natural numbers:
The existence of the totality of real numbers can be demonstrated in a
way similar to that in which the existence of the smallest inﬁnite can
be proved; in fact, the axioms for real numbers as I have set them up
... can be expressed by precisely such formulas as the axioms hitherto
assumed. ... and the axioms for the totality of real numbers do not
diﬀer qualitatively in any respect from, say, the axioms necessary for
the deﬁnition of the integers.
In the recognition of this fact lies, I
believe, the real refutation of the conception of arithmetic associated
with L. Kronecker ...50
In the consistency proof for the above system Hilbert uses the property of homo-
geneity; an equation a = b is called homogeneous if and only if a and b have the
same number of symbol occurrences. It is easily seen, by induction on derivations,
that all equations derivable from axioms (1)–(3) are homogeneous. A contradiction
can be obtained only by establishing an unnegated instance of (4) from (1)–(3),
but such an instance is necessarily inhomogeneous and thus not provable. Hilbert
comments:
The considerations just sketched constitute the ﬁrst case in which a
direct proof of consistency has been successfully carried out for axioms,
whereas the method of a suitable specialization, or of the construction
of examples, which is otherwise customary for such proofs - in geometry
in particular - necessarily fails here.51
Hilbert stressed in his Heidelberg talk the programmatic goal of developing logic
and mathematics simultaneously. The actual work has signiﬁcant shortcomings,
as there is no calculus for sentential logic, there is no proper treatment of quantiﬁ-
cation, and induction is not incorporated into the argument. In sum, there is an
important shift from semantic arguments to syntactic ones, but the very set-up is
inadequate as a formal framework for mathematics. It should also be noted very
clearly that the ultimate goal of the consistency proof remains to guarantee the
existence of a set, here of the smallest inﬁnite one.
50In van Heijenoort, pp. 137-8. Here is the German text from Hilbert 1905, pp. 278-279:
¨Ahnlich wie die Existenz des kleinsten Unendlich bewiesen werden kann, folgt die Existenz des
Inbegriﬀs der reellen Zahlen: in der Tat sind die Axiome, wie ich sie f¨ur die reellen Zahlen
aufgestellt habe, genau durch solche Formeln ausdr¨uckbar, wie die bisher aufgestellten Axiome.
. . . und die Axiome f¨ur den Inbegriﬀder reellen Zahlen unterscheiden sich qualitativ in keiner
Hinsicht etwa von den zur Deﬁnition der ganzen Zahlen notwendigen Axiomen. In der Erkenntnis
dieser Tatsache liegt, wie ich meine, die sachliche Widerlegung der von L. Kronecker vertretenen
. . . Auﬀasung der Grundlagen der Arithmetik.
51In van Heijenoort, p. 135; the German text loc. cit. p. 273 is: Die eben skizzierte Betrach-
tung bildet den ersten Fall, in dem es gelingt, den direkten Nachweis f¨ur die Widerspruchslosigkeit
von Axiomen zu f¨uhren, w¨ahrend die sonst — insbesondere in der Geometrie — f¨ur solche Nach-
weise ¨ubliche Methode der geeigneten Spezialisierung oder Bildung von Beispielen hier notwendig
versagt.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
345
Hilbert was obviously not fully satisﬁed with the work he had presented in
Heidelberg, and in the summer term of 1905 he did give lectures under the title
Logische Principien des mathematischen Denkens. Towards the end of the term he
reviewed the consistency proof sketched above and considers it “as the ﬁrst attempt
[my emphasis, WS] of a consistency proof without giving a special example.” He
articulates what he considers to be problematic and continues:
Carrying out this thought in a precise way would at any rate present
considerable diﬃculties, in particular the exact justiﬁcation of the
statement that “all” inferences from the ﬁrst axioms lead only to ho-
mogeneous equations. One arrives with such considerations ﬁnally at
the thought that proofs should be viewed as mathematical things; the
logical calculus indicates that.52
But how is it possible to characterize “proofs” mathematically, if they constitute
an inﬁnite totality?
And, even if one has succeeded to do that, how can one
give arguments concerning them? Those questions were already on Hilbert’s mind
during the summer of 1904; in Born’s notes from that term one ﬁnds remarks
concerning concepts that have particular deﬁning characteristics. Such concepts
are viewed as consistent just in case it is not possible to obtain a contradiction by
drawing all possible inferences from their characteristics. Hilbert then concludes.
But in proceeding in this way one obviously uses already arithmetic;
in a sense one does so when forming the plural, but certainly when
speaking of all inferences etc.53
These problematic aspects are sharpened, but not resolved in the 1905 lectures.
3.2
Obstacles
When Hilbert suggests, as I reported above, that proofs might be viewed as “math-
ematical things”, he considers one possibility of doing so “that is more formal and
is completely based on the logical calculus.” (p. 266) As this formal approach
requires a complete formulation of all axioms, in particular, of those that con-
cern “Every”, he encounters even there the very same issue. After all, replacing
variables by arbitrary combinations is the principal operation and, on account of
the great variety of potential combinations, it is diﬃcult to provide a rigorous
formulation. Hilbert concludes these reﬂections by stating:
52Hilbert 1905*, pp.
264-265.
The German text is:
Eine genaue Durchf¨uhrung dieses
Gedankens w¨urde immerhin noch betr¨achtliche Schwierigkeiten bieten, insbesondere die exakte
Begr¨undung der Aussage, daß “alle” Schl¨usse aus den ersten Axiomen nur auf homogene Glei-
chungen f¨uhren. Man kommt bei solchen ¨Uberlegungen schließlich darauf, den Beweis selbst als
ein mathematisches Ding anzusehen, worauf ja auch der Logikkalk¨ul hinweist.
53 Hilbert 1904*, p. 170. The German text is: Dabei benutzt man aber oﬀenbar schon die
Arithmetik, eigentlich schon bei der Bildung des Plurals, noch mehr aber, wenn man von allen
Schl¨ussen etc. spricht.

346
Wilfried Sieg
Accordingly the main task would be to formulate exactly the axioms
for “Every” and the concept of combination that is closely connected
with them.54
As is well known, Poincar´e challenged the presumed foundational import of Hilbert’s
consistency proof, because it proceeds by induction; this is absolutely to the point.
He also brought out other methodological shortcomings that are closely linked with
the attempts Hilbert made in the Heidelberg talk to overcome the diﬃculties I just
sketched.55
How penetrating Poincar´e’s considerations were becomes plain when one reads
the remarks of Bernays on Hilbert’s Heidelberg paper that give essentially a pr´ecis
of Poincar´e’s critique, but also of Hilbert’s reﬂection on the issues; Bernays writes
in his 1935:
In addition, the systematic standpoint of Hilbert’s proof theory is not
yet fully and clearly developed in the Heidelberg address. Some places
indicate that Hilbert wants to avoid the intuitive conception of number
and replace it by its axiomatic introduction. Such a procedure would
lead to a circle in the proof theoretic considerations.56
Bernays emphasizes that Hilbert did not express distinctions that would be central
to the later Hilbert Program; for example, Hilbert did not bring out the restriction
on the contentual application of the forms of existential and universal judgments.57
Poincar´e’s incisive analysis of the syntactic, proof theoretic approach and his
own insight into its shortcomings shifted Hilbert’s attention from the stand he had
advocated in the Heidelberg talk. Hilbert’s lectures, given throughout the period
from 1905 to 1917, document his continued foundational concerns.
Under the
impact of a detailed study of Principia Mathematica that began in 1913, Hilbert
ﬂirted again with logicism.58 What resulted from this study, most importantly,
were the 1917–18 lectures Prinzipien der Mathematik signaling the emergence
54 Hilbert 1905*, 269. The German text is: Hiernach w¨are dann die exakte Formulierung der
Axiome des ‘Jedes’ und des damit in naher Verbindung stehenden Begriﬀes der Kombination die
Hauptaufgabe.
55Poincar´e 1905, in Ewald, pp. 1026-1027.
56Bernays 1935, p. 200. The German text is: Außerdem ist auch der methodische Standpunkt
der Hilbertschen Beweistheorie in dem Heidelberger Vortrag noch nicht zur vollen Deutlichkeit
entwickelt. Einige Stellen deuten darauf hin, daß Hilbert die anschauliche Zahlvorstellung vermei-
den und durch die axiomatische Einf¨uhrung des Zahlbegriﬀs ersetzen will. Ein solches Verfahren
w¨urde in den beweistheoretischen ¨Uberlegungen einen Zirkel ergeben.
57L.c., p.
200.
This is part of the following text:
Auch wird der Gesichtspunkt der
Beschr¨ankung in der inhaltlichen Anwendung der Formen des existentialen und des allgemeinen
Urteils noch nicht ausdr¨ucklich und restlos zur Geltung gebracht.
58Around 1913 Hilbert became familiar with some of Russell’s writings and intended to invite
Russell to give lectures in G¨ottingen; the outbreak of World War I made that impossible. In the
notes from the winter term 1914-15 one ﬁnds brief remarks about type theory and in serendipi-
tously preserved notes of a student (found in the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton) even
more extended ones. Of greatest signiﬁcance in indicating the degree to which the Hilbert group
discussed the details of Principia Mathematica is Behmann’s dissertation; that is described in
Mancosu 1999. Not only the details of Principia Mathematica were of signiﬁcance; on the con-

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
347
of modern mathematical logic.
In the following two years, the programmatic
logicism that was underlying those lectures was abandoned for good reasons. A
radical constructivism was adopted instead and subsequently also abandoned – for
equally good, but obviously diﬀerent reasons. The ﬁnitist consistency program as
we think of it was formulated only in lectures given in the winter term 1921–22.59
The evolution towards the program started, however, in the summer term of
1920 when Hilbert came back to the proof theoretic approach of his 1905. The
notes from that term contain in section 7 a consistency proof for exactly the
same fragment of arithmetic that was investigated in the Heidelberg talk.
Its
formulation is informed by the investigations of 1917-18: the language is more
properly described; the basic vocabulary consists of variables a, b, ..., non-logical
constants 1, +, and all numerals; = and ̸= are relation symbols, and →is the sole
logical symbol. The axioms are:
1 = 1
a = b →a + 1 = b + 1
a + 1 = b + 1 →a = b
a = b →(a = c →b = c)
a + 1 ̸= 1
Modus ponens and substitution, now applicable only to numerals, are the sole
inference rules. The combinatorial argument is diﬀerent from that given in 1905,
mainly by the introduction of the notion “k¨urzbar”:
... If one considers a proof with respect to a particular concrete prop-
erty it has, then it is possible that the removal of some formulas in this
proof still leaves us with a proof that has that particular property. In
this case we are going to say that the proof is k¨urzbar with respect to
the given property.60
Hilbert establishes three lemmata. The ﬁrst claims that a theorem can contain
at most two occurrences of →, the second asserts that no statement of the form
(A →B) →C can be proved, and the third expresses that a formula a = b is
provable only if a and b are the same term. On the surface, Hilbert does not
use an induction principle in these proofs. He compares, playing on the double
meaning of “k¨urzbar”, the structure of the proof to that for the irrationality of
trary, the broad logicist outlook had a real impact on Hilbert. Hilbert’s notes for his course on
Set Theory from the summer term 1917 and his talk Axiomatisches Denken (given on September
11, 1917 in Z¨urich) reveal a logicist direction of his work.
59For details see my Hilbert’s Programs: 1917–1922, but also for the relationship between the
1917–18 lectures and Hilbert & Ackermann’s book of 1928.
60Hilbert 1920*, p. 38. The German text is: Betrachtet man einen Beweis in Hinsicht auf
eine bestimmte, konkret aufweisbare Eigenschaft, welche er besitzt, so kann es sein, dass, nach
Wegstreichung einiger Formeln in diesem Beweise noch immer ein Beweis (...)
¨ubrig bleibt,
welcher auch noch jene Eigenschaft besitzt. In diesem Fall wollen wir sagen, dass der Beweis sich
in bezug auf die betreﬀende Eigenschaft k¨urzen l¨asst.

348
Wilfried Sieg
√2. In that classical indirect argument one starts out by assuming there are p and
q, q ̸= 0, such that √2 = p/q; without loss of generality p and q are then taken to
be relatively prime, i.e., the fraction p/q is not “k¨urzbar”.
The presentation of the consistency proof is simpliﬁed in Hilbert 1922.61 Though
“K¨urzbarkeit” is only implicit in the argument, the strategic point of the modiﬁed
argument is made quite explicit; Hilbert insists that Poincar´e has been refuted.
Poincar´e’s objection, claiming that the principle of complete induction
cannot be proved but by complete induction, has been refuted by my
theory.62
Is this to be taken in the strong sense that no induction principle is being used?
Or does one use perhaps a special procedure that is based on the construction
and deconstruction of numerals and that, by its very nature, is diﬀerent from the
full principle? From a mathematical point of view, Hilbert uses the “least number
principle” that is equivalent to induction; it is used in an elementary form for just
purely existential statements.
3.3
New directions
In the second part of this paper63 the theory is signiﬁcantly expanded. The basic
system is modiﬁed by replacing the axiom 1 = 1 with a = a, but also by including
the axioms 1 + (a + 1) = (1 + a) + 1 and a ̸= 1 →a = δ(a) + 1, where δ is the
predecessor function. A schema for identity
a = b →(A(a) →A(b))
61This paper was based on talks given in the spring and summer of 1921 in Copenhagen, respec-
tively Hamburg, where Hilbert presented his new investigations on the foundations of arithmetic.
Reports on the three Copenhagen talks were published in Berlingske Tidende. Hilbert gave these
lectures on March 14, 15, and 17. The ﬁrst talk had the title Natur und mathematisches Erken-
nen; the second and third were entitled Axiomenlehre und Widerspruchsfreiheit.
As to the
Hamburg talks: Heinrich Behnke gives in his 1976 a brief description of the impact of the Ham-
burg lecture: “Im Sommer 1922 [sic!] trug Hilbert hier seinen viel zitierten ersten Aufsatz zur
Neubegr¨undung der Mathematik vor. Es war eine Entgegnung auf die Schriften von Hermann
Weyl und L. E. J. Brouwer, die Unruhe unter die Mathematiker gebracht hatten, weil sie das
tertium non datur bestritten und damit schon die Existenz der reellen Zahlen in Frage stellten.
In den Diskussionen zu Hilberts Vortr¨agen [sic!] sprachen Ernst Cassirer, damals Professor der
Philosophie in Hamburg, Heinrich Scholz aus Kiel, der sp¨atere Begr¨under der mathematischen
Logik in Deutschland, Kowalewski – K¨onigsberg, der f¨ur die Philosophie des “Als ob” von Vai-
hinger warb, und mancher andere. Die Er¨orterungen waren viel reger und grunds¨atzlicher, als
es sonst nach mathematischen Vortr¨agen der Fall zu sein pﬂegt. Man begriﬀ, daß Hilbert sich
um die entscheidende Sicherung der Mathematik gegen Angriﬀe der Intuitionisten wandte.” The
detailed information concerning the talks in Copenhagen was conveyed to me by V. Hendricks,
that concerning the Hamburg talks by A. Behboud.
62Hilbert 1922, p. 161. The German text is: Sein [Poincar´es] Einwand, dieses Prinzip [der
vollst¨andigen Induktion] k¨onnte nicht anders als selbst durch vollst¨andige Induktion bewiesen
werden, ist durch meine Theorie widerlegt.
63The editors of Hilbert’s Gesammelte Abhandlungen remark in note 2 on page 168 that the
consistency arguments stem from an earlier stage of proof theory, and that a new direction of
Hilbert’s considerations is indicated on the following pages.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
349
is also added. (Upper case Roman letters are viewed as formula variables.) The
system includes rules for universal quantiﬁers; but as negation is available only for
identities, existential quantiﬁers cannot be introduced. The induction principle
and certain logical principles are adjoined to the basic theory. The former principle
is given in the form
(a)(A(a) →A(a + 1)) →{A(1) →(Z(b) →A(b))}.
The logical axioms are to reﬂect the usual inference procedures and are divided
into two groups; those in the ﬁrst group concern the conditional →, and those of
the second group deal with negation. Here are the axioms of the ﬁrst group:
A →(B →A)
{A →(A →B)} →(A →B)
{A →(B →C)} →{B →(A →C)}
(B →C) →{(A →B) →(A →C)}.
Negation is available only for equations. It is thus treated in a restricted way:
a ̸= a →A,
(a = b →A) →((a ̸= b →A) →A)).
As to this restricted use of negation, Hilbert remarks that the system is to be
kept constructive; thus, the proper metamathematical direction of the program
has not yet been taken.64 Eight arithmetical axioms concerning Z, addition, and
subtraction round out the system. Hilbert emphasizes that the axioms ensure that
all statements of arithmetic can be obtained in a formal way.
The editors of Hilbert’s Gesammelte Abhandlungen mention (in note 1, p. 176)
that “a schema for the introduction of functions by recursion equations” has to be
64Hilbert emphasizes (on p.
173): Wir haben außer dem Zeichen →und dem Allzeichen
kein anderes logisches Zeichen eingef¨uhrt und insbesondere f¨ur die logische Operation ‘nicht’ die
Formalisierung vermieden. Dieses Verhalten gegen¨uber der Negation ist f¨ur unsere Beweistheorie
charakteristisch: ein formales ¨Aquivalent f¨ur die fehlende Negation liegt lediglich in dem Zeichen
̸=, durch dessen Einf¨uhrung die Ungleichheit gewissermaßen ebenso positiv ausgedr¨uckt und
behandelt wird, wie die Gleichheit, deren Gegenst¨uck sie ist.
Inhaltlich kommt die Negation
nur im Nachweise der Widerspruchsfreiheit zur Anwendung, und zwar nur, insoweit es unserer
Grundeinstellung entspricht.
Mit R¨ucksicht auf diesen Umstand bringt uns, wie ich glaube,
unsere Beweistheorie zugleich auch eine erkenntnistheoretische wichtige Einsicht in die Bedeutung
und das Wesen der Negation. When discussing that the existential quantiﬁer can be deﬁned
in “formal logic” with the universal quantiﬁer and negation, Hilbert points out (on p.
174):
Da aber in unserer Beweistheorie die Negation keine direkte Darstellung haben darf, so wird
hier die Formalisierung von ‘es gibt’ dadurch erreicht, daß man individuelle Funktionszeichen
mittels einer Art impliziter Deﬁnition einf¨uhrt, indem gewissermaßen das, ‘was es gibt’, durch
eine Funktion wirklich hergestellt wird. Hilbert discusses then as an example the predecessor
function.
In the 1923-paper Hilbert acknowledges very brieﬂy on p.
179, note 1: In meiner
vorhin zitierten Abhandlung [Hilbert 1922; WS] hatte ich dieses Zeichen noch vermieden; es
hat sich herausgestellt, daß bei der gegenw¨artigen, ein wenig ver¨anderten Darstellung meiner
Theorie der Gebrauch des Zeichens ‘nicht’ ohne Gefahr geschehen kann. This is not a minor shift
in perspective, but a methodologically dramatic one!

350
Wilfried Sieg
added, if this last goal is to be reached. As to the extent of the claimed consistency
result, they assert (in note 2, p. 176) that it holds only if the universal quantiﬁer
is excluded and the induction axiom is replaced by the induction rule. Taking
into account these modiﬁcations, consistency is claimed for a theory that includes
primitive recursive arithmetic. There is no indication of a proof, but the result can
obviously not be obtained by extending the combinatorial argument I described
above.65
Hilbert’s 1922 was based, as described in a previous note, on talks he had given
in the spring and summer of 1921 in Copenhagen, respectively Hamburg. The ﬁrst
Copenhagen talk has been preserved as a manuscript in Hilbert’s own hand. It
is worthwhile to quote its last paragraph in order to re-emphasize Hilbert’s broad
vision for mathematics.
We went rapidly through those chapters of theoretical physics that
are currently most important. If we ask, what kind of mathematics
is being considered by physicists, then we see that it is analysis that
serves physicists in its complete content and extension. Indeed, it does
so in two diﬀerent ways: ﬁrst it serves to clarify and formulate their
ideas, and second — as an instrument of calculation — it serves to
obtain quickly and reliably numerical results, which help to check the
correctness of their ideas. Apart from this face seen by physicists, there
is a completely diﬀerent face that is directed towards philosophy; the
features of that face deserve no less our interest. That topic will be
discussed in my subsequent talks.66
Hilbert did not only expound his particular perspective, but argued also against
the stand of Brouwer and Weyl. Summarizing his position in the published essay,
he contrasts their constructive tendencies with his own, claiming that Weyl has
“failed to see the path to the fulﬁllment of these [constructive, WS] tendencies”
and that “only the path taken here in pursuit of axiomatics will do full justice to
65After having made the claim that the consistency of that system can be obtained, Hilbert
goes on to say (on p. 176): Aber der wesentlichste Schritt bleibt noch zu tun ¨ubrig, n¨amlich
der Nachweis der Anwendbarkeit des logischen Prinzips ‘tertium non datur’ in dem Sinne der
Erlaubnis, auch bei unendlich vielen Zahlen, Funktionen oder Funktionenfunktionen schließen zu
d¨urfen, daß eine Aussage entweder f¨ur alle diese Zahlen, Funktionen bzw. Funtionenfunktionen
gilt oder daß notwendig unter ihnen eine Zahl, Funktion bzw. Funtionenfunktion vorkommt, f¨ur
die die Aussage nicht gilt. It is then claimed that by introducing appropriate functionals the
foundation of classical analysis can be provided and that the consistency of the extended system
can be established.
66Hilbert 1921*, pp.
28-9.
The German text is: Wir haben so im Fluge, die gegenw¨artig
wichtigsten Kapitel der theoretischen Physik durcheilt.
Fragen wir, welcher Art Mathematik
dabei f¨ur den Physiker in Betracht kommt, so sehen wir, dass es die Analysis ist, [die] in ihrem
gesamten Inhalt und Umfang dem Physiker dient und zwar auf zweierlei Weisen: erstens zur
Kl¨arung und Formulierung seiner Ideen und zweitens als Instrument der Rechnung zur raschen
und sicheren Gewinnung numerischer Resultate, durch die er die Richtigkeit seiner Ideen pr¨uft.
Ausser diesem Antlitz, in das der Physiker schaut, hat die Mathematik aber noch ein ganz
anderes Gesicht, das auf die Philosophie gerichtet ist, [und] dessen Z¨uge nicht minder unser
Interesse verdienen. Dar¨uber will ich in meinen folgenden Vortr¨agen handeln.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
351
the constructive tendencies”:
The goal of securing a ﬁrm foundation for mathematics is also my
goal. I should like to regain for mathematics the old reputation for
incontestable truth, which it appears to have lost as the result of the
paradoxes of set theory; but I believe that this can be done while fully
preserving its accomplishments.
The method I follow in pursuit of
this goal is none other than the axiomatic method; its essence is as
follows.67
Having described the nature of the axiomatic method, he points to the task of rec-
ognizing the consistency of the arithmetical axioms including at this point axioms
for number theory, analysis, and set theory. This task leads naturally to the meta-
mathematical investigation of suitable formalisms, in which parts of mathematics
can be carried out and proofs are given. The concepts of proof and provability are
thus “relativized” to the underlying axiom system. Hilbert emphasizes,
This relativism is natural and necessary; it causes no harm, since the
axiom system is constantly being extended, and the formal structure,
in keeping with our constructive tendency, is becoming more and more
complete.68
Hilbert’s constructivism comes in at this point in yet a diﬀerent way, namely,
through constructing ever more complete formalisms for the development of math-
ematics.
The terms “Hilbertsche Beweistheorie” und “ﬁnite Mathematik” appear for the
ﬁrst time in the 1921-22 Notes.
“Hilbertsche Beweistheorie” is of course self-
explanatory, but “ﬁnite Mathematik” is not, unless one interprets it simply as
having been chosen in contrast to “transﬁnite Mathematik”. Hilbert and Bernays
give no philosophical explication. Rather, they insist that an intuitive foundation
(“anschauliche Begr¨undung”) is to be given and develop paradigmatically elemen-
tary number theory on such a foundation; their development is a marvelously
detailed and thorough presentation of the beginnings of recursive number theory.
The opposition between “ﬁnite” and “transﬁnite Mathematik” is founded on that
between “ﬁnite” and “transﬁnite Logik”, as the step from “ﬁnite” to “transﬁnite
Mathematik” is taken when the classical logical equivalences between the quanti-
ﬁers are taken to be valid even when we are dealing with inﬁnite totalities. But
67Ewald, p. 1119. Here is the German text from Hilbert 1922, p. 160: Das Ziel, die Mathematik
sicher zu begr¨unden, ist auch das meinige; ich m¨ochte der Mathematik den alten Ruf der unan-
fechtbaren Wahrheit, der ihr durch die Paradoxien der Mengenlehre verloren zu gehen scheint,
wiederherstellen; aber ich glaube, daß dies bei voller Erhaltung ihres Besitzstandes m¨oglich ist.
Die Methode, die ich dazu einschlage, ist keine andere als die axiomatische; ihr Wesen ist dieses.
68Ewald, p. 1127. Here is the German text from Hilbert 1922, p. 169: Dieser Relativismus ist
naturgem¨aß und notwendig; aus ihm entspringt auch keinerlei Schaden, da das Axiomensystem
best¨andig erweitert und der formale Aufbau, unserer konstruktiven Tendenz entsprechend, immer
vollst¨andiger wird.

352
Wilfried Sieg
that cannot be done in “ﬁnite Mathematik”: “Assuming the unrestricted valid-
ity of those equivalences amounts to thinking of totalities with inﬁnitely many
individuals as completed ones.”69
Elementary number theory as Hilbert and Bernays develop it should not be
understood as all of their “ﬁnite Mathematik”. On the contrary, they envision
a dramatic expansion; an expansion that is needed, on the one hand, to fully
develop analysis and set theory and, on the other hand, to recognize “on the basis
of ﬁnitist logic” why and to what extent “the application of transﬁnite inferences
[in analysis and set theory] always leads to correct results”. The strategy that is
suggested reﬂects what Hilbert had done already, to some extent, around the turn
of the century, namely, to shift the Kroneckerian constructivity requirements from
mathematics itself to metamathematics. We have to expand, so they demand, the
domain of objects that are being considered:
. . . i.e., we have to apply our intuitive considerations also to ﬁgures
that are not number signs. Thus we have good reasons to distance
ourselves from the earlier dominant principle according to which each
theorem of pure mathematics is ultimately a statement concerning in-
tegers. This principle was viewed as expressing a fundamental method-
ological insight, but it has to be given up as a prejudice.
We have to adhere ﬁrmly to one demand, namely, that the ﬁgures we
take as objects must be completely surveyable and that only discrete
determinations are to be considered for them. It is only under these
conditions that our claims and considerations have the same reliability
and evidence as in intuitive number theory.70
So at this point Hilbert and Bernays ﬁnd, simultaneously, a resolution for two
problems, namely, to ﬁx the standpoint on the basis of which consistency proofs
are to be carried out (“ﬁnite Mathematik”) and on the basis of which the formal
development of mathematics can be pushed along in a systematic way. This res-
olution addresses in particular, so it was thought, the problem that had plagued
Hilbert in 1905, but also before and after, namely, to capture the content of a
69Hilbert 1921-22*, p.
2a of Part III. The German text is:
Denn die Annahme der
unbeschr¨ankten G¨ultigkeit jener Aequivalenzen kommt darauf hinaus, dass wir uns Gesamtheiten
von unendlich vielen Individuen als etwas fertig Vorhandenes denken.
70Hilbert 1921–22*, pp. 4a and 5a of Part III. The German text is: . . . d.h. wir m¨ussen unsere
anschaulichen Ueberlegungen auch auf andere Figuren als auf Zahlzeichen anwenden. Wir sehen
uns somit veranlasst, von dem fr¨uher herrschenden Grundsatz abzugehen, wonach jeder Satz
der reinen Mathematik letzten Endes in einer Ausage ¨uber ganze Zahlen bestehen sollte. Dieses
Prinzip, in welchem man eine grundlegende methodische Erkenntnis erblickt hat, m¨ussen wir als
Vorurteil preisgeben.
An einer Forderung aber m¨ussen wir festhalten, dass n¨amlich die Figuren, die wir als
Gegenst¨ande nehmen, vollst¨andig ¨uberblickbar sind, and dass an ihnen nur diskrete Bestim-
mungen in Betracht kommen. Denn nur unter diesen Bedingungen k¨onnen unsere Behauptungen
und Ueberlegungen die gleiche Sicherheit und Handgreiﬂichkeit haben wie in der anschaulichen
Zahlentheorie.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
353
statement concerning all natural numbers or all proofs of a formal system with-
out needing the “axiomatic deﬁnition of the system (Gesamtbegriﬀes) of natural
numbers [or of proofs, WS] as one thing.” A systematic formal development had
already been required in 1905* (p. 250) but was viewed as extremely diﬃcult. It
was hoped then, that it would lead to a complete description of mathematical and
thus of all theoretical thinking; in addition, the eﬀectiveness requirements for the
metamathematical notions would achieve an almost Leibnizian end:
. . . and in this way, by writing down certain symbols in limited num-
ber, every question shall be decidable by an “experiment with chalk or
pen”.71
To recognize early and deep roots of principled aspects of Hilbert’s thinking seems
to me to be important; it is equally important to see how the study of Principia
Mathematica opened a new way to the formalization of mathematics that had not
been available to Hilbert in 1905, in spite of Frege’s work. What is the status
of “ﬁnite” in “ﬁnite Mathematik” in that historical regard? Does it indicate a
new philosophical perspective with a particular foundational claim that emerged
in the early 1920s? The way in which the concept is introduced in 1921–22*, very
matter of fact and without great fanfare, almost leads one to suspect that Hilbert
and Bernays employ a familiar one.72 That suspicion is hardened by aspects of the
past and an attitude that is pervasive until 1932: as to the attitude, ﬁnitism and
intuitionism were considered as co-extensional until G¨odel and Gentzen proved in
1932 the consistency of classical arithmetic relative to its intuitionistic version; as
to aspects of the past, there are Hilbert’s many and oft-repeated remarks about
constructivist demands, mostly connected to Kronecker. Hilbert himself remarked
in 1931 that Kronecker’s conception of mathematics “essentially coincides with
our ﬁnitist mode of thought.”73
There is also a very informative paper by Felix Bernstein, entitled “Die Men-
genlehre Georg Cantors und der Finitismus” and published in 1919; it is one of
the few papers listed at the end of the Introduction to the second edition of Prin-
cipia Mathematica in 1927.
Bernstein characterizes “Finitismus” as a familiar
foundational stance that opposed set theory since its very beginnings in Cantor’s
and Dedekind’s work. Somewhat indiscriminately, Kronecker and Hermite, Borel
and Poincar´e, Richard and Lindel¨of, but also Brouwer and Weyl (on account of
Das Kontinuum) are viewed as members of the ﬁnitist movement. Bernstein’s
paper was published before Hilbert and Bernays viewed “ﬁnite Mathematik” as
71Hilbert 1905*, p. 275. The quotation is part of the following German text: Jeder mathema-
tische Satz und Beweis soll auf eine hinschreibbare Form gebracht werden, und jede Frage soll
damit durch ein Hinschreiben gewisser Zeichen in begrenzter Zahl, durch ein “Experiment mit
Kreide oder Feder” entschieden werden k¨onnen.
72It is most informative to look at the “Disposition” (outline) for the 1921-22 lectures. Bernays
proposed it in a letter to Hilbert dated 17 October 1921. The actual lectures followed that “Dis-
position”. But what is in the lectures called “ﬁnitist” is here still simply called “constructive”;
the outline is reprinted in full in Sieg 1999, pp. 35-36.
73Ewald, p.1151.

354
Wilfried Sieg
foundationally signiﬁcant for proof theory. (The characteristic features of ﬁnitism
Bernstein formulated are actually close to those of “ﬁnite Mathematik” Hilbert
and Bernays emphasized in 1921–22*.)
That concrete background of the term “ﬁnitism” could of course be a topic
of detailed historical analysis, but it won’t be discussed any further here. I just
state as a fact that in the lecture notes from the 1920s no detailed discussion of
“ﬁnite Mathematik” is found. The most penetrating analysis is given in Bernays
1930 still emphasizing the co-extensionality of ﬁnitism and intuitionism. Indeed,
Bernays interprets Brouwer’s mathematical work as showing that considerable
parts of analysis and set theory can be “given a ﬁnitist foundation”.74
What
is found in the lecture notes is innovative metamathematical work that tries to
overcome in leaps and bounds the obstinate diﬃculties of giving consistency proofs
for stronger formal theories, but in the end unsuccessfully. That’s what I am going
to describe in some detail now.
4
FINITIST PROOF THEORY
In the winter term 1921-22, Hilbert and Bernays not only introduced the terms
“Hilbertsche Beweistheorie” and “ﬁnite Mathematik”, but they also used novel
techniques to give a ﬁnitist proof of the restricted consistency result formulated
in Hilbert 1922. The proof is presented in Kneser’s Mitschrift of these lectures.
Indeed, the proof theoretic considerations start on 2 February and end on 23
February 1922; they include a treatment of deﬁnition by (primitive) recursion and
proof by induction. The latter principle is formulated as a rule and restricted to
quantiﬁer-free formulas. The part of the oﬃcial notes 1921–22* that present the
consistency proof was written by Bernays after the term had ended and contains
a diﬀerent argument; that argument pertains only to the basic system and is
sketched in Hilbert 1923. I am going to describe a third modiﬁcation found in
Kneser’s Mitschrift of the 1922-23 lectures. Apart from this important beginning
of proof theoretic investigations, I will discuss Hilbert’s Ansatz for the treatment
of quantiﬁers, some relevant further developments in the 1920s due to Ackermann
and von Neumann, and the reﬁned and systematic presentation of this work in the
ﬁrst and second volume of Grundlagen der Mathematik.
74Bernays 1930, pp. 41-42. The quoted remark is part of this longer passage: Brouwer hat
den Standpunkt Kroneckers nach zwei Richtungen weitergef¨uhrt: einerseits in Hinsicht auf die
philosophische Motivierung, durch die Aufstellung seiner Theorie des “Intuitionismus”, anderer-
seits dadurch, daß er gezeigt hat, wie man im Gebiete der Analysis und der Mengenlehre den
ﬁniten Standpunkt zur Anwendung bringen und, durch eine Umgestaltung der Begriﬀsbildung
und der Schlussweisen von Grund auf, diese Theorien wenigstens zu einem betr¨achtlichen Teil
auf ﬁnitem Wege begr¨unden kann.
Bernays attached to “Intuitionismus” in the above passage a footnote, saying: Es scheint mir im
Interesse der Kl¨arung der Diskussion angezeigt, den Ausdruck “Intuitionismus” als Bezeichnung
einer philosophischen Ansicht zu gebrauchen, im Unterschied von dem Terminus “ﬁnit”, der eine
bestimmte Art des Schließens und der Begriﬀsbildung bezeichnet.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
355
4.1
Proof transformations
The work in 1921–22 gave a new direction to proof theoretic investigations and
required the partial resolution of some hard technical, as well as deep method-
ological issues. In the ﬁrst group of issues we ﬁnd in particular the treatment of
quantiﬁers; that is absolutely crucial, if consistency is to be established for the
kind of formalisms that had been used in the 1917–18 lectures to represent clas-
sical mathematical practice. The second group of issues concerns the extent of
metamathematical means (is contentual induction admitted?) and the character
of the formal systems to be investigated (are they to be quasi-constructive?). The
last issue has a direct resolution: it is addressed in 1921–22* by a modiﬁcation of
the logical calculus, i.e., by replacing the (in-) equalities in the axioms for negation
by (negations of) arbitrary formulas B. The axioms are given in the form:
B →(¬B →A)
(B →A) →((¬B →A) →A)
With this emendation we have the system that is used in Hilbert’s 1923; the ﬁrst
axiom expresses the principle of contradiction and the second the principle of
tertium non datur.
Though the technical resolution is straightforward it required a new philosoph-
ical perspective that is, perhaps ﬁrst and best, articulated in Bernays’ 1922 that
was written during the early fall of 1921. The paper starts out with a discussion of
existential axiomatics, which presupposes, as we saw in Part 2, a system of objects
satisfying the structural conditions formulated by the axioms. The assumption of
such a system contains, Bernays writes, “something so-to-speak transcendent for
mathematics.” Thus, the question arises, “which principled position with respect
to it should be taken.” Bernays remarks that it might be perfectly coherent to ap-
peal to an intuitive grasp of the natural number sequence or even of the manifold
of real numbers. However, that could obviously not be an intuition in any prim-
itive sense, and one should take very seriously the tendency in the exact sciences
to use, as far as possible, only restricted means for acquiring knowledge. Bernays
is thus led to a programmatic demand:
Under this perspective we are going to try, whether it is not possible
to give a foundation to these transcendent assumptions in such a way
that only primitive intuitive knowledge is used.75
Clearly, contentual mathematics is to be based on primitive intuitive knowledge
and that includes for Bernays already at this stage induction.
Bernays’ perspective is clearly reﬂected in the notes 1921–22*. The notes con-
tain a substantial development of ﬁnitist arithmetic that involves from the very
outset contentual induction (“anschauliche Induktion”). This step was not a small
75Bernays 1922, p.
11.
The German text is:
Unter diesem Gesichtspunkt werden wir
versuchen, ob es nicht m¨oglich ist, jene transzendenten Annahmen in einer solchen Weise zu
begr¨unden, daß nur primitive anschauliche Erkenntnisse zur Anwendung kommen.

356
Wilfried Sieg
one for Hilbert. In 1904 he had described Kronecker as a dogmatist because of his
view “that integers — and in fact integers as a general notion (parameter value)
— are directly and immediately given.” In the intervening years he scolded Kro-
necker for just that reason and accused him of not being radical enough. Bernays
reports that Hilbert viewed this expansion of contentual arithmetic as a compro-
mise, and it is indeed a compromise between a radical philosophical position and
intrinsic demands arising from metamathematical investigations. But it is also
a compromise in that it gives up the direct parallelism with the case of physics,
when statements that can be veriﬁed by observation are viewed as corresponding
to statements that can be checked by calculation.
For the central steps of the consistency argument we need a deﬁnition: a formula
is called numeric if it is built up solely from =, ̸=, numerals, and sentential logical
connectives. The ﬁrst step transforms formal proofs with a numeric endformula
into proofs that contain only closed formulas, without changing the endformula.
In the second step these modiﬁed proofs are turned into conﬁgurations that may
no longer be proofs, but consist only of numeric formulas; that is achieved by
reducing the closed terms to numerals. Finally, all formulas in these conﬁgurations
are brought into disjunctive normal form and syntactically recognized as “true”.
Assume now that there is a formal proof of 0 ̸= 0; the last observation allows us
to infer that the endformula of this proof is true. However, 0 ̸= 0 is not true and
hence not provable.
This proof is given with many details in 1921–22*. It is sketched in Hilbert
1923 (on p. 184) and presented in a slightly modiﬁed form, according to Kneser’s
Mitschrift, in the winter term of 1922–23.
For that term the papers Bernays
1922, Hilbert 1922, and Hilbert 1923 were all available as indicated explicitly by
Kneser. The system in Kneser 1922-23 uses a calculus for sentential logic that
incorporates the connectives & and ∨. The main point of this expanded language
and calculus is to provide a more convenient formal framework for representing
informal arguments. The axioms for the additional connectives are given as follows:
A&B →A
A&B →B
A →(B →A&B)
A →A ∨B
B →A ∨B
(A →C) →((B →C) →(A ∨B →C))
Clearly, the axioms correspond directly to “natural” rules for these connectives,
and one ﬁnds here the origin of Gentzen’s natural deduction calculi. In Bernays
1927b the completeness of this calculus is asserted and its methodological advan-
tages are discussed. Bernays writes:
The initial formulas can be chosen in quite diﬀerent ways. In particular
one has tried to get by with the smallest number of axioms, and in this
respect the limit of what is possible has indeed been reached. One
supports the purpose of logical investigations better, if one separates,
as it is done in the axiomatics of geometry, diﬀerent groups of axioms in

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
357
such a way that each of these groups expresses the role of one particular
logical operation.76
Then he lists the three groups, namely, axioms for the conditional →, for conjunc-
tion &, disjunction ∨, as well as for negation ¬. This formal system is used in
Ackermann 1925, in ¨Uber das Unendliche, and in Hilbert’s second Hamburg talk
of 1927. Hilbert gives in the Hamburg talk an interestingly diﬀerent formulation
of the axioms for negation, calling them the principle of contradiction and the
principle of double negation:
(A →(B&¬B)) →¬A
¬¬A →A
These are axiomatic formulations of Gentzen’s natural deduction rules for clas-
sical negation; the earlier axioms for negation can be derived easily. (This new
formulation can be found in van Heijenoort on p.
382 and more fully on pp.
465-466.)
The consistency argument for the system of arithmetic described above, but
with this logical calculus, is given in Kneser 1922-23 (pp. 20-22); its form is used
in the ﬁrst volume of Grundlagen der Mathematik. It begins by separating lin-
ear proofs into proof threads (“Auﬂ¨osung in Beweisf¨aden”). Then variables are
eliminated in the resulting proof trees (“Ausschaltung der Variablen”), and the
numerical value of functional terms is determined by calculation (“Reduktion der
Funktionale”). That makes it possible to determine the truth or falsity of formulas
in the very last step. Here that is not done by turning formulas into disjunctive
normal form, but rather simply by truth-table computations (“Wahrheitsbewer-
tung”). Incorporating deﬁnition by recursion and proof by induction into these
considerations is fairly direct.
From a contemporary perspective this argument shows something very impor-
tant. If a formal theory contains a certain class of ﬁnitist functions, then it is
necessary to appeal to a wider class of functions in the consistency proof: an eval-
uation function is needed to determine uniformly the numerical value of terms, and
such a function is no longer in the given class. The formal system considered in
the above consistency proof includes primitive recursive arithmetic, and the con-
sistency proof goes beyond the means available in primitive recursive arithmetic.
At this early stage of proof theory, ﬁnitist mathematics is consequently stronger
than primitive recursive arithmetic. This assessment of the relative strength is
sustained, as we will see, throughout the development reported in this essay.
76Bernays 1927b, p.
10.
The German text is:
Die Wahl der Ausgangsformeln kann auf
sehr verschiedene Weise getroﬀen werden. Man hat sich besonders darum bem¨uht, mit einer
m¨oglichst geringen Zahl von Axiomen auszukommen, und hat hierin in der Tat die Grenze des
M¨oglichen erreicht. Den Zwecken der logischen Untersuchung wird aber besser gedient, wenn wir,
entsprechend wie in der Axiomatik der Geometrie, verschiedene Axiomengruppen voneinander
sondern, derart, daß jede von ihnen die Rolle einer logischen Operation zum Ausdruck bringt.
It is informative to compare these remarks with Hilbert’s in the Introduction to 1899, quoted in
section 2.2.

358
Wilfried Sieg
4.2
Hilbert’s Ansatz: the ε-substitution method
Ackermann reviewed in section II of his 1925 the above consistency proof; the sec-
tion is entitled The consistency proof before the addition of the transﬁnite axioms
(“Der Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweis vor Hinzunahme der transﬁniten Axiome”).
The very title reveals the restricted programmatic signiﬁcance of this result, as
it concerns a theory that is part of ﬁnitist mathematics and need not be secured
by a consistency proof. The truly expanding step that goes beyond the ﬁnitist
methods just described involves the treatment of quantiﬁers. Already in Hilbert’s
1922 we ﬁnd a brief indication of his Ansatz, which is elaborated in Kneser 1921–
22. Indeed, the treatment of quantiﬁers is just the ﬁrst of three steps that have to
be taken: the second concerns the general induction principle for number theory,
and the third an expansion of proof theoretic considerations to analysis.
Hilbert sketched in his Leipzig talk of September 1922, which was published as
Hilbert 1923, the consistency proof from section 4.1. However, the really dramatic
aspect of his proof theoretic discussion is the treatment of quantiﬁers with the
τ-function, the dual of the later ε-operator.
The logical function τ associates
with every predicate A(a) a particular object τa(A(a)) or simply τA. It satisﬁes
the transﬁnite axiom A(τA) →A(a), which expresses, according to Hilbert, “if a
predicate A holds for the object τA, then it holds for all objects a.” The τ-operator
allows the deﬁnition of the quantiﬁers:
(a)A(a) ↔A(τA)
(Ea)A(a) ↔A(τ(¬A))
Hilbert extends the consistency argument then to the “ﬁrst and simplest case” that
goes beyond the ﬁnitist system: this “Ansatz” will evolve into the ε-substitution
method. It is only in the Leipzig talk that Hilbert gave proof theory its prin-
cipled formulation and discussed its technical tools — for the ﬁrst time outside
of G¨ottingen. As far as analysis is concerned, Hilbert had taken as the formal
frame for its development ramiﬁed type theory with the axiom of reducibility in
1917–18*. In his Leipzig talk he considers a third-order formulation; appropriate
functionals (Funktionenfunktionen) allow him to prove (on pp. 189-191) i) the
least upper bound principle for sequences and sets of real numbers and ii) Zer-
melo’s choice principle for sets of sets of real numbers. He conjectures that the
consistency of the additional transﬁnite axioms can be patterned after that for τ.
He ends the paper with the remark:
Now the task remains of precisely carrying out the basic ideas I just
sketched; its solution completes the founding of analysis and prepares
the ground for the founding of set theory.77
In Supplement IV of the second volume of Grundlagen der Mathematik, Hilbert
and Bernays give a beautiful exposition of analysis and emphasize, correctly, that
77Hilbert 1923, p. 191. The German text is: Es bleibt nun noch die Aufgabe einer genauen
Ausf¨uhrung der soeben skizzierten Grundgedanken; mit ihrer L¨osung wird die Begr¨undung der
Analysis vollendet und die der Mengenlehre angebahnt sein

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
359
the formalisms for their “deductive treatment of analysis” were used in Hilbert’s
early lectures on proof theory and that they were described in Ackermann 1925.
The above concrete proof theoretic work was directly continued in Ackermann’s
thesis, on which Ackermann 1925 is based. The paper was submitted to Mathema-
tische Annalen on 30 March 1924 and published in early 1925.78 It starts out, as
I mentioned, with a concise review of the earlier considerations for quantiﬁer-free
systems. The ε-symbol had been substituted for the τ-symbol in 1923 as is clear
from Kneser 1922-23, and in Ackermann’s dissertation the ε-calculus as we know
it replaced the τ-calculus from 1922. The transﬁnite axiom of the ε-calculus is
obviously dual to the axiom for τ and is formulated in Ackermann 1925 in section
III entitled, “Die Widerspruchsfreiheit bei Hinzunahme der transﬁniten Axiome
und der h¨oheren Funktionstypen.” For number variables the crucial axiom is for-
mulated as A(a) →A(εA) and allows of course the deﬁnition of quantiﬁers:
(Ea)A(a) ↔A(εA)
(a)A(a) ↔A(ε(¬A))
The remaining transﬁnite axioms are adopted from Hilbert 1923. However, the
ε-symbol is actually characterized as the least-number operator, and the recursion
schema with just number variables is extended to a schema that permits also
function variables.
The connection to the mathematical development in Hilbert’s paper is ﬁnally
established in section IV, where Ackermann explores the “Tragweite” of the ax-
ioms. At ﬁrst it was believed that Ackermann had completed the task indicated
by Hilbert at the end of the Leipzig talk and had established not only the con-
sistency of full classical number theory but even of analysis.
However, a note
was added in proof (p. 9) that signiﬁcantly restricted the result; von Neumann
noted a mistake in Ackermann’s arguments. In his own paper Zur Hilbertschen
Beweistheorie, submitted on 29 July 1925, a consistency proof was given for a sys-
tem that covers, von Neumann asserts (p. 46), Russell’s mathematics without the
axiom of reducibility or Weyl’s system in Das Kontinuum. Ackermann corrected
his arguments and obtained an equivalent result; that corrected proof is discussed
in Hilbert 1927 and Bernays 1927a.79 (It is also the basis for the corresponding
presentation in the second volume of Hilbert & Bernays; see section 4.4 below.)
In his Bologna talk of 1928 Hilbert stated, in line with von Neumann’s observa-
tion, that the consistency of full number theory had been secured by the proofs of
Ackermann and von Neumann; according to Bernays in his preface to the second
volume of Grundlagen der Mathematik that belief was sustained until 1930.
A number of precise metamathematical problems were formulated in Hilbert’s
Bologna talk, among them the completeness question for ﬁrst-order logic, which
78In his lecture ¨Uber das Unendliche given on 4 June 1925 in M¨unster, Hilbert presented an
optimistic summary of the state of proof theoretic aﬀairs together with bold new considerations.
Even before this talk, Hilbert had turned his attention to issues beyond the consistency of number
theory and analysis, namely, the solution of the continuum problem.
79See van Heijenoort, p. 477 and p. 489, but also note 3 on p. 489 and the introductions to
these papers.

360
Wilfried Sieg
is presented in a new formulation suggested by the L¨owenheim Skolem Theorem.
The latter theorem also suggested, so it seems, that higher mathematical theo-
ries might not be syntactically complete. In any event, Hilbert’s Bologna address
shows most dramatically through its broad perspective and clear formulation of
open problems, how far mathematical logic had been moved in roughly a decade.
This is a remarkable achievement with impact not just on proof theory; the (in-)
completeness theorems, after all, are to be seen in this broader foundational en-
terprise.80
In terms of speciﬁcally proof theoretic results no striking progress was made, in
spite of the fact that most talented people had been working on the consistency
program. That state of aﬀairs had intrinsic reasons. In the preface to the ﬁrst
volume of Grundlagen der Mathematik, Bernays asserts that a presentation of
proof theoretic work had almost been completed in 1931. But, he continues, the
publication of papers by Herbrand and G¨odel produced a deeply changed situation
that resulted in an extension of the scope of the work and its division into two
volumes.
The eight chapters of the ﬁrst volume can be partitioned into three
groups: chapters 6 to 8 give reﬁned versions of results that had been obtained
in the 1920s, investigating the consistency problem and other metamathematical
questions for a variety of (sub) systems of number theory; chapters 3 to 5 develop
systematically the logical framework of ﬁrst-order logic (with identity); chapters
1 and 2 discuss the central foundational issues and the ﬁnitist standpoint in most
informative and enlightening ways. Let me start with a discussion of the central
issues as viewed in 1934.
4.3
Grundlagen, 1934
Chapter 1 begins with a general discussion of axiomatics, at the center of which
is a distinction between contentual and formal axiomatic theories. Contentual ax-
iomatic theories like Euclid’s geometry, Newton’s mechanics, and Clausius’ ther-
modynamics draw on experience for the introduction of their fundamental concepts
and principles, all of which are understood contentually. Formal axiomatic the-
ories like Hilbert’s axiomatization of geometry, by contrast, abstract away such
intuitive content. They begin with the assumption of a ﬁxed system of things (or
several such systems), which is delimited from the outset and constitutes a “do-
main of individuals for all predicates from which the statements of the theory are
built up.“ The existence of such a domain of individuals constitutes an “idealizing
assumption that joins the assumptions formulated in the axioms.”81 Hilbert and
80A remark indicating the depth of Dedekind’s continued inﬂuence: Hilbert formulated as
Problem I of his Bologna talk the consistency of the ε-axioms for function variables and com-
mented, “The solution of problem I justiﬁes also Dedekind’s ingenious considerations in his essay
Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen?”
81 Hilbert and Bernays 1934, pp. 1-2. The last quotation is part of this German text: In
der Voraussetzung einer solchen Totalit¨at des “Individuen-Bereiches” liegt — abgesehen von
den trivialen F¨allen, in denen eine Theorie es ohnehin nur mit einer endlichen, festbegrenzten
Gesamtheit von Dingen zu tun hat — eine idealisierende Annahme, die zu den durch die Axiome

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
361
Bernays refer to this approach as existential axiomatics. They clearly consider
formal axiomatics to be a sharpening of contentual axiomatics, but are also quite
explicit that the two types of axiomatics complement each other and are both
necessary.
The consistency of a formal axiomatic theory with a ﬁnite domain can be estab-
lished by exhibiting a model satisfying the axioms. However, for theories F with
inﬁnite domains consistency proofs present a special problem, because “reference
to non-mathematical objects cannot settle the question whether an inﬁnite man-
ifold exists; the question must be solved within mathematics itself.”82 One must
treat the consistency problem for such a theory F as a logical problem — from
a proof theoretic perspective. This involves formalizing the principles of logical
reasoning and proving that from F one cannot derive (with the logical principles)
both a formula and its negation. Proof theory need not prove the consistency of
every F; it suﬃces to ﬁnd a proof for a system F with a structure that is (i) sur-
veyable to make a consistency proof for the system plausible and (ii) rich enough
so that the existence of a model S for F guarantees the satisﬁability of axiom sys-
tems for branches of physics and geometry. Arithmetic (including number theory
and analysis) is considered to be such an F.
For a consistency argument to be foundationally signiﬁcant it must avoid the
idealizing existence assumptions made by formal axiomatic theories. But if a proof
theoretic justiﬁcation of arithmetic by elementary means were possible, might
it not also be possible to develop arithmetic directly, free from non-elementary
assumptions and thus not requiring any additional foundational justiﬁcation? The
answer to this question involves elementary presentations of parts of number theory
and formal algebra; these presentations serve at the same time to illuminate the
ﬁnitist standpoint.
Finitist deliberations take here their purest form, i.e., the
form of “thought experiments involving objects assumed to be concretely given.”83
The word ﬁnitist is intended to convey the idea that a consideration, a claim or
deﬁnition respects (i) that objects are representable, in principle, and (ii) that
processes are executable, in principle.84
A direct, elementary justiﬁcation for all of mathematics is not possible, Hilbert
and Bernays argue, because already in number theory and analysis one uses non-
ﬁnitist principles. While one might circumvent the use of such principles in number
formulierten Annahmen hinzutritt.
82L.c., p. 17. The German text is: Auf Grund dieser ¨Uberlegungen kommen wir zu der Einsicht,
daß die Frage nach der Existenz einer unendlichen Mannigfaltigkeit durch eine Berufung auf
außermathematische Objekte nicht entschieden werden kann, sondern innerhalb der Mathematik
selbst gel¨ost werden muß.
83L.c., p. 20. The German text is: Das Kennzeichnende f¨ur diesen methodischen Standpunkt
ist, daß die ¨Uberlegungen in der Form von Gedankenexperimenten an Gegenst¨anden angestellt
werden, die als konkret vorliegend angenommen werden.
84L.c., p. 32. The German text is: Im gleichen Sinne wollen wir von ﬁniten Begriﬀsbildungen
und Behauptungen sprechen, indem wir allemal mit dem Wort “ﬁnit” zum Ausdruck bringen, daß
die betreﬀende ¨Uberlegung, Behauptung oder Deﬁnition sich an die Grenzen der grunds¨atzlichen
Vorstellbarkeit von Objekten sowie der grunds¨atzlichen Ausf¨uhrbarkeit von Prozessen h¨alt und
sich somit im Rahmen konkreter Betrachtung vollzieht.

362
Wilfried Sieg
theory (as only the existence of the domain of integers is assumed), the case for
analysis is diﬀerent. There the objects of the domain are themselves inﬁnite sets
of integers, and the principle of the excluded middle is applied in this extended
domain. Thus one is led back to using ﬁnitist proof theory as a tool to secure
the consistency of mathematics. (This restriction is relaxed only at the end of the
second volume when “extensions of the methodological framework of proof theory”
are considered.) The ﬁrst stage of this project, the proof theoretic investigation of
appropriate logical formalisms, occupies chapters 3 through 5. These systems are
close to contemporary ones; they can be traced back to the lectures given in 1917–
18 and were presented also in Hilbert and Ackermann 1928. The second stage is
carried out in chapters 6 through 8 and involves the investigation of sub-systems
of ﬁrst-order number theory; there are three diﬀerent groups of such systems.
The ﬁrst group consists of weak fragments of number-theory that contain few,
if any, function symbols and extend predicate logic with equality by axioms for 0,
successor and <; some of the fragments involve quantiﬁer-free induction. Meta-
mathematical relations between them are explored, and independence as well as
consistency results are established.
The main technique for giving consistency
proofs is that discussed in section 4.1 above. However, since the formalisms con-
tain quantiﬁers, an additional procedure is required, namely a procedure that
assigns reducts, quantiﬁer-free formulas acting as witnesses, to formulas contain-
ing quantiﬁers. The method underlying this procedure is due to Herbrand and
Presburger. Consistency is inferred from results that involve the notion of veriﬁ-
ability, extending the notion of truth to formulas containing free variables, bound
variables, and recursively deﬁned function signs.85 In order to establish the con-
sistency of a formalism F, one proves that every formula not containing formula
variables is veriﬁable, if it is derivable in F. Since 0 ̸= 0 is not veriﬁable, it is not
derivable in F; thus, F is consistent.
The second group of subsystems of number theory contains formalisms arising
from the elementary calculus with free variables (the quantiﬁer free fragment of
the predicate calculus) through the addition of functions deﬁned by recursion.
Hilbert and Bernays discuss at the beginning of chapter 7 the formalization of the
deﬁnition principle for recursion, reminding the reader how they viewed recursive
deﬁnition of a function in their discussion of ﬁnitist number theory in chapter 1.
There they emphasize that by “function” they understand an intuitive instruction
(“anschauliche Anweisung”) on account of which a numeral is associated with a
given numeral, or a pair of numerals, or a triple . . .
of numerals.
The proof
method of complete induction is not considered as an “independent principle” but
85More precisely, letting A be a formula of the formalism F: (i) if A is a numeric formula,
it is veriﬁable if it is true; (ii) if A contains free numeric variables (but no formula variables
or bound variables), it is veriﬁable if one can show by ﬁnitist means that the substitution of
arbitrary numerals for variables (followed by the evaluation of all function-expressions and their
replacement through their numerical values) yields a true numeric formula; (iii) if A contains
bound variables but no formula variables, it is veriﬁable if its reduct is veriﬁable (according to
(i) and (ii)).

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
363
as a consequence that is gathered from the concrete build-up of numerals.86 Sim-
ilarly, deﬁnition by recursion is not viewed as an independent deﬁnition principle
but rather as “an agreement concerning an abbreviated description of certain con-
struction processes by means of which one obtains a numeral from one or several
given numerals.”87 These processes or procedures can be mimicked formally by the
introduction of function symbols together with recursion equations.88 They treat
in a ﬁrst step (“zun¨achst”) what they consider as the simplest schema of recur-
sion (and “restrict for the time being the notion of recursion to it”). That simplest
schema of recursion is the schema of what we (and they later on p. 326/331) call
primitive recursion, namely,
f(a, . . ., k, 0) = a(a, . . ., k),
f(a, . . ., k, n′) = b(a, . . ., k, n, f(a, . . ., k, n)).
a and b denote previously deﬁned functions and a, . . ., k, n are numerical variables.
What then is the formalization of the intuitive procedure associated with a recur-
sive deﬁnition that is formally reﬂected by the recursion schema for f? It is given
by a derivation — via the recursion equations and the axioms for identity — of the
equation f(a, . . ., k, z) = t(a, . . ., k) for each numeral z, where t is a term not con-
taining f. Then they argue that the value of f(a, . . ., k, z) can be determined for
each sequence of numerals a, . . ., k and conclude their considerations with: “Thus
we can completely mimick the recursive calculation procedure of ﬁnitist number
theory in our formalism by the deductive application of the recursion equations.”89
They then prove on pp. 298–300 a general Consistency Theorem: Let F be a
formalism extending the elementary calculus with free variables by veriﬁable ax-
ioms (that may contain recursively deﬁned functions whose deﬁning equations are
taken as axioms) and the schema of quantiﬁer-free induction, then every derivable
formula of F (without formula variables) is veriﬁable. This theorem is explicitly
taken to establish the consistency of a number of formalisms including in particu-
lar that of recursive number theory. Having formally developed the latter theory
to indicate the strength of this recursive treatment of number theory, they state:
86Hilbert and Bernays 1934, p. 25. The German text is: Wir haben es also hier nicht mit
einem selbst¨andigen Prinzip zu tun, sondern mit einer Folgerung, die wir aus dem konkreten
Aufbau der Ziﬀern entnehmen.
87Hilbert and Bernays 1934, p. 27. The German text is: Es handelt sich hier bei der Deﬁnition
durch Rekursion wiederum nicht um ein selbst¨andiges Deﬁnitionsprinzip, sondern die Rekursion
hat im Rahmen der elementaren Zahlentheorie lediglich die Bedeutung einer Vereinbarung ¨uber
eine abgek¨urzte Beschreibung gewisser Bildungsprozesse, durch die man aus einer oder mehreren
gegebenen Ziﬀern wieder eine Ziﬀer enth¨alt.
88Hilbert and Bernays 1934, p. 287. This is a translation of part of the following German text:
Dieses Verfahren [der Berechnung von Funktionswerten in der ﬁniten Zahlentheorie] k¨onnen wir
auch im Formalismus nachbilden, indem wir allgemein die Einf¨uhrung von Funktionszeichen in
Verbindung mit Rekursionsgleichungen zulassen.
89Hilbert and Bernays 1934, p. 292. The German text is: Somit k¨onnen wir das rekursive
Berechnungsverfahren der ﬁniten Zahlentheorie in unserem Formalismus durch die deduktive
Anwendung der Rekursionsgleichungen vollkommen nachbilden.

364
Wilfried Sieg
This recursive number theory is closely related to intuitive number the-
ory, as we have considered it in §2, because all of its formulas can be
given a ﬁnitist contentual interpretation. This contentual interpretabil-
ity follows from the veriﬁability of all derivable formulas of recursive
number theory, as we established it already. Indeed, in this area ver-
iﬁability has the character of a direct contentual interpretation, and
thus the proof of consistency could be obtained here so easily.
As we have a ﬁnitist consistency proof for recursive arithmetic, ﬁnitist mathematics
here goes beyond recursive arithmetic. Their notion of recursive number theory
was at ﬁrst, as I emphasized above, to involve only primitive recursions; so ﬁnitist
mathematics is stronger than primitive recursive arithmetic.
Indeed, after the
above remark they continue the discussion of the relationship between intuitive
and recursive number theory as follows:
Recursive number theory is diﬀerentiated from intuitive number theory
by its formal restrictions; its only method for forming concepts, apart
from explicit deﬁnitions, is the recursion schema, and its methods of
derivation are also ﬁrmly delimited.
However, without taking away from recursive number theory what is
the characteristic feature of its method, we can admit certain exten-
sions of the recursion schema as well as of the induction schema. We’ll
discuss these [extensions] now brieﬂy.
The extending formalisms involve the schema of nested recursion (“verschr¨ankte
Rekursion”) that allows in particular the deﬁnition of the Ackermann function;
they remark that their previous consistency results are extended to these proper
extensions of recursive number theory as well; thus, the bounds of ﬁnitist mathe-
matics are pushed still further.90
The third group of formalisms that are actually equivalent to full number theory
is investigated towards the end of chapter 7 and in chapter 8. The ﬁrst of these
90The two long quotations above are both found on p. 325/330 of Hilbert and Bernays 1934.
The remark concerning the ﬁnitist provability of the consistency of the extended formalisms is
on p. 325/330; more precisely, it is asserted there, all formulas (not containing formula variables)
that are provable in the extended formalisms are veriﬁable. Here is the ﬁrst German text:
Diese rekursive Zahlentheorie steht insofern der anschaulichen Zahlentheorie, wie wir sie im
§2 betrachtet haben, nahe, als ihre Formeln s¨amtlich einer ﬁniten inhaltlichen Deutung f¨ahig
sind.
Diese inhaltliche Deutbarkeit ergibt sich aus der bereits festgestelletn Veriﬁzierbarkeit
aller ableitbaren Formeln der rekursiven Zahlentheorie.
In der Tat hat in diesem Gebiet die
Veriﬁzierbarkeit den Charakter einer direkten inhaltlichen Interpretation, und der Nachweis der
Widerspruchsfreiheit war daher auch hier so leicht zu erbringen.
And here is the second passage:
Der Unterschied der rekursiven Zahlentheorie gegen¨uber der anschaulichen Zahlentheorie
besteht in ihrer formalen Gebundenheit; sie hat als einzige Methode der Begriﬀsbildung, außer
der expliziten Deﬁnition, das Rekursionsschema zur Verf¨ugung, und auch die Methoden der
Ableitung sind fest umgrenzt.
Allerdings k¨onnen wir, ohne der rekursiven Zahlentheorie das Charakteristische ihrer Methode
zu nehmen, gewisse Erweiterungen des Schemas der Rekursion sowie auch des Induktionsschemas
zulassen. Auf diese wollen wir noch kurz zu sprechen kommen.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
365
is the formalism of the axiom system (Z); call this formalism Z.
Hilbert and
Bernays comment that the techniques used in the consistency proofs for fragments
of number theory cannot be generalized to Z, as any reduction procedure for Z
would provide a decision procedure for Z and, thus, allow solving all number
theoretic problems. They leave the possibility of such a procedure as an open
problem (whose solution, if it exists, they view as a long way oﬀ) and focus on
examining whether Z provides the means for formalizing informal number theory.
With this end in mind, it is proved in chapter 8 that all recursive functions are
representable in Z. For this proof they establish three separate claims: (1) the least
number operator μ can be explicitly deﬁned in terms of Russell and Whitehead’s ι-
symbol; (2) any recursive deﬁnition can be explicitly deﬁned in Zμ, i.e., Z extended
by deﬁning axioms for the μ-operator; (3) the addition of the ι-rule to Z is a
conservative extension of Z.91 Volume I concludes with the remark that the above
results entail the consistency of Zμ relative to that of Z, but that none of the
results or methods considered so far suﬃce to show that Z is consistent.
4.4
Limited results for quantiﬁers
The consistency proofs in chapter 7.a) of the ﬁrst volume are given for quantiﬁer-
free systems. In the second volume, these theories are embedded in the system of
full predicate logic together with the ε-axioms in the form A(a) →A(εx.A(x)).
The ﬁrst crucial task is to eliminate all references to bound variables from proofs of
theorems that do not contain them; axioms used in these proofs must not contain
bound variables either. In the formulation of Hilbert and Bernays, the consistency
of a system of proper axioms relative to the predicate calculus together with the ε-
axioms is to be reduced to the consistency of the system relative to the elementary
calculus (with free variables).92 The consistency of the latter system is recognized
on account of a suitable ﬁnitist interpretation. Thus, it is emphasized, operating
with the ε-symbol can be viewed as “merely an auxiliary calculus, which is of
considerable advantage for many metamathematical considerations.”93
In the framework of the extended calculus bound variables are associated with
just ε-terms, as the quantiﬁers can be deﬁned. The initial elimination result is
91The second claim is ﬁrst established for primitive recursively deﬁned functions, but then
extended to the case of nested recursion; cf. Hilbert and Bernays 1934, p. 421/431. The latter
result is attributed to von Neumann and G¨odel. As to the general issues compare von Neumann’s
letter to G¨odel of 29 November 1930; the letter is reprinted and translated in volume V of G¨odel’s
Collected Works.
92Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p.
33.
Referring to the ﬁrst ε-theorem they write there:
Die Bedeutung dieses Theorems besteht ja darin, daß es die Frage der Widerspruchsfreiheit
eines Systems von eigentlichen Axiomen ohne gebundene Variablen bei Zugrundelegung des
Pr¨adikatenkalkuls und des ε-axioms zur¨uckf¨uhrt auf die seiner Widerspruchsfreiheit bei Zugrun-
delegung des elementaren Kalkuls mit freien Variablen.
93Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p. 13. The quotation is part of this German text: Es besteht ja
keineswegs die Notwendigkeit, das ε-symbol in den endg¨ultigen deduktiven Aufbau des logisch-
mathematischen Formalismus einzubeziehen. Vielmehr kann das Operieren mit dem ε-Symbol
als ein bloßer Hilfskalkul angesehen werden, der f¨ur viele metamathematische ¨Uberlegungen von
erheblichem Vorteil ist.

366
Wilfried Sieg
the First ε-Theorem: If the axioms A1, . . ., Ak
and the conclusion of a proof do
not contain bound individual variables or (free) formula variables, then all bound
variables can be eliminated from the proof.
The argument can be extended to
cover proofs of purely existential formulas, but the proofs yield then as their con-
clusion suitable disjunctions of instances of the endformula. Based on this exten-
sion a Consistency Theorem of a quite general character is proved: If the axioms
A1, . . ., Ak are veriﬁable, then (i) any provable formula containing at most free in-
dividual variables is veriﬁable, and (ii) for any provable, purely existential formula
(Ex1). . .(Exn)A(x1, . . ., xn) (with only the variables shown) there are variable-free
terms t1, . . ., tn such that A(t1, . . ., tn) is true. This theorem is applied to establish
the consistency (i) of Euclidean and Non-Euclidean geometry without continuity
assumptions in section 1.4, and (ii) of arithmetic with recursive deﬁnitions, but
only quantiﬁer-free induction in sections 2.1 and 2.2. In essence then, the consis-
tency theorem from Herbrand 1931 (cf. section 5.1) has been reestablished in a
subtly more general way: Hilbert and Bernays allow the introduction of a larger
class of recursive functions.94
Putting the result in the appropriate systematic
context, we see that the consistency proof of 1922 for the quantiﬁer-free system of
primitive recursive arithmetic has been extended to cover that system’s expansion
by full classical quantiﬁcation theory. Indeed, the extensions from 1934 are also
covered.
The remainder of chapter 2 discusses the diﬃculty of extending the elimina-
tion procedure in the proof of the ﬁrst ε-theorem to a system with full induction
and examines Hilbert’s original Ansatz for eliminating ε-symbols.95 The next two
chapters investigate the formalism for predicate logic and begin in chapter 3 with
a proof of the Second ε-Theorem: If the axioms and the conclusion of a proof
(in predicate logic with identity) do not contain ε-symbols, then all ε-symbols can
be eliminated from the proof. Herbrand’s theorem is obtained as well as a va-
riety of criteria for the refutability of formulas in predicate logic; proofs of the
L¨owenheim–Skolem theorem and of G¨odel’s completeness theorem are also given.
These considerations are used to establish results concerning the decision prob-
lem; solvable cases as well as reduction classes are discussed. In chapter 4 G¨odel’s
“arithmetization of metamathematics” is presented in great detail and applied to
obtain a fully formalized proof of the completeness theorem.
The completeness theorem can be taken as stating that the consistency of an
axiom system relative to the calculus of predicate logic coincides with satisﬁabil-
ity of the system by an arithmetic model. The formalized proof is intended to
94Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p. 52. That is made explicit in note 1 on page 52. Though this
larger class of functions (all general recursive ones?) allows a generalized notion of veriﬁability,
the latter would no longer guarantee a ﬁnitist consistency proof. They write there: Diese [all-
gemeine Anweisung zur Einf¨uhrung von Funktionszeichen in Herbrand 1931] ist insofern etwas
enger als die hier formulierte Anweisung, als Herbrand verlangt, daß das Verfahren der Wertbe-
stimmung sich, so wie bei den Schematen der rekursiven Deﬁnition, durch eine ﬁnite Deutung
der Axiome ergeben soll.
95As to the character of the original and the later version of the elimination method and
Ackermann’s work see pp. 21, 29-30, 92ﬀ, 121ﬀ, the note on p. 121, as well as Bernays’ preface.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
367
establish a kind of ﬁnitist equivalent to a consequence of this formulation, namely,
that the consistency relative to the predicate calculus guarantees consistency, as
it is formulated on p. 205, in an open contentual sense (“im unbegrenzten in-
haltlichen Sinne”). The ﬁnitist equivalent is formulated roughly as follows: if a
formula is irrefutable in predicate logic, then it remains irrefutable in “every con-
sistent number theoretic formalism,” i.e., in every formalism that is consistent and
remains consistent when the axioms of Zμ and veriﬁable formulas are added. That
result expresses a strong deductive closure of the predicate calculus, but only if
Zμ is consistent.96 Thus, there is another reason for establishing ﬁnitistically the
consistency of this number theoretic formalism.
5
INCOMPLETENESS
The second volume picks up where the ﬁrst left oﬀ. As we saw, it presents in
chapters 1 and 2 Hilbert’s proof theoretic “Ansatz” based on the ε-symbol as well
as related consistency proofs; this is the ﬁrst main topic. The methods used there
open a simple approach to Herbrand’s theorem, which is at the center of chapter
3. The discussion of the decision problem at the end of that chapter leads, after
a thorough discussion of the “method of the arithmetization of metamathemat-
ics,” in the next chapter to a proof theoretic sharpening of G¨odel’s completeness
theorem.
The remainder of the second volume of Grundlagen der Mathematik
is devoted to the second main topic, the examination of the fact, “which is the
basis for the necessity to expand the frame of the contentual inference methods,
which are admitted for proof theory, beyond the earlier delimitation of the ‘ﬁnitist
standpoint’.”97 Of course, G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems are at the center of
that discussion, and they were also at the center for the changed situation that
forced a rethinking of the proof theoretic enterprise. This rethinking took two
directions, (i) exploring the extent of ﬁnitist mathematics, and (ii) demarcating
the appropriate methodological standpoint for proof theory.
5.1
Changed situation
The consistency result in Herbrand 1931 took an additional step beyond Acker-
mann’s, as far as the very claim is concerned; at the time, it was the strongest
proof theoretic result established by ﬁnitist means. Comparing Ackermann’s result
with his own, Herbrand wrote to Bernays in a letter dated 7 April 1931:
96Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p.
253/263.
Here is the German text of which the quoted
remark is a part:
Das hiermit bewiesene Theorem hat allerdings seine Bedeutung als ein
Vollst¨andigkeitssatz,
d.h.
als Ausdruck einer Art von deduktiver Abgeschlossenheit des
Pr¨adikatenkalkuls, nur unter der Voraussetzung der Widerspruchsfreiheit des zahlentheoretischen
Formalismus.
97Bernays wrote in “Zur Einf¨uhrung” of the second volume of Grundlagen der Mathematik:
Das zweite Hauptthema bildet die Auseinandersetzung des Sachverhalts, auf Grund dessen sich
die Notwendigkeit ergeben hat, den Rahmen der f¨ur die Beweistheorie zugelassenen inhaltlichen
Schlußweisen gegen¨uber der vorherigen Abgrenzung des “ﬁniten Standpunktes” zu erweitern.

368
Wilfried Sieg
In my arithmetic the axiom of complete induction is restricted, but
one may use a variety of functions other than those that are deﬁned
by simple recursion: in this direction, it seems to me, that my theorem
goes a little farther than yours [i.e., Ackermann’s].
G¨odel formulated Herbrand’s central result in this beautiful and penetrating way:
“If we take a theory which is constructive in the sense that each existence assertion
made in the axioms is covered by a construction, and if we add to this theory the
non-constructive notion of existence and all the logical rules concerning it, e.g.,
the law of excluded middle, we shall never get into any contradiction.”98 Obvi-
ously, that formulation covers equally well the above result obtained by Hilbert and
Bernays in 1939. When Herbrand wrote his last paper 1931, he knew already of
G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems and von Neumann’s related conjecture. The lat-
ter had drawn the consequences of G¨odel’s results most sharply and dramatically:
“If there is a ﬁnitist consistency proof at all, then it can be formalized. Therefore,
G¨odel’s proof implies the impossibility of any [such] consistency proof.”99
Was this the end of the proof theoretic program? An answer to this question
required an answer to another question: What is ﬁnitist mathematics by means of
which the proof theoretic program was supposed to be carried out? There is, as I
described above, no sharp and clear answer to be found in Hilbert and Bernays’
work from the 1920s as to the upper limits. At the very start of Hilbert’s new
proof theoretic investigations, ﬁnitist considerations are extended beyond primitive
recursive arithmetic, and it is clear that ﬁnitist arguments make use only of proof
by induction and deﬁnition by recursion within a quantiﬁer-free framework. That
is clear also from the perspective of “outsiders” in the early 1930s, cf. Herbrand
1931 and G¨odel 1933. At issue was, and to some extent still is, what are the
recursion schemata that are ﬁnitistically allowed? Again, there is no sharp and
clear answer to be extracted (or to be expected) from the early work of Hilbert
and Bernays. However, one fact can be stated: von Neumann, Herbrand, G¨odel
in 1933 and even Hilbert and Bernays in 1934 and 1939 consider the Ackermann
function as a ﬁnitist one. I.e., the lower bound on the strength of ﬁnitist methods
is given by a proper extension of primitive recursive arithmetic. The issue of an
upper bound was much discussed in 1931 and subsequent years, when people tried
to assess the impact of the incompleteness theorems. I mentioned already von
Neumann’s immediate and decidedly pessimistic judgment.
G¨odel was much more cautious in his 1931 and also in his letter to Herbrand
dated 25 July 1931; in the former he asserted that the second incompleteness
theorem does not contradict Hilbert’s formalist viewpoint:
98G¨odel 1933, p. 52.
99Minutes of the meeting of the Vienna Circle on 15 January 1931; the minutes are found in
the Carnap Archives of the University of Pittsburgh. The German text is: Wenn es einen ﬁniten
Widerspruchsbeweis ¨uberhaupt gibt, dann l¨asst er sich auch formalisieren. Also involviert der
G¨odelsche Beweis die Unm¨oglichkeit eines Widerspruchsbeweises ¨uberhaupt. The minutes are
quoted more fully in Sieg 1988, note 11, and in Mancosu 1999a, pp. 36-37.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
369
. . .
this viewpoint presupposes only the existence of a consistency
proof in which nothing but ﬁnitist means of proof are used, and it is
conceivable that there exist ﬁnitist proofs that cannot be expressed in
the formalism of P (or of M or A).100
Both von Neumann and Herbrand argued in correspondence with G¨odel against
that position and conjectured that ﬁnitist arguments may be formalizable already
in elementary number theory (and if not there, then undoubtedly in analysis).
That would establish the limited reach of Hilbert’s ﬁnitist consistency program.101
What is the perspective Hilbert and Bernays took on these deliberations in volume
II of Grundlagen der Mathematik?
5.2
G¨odel’s theorems
Hilbert and Bernays’ discussion of the incompleteness theorems begins with a
thorough investigation of semantic paradoxes. This investigation does not try to
“solve” the paradoxes in the case of natural languages, but focuses on the ques-
tion under what conditions analogous situations can occur in the case of formalized
languages. These conditions are formulated quasi-axiomatically for deductive for-
malisms F taking for granted that there is a bijection between the expressions of
F and natural numbers, a “G¨odel-numbering.” The formalism F and the number-
ing are required to satisfy roughly two representability conditions: R1) primitive
recursive arithmetic is “contained in” F, and R2) the syntactic properties and
relations of F’s expressions, as well as the processes that can be carried out on
them, are given by primitive recursive predicates and functions.
For the consideration of the ﬁrst incompleteness theorem the second repre-
sentability condition is made more speciﬁc. It is now required that the substitution
function (yielding the number of the expression obtained from an expression with
number k, when every occurrence of the number variable a is replaced by a numeral
l) is given primitive recursively by a binary function s(k,l) and the proof predicate
by a binary relation B(m, n) (holding when m is the number of a sequence of for-
mulas that constitutes an F-derivation of the formula with number n). Consider,
as G¨odel did, the formula ¬B(m, s(a, a)); according to the ﬁrst representability
condition this is a formula of the formalism F and has a number, say p. Be-
cause of the deﬁning property of s(k, l), the value of s(p,p) is then the number q
100G¨odel 1931, p. 194. The German text is: Es sei ausdr¨ucklich bemerkt, daß Satz XI (und
die entsprechenden Resultate ¨uber M, A) in keinem Widerspruch zum Hilbertschen formalisti-
schen Standpunkt stehen. Denn dieser setzt nur die Existenz eines mit ﬁniten Mitteln gef¨uhrten
Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweises voraus und es w¨are denkbar, daß es ﬁnite Beweise gibt, die sich
in P (bzw. M, A) nicht darstellen lassen. The formalism P is that of Principia Mathematica, M
is that of von Neumann’s set theory, and A that of analysis. The letter to Herbrand is found in
volume V of G¨odel’s Collected Works.
101That discussion in their correspondence with G¨odel is described in Sieg 2005. There is also
an informative letter of Herbrand to his friend Claude Chevalley; the letter was written on 3
December 1930, when Herbrand was in Berlin working on proof theory and discussing G¨odel’s
theorems with von Neumann. (The letter is presented and analyzed in the Appendix of Sieg
1994.)

370
Wilfried Sieg
of the formula ¬B(m, s(p, p)). The equation s(p, p) = q is provable in F; thus,
¬B(m, s(p, p)) is actually equivalent to ¬B(m, q) and expresses that “the formula
with number q is not provable in F.” As q is the number of ¬B(m, s(p, p)), this
formula consequently expresses (via the equivalence) its own underivability. The
argument adapted from that for the liar paradox leads, assuming that this formula
is provable, directly to a contradiction in F. But instead of encountering a paradox
one infers that the formula is not provable, if the formalism F is consistent.
Hilbert and Bernays discuss — following G¨odel and assuming the ω-consistency
of F — the unprovability of the sentence ¬(x)¬B(x, q). Then they establish the
Rosser version of the ﬁrst incompleteness theorem, i.e., the independence of a for-
mula R from F assuming just F’s consistency. Thus, a “sharpened version” of the
theorem can be formulated for deductive formalisms satisfying certain conditions:
One can always determine a unary primitive recursive function f, such that the
equation f(m) = 0 is not provable in F, while for each numeral l the equation
f(l) = 0 is true and provable in F; neither the formula (x)f(x) = 0 nor its nega-
tion is provable in F.102 This sharpened version of the theorem asserts that every
suﬃciently expressive, sharply delimited, and consistent formalism is deductively
incomplete.
For a formalism F that is consistent and satisﬁes the restrictive conditions, the
proof of the ﬁrst incompleteness theorem shows the formula ¬B(m, q) to be un-
provable. However, it also shows that the sentence ¬B(m, q) holds and is provable
in F, for each numeral m. The second incompleteness theorem is obtained by for-
malizing these considerations, i.e. by proving in F the formula ¬B(m, q) from the
formal expression C of F’s consistency. That is possible, however, only if F sat-
isﬁes additional conditions, the so-called derivability conditions. The formalized
argument makes use of the representability conditions R1) and R2). The second
condition now requires also that there is a unary primitive recursive function e,
which when applied to the number n of a formula yields as its value the number
of the negation of that formula. The derivability conditions are formulated as fol-
lows: D1) If there is a derivation of a formula with number l from a formula with
number k, then the formula (Ex)B(x, k) →(Ex)B(x, l) is provable in F; D2) The
formula (Ex)B(x, e(k)) →(Ex)B(x, e(s(k, l))) is provable in F; D3) If f(m) is a
primitive recursive term with m as its only variable and if r is the number of the
equation f(a) = 0, then the formula f(m) = 0 →(Ex)B(x, s(r, m)) is provable in
F. Consistency is formally expressed by (Ex)B(x, n) →¬(Ex)B(x, e(n)); starting
with that formula C as an assumption, the formula ¬B(m, q) is obtained in F by
a rather direct argument. So, in case the formalism F is consistent, no formalized
proof of consistency, i.e., no derivation of the formula C can exist in F.103
There are two brief remarks with which I want to complement this metamath-
ematical discussion of the incompleteness theorems. The ﬁrst simply states that
verifying the representability conditions and the derivability conditions is the cen-
tral mathematical work that has to be done; Hilbert and Bernays accomplish this
102Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p.279/288.
103Hilbert and Bernays 1939, pp. 286-288/296-297.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
371
for the formalisms Zμ and Z.104
Thus, the second volume of Grundlagen der
Mathematik contains the ﬁrst full argument for the second incompleteness theo-
rem; after all, G¨odel’s paper contains only a minimal sketch of a proof. However,
it has to be added — and that is the second remark — that the considerations
are not fully satisfactory for a general formulation of the theorems, as there is no
argument given why deductive formalisms should satisfy the particular restrictive
conditions on their syntax. (This added observation points to one of the general
methodological issues discussed brieﬂy at the end of section 5.3.)
Existential formal axiomatics emerged in the second half of the 19th century
and found its remarkable expression in 1899 through Hilbert’s Grundlagen der
Geometrie; its existential assumption constituted the really pressing issue for the
various Hilbert programs during the period from 1899 to 1934, the date of the
publication of the ﬁrst volume of Grundlagen der Mathematik. The ﬁnitist consis-
tency program began to be pursued in 1922 and is the intellectual thread holding
the investigations in both volumes together. The ultimate goal of proof theoretic
investigations, as Hilbert formulated it in the preface to volume I, is to recog-
nize the usual methods of mathematics, without exception, as consistent. Hilbert
continued,
With respect to this goal I would like to emphasize the following: the
view, which temporarily arose and maintained that certain recent re-
sults of G¨odel imply the infeasibility of my program, has been shown
to be erroneous.105
How is the program aﬀected by those results? Is it indeed the case, as Hilbert
expressed it also in that preface of 1934, that G¨odel’s theorems just force proof
theorists to exploit the ﬁnitist standpoint in a sharper way?
5.3
Completeness and bounds on ﬁnitism
The second question is raised prima facie through the second incompleteness the-
orem. However, Hilbert and Bernays discuss also the eﬀect of the ﬁrst incomplete-
ness theorem and ask explicitly, whether the deductive completeness of formalisms
is a necessary feature for the consistency program to make sense. They touched
on this very issue already in pre-G¨odel publications: Hilbert in his Bologna talk
of 1928, and Bernays in his penetrating article 1930. Hilbert formulated in his
talk the question of the syntactic completeness for number theory and analysis as
Problem IV; he concluded the discussion by suggesting that “in h¨oheren Gebieten”
(higher than number theory) it is thinkable that a system of axioms could be con-
sistently extended by a statement S, but also by its negation ¬S; the acceptance of
104The considerations for the former systems start on p. 293/306, for the latter on p. 324/337.
105Hilbert and Bernays 1934, in Hilbert’s “Zur Einf¨uhrung”. The German text is: Im Hinblick
auf dieses Ziel m¨ochte ich hervorheben, daß die zeitweilig aufgekommene Meinung, aus gewissen
neueren Ergebnissen von G¨odel folge die Undurchf¨uhrbarkeit meiner Beweistheorie, als irrt¨umlich
erwiesen ist.

372
Wilfried Sieg
one of the statements is then to be justiﬁed by “systematic advantages (principle
of the permanence of laws, possibilities of further developments etc.).”106
Hilbert conjectured that number theory is deductively complete. That is reit-
erated in Bernays’ 1930 and followed by the remark that “the problem of a real
proof for this is completely unresolved.” The problem becomes even more diﬃcult,
Bernays continues, when we consider systems for analysis or set theory. However,
this “Problematik” is not to be taken as an objection against the standpoint pre-
sented:
We only have to realize that the [syntactic] formalism of statements and
proofs we use to represent our conceptions does not coincide with the
[mathematical] formalism of the structure we intend in our thinking.
The [syntactic] formalism suﬃces to formulate our ideas of inﬁnite
manifolds and to draw the logical consequences from them, but in
general it [the syntactic formalism] cannot combinatorially generate
the manifold as it were out of itself.107
That is also the central point in the general discussion of the ﬁrst incompleteness
theorem. Indeed, Hilbert and Bernays emphasize that in formulating the problems
and goals of proof theory they avoided from the beginning “to introduce the idea
of a total system for mathematics with a philosophically principled signiﬁcance.“
It suﬃces to characterize the actual systematic structure of analysis and set the-
ory in such a way that it provides an appropriate frame for (the reducibility of)
the geometric and physical disciplines.108 That point was already emphasized in
section 3.3.
From these reﬂective remarks it follows that the ﬁrst incompleteness theorem
for the central formalisms F (of number theory, analysis, and set theory) does not
directly undermine Hilbert’s program. It raises nevertheless in its sharpened form
a peculiar issue: any ﬁnitist consistency proof for F would yield a ﬁnitist proof
106 Hilbert 1930, p. 6. The German text is: In h¨oheren Gebieten w¨are der Fall der Wider-
spruchsfreiheit von S und der von ¬S denkbar; alsdann ist die Annahme einer der beiden Aus-
sagen S, ¬S als Axiom durch systematische Vorz¨uge (Prinzip der Permanenz von Gesetzen,
weitere Aufbaum¨oglichkeiten u.s.w.) zu rechtfertigen. This paragraph does not appear in the
original proceedings of the Bologna Congress in 1928.
107Bernays 1930, p. 59. The German text is: Wir m¨ussen uns nur gegenw¨artig halten, daß der
Formalismus der S¨atze und Beweise, mit denen wir unsere Ideenbildung zur Darstellung bringen,
nicht zusammenf¨allt mit dem Formalismus derjenigen Struktur, die wir in der Gedankenbildung
intendieren. Der Formalismus reicht aus, um unsere Ideen von unendlichen Mannigfaltigkeiten zu
formulieren und aus diesen die logischen Konsequenzen zu ziehen, aber er vermag im allgemeinen
nicht, die Mannigfaltigkeit gleichsam aus sich kombinatorisch zu erzeugen.
108Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p. 280/289. The extended German text is: Wir haben in un-
serer Darstellung der Ausgangsproblematik und der Zielsetzung der Beweistheorie von vornherein
vermieden, den Gedanken eines Totalsystems der Mathematik in einer philosophisch prinzipiell-
len Bedeutung einzuf¨uhren, vielmehr uns begn¨ugt, die tats¨achlich vorhandene Systematik der
Analysis und Mengenlehre als eine solche zu charakterisieren, die einen geeigneten Rahmen f¨ur
die Einordnung der geometrischen und physikalischen Disziplinen bildet. Diesem Zweck kann ein
Formalismus auch entsprechen, ohne die Eigenschaft der vollen deduktiven Abgeschlossenheit zu
besitzen.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
373
of a statement in recursive number theory — that is not provable in F. Finitist
methods would thus go beyond those of analysis and set theory, even for the proof
of number theoretic statements. (That is of course the situation G¨odel contem-
plated in his remarks, when claiming that his results don’t contradict Hilbert’s
standpoint; see section 5.1.) This is a “paradoxical” situation, in particular, as
Hilbert and Bernays quite unambiguously state in the ﬁrst volume (on p. 42),
“ﬁnitist methods are included in the usual arithmetic.” Consequently, even the
ﬁrst theorem forces us to address two general tasks, namely, (i) exploring the ex-
tent of ﬁnitist methods, and (ii) demarcating appropriately the methodological
standpoint for proof theory.
Tasks (i) and (ii) are usually associated with the second incompleteness theorem,
which, as emphasized in section 5.2, allows us to infer directly and sharply that
a ﬁnitist consistency proof for a formalism F (satisfying the representability and
derivability conditions) cannot be carried out in F. Hilbert and Bernays explore
the extent of ﬁnitist methods in chapter 5.a) by ﬁrst trying to answer the question,
in which formalism their various ﬁnitist investigations can actually be carried out.
The immediate claim is that most considerations can be formalized, perhaps with
a great deal of eﬀort, already in primitive recursive arithmetic. But then they
assert: “At various places this formalism is admittedly no longer suﬃcient for the
desired formalization. However, in each of these cases the formalization is possible
in (Zμ).”109 They point to the more general recursion principles from chapter 7 of
the ﬁrst volume as an example of “procedures of ﬁnitist mathematics” that cannot
be captured in primitive recursive arithmetic, but can be formalized in Zμ.
In the remainder of chapter 5.3.a) they discuss “certain other typical cases,” in
which the boundaries of primitive recursive arithmetic are too narrow to allow a
formalization of their prior ﬁnitist investigations. There is, ﬁrst of all, the issue
of an evaluation function that is needed for the consistency proof of primitive
recursive arithmetic (already in volume I), but cannot be deﬁned by primitive
recursion (p.
341/355).
Secondly, there is the general concept of a calculable
function (p. 341/356). That concept is used (p. 189/198) to formulate a sharpened
notion of satisﬁability, i.e. eﬀective satisﬁability, in their treatment of solvable
cases of the decision problem. Thirdly, they discuss (p. 344/358) the principle of
induction for universally quantiﬁed formulas used in consistency proofs. The issue
surrounding this principle is settled metamathematically, as we know, by later
proof theoretic work: the system of elementary number theory with this induction
principle is conservative over recursive arithmetic, whether in the narrow or wider
109Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p. 340/354. The extended German text is: An verschiedenen
Stellen ist freilich dieser Formalismus [der rekursiven Zahlentheorie mit nur primitiver Rekur-
sion, WS] nicht mehr f¨ur die gew¨unschte Formalisierung ausreichend.
Doch zeigt sich dann
jedesmal die M¨oglichkeit der Formalisierung in (Zμ). Gewisse ¨uber die rekursive Zahlentheorie
(im urspr¨unglichen Sinne) hinausgehende Verfahren der ﬁniten Mathematik haben wir bereits
im §7 besprochen, n¨amlich die Einf¨uhrung von Funktionen durch verschr¨ankte Rekursionen und
die allgemeineren Induktionsschemata. Dabei erw¨ahnten wir auch die Formalisierbarkeit dieser
Rekursions- und Induktionsschemata im vollen zahlentheoretischen Formalismus.

374
Wilfried Sieg
sense.110
As to the second issue (eﬀective satisﬁability), some remarks concerning Sup-
plement II are relevant here, because the notion of a calculable function has to be
sharpened in such a way as to be formalizable. The presentation of the negative
solution of the decision problem in supplement II is preceded by an analysis of the
concept “reckonable function”, i.e., of a function whose values can be calculated
according to elementary rules. The latter rather vague notion is sharpened in a way
that is methodologically very similar to their analysis of the incompleteness the-
orems, namely, by formulating recursiveness conditions for deductive formalisms
that allow equational reasoning. The central condition requires the proof predicate
to be primitive recursive. It is then shown that the functions calculable in for-
malisms satisfying these conditions are exactly the general recursive ones. Though
their analysis is not fully satisfactory for the reason mentioned in section 5.2, it is
nevertheless a major and concluding step for the analysis of eﬀectively calculable
functions as pursued in the mid-1930s by G¨odel, Church, Kleene, and others. It
should be emphasized that Hilbert and Bernays are perfectly clear about one fact,
namely, that this class of functions goes beyond the class of functions introduced
in Herbrand’s 1931 by the axioms of his “Groupe C”. Indeed, they write:
General instructions for the introduction of new function symbols were
given by Herbrand in his paper [1931, WS] . . . (“Groupe C”). These
are somewhat narrower than the ones formulated here inasmuch as
Herbrand requires that the procedure for determining values [of func-
tions] is to follow from a ﬁnitist interpretation of the axioms, as is the
case for the schemata of recursive deﬁnitions.111
So it is also here quite clear that Hilbert and Bernays view Herbrand’s procedure
of introducing function symbols as a deﬁnitely ﬁnitist one; recall that Herbrand
mentions explicitly that a symbol for the Ackermann function can be introduced
in this way.
5.4
Methodological frame
The careful re-examination of their own proof theoretic practice leads Hilbert and
Bernays to the conclusion that some ﬁnitist considerations go beyond primitive
recursive arithmetic, but can be formally captured in Zμ; most of this was pointed
out already in volume I. It is at exactly this point that the second incompleteness
theorem provides, as the title of Chapter 5 states, the “reason for extending the
methodological frame for proof theory.” Already in the transition from Chapter
110See Sieg 1991, section 2.1 and references there to work by Charles Parsons.
111Here is the German text: Eine allgemeine Anweisung zur Einf¨uhrung neuer Funktionszeichen
durch Axiome wurde von Herbrand in seiner Abhandlung [1931, WS]. . . gegeben (“Groupe C”).
Diese ist insofern etwas enger als die hier formulierte Anweisung, als Herbrand verlangt, daß das
Verfahren der Wertbestimmung sich, so wie bei den Schematen der rekursiven Deﬁnition, durch
eine ﬁnite Deutung der Axiome ergeben soll. This is found in note 2 on p. 52 (of the second
volume).

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
375
4 to Chapter 5, Hilbert and Bernays state speciﬁcally that consequences of the
theorem force us to view the domain of the contentual inference methods used
for the investigations of proof theory more broadly “than it corresponds to our
development of the ﬁnitist standpoint so far.”112
The question is, whether there are any methods that can still be called properly
“ﬁnitist” and yet go beyond Zμ. Hilbert and Bernays argue that this is not a
precise question, as “ﬁnitist” is not a sharply delimited notion, but rather indi-
cates methodological guidelines that enable us to recognize some considerations as
deﬁnitely ﬁnitist and others as deﬁnitely non-ﬁnitist. The limits of ﬁnitist consid-
erations are to be “loosened”; two possibilities for such loosenings are considered
and quickly seen to be conservative.113 Which further loosening is “admissible,
if we want to adhere to the fundamental tendencies of proof theory?” Against
this background two results, then quite recent, are examined: the reduction of
classical arithmetic Z to the system Z of arithmetic with just minimal logic, and
Gentzen’s consistency proof for a version of Z (and thus of Z) using a special form
of transﬁnite induction.
The reductive result Hilbert and Bernays formulate is a slightly stronger one
than the one obtained by G¨odel and, independently, by Gentzen. The proof show-
ing that Z is consistent relative to Z is an elementary ﬁnitist one.
Thus, the
obstacle for obtaining a ﬁnitist consistency proof for Z does not lie in the fact that
it contains the typically non-ﬁnitist logical principles like tertium non datur! The
obstacle appears already when one tries to give a ﬁnitist consistency proof for Z.
The consistency of Z would be established on the basis of any assumptions, “which
suﬃce to give a verifying interpretation of the restricted formalism.”114 Such a con-
tentual veriﬁcation, based on interpretations of Kolmogoroﬀand Heyting, is then
examined with the conclusion that it involves the intuitionistic understanding of
negation as absurdity. In using the underlying contentual concept of consequence,
it is claimed, “we are totally turning away from Hilbert’s methodological ideas for
proof theory.”115 That is consonant with the view expressed in the ﬁrst volume
112Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p.
253/263.
The German text is: Dieser Umstand [daß die
bisherigen Methoden nicht zum Nachweis der Konsistenz des vollen zahlentheoretischen Formal-
ismus ausreichen, WS] . . .
ﬁndet nun eine grunds¨atzliche Erkl¨arung durch ein Theorem von
G¨odel ¨uber deduktive Formalismen, f¨ur welches der zahlentheoretische Formalismus einen ersten
Anwendungsfall bildet und dessen Konsequenzen uns dazu n¨otigen, den Bereich der inhaltlichen
Schlußweisen, die wir f¨ur die ¨Uberlegungen der Beweistheorie verwenden, weiter zu fassen, als es
unserer bisherigen Durchf¨uhrung des ﬁniten Standpunktes entspricht.
113In the context of this discussion, on p. 348/362, a very concise explication of “Begriﬀder
ﬁniten Aussage” is given that reﬂects faithfully the informal considerations on which I have been
reporting.
114Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p.
357/371.
That point is reemphasized after the reductive
argument has been completed. The German text there is: Stellen wir uns andererseits auf einen
inhaltlichen Standpunkt, von dem aus die formalen Ableitungen in (Z) als Darstellung richtiger
inhaltlicher ¨Uberlegungen deutbar sind, so ist f¨ur diesen auf Grund der festgestellten Beziehung
zwischen den Formalismen (Z) und (Z) die Widerspruchsfreiheit des Systems (Z) ersichtlich.
115Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p. 358/372. The fuller German text is: Jedoch entfernen wir uns
mit dem inhaltlichen Folgerungsbegriﬀtotal von Hilberts methodischen Gedanken der Beweis-
theorie, . . .

376
Wilfried Sieg
(p. 43) that intuitionism is a proper extension of ﬁnitist mathematics (in sharp
contrast to the earlier perspective that was discussed in the second half of section
3.3). Bernays expressed that view also in contemporaneous papers and in many
later comments, perhaps most dramatically in his article 1967 on Hilbert, where
(on p. 502) the above relative consistency proof for Z is seen as the reason for the
recognition “that intuitionistic reasoning is not identical with ﬁnitist reasoning,
contrary to the prevailing views at the time.”
The question is raised, whether — in a proof of the consistency of Z — the
use of absurdity can be avoided, as well as the appeal to an interpretation of
the formalism (viewed in contrast to its direct proof theoretic examination). It
is claimed that Gentzen’s consistency proof addresses both these issues. After a
thorough discussion of the details of the system of ordinal notation (for ordinals
less than the ﬁrst epsilon number) and the justiﬁcation of the principle of transﬁ-
nite induction, but only the briefest indication of the structure of Gentzen’s proof,
the main body of the ﬁrst edition of the book concludes with some extremely gen-
eral remarks about the signiﬁcance of that proof: it provides a perspective for the
proof theoretic investigation also of stronger formalisms, when one clearly has to
countenance the use of larger and larger ordinals. The volume concludes with the
sentence: “If this perspective should prove its value, then Gentzen’s consistency
proof would open a new phase of proof theory.” In this way, it seems, Bernays
sees Gentzen’s approach as overcoming “the temporary ﬁasco of proof theory”
he discussed in the introduction to volume II and attributed to “. . .
exagger-
ated methodological demands put on the theory.” No explicit ﬁnal and deﬁnitive
judgment on the methodologically appropriate character of Gentzen’s consistency
proof is articulated in the ﬁrst edition of the book. However, in the introduction
to the second edition Bernays states that the transﬁnite induction principle used
in it is “a non-ﬁnitist tool.”
In the introduction of the ﬁrst edition and the detailed discussion sketched here,
some see an ambiguity in Hilbert and Bernays’ view as to whether the extension of
the ﬁnitist standpoint necessitated by the incompleteness theorems is essentially
still the ﬁnitist standpoint as articulated in the ﬁrst two chapters of volume I or
whether it is a proper extension compatible with the broader strategic consider-
ations underlying proof theory. I think the ambiguity, if it is there at all, should
be resolved in the latter sense; after all, the considerations in Chapter 5.5 come
under the heading “Transcending the former methodological standpoint of proof
theory. Consistency proofs for the full number theoretic formalism.” One just has
to distinguish very carefully, as Bernays does, between the two diﬀerent tasks I
described at the very beginning of this section: (i) exploring the extent of ﬁnitist
mathematics, and (ii) demarcating the appropriate methodological standpoint for
proof theory.
However, there is not even a broad demarcation of a new, wider methodological
standpoint for proof theory; a reason for this lack is perhaps implicit in the remarks
connecting the consistency proof for Z relative to intuitionistic arithmetic with
Gentzen’s consistency proof (p. 359/372).
It is claimed, ﬁrst of all, that it is

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
377
“unsatisfactory from the standpoint of proof theory” to have a consistency proof
for Z that “rests mainly on an interpretation of a formalism.”
It is observed,
secondly, that the only method of going beyond the formalism Z has been the
formulation of truth deﬁnitions: a classical truth deﬁnition was given for Z, and
the formalization of the consistency proof based on an intuitionistic interpretation
would amount to using a truth deﬁnition. Thirdly and ﬁnally, it is argued that a
consistency proof is desirable that rests on “the direct treatment of the formalism
itself;” that is seen in analogy to obtaining the consistency of (primitive) recursive
arithmetic, where Hilbert and Bernays were not satisﬁed with the possibility of
a ﬁnitist interpretation, but rather convinced themselves of the consistency by
speciﬁc proof theoretic methods. Where in this discussion is even an opening for
a broader demarcation?
Bernays, in the “Nachtrag” to his 1930, reﬂects on these issues and indicates, in
particular, that the epistemological perspective that was underlying proof theory
became problematic. Referring to his own essay he writes:
. . . the sharp distinction between what is intuitive and what is not, as
it is used in the treatment of the problem of the inﬁnite, apparently
cannot be drawn so strictly, and the reﬂections on the formation of
mathematical ideas still need to be worked out in more detail in this
respect. Various considerations for this are contained in the following
essays.116
Some indications of a general direction for philosophical reﬂections are indeed
contained in the essays reprinted in Bernays 1976, but also in an essay that is not
reprinted there, namely, Bernays 1954. There he envisions the appeal to what he
calls sharpened axiomatics (versch¨arfte Axiomatik) and, opposing it to existential
axiomatics, formulates as a minimal requirement that “the objects [making up
the intended model of the theory] are not taken from a domain that is thought
as being already given, but are rather constituted by generative processes.”117
116Bernays 1976, p. 61. The German text is: . . . die scharfe Unterscheidung des Anschaulichen
und des Nicht-Anschaulichen, wie sie bei der Behandlung des Problems des Unendlichen ange-
wandt wird, ist anscheined nicht so strikt durchf¨uhrbar, und die Betrachtung der mathematischen
Ideenbildung bedarf wohl in dieser Hinsicht noch der n¨aheren Ausarbeitung. F¨ur eine solche sind
in den folgenden Abhandlungen verschiedene ¨Uberlegungen enthalten. The “folgenden Abhand-
lungen” are referring, obviously, to the essays in Bernays 1976.
117Bernays 1954, pp.
11-12.
The German text is: Die Mindest-Anforderung an eine ver-
sch¨arfte Axiomatik ist die, dass die Gegenst¨ande nicht einem als vorg¨angig gedachten Bereich
entnommen werden, sondern durch Erzeugungsprozesse konstituiert werden. Bernays continues
with a methodologically important remark: Es kann aber dabei die Meinung sein, dass durch
diese Erzeugungsprozesse der Umkreis der Gegenst¨ande determiniert ist; bei dieser Auﬀassung
erh¨alt das tertium non datur seine Motivierung.
In der Tat kann Oﬀenheit eines Bereiches
in zweierlei Sinn verstanden werden, einmal nur so, dass die Konstruktionsprozesse ¨uber jeden
einzelnen Gegenstand hinausf¨uhren, und andererseits in dem Sinne, dass der resultierende Be-
reich ¨uberhaupt nicht eine mathematisch bestimmte Mannigfaltigkeit darstellt. Je nachdem die
Zahlenreihe in dem erstgenannten oder in dem zweiten Sinne aufgefasst wird, hat man die An-
erkennung des tertium non datur in bezug auf die Zahlen oder den intuitionistischen Standpunkt.
Bei dem ﬁniten Standpunkt kommt noch die Anforderung hinzu, dass die ¨Uberlegungen an Hand

378
Wilfried Sieg
There is no indication in that paper or in other writings what kind of generative
processes should be considered, and why that particular feature of domains should
play a distinctive foundational role. Contemporary proof theoretic investigations
give such indications.
6
OUTLOOK BEYOND 1939
What Ackermann formulated in his review of just the ﬁrst volume of Grundla-
gen der Mathematik, holds even more for the complete two-volume work, namely,
that it “is to be viewed in line with the great publications of Frege, Peano, and
Russell-Whitehead.” In contrast to the other works, these two volumes synthe-
size contemporaneous research and continue to have a deep eﬀect on research in
mathematical logic and proof theory.118
Ever since the G¨odel-Gentzen reduction of classical arithmetic to its intuition-
istic version was obtained in 1932, foundational reductions have been pursued.
We have been able to establish the consistency of strong subsystems of analy-
sis, respectively of weak subsystems of set theory. These consistency results have
been achieved relative to constructive theories (like theories of constructive num-
ber classes and Martin-L¨of type theory) or relative to intuitionistic number theory
together with transﬁnite induction for long initial segments of the second number
class. Classical analysis as presented in Supplement IV of Hilbert and Bernays
can easily be carried out in the theory (Π1
1 −CA)↾, which is consistent relative to
the intuitionistic theory of ﬁnite number classes.119
While such foundational reductions were being pursued, it was also becoming
clear through reﬁned mathematical investigations that most of classical analysis
can be carried out in (Π0
1 −CA)↾or, what Kreisel called, the theory of arithmetic
properties. This theory is like (Π1
1 −CA)↾, except that the comprehension prin-
ciple is restricted essentially to arithmetic formulas; it is a conservative extension
of (Z) and, thus, actually consistent relative to the system Z. The program of
Reverse Mathematics, initiated by H. Friedman and S. Simpson, has grown a sort
of Kroneckerian oﬀshoot that allows developing substantial parts of analysis and
algebra already in conservative extensions of primitive recursive arithmetic and
even weaker theories, like F. Ferreiras’ feasible analysis. As these conservation
results mostly hold also for Π0
2-sentences one achieves computational reductions:
der Betrachtung von endlichen Konﬁgurationen verlaufen, somit insbesondere Annahmen in der
Form allgemeiner S¨atze ausgeschlossen werden.
118Kreisel’s Survey of proof theory gives a most interesting, albeit somewhat idiosyncratic per-
spective. Proof theoretic investigations in Gentzen-style are presented by Schwichtenberg, Fe-
ferman in Buchholz e.a., and of course in the textbooks by Sch¨utte, Takeuti, and Pohlers. The
constructive understanding of formalisms via (G¨odel’s Dialectica) interpretation is presented in
Troelstra, and surveyed in Avigad and Feferman. Other constructive approaches were initiated
through Martin-L¨of’s type theory and Myhill’s constructive set theory.
119(Π1
1 −CA)↾is the subsystem of second-order arithmetic with the comprehension principle for
formulas of the form (X)φ(X), where the matrix φ is purely arithmetic, and with the induction
principle formulated as a second-order axiom, not as a schema for all formulas of the theory.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
379
proofs of such statements yield Skolem functions that lie in particular classes of
calculable functions, and proof theoretic tools are used to extract computational
information. Kohlenbach has been very successful in obtaining mathematically
signiﬁcant results by this “proof mining.”
All of this is in a certain sense internal to proof theory. However, we should
consider the stimulus Hilbert’s approach and questions provided to contempo-
raries outside the Hilbert School, for example, to von Neumann, Herbrand, G¨odel,
Church, and Turing. There is indeed no foundational enterprise with a more pro-
found or more far-reaching eﬀect on the emergence and development of modern
mathematical logic. The foundational concerns have led to a dramatic expansion
of the reach of mathematical thought. Hilbert would be delighted with the de-
velopment of mathematical logic in general, and proof theory in particular — in
spite of the fact that his Second Problem hasn’t been solved yet. He might just
note optimistically “Wir m¨ussen wissen, wir werden wissen.” and follow this by
“Es gibt kein Ignorabimus!” for added emphasis.
Hilbert’s speciﬁc proposal of mediating between a restricted constructivist and
a strong classical position does not work out, when ﬁnitism is equated with the
methodological stance associated with proof theory. The reductive program that
emerged from it provides, however, an important perspective on aspects of math-
ematical experience and helps us to gain a better understanding of the distinctive
character of modern mathematics. It is centrally connected to the starting point
of Hilbert’s considerations, namely, the foundational opposition of Dedekind and
Kronecker. Hilbert’s principal goal was to secure mathematics from contradictions
— and thus to safeguard creative freedom within mathematics and for contexts
of applications. In the Heidelberg talk of 1904 he formulated the creative princi-
ple that “in its freest use justiﬁes us in forming ever new notions, with the sole
restriction that we avoid a contradiction.” As philosophers and mathematicians
we should exploit Hilbert’s complex insights into the workings of mathematics,
instead of keeping him shackled to a narrow foundational position that was taken
for exploratory, programmatic reasons.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The notes of lectures given by Hilbert (and Bernays) I used are available from the Hilbert Nachlass
at the Library of the University of G¨ottingen (SUB mark) or from the Mathematical Institute
(marked by MI). Those concerning geometry have been published in volume 1 of David Hilbert’s
Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics and Physics, 1891 to 1933; volumes 2 and 3 will
contain those that are mainly concerned with logic and arithmetic. I refer by LFMP1 to the ﬁrst
volume of this series. On pp. 607-623 of that volume, one can ﬁnd a complete listing of Hilbert’s
lectures. Translations are my own, unless they are explicitly quoted from a published source.
[Ackermann, 1925] W.
Ackermann.
Begr¨undung
des
“tertium
non
datur”
mittels
der
Hilbertschen Theorie der Widerspruchsfreiheit; Mathematische Annalen 93, 1-36, 1925.
[Ackermann, 1934] W. Ackermann. Review of Grundlagen der Mathematik, vol. 1; Fortschritte
der Mathematik 60, 17-19, 1924.
[Avigad, 2006] J. Avigad. Methodology and metaphysics in the development of Dedekind’s the-
ory of ideals; in: Ferreir`os and Gray 2006, 159-186, 2006.

380
Wilfried Sieg
[Avigad and Feferman, 1998] J. Avigad and S. Feferman. G¨odel’s functional (“Dialectica”) in-
terpretation; in: S.R. Buss (ed.), Handbook of proof theory; Elsevier, 337-405, 1998.
[Baldus, 1924] R. Baldus. Formalismus und Intuitionismus in der Mathematik; G. Braun,
Karlsruhe i. B, 1924.
[Behnke, 1976] H. Behnke. Die goldenen Jahre des Mathematischen Seminars der Universit¨at
Hamburg; Mitteilungen der Math. Gesellschaft in Hamburg, Bd X, Heft 4, 1976, 225–240,
1976.
[Bernays, 1922] P. Bernays. ¨Uber Hilberts Gedanken zur Grundlegung der Mathematik; Jahres-
berichte DMV 31, 10-19, 1922.
[Bernays, 1927a] P. Bernays. Zusatz zu Hilberts Vortrag ¨uber “Die Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik”; Abhandlungen aus dem mathematischen Seminar der Hamburgischen Universit¨at 6,
89-92, 1927; translated in: van Heijenoort 1967, 485-489.
[Bernays, 1927b] P. Bernays. Probleme der theoretischen Logik; in: Bernays 1976, 1-16, 1927.
[Bernays, 1930] P. Bernays. Die Philosophie der Mathematik und die Hilbertsche Beweistheorie,
1930; in: Bernays 1976, 17-61.
[Bernays, 1935] P. Bernays. Hilberts Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Arithmetik. 1935;
in: Hilbert 1935, 196-216.
[Bernays, 1967] P. Bernays. Hilbert, David; in: Encyclopedia of Philosophy, P. Edwards (ed.),
Macmillan, New York and London, 496-504, 1967.
[Bernays, 1976] P. Bernays. Abhandlungen zur Philosophie der Mathematik; Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, 1976.
[Bernstein, 1919] F. Bernstein. Die Mengenlehre Georg Cantors und der Finitismus; Jahres-
berichte DMV 28, 63-78, 1919.
[Buchholz et al., 1981] W. Buchholz, S. Feferman, W. Pohlers, and W. Sieg. Iterated inductive
deﬁnitions and subsystems of analysis: Recent proof-theoretical studies; Springer Lecture
Notes in Mathematics 897, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1981.
[Corry, 1996] L. Corry. Modern algebra and the rise of mathematical structures, 1996; Second
edition, 2004, Birkh¨auser-Verlag, Basel.
[Dedekind, 1872] R. Dedekind. Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen, 1872; in: Dedekind 1932, 315–
334 and in: Dedekind 1969.
[Dedekind, 1888] R. Dedekind. Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen, 1888; in: Dedekind 1932,
335-391 and in: Dedekind 1969.
[Dedekind, 1889] R. Dedekind. Letter to Keferstein, 1889; in: van Heijenoort 1967, 98-103.
[Dedekind, 1932] R. Dedekind. Gesammelte mathematische Werke, Dritter Band; R. Fricke, E.
Noether, and ¨O. Ore (eds.); Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1932.
[Dedekind, 1969] R. Dedekind. Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? Stetigkeit und irrationale
Zahlen; Vieweg, 1969.
[Dugac, 1976] P. Dugac. Richard Dedekind et les fondements des math´ematiques; Vrin, Paris,
1976.
[Ebbinghaus, 2007] H.-D. Ebbinghaus. Ernst Zermelo:
An approach to his life and work;
Springer, 2007.
[Ewald, 1996] W. B. Ewald, ed. From Kant to Hilbert - A source book in the foundations of
mathematics; two volumes; Oxford University Press, 1996.
[Feferman, 1981] S. Feferman. How we got from there to here; in: Buchholz e.a. 1981, 1-15,
1981.
[Feferman, 1988] S. Feferman. Hilbert’s Program relativized: proof-theoretical and foundational
reductions, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 53 (2), 364-384, 1988.
[Feferman, 1998] S. Feferman. In the light of logic; Oxford University Press, 1998.
[Feferman and Sieg, 1981] S. Feferman and W. Sieg. Iterated inductive deﬁnitions and subsys-
tems of analysis; in: Buchholz e.a. 1981, 16-77, 1981.
[Ferreira, 1994] F. Ferreira. A feasible theory for analysis; Journal of Symbolic Logic, 59, 1001-
1011, 1994.
[Ferreira and Ferreira, 2006] F. Ferreira and G. Ferreira. Counting as integration in feasible
analysis, Mathematical Logic Quarterly 45, 399-407, 2006.
[Ferreir`os, 1999] J. Ferreir`os. Labyrinth of thought – A history of set theory and its role in
modern mathematics; Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1999; second revised edition, 2007.
[Ferreir`os and Gray, 2006] J. Ferreir`os and J. Gray, eds. The architecture of modern mathemat-
ics – Essays in history and philosophy; Oxford University Press, 2006.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
381
[Gentzen, 1934] G. Gentzen. Untersuchungen ¨uber das logische Schließen, Mathematische
Zeitschrift 39, 176-210, 405-431, 1934.
[Gentzen, 1936] G. Gentzen. Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie, Mathematische
Annalen 112, 493-565, 1936.
[Gentzen, 1943] G. Gentzen. Beweisbarkeit und Unbeweisbarkeit von Anfangsf¨allen der trans-
ﬁniten Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie, Mathematische Annalen 119, 140-161, 1943.
[G¨odel, 1931] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I; Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik 38, 173-98, 1931.
[G¨odel, 1933] K. G¨odel. The present situation in the foundations of mathematics, 1933; in:
G¨odel 1995, 36-53.
[G¨odel, 1986] K. G¨odel. Collected Works I ; Oxford University Press, 1986.
[G¨odel, 1990] K. G¨odel. Collected Works II ; Oxford University Press, 1990.
[G¨odel, 1995] K. G¨odel. Collected Works III; Oxford University Press, 1995.
[G¨odel, 2003a] K. G¨odel. Collected Works VI ; Oxford University Press, 2003.
[G¨odel, 2003b] K. G¨odel. Collected Works V ; Oxford University Press, 2003.
[Gray, 1992] J. Gray. A 19th century revolution in mathematical ontology; in: D. Gillies (ed.),
Revolutions in mathematics, Oxford University Press, 226-248, 1992.
[Hallett, 1994] M. Hallett. Hilbert’s axiomatic method and the laws of thought; in: A. George
(ed.), Mathematics and Mind, Oxford University Press, 71-117. 1994.
[Herbrand, 1931] J. Herbrand. Sur la non-contradiction de l’arithm´etique; Journal f¨ur die reine
und angewandte Mathematik 166, 1-8, 1931. Translated in: van Heijenoort 1967, 612-628.
[Hertz, 1894] H. Hertz. Die Prinzipien der Mechanik (Gesammelte Werke, Band III); Barth,
Leipzig, 1894.
[Hilbert, 1889-90*] D. Hilbert. Einf¨uhrung in das Studium der Mathematik. (SUB 530), 1889–
90.
[Hilbert, 1891*] D. Hilbert. Projektive Geometrie. (SUB 535), 1891.
[Hilbert, 1893–94*] D. Hilbert. Einleitung in die Functionentheorie. (SUB 540), 1893–94.
[Hilbert, 1894*] D. Hilbert. Die Grundlagen der Geometrie. (SUB 541), 1894.
[Hilbert, 1894–95*] D. Hilbert. Quadratur des Kreises. (SUB 542), 1894–95.
[Hilbert, 1896–97*] D. Hilbert. Theorie der Functionen einer komplexen Ver¨anderlichen. (MI),
1896–97.
[Hilbert, 1897–98*] D. Hilbert. Zahlbegriﬀund Quadratur des Kreises. (SUB 549), 1897–98.
[Hilbert, 1898–99*] D. Hilbert. Elemente der Euklidischen Geometrie. (SUB 552), 1898–99.
[Hilbert, 1899] D. Hilbert. Grundlagen der Geometrie; Teubner, Leipzig, 1899.
[Hilbert, 1899–1900*] D. Hilbert. Zahlbegriﬀund Quadratur des Kreises. (SUB 549 extended),
1899–1900.
[Hilbert, 1900] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber den Zahlbegriﬀ; Jahresbericht der DMV 8, 180-94, 1900.
Reprinted in the third edition of Hilbert 1899 , Teubner, 1909, 256-262.
[Hilbert, 1901] D. Hilbert. Mathematische Probleme. Vortrag, gehalten auf dem internationalen
Mathematiker-Kongress zu Paris 1900; Archiv der Mathematik und Physik, 3rd series, 1,
44-63, 213-237; part of the essay is translated in Ewald 1996, 1096-1105.
[Hilbert, 1901–02*] D. Hilbert. Zahlbegriﬀund Quadratur des Kreises. (SUB 549 with “Dispo-
sition”), 1901–02.
[Hilbert, 1904*] D. Hilbert. Zahlbegriﬀund Quadratur des Kreises. (MI), 1904.
[Hilbert, 1905] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber die Grundlagen der Logik und der Arithmetik; in: Verhand-
lungen des Dritten Internationalen Mathematiker-Kongresses, pp. 174-85, 1905. Teubner,
Leipzig. Reprinted in the third edition of Hilbert 1899, Teubner, 1909, pp. 263-279. English
translation in: van Heijenoort 1967, 129-38.
[Hilbert, 1905a*] D. Hilbert. Logische Prinzipien des mathematischen Denkens. (MI), 1905.
[Hilbert, 1917*] D. Hilbert. Mengenlehre. (MI), 1917.
[Hilbert, 1917–18*] D. Hilbert. Prinzipien der Mathematik. (MI), 1917–18.
[Hilbert, 1918] D. Hilbert. Axiomatisches Denken; Mathematische Annalen 78, 405-415, 1918;
reprinted in: Hilbert 1935, 146-156. Translated in: Ewald 1996, 1105-1115.
[Hilbert, 1920*] D. Hilbert. Probleme der Mathematischen Logik. (MI), 1920.
[Hilbert, 1921*] D. Hilbert. Natur und mathematisches Erkennen; talk given in Copenhagen on
March 14, 1921. (SUB 589), 1921.
[Hilbert, 1921–22*] D. Hilbert. Grundlagen der Mathematik. (MI), 1921–22.

382
Wilfried Sieg
[Hilbert, 1922] D. Hilbert. Neubegr¨undung der Mathematik; Abhandlungen aus dem mathema-
tischen Seminar der Hamburgischen Universit¨at 1, 157-177, 1922; translated in: Ewald 1996,
1115-1134.
[Hilbert, 1922–23*] D. Hilbert. Logische Grundlagen der Mathematik. (SUB 567), 1922–23.
[Hilbert, 1923] D. Hilbert. Die logischen Grundlagen der Mathematik; Mathematische Annalen
88, 151-165, 1923; translated in: Ewald 1996, 1134-1148.
[Hilbert, 1923–24*] D. Hilbert. Logische Grundlagen der Mathematik. (SUB 567 extended),
1923–24.
[Hilbert, 1926] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber das Unendliche; Mathematische Annalen 95, 161-190, 1926;
translated in: van Heijenoort 1967, 464-479.
[Hilbert, 1930] D. Hilbert. Probleme der Grundlegung der Mathematik; Mathematische Annalen
102, 1-9, 1930.
[Hilbert, 1931] D. Hilbert. Die Grundlegung der elementaren Zahlentheorie; Mathematische An-
nalen 104, 485-494, 1930; translated in: Ewald 1996, 1148-1157.
[Hilbert, 1935] D. Hilbert. Gesammelte Abhandlungen, vol. 3, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 1935.
[Hilbert, 2004] D. Hilbert. Lectures on the Foundations of Geometry, 1891-1902, volume 1 of
Hilbert’s Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics and Physics, 1891-1933; M. Hallet and
U. Majer (eds.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin and Heidelberg, 2004.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der theoretischen
Logik; Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1928.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1934] D. Hibert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik, Band 1;
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1934; a second edition was published by Springer in 1968.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1939] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik, Band 2,
1939; Springer-Verlag, Berlin; a second edition was published by Springer in 1970.
Almost all the quotations I am using occur in both volumes, and I refer to them by “Hilbert
and Bernays 193m kkk/lll”, where m is either 4 or 9 and kkk is the page number of the ﬁrst
edition, whereas lll is that of the second edition. If a quotation occurs only in the ﬁrst or only in
the second edition the context will make it very clear from which edition I am quoting. And of
course, if kkk is the same as lll, I list just one.
[Kneser, 1921–22*] H. Kneser. Private notes of Hilbert 1921–22.
[Kneser, 1922–23*] H. Kneser. Private notes of Hilbert 1922–23.
[Kneser, 1923–24*] H. Kneser. Private notes of Hilbert 1923–24.
[Kohlenbach and Oliva, 2003] U. Kohlenbach and P. Oliva. Proof mining: a systematic way of
analysing proofs in mathematics; Proc. Steklov Inst. Math. 242, 136-164, 2003.
[Kreisel, 1968] G. Kreisel. Survey of proof theory; Journal of Symbolic Logic 33, 321-388, 1968.
[Majer, 2006] U. Majer. Hilbert’s axiomatic approach to the foundations of science - A failed
research program?; in: Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 251, 155-184, 2006.
[Mancosu, 1999] P. Mancosu. Between Russell and Hilbert: Behmann on the foundations of
mathematics; Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 5, 303-330, 1999.
[Mancosu, 1999a] P. Mancosu. Between Vienna and Berlin: the immediate reception of G¨odel’s
incompleteness theorems; History and Philosophy of Logic 20, 33-45, 1999.
[MacLane, 1935] S. MacLane. Hilbert-Bernays on proof theory; Bulletin of the American Math-
ematical Society, 162-165, 1935.
[Martin-L¨of, 1984] P. Martin-L¨of. Intuitionistic type theory; Bibliopolis, Naples, 1984.
[Moore, 1997] G. Moore. Hilbert and the emergence of modern mathematical logic; Theoria 12,
65-90, 1997.
[Myhill, 1975] J. Myhill. Constructive set theory; Journal of Symbolic Logic 40, 347-382, 1975.
[Parsons, 2008] C. D. Parsons. Mathematical thought and its objects; Cambridge University
Press, 2008.
[Peckhaus, 1990] V. Peckhaus. Hilbertprogramm und kritische Philosophie; Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, G¨ottingen, 1990.
[Peckhaus and Kahle, 2002] V. Peckhaus and R. Kahle. Hilbert’s paradox; Historia Mathemat-
ica 29, 157-175, 2002.
[Pohlers, 1997] W. Pohlers. Proof theory – An introduction; Springer Lecture Notes in Mathe-
matics 1407; Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1997.
[Poincar´e, 1902] H. Poincar´e. Review of Hilbert 1899; Bulletin des sciences math´ematiques 26,
249-272. 1902.

Hilbert’s Proof Theory
383
[Poincar´e, 1905] H. Poincar´e. Les math´ematiques et la logique; Revue de m´etaphysique et de
morale, 13, 815-35, 1905; translated in (Ewald, vol. 2), 1021-38.
[Poincar´e, 1906] H. Poincar´e. Les math´ematiques et la logique; Revue de m´etaphysique et de
morale, 14, 17-34, 1906; translated in (Ewald, vol. 2), 1038-52.
[Poincar´e, 1906a] H. Poincar´e. Les math´ematiques et la logique; Revue de m´etaphysique et de
morale, 14, 294-317, 1906; translated in (Ewald, vol. 2), 1052-71.
[Purkert and Ilgauds, 1987] W. Purkert and H. J. Ilgauds. Georg Cantor; Birkh¨auser-Verlag,
Basel, 1987.
[Ravaglia, 2003] M. Ravaglia. Explicating the ﬁnitist standpoint; Ph.D. Thesis, Department of
Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, 2003.
[Reid, 1970] C. Reid. Hilbert; Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1970.
[Rowe, 2000] D. Rowe. The calm before the storm: Hilbert’s early views on foundations; in: V.
Hendricks (ed.), Proof Theory: History and Philosophical Signiﬁcance, Kluwer, 55-94, 2000.
[Sch¨utte, 1977] K. Sch¨utte. Proof theory; Springer-Verlag, 1977.
[Schwichtenberg, 1977] H. Schwichtenberg. Proof theory: Some applications of cut-elimination;
in: Barwise, J. (ed.), Handbook of mathematical logic, North-Holland, 867-895, 1977.
[Sieg, 1988] W. Sieg. Hilbert’s program sixty years later; Journal of Symbolic Logic 53, 338-348,
1988.
[Sieg, 1991] W. Sieg. Herbrand analyses; Archive for Mathematical Logic 30, 409-441, 1991.
[Sieg, 1994] W. Sieg. Mechanical procedures and mathematical experience; in: A. George (ed.),
Mathematics and Mind, Oxford University Press, 71-117, 1994.
[Sieg, 1999] W. Sieg. Hilbert’s programs: 1917-1922; Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 5, 1-44, 1999.
[Sieg, 2005] W. Sieg. Only two letters: The correspondence between Herbrand and G¨odel; Bul-
letin of Symbolic Logic 11, 172-184, 2005.
[Sieg and Ravaglia, 2005] W. Sieg and M. Ravaglia. David Hilbert and Paul Bernays, Grundla-
gen der Mathematik; in: I. Grattan-Guinness (ed.), Landmark Writings in Western Mathe-
matics, 1640-1940, Elsevier, 981-999, 2005.
[Sieg and Schlimm, 2005] W. Sieg and D. Schlimm. Dedekind’s analysis of number: Systems
and axioms; Synthese 147, 121-170, 2005.
[Tait, 2005] W. W. Tait. The provenance of pure reason – Essays in the philosophy of mathe-
matics and its history; Oxford University Press, 2005.
[Takeuti, 1987] G. Takeuti. Proof theory; second edition; North-Holland, 1987.
[Tapp, 2006] C. Tapp. An den Grenzen des Endlichen – erkenntnistheoretische, wissenschafts-
philosophische und logikhistorische Perspektiven auf das Hilbertprogramm; Dissertation,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at, M¨unchen, 2006.
[Toepell, 1986] M.-M. Toepell. ¨Uber die Entstehung von David Hilberts “Grundlagen der Ge-
ometrie”; Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, G¨ottingen, 1986.
[Torretti, 1984] R. Torretti. Philosophy of Geometry from Riemann to Poincar´e. D. Reidel Pub-
lishing Company, 1984.
[Troelstra, 1973] A. Troelstra, ed. Metamathematical investigations of intuitionistic arithmetic
and analysis; Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics 344; Berlin, Heidelberg, New York,
1973.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, ed. From Frege to G¨odel, a source book in mathemat-
ical logic, 1879-1931; Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1967.
[von Neumann, 1927] J.
von
Neumann.
Zur
Hilbertschen
Beweistheorie;
Mathematische
Zeitschrift 26, 1-46, 1927.
[Weber, 1895] H. Weber. Lehrbuch der Algebra; Braunschweig, 1895.
[Weyl, 1918] H. Weyl. Das Kontinuum; Verlag von Veit, Leipzig, 1918; English translation by
S. Pollard and T. Bole, Dover edition, 1987.
[Weyl, 1927] H. Weyl. Diskussionsbemerkungen zu dem zweiten Hilbertschen Vortrag ¨uber die
Grundlagen der Mathematik; Abhandlungen aus dem mathematischen Seminar der Hambur-
gischen Universit¨at 6, 86-89, 1927; translated in: van Heijenoort 1967, 480-484.
[Weyl, 1944] H. Weyl. David Hilbert and his mathematical work; Bulletin of the AMS 50, 612-
654, 1944.
[Zach, 1999] R. Zach. Completeness before Post: Bernays, Hilbert, and the development of
propositional logic; Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 5, 331-366, 1999.
[Zach, 2003] R. Zach. The practice of ﬁnitism:
epsilon calculus and consistency proofs in
Hilbert’s program; Synthese 137, 211-259, 2003.

384
Wilfried Sieg
[Zermelo, 1908] E. Zermelo. Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I; Mathe-
matische Annalen 65, 261-281, 1908; translated in: van Heijenoort 1967, 199-215.
[Zermelo, 1930] E. Zermelo. ¨Uber Grenzzahlen und Mengenbereiche; Fund. Math. 16, 29-47.
1930; translated in: Ewald 1996, 1219-1233.
[Zermelo, 1931] E. Zermelo. ¨Uber Stufen der Quantiﬁkation und die Logik des Unendichen;
Jahresberichte DMV 41, 85-88, 1931.

HILBERT’S EPSILON CALCULUS AND ITS
SUCCESSORS
Barry Hartley Slater
1
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter we shall study the variety of epsilon calculi which have been devel-
oped since the days of Hilbert and Bernays. But it is not just the related formal
results, and structures which will be of interest. Even in Hilbert and Bernays’
Grundlagen der Mathematik, epsilon terms originated in the study of certain nat-
ural language structures, such as deﬁnite descriptions, and they turn out to have
a much larger range of linguistic applications, for example in the formalisation
of personal pronouns. Up to the second world war, epsilon calculi were studied
closely by several mathematicians and set theorists grouped around Hilbert; some
developments of this interest have appeared since. But the major concern with
these calculi subsequently has been with them either as pure logics to be studied
in their own right [Leisenring, 1969], or as applied in the study of certain linguis-
tic structures, and their related philosophical problems [von Heusinger and Egli,
2000]. Thus the validation of syllogisms with forms not considered before, like ‘All
men are mortal; there is a man; so he is mortal’, has become available; and diﬃcul-
ties with paradoxical referring phrases like ‘the least number not denotable in less
than nineteen syllables’ (which contains less than nineteen syllables) have been
overcome. Epsilon calculi have therefore emerged, more recently, as ‘logic’ in the
sense this word had before the intrusion of foundational studies in Mathematics,
as in Frege’s Grundgesetze, and Russell and Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica.
In this respect they force a return to the ‘logic as language’ paradigm, and a move
away from the ‘logic as calculus’ one, as argued for independently by, for instance,
Cocchiarella [Cocchiarella, 1988].
Epsilon terms (‘epsilon’ will be used throughout, although ‘sigma’, ‘tau’, ‘iota’,
and ‘eta’ terms have been used to the same eﬀect, by diﬀerent writers, as we shall
see) were introduced by Hilbert and Bernays to provide a basis on which to deﬁne
the existential and universal quantiﬁers of standard predicate logic. There was
subsequently the formal development of ‘the epsilon substitution method’; see,
for example, [Ackermann, 1924; Ackermann, 1940; Kreisel, 1951; Kreisel, 1952;
Tait, 1965; Mints, 1989; Mints, 1994; Mints, 1996; Mints, 1997; Zach, 2003].
Equally, Hilbert and Bernays used the epsilon calculus to prove two central meta-
theorems about the predicate calculus: the First Epsilon Theorem, a relative of
Herbrand’s Theorem, from which came the development of semantic tableaux,
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

386
Barry Hartley Slater
for instance; also the Second Epsilon Theorem, showing that epsilon calculi are
conservative extensions of the predicate calculus, which thus provides a kind of
completeness theorem for the predicate calculus. Quite short, semantical proofs
of the Second Epsilon Theorem are common these days, but Hilbert and Bernays
used proof theoretic reasoning — though even that in a more complex way than
is now necessary. But while epsilon calculi had these crucial formal functions, and
there were other formal developments of related kinds as well, some of which we
will trace below, we will not just investigate such aspects, since, in line with more
contemporary concerns, we shall also follow the large, philosophical and linguistic
discussion of natural language structures upon which epsilon calculi throw a very
revealing light.
Appreciation of this larger content and application of epsilon calculi has only
developed over a period. Hilbert and Bernays used epsilon terms for the various
formal purposes above, but the strict deﬁnition of an epsilon calculus, structured
and discussed as a full formal logic comparable to the predicate calculus, is only
ﬁrst found in Bourbaki’s ´El´ements de Math´ematique (though see also [Ackermann,
1937–8]). The classical epsilon calculi, at that time, were also developed without
the beneﬁt of any formal semantics, but these came into prominence through the
work of Asser in 1957, which was later published in the major text by Leisenring, in
1969. Even in Leisenring, however, readings of epsilon terms in ordinary language
were a rarity — a clear mathematical sense in terms of the least number operator
was given in some cases, but this, by its nature, could not apply any more generally.
It is part of the history of this period that logic, more widely, turned towards
such mathematics, but a study of epsilon calculi forces a re-appraisal of this trend.
We shall ﬁnd that epsilon terms, for instance, generally have a natural language
rather than mathematical reading. Even the epsilon terms which refer to numbers
have this feature, since 9, for instance, we will see, is identical with the number
of the planets. But also, even more important, in the move away from mathe-
matics, we shall ﬁnd there are predicates without a number (c.f. [Bunt, 1985, pp.
262–263]), as was here the case before the planets were formed, and there was
just planetary material. For some predications involve mass terms, which denote
substances rather than individuals. The reverse point of view, namely that all
predicates are count terms, has been implicit in much twentieth century practise,
but has not always been made explicit. It comes from the attempt to arithmetise
Analysis in the late nineteenth century, and the forces before which led to that,
and it resulted at one time in the belief that all predicates determine sets, rather
than, for instance, sets or proper classes. Russell’s Paradox, of course, disabused
most logicians of the former idea.
Within symbolic logic, however, Tarski’s semantics has been a major contri-
bution which continues the older, set-theoretic tradition, since Tarski took all
predicates to determine sets. And in this tradition we ﬁnd Hughes and Cresswell,
for instance, made one relevant explicit assertion, ‘there must be some number
which is the number of the planets’ [Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, p. 144], whose
larger content is only implicit in their account of Tarski’s semantics [Hughes and

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
387
Cresswell, 1968, pp. 135–136]:
For predicate variables we proceed as follows: if F is a monadic pred-
icate it is convenient for our purposes to think of the property F as
being determined by the set of things that possess it; e.g. if Fx means
‘x is human’ we can, instead of thinking of F as the abstract property
of humanity, think of it in terms of the set of human beings.
We shall ﬁnd that this is false, so that predicates generally must not be inter-
preted mathematically, and the related, but much broader question of the relation
between formal logic and natural language, as a result, starts to become very
pressing. This will happen in several ways. The many attempts to add epsilon
terms to Intuitionistic Logic, for example, take us well away from anything which
is naturally interpretable, which forces a re-assessment of the viability of this as an
alternative formal logic, as we shall see. Simply adding epsilon terms, and their
deﬁnitional axiom, to Intuitionistic Logic produces Epsilon Intuitionistic Logic,
but this is not a conservative extension of Intuitionistic Predicate Logic; and the
second epsilon theorem in this context only extends to formulas in prenex normal
form in Intuitionistic Predicate Logic [Rasiowa, 1956].
A natural language meaning for epsilon terms was intended even in Hilbert
and Bernays’ own treatment. For at the end of book 1 of Hilbert and Bernays’
Grundlagen we ﬁnd a rival theory of deﬁnite descriptions to Russell’s, and the
later introduction of epsilon terms is directly related to this. In Russell’s theory
of deﬁnite descriptions there are, it will be remembered, three clauses: with ‘The
King of France is bald’ these are ‘there is a king of France’, ‘there is only one king
of France’ and ‘he is bald’. Russell used an iota term to symbolise the deﬁnite
description, but it is not an individual symbol: it is an ‘incomplete’ term, as
he explained it, since ‘The King of France is bald’ is taken to have the complex
analysis,
(∃x)(Kx.(y)(Ky ⊃y = x).Bx),
and so it does not have the elementary form ‘Bx’. Russell hypothesised that, in
addition to the linguistic expressions gaining formalisations by means of his iota
terms, there was another, quite distinct class of expressions, which he called ‘log-
ically proper names’. Logically proper names would, amongst other things, take
the place of the variable in such forms as ‘Bx’. Russell suggested that demon-
stratives might be in this class, but he could give no further formal expression to
them.
Hilbert and Bernays themselves introduce a kind of complete symbol, by con-
trast with Russell, defending what would later be called a ‘pre-suppositional the-
ory’ of deﬁnite descriptions. The ﬁrst two clauses of Russell’s deﬁnition,
(∃x)(Kx.(y)(Ky ⊃y = x)),

388
Barry Hartley Slater
are not taken, by pre-suppositionalists, to be part of what is asserted by ‘The King
of France is bald’; they are, instead, the conditions under which one is allowed to
introduce into the language an individual term for ‘the King of France’, which
then satisﬁes the matrix of the quantiﬁcational expression above, and becomes a
proper symbol to replace the variable in such expressions as ‘Bx’. Hilbert and
Bernays still used an iota term for this purpose, although it is quite diﬀerent from
Russell’s iota term, since, when it is part of the language, it is equivalent to the
related epsilon term [Kneebone, 1963, p. 102]. We shall ﬁnd that epsilon terms,
being complete symbols, are the ‘logically proper names’ Russell was looking for,
and that their natural reading is indeed as forms of demonstratives.
It is at the start of book 2 of the Grundlagen that Hilbert and Bernays introduce
epsilon terms. They ﬁrst go on to produce a theory of non-deﬁnite descriptions
of the same pre-suppositional sort to their theory of deﬁnite descriptions. Thus
they permit an eta term to be introduced into the language if the ﬁrst of Russell’s
conditions is met, ‘(∃x)Kx’; this term then satisﬁes the associated matrix, but
it is, in general, an individual, pre-suppositional term of the same kind as their
iota one. There is a singular diﬀerence in certain cases, however, since the pre-
supposition of the eta term can be proved conclusively, for certain matrices. Thus
we know, for any predicate ‘F’, that
(∃x)((∃y)Fy ⊃Fx),
since this is a theorem of the predicate calculus. The eta term this theorem permits
us to introduce is what Hilbert and Bernays call an epsilon term, so we get the
epsilon axiom schema
(∃y)Fy ⊃FϵxFx.
But an epsilon term is very unlike the generality of eta terms, since its introduction
is clearly not dependent on any contingent facts about F. It is this which permits
completely formal theories using epsilon terms to be developed, because such ep-
silon terms, unlike Hilbert and Bernays’ iota terms, are always deﬁned, and, as the
theorem indicates, they refer to exemplars of the property in question. The above
predicate calculus theorem, in other words, provides the existence condition for
certain objects, which the various epsilon calculi then go on to symbolise reference
to, using epsilon terms. Copi has explained the theorem’s relation with exemplars
very fully [Copi, 1973, p. 110].
Kneebone read epsilon terms as formalising indeﬁnite descriptions [Kneebone,
1963, p. 101], and this idea is commonly also found in the work of his pupil, Priest,
although strangely Priest himself has pointed out that reading ‘(∃x)(Gx.Fx)’ as
‘GϵxFx’ will not do ([Priest, 1979, p. 6], see also [Slater, 1988b, p. 285]). Hilbert
read the epsilon term in the above case ‘the ﬁrst F’, which indicates its place in
some, otherwise unspeciﬁed well-ordering of the F’s — for instance, in connection
with arithmetical predicates, that generated by the least number operator. The
same general idea provided Bernays with a form of the Axiom of Choice, in his

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
389
epsilon formulation of Set Theory [Bernays, 1958, Ch VIII]. So ‘ϵxFx’ is not ‘an
F’. Moreover, as Copi’s discussion makes very clear, it is possible that an epsilon
term refers to something which is in fact not F — it does this, of course, if there
are no F’s at all — and that will lead us to theories of reference which materialised
only in the 1960s and later, when reference came to be properly distinguished from
attribution. If there are F’s then the ﬁrst F is a chosen one of them; but if there
are no F’s then ‘the ﬁrst F’ must be non-attributive, and so denotes something it
cannot connote. It functions like a Millian name, in other words, with no applicable
sense. With denotation in this way clearly distinguished from description we can
then start to formalise the cross-reference which even Russell needed to link his
ﬁrst two conditions ‘There is one and only one king of France’ with his further
condition ‘He is bald’. For, by an extension of the epsilon substitution method, the
‘he’ in the latter comes to be a pronoun for the same epsilon term as arises in the
former — whether or not the former is true. And such anaphoric cross-reference
in fact may stretch into and across intensional contexts of the kind Russell was
also concerned with, such as
George IV wondered whether the author of Waverley was Scott.
For, of course, he was indeed Scott, and we may all now know very well that he
was Scott. So we obtain a formalisation for transparency in such locutions.
That puts developed epsilon calculi at variance with Fregean views of intensional
contexts — and also the Kripkean semantics which has continued to support Frege
in this area. But Fregean intensional logic did not incorporate Millian symbols for
individuals, and in particular, as we shall see in detail later, that meant it could
not clearly distinguish individuals from their identifying properties. The addition
of epsilon terms provides the facility for separating, for instance,
s = ϵx(y)(Ay ≡y = x),
and
(y)(Ay ≡y = s),
and so for isolating the proper object of George IV’s thought.
Comparable discriminations are then also available with other types of expres-
sion. Thus in higher-order epsilon calculi, epsilon terms provide more appropriate
formalisations for propositional descriptions like ‘what George IV wondered’, and
numerical descriptions like ‘the number of the planets’, which resolves a number
of diﬃculties there have been with other formalisations. But there is no problem
about even ‘the number of the colours’, from an epsilon point of view, even though
there is no ﬁxed number of colours: the colours form a continuum, with the result
that there is only the amount of colour at a certain place, just like there might
be an amount of planetary material. And that bears on several matters to do
with the foundations of set theory, not the least being some classic puzzles about
inﬁnity.

390
Barry Hartley Slater
2
THE EPSILON SUBSTITUTION METHOD
The epsilon substitution method is based on the use of epsilon terms to replace the
existential and universal quantiﬁers [Weyl, 1944; Kreisel, 1964]. Epsilon terms are
individual terms of the form ‘ϵxFx’, where ‘ϵ’ is a variable binding term operator,
and ‘x’ is a free variable in ‘Fx’. There may be other free variables in ‘Fx’, in
which case ‘ϵxFx’ is simply a functional epsilon term; if there are no other free
variables in ‘Fx’ then ‘ϵxFx’ is a constant epsilon term. Sometimes only such
constant epsilon terms are called ‘terms’, with the generality of epsilon terms then
being ‘quasiterms’, but we will not keep to that usage here. The main axiom which
governs epsilon terms is:
Fy ⊃FϵxFx,
with a free variable ‘y’, and some appropriate arrangement to avoid clashes of
bound variables [Meyer Viol, 1995, p. 8], [Leisenring, 1969, p. 53]. On this basis
the existential quantiﬁer can be deﬁned via
(∃x)Fx ≡FϵxFx,
which means that, by suitable introduction of negations,
(x)Fx ≡Fϵx¬Fx.
Eliminating quantiﬁers using these deﬁnitions evidently turns all general state-
ments formulable in the language of predicate logic into statements about indi-
viduals, which Hilbert and his school saw as replacing objectionable ‘inﬁnitistic’
elements by tractable ‘ﬁnitistic’ ones.
Hilbert distinguished two kinds of arithmetical statement. ‘Real’ statements,
such as ‘2 + 1 = 1 + 2’, are reducible to identities involving computable functions
for given numerical arguments. They refer only to ﬁnite totalities, and hence are
capable of immediate veriﬁcation, at least in principle, by a mechanical computa-
tion in a ﬁnite number of steps. ‘Ideal’ statements, such as ‘(x)(x + 1 = 1 + x)’,
essentially involve inﬁnite totalities, typically the ranges of unbounded universal
and existential quantiﬁers. These do not obviously allow immediate veriﬁcation,
since a search through an inﬁnite totality is not a mechanical procedure. Hilbert
wanted the justiﬁcation for such general statements to be reduced to proving that
their real consequences are true, with the proof of this fact being ﬁnitist, i.e. us-
ing only computable functions and free-variable properties of their values. The
epsilon reduction of the quantiﬁers enables this to be done, since the proof of an
ideal statement, in an epsilon calculus setting, will essentially rest on just a ﬁnite
set E of ‘critical formulas’, which are of the form of the main epsilon axiom above.
Further epsilon axioms were employed in Hilbert and Bernays’ Arithmetic, which
we shall look at in closer detail later, but in the present context they can be dealt
with quite easily.

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
391
Now Hilbert took universal statements to be equivalent to free-variable state-
ments, and so treated them as schemata for their numerical instances. As such
they cannot be negated, which meant free-variable statements only had instru-
mental value, Hilbert believed, and they could always be eliminated in favour of
ﬁnitistic proofs of their instances. Thus, if the last formula of a proof is a constant
combinatorial identity, then replacing all free variables in that proof by arbitrary
numerals, and then each epsilon term by an appropriate numerical substitution
would immediately yield a variable-free, and so ﬁnitist, combinatorial proof of the
same identity. So consider, therefore, a substitution S of numerals for the constant
epsilon terms in a proof: if all critical formulas in the proof are true under the
substitution S then we have a what is called a ‘solving solution’ for the system
E, and so the possibility of a ﬁnitist proof of the ideal statement. The same de-
vice allows one to extract the numerical content of proofs of existential formulas
like (∃x)Fx, for instance, since, with (∃x)Fx translated as FϵxFx, for S to be a
solving solution for the proof P of such a formula, then S(P) must just be a proof
of Fn where n = S(ϵxFx). Similar points arise in other cases, thus, as Skolem
showed, for every sentence (x)(∃y)Rxy provable in Arithmetic there is a function
f(x) satisfying (x)Rxf(x) which thus gives the content of the epsilon term ϵyRxy.
The problem invariably reduces to ﬁnding a solving solution of the critical formu-
las in a proof. Hilbert proposed a method of ﬁnding such a solution by successive
approximation.
We order the critical formulas into a list, and take as the initial substitution
one which makes all constant epsilon terms zero. Then, if some substitution is not
a solving substitution we modify it by taking the ﬁrst critical formula in the list
which is false under it, and altering the numerical value substituted for the epsilon
term in that critical formula. Thus if we have
S(Fy) is true, but S(FϵxFx) is false,
then we make S′ the same as S except
S′(ϵxFx) = the least n less than or equal to S(y) such that S(Fn) is true.
In this way we automatically take care of the further, ‘least number’ axiom (c.f.
[Leisenring, 1969, p. 98]), and generate a sequence of substitutions which suc-
cessively verify more and more of the critical formulas in the form of the main
epsilon axiom. What remains to be shown, therefore, is that this sequence termi-
nates after a ﬁnite number of steps in a solving solution. Ackermann in 1940 was
able to prove termination for full ﬁrst order Arithmetic, i.e. pure number theory
(see also [Wang, 1962, Ch 14]). A much simpler, though non-eﬀective termination
proof for full ﬁrst order Arithmetic was later outlined by Kreisel [Kreisel, 1951;
Kreisel, 1952], see also [Tait, 1965; Mints, 1982].
A proof of the existence of a solving solution is now available for the case of
Analysis, i.e. second order Arithmetic, although not in this simple manner. In
any such solving solution the substitutions for second-order epsilon terms are, of

392
Barry Hartley Slater
course, not numerals; they are taken to be lambda abstracts. Ackermann’s early
attempt at a proof for this case, in 1924 [Ackermann, 1924], was quickly shown
to contain a defect by von Neumann, in 1927 [von Neumann, 1927], although
von Neumann was unable to replace it with a proof in the general case. Mints,
Tupailo and Buchholz have obtained a complete proof only more recently, in 1996
[Mints et al., 1996; Mints and Tupailo, 1999].
It should be noted that these
proofs are not in the natural sense ‘ﬁnitistic’, since they follow Gentzen’s use of
transﬁnite induction up to the ﬁrst epsilon number in his proof of the consistency
of Arithmetic. But Hilbert’s school came to be satisﬁed that this still conformed to
the basic requirements of their philosophical position (see [G¨odel, 1980; Tait, 1981;
Zach, 2003], also, for instance, [Tiles, 1991, pp. 120–121]).
Even other central aspects of Hilbert’s ‘ﬁnitism’ are questionable in certain ways
— his notion of free-variable formula, for instance, and his attitude to Induction
[Slater, 1992a]. Detlefsen has also questioned these [Detlefsen, 1986, pp. 46–8]
and shown that, in the former case, that faces Hilbert with ‘Frege’s Problem’
[Detlefsen, 1986, pp. 9–11]. Thus Hilbert said [Hilbert, 1967, p. 378]:
...we come upon a transﬁnite proposition when we negate a universal
assertion, that is, one that extends to arbitrary numerals.
So, for
example, the proposition that, if x is a numeral, we must always have
x + 1 = 1 + x
is from the ﬁnitist point of view incapable of being negated. This will
become clear for us if we reﬂect upon the fact that the proposition
cannot be interpreted as a combination, formed by means of ‘and’, of
inﬁnitely many numerical equations, but only as a hypothetical judge-
ment that comes to assert something when a numeral is given.
Detlefsen was ‘bewildered’ by this, ﬁnding the reasoning behind it ‘perplexing’,
for it makes out that a generalisation is not a genuine proposition. The question
had been raised before by Frege [Frege, 1971, p. 86]:
From the fact that the pseudo-axioms do not express thoughts it...follows
that they cannot be premises of an inference chain. Of course, one
really cannot call...groups of audible or visible signs...premises any-
way, but only the thoughts expressed by them. Now in the case of
the pseudo-axioms, there are no thoughts at all, and consequently no
premises. Therefore when it appears that Mr Hilbert nevertheless does
use his axioms as premises of inferences and apparently bases proofs
on them, these can be inferences and proofs in appearance only.
Indeed, how can one get from a non-proposition to a proposition, when deducing
an instance from a generalisation, if generalisations are free-variable formulas, and
these are not propositions?

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
393
The confusion in Hilbert’s mind, I think, is connected with the shift which was
in his time under way in the expression of generality: from the simple free-variable,
algebraic forms which had been the common currency for several centuries, to the
quantiﬁed forms, capable of greater complexity, popularised by Frege and the more
recent logicians. There is an inconsistency in the double symbolism if it is thought
that free-variable expressions express something diﬀerent, while Fregean predicate
language is expressively complete. But, if they are just alternative expressions for
generality, then the open formulas which Hilbert thought signiﬁed nothing are also
ﬁnitary — using Hilbert’s own elimination strategy. Thus they are not in contrast
with clearly ﬁnitary expressions like ‘2 + 1 = 1 + 2’. If the open formula
x + 1 = 1 + x,
for instance, is equivalent to the quantiﬁed generalisation
(x)(x + 1 = 1 + x),
then it is
a + 1 = 1 + a,
for a = ϵx¬(x+1 = 1+x). And not only has ‘a+1 = 1+a’ straightforwardly all the
supposed inferential properties of the free-variable formula, it also can be negated,
and can be a proper Fregean premise, or conclusion. Epsilon terms are not like,
say, the arbitrary names in some predicate calculus proofs and deductions, which
cannot occur outside the calculation; epsilon terms are calculatory instruments
and more, since they can also occur in premises and conclusions which may be
asserted.
Even in Kreisel’s more ﬁne grained, later discussion, the point is not cleared up.
Indeed, Kreisel took it that there were three categories of mathematical statement
[Kreisel, 1951, pp. 241–242]: there were formulas without variables, as before,
and free-variable formulas, but also certain others.
The free-variable formulas
he took to be still decidable, since, with numerals for the individual variables,
and computable functions for the function variables, the result is in the previ-
ous category. Hence ﬁnitist arguments, he thought, could establish free-variable
formulas, and these might then be used as schemata for elementary proofs of
their particular cases. Were they then alternative expressions for generality? If
they weren’t they faced Frege’s Problem; but if they were then how were they
not just a subclass of Kreisel’s third category? For, added to the previous two
categories, according to Kreisel, was a third category, namely formulas containing
bound variables. These could be put into prenex normal form with matrices which
were free-variable formulas, but, unlike with the free-variable formulas themselves,
Kreisel did not consider an argument to be ﬁnitist if it contained formulas con-
taining bound variables. Nevertheless, it was for the latter that he formulated his
‘no-counter-example’ interpretation, which was a kind of ﬁnitist interpretation.
Kreisel’s ‘no-counter-example’ interpretation was based on the First Epsilon
Theorem, which, like Herbrand’s Theorem, shows that if a quantiﬁed formula is

394
Barry Hartley Slater
provable in the predicate calculus then a certain ﬁnite disjunction of instances
of its matrix is also provable, in a language enriched by certain epsilon terms
— i.e. Herbrand functions. Then, in systems of number theory whose formulas
are recursively enumerable, there will be a computable function which identiﬁes
(through G¨odel numberings) the appropriate disjunction for any given formula,
and such that if the formula is proved, then from the proof we can discover which
disjunct is veriﬁable, while if the negation of the formula is proved, then for each
disjunct we can ﬁnd a substitution for the variables in it which makes it false.
Kreisel gives the example
(∃x)(y)(∃z)(t)¬Axyzt
[Kreisel, 1951, p. 246] saying that if this is provable then there is a number r, and
function f, such that
¬Aryf(y)t,
is veriﬁable (for all y and t), while if the negative of the formula is provable then,
for any of the given r and f, there is a y and t which make it false.
Did Kreisel forget that his Herbrand reduction also applies in the simple case
above, where
(x)(x + 1 = 1 + x),
is, in fact, entirely equivalent to
a + 1 = 1 + a?
For the speciﬁc ‘a’ in question in this case, namely ‘ϵx¬(x + 1 = 1 + x)’, is just a
Herbrand constant. And not only is this a perfect illustration of the ‘no-counter-
example’ interpretation — because ‘ϵx¬(x + 1 = 1 + x)’ reads expressly as ‘that
x for which x + 1 = 1 + x does not hold’ — the possibility of having a ﬁnitist
representation of universal statements throws considerable light on how Induction
is to be viewed from a ﬁnitistic point of view.
Thus it might be thought [Detlefsen, 1986, p. 48] that Hilbert was obliged to
see Induction as just a proof-schema showing how ﬁnitist proofs of Fn can be
obtained, for each particular value of n — each time from F1, and n −1 other
premises of the form ‘Fm ⊃Fsm’, where sm is the successor of m. For he could
hardly have thought that one needed to run through all such proofs before one
could establish (n)Fn, and thereby the open formula Fn. But there is certainly no
obligation on a ﬁnitist to see Induction in the other way, whatever the historical
speciﬁcs about Hilbert’s actual position.
For, through the epsilon elimination
strategy again, the universal statement at the terminus of the Induction proof is
equivalent to a certain individual one, namely Fϵn¬Fn, and so one of the previous
ﬁnitist proofs will establish it (c.f. [Tait, 1965, p. 178], [Leisenring, 1969, p. 93])
— even though we do not know in general which one. If 2 = ϵn¬Fn then the
proof that F2 is a proof that Fϵn¬Fn, and so (n)Fn, if 200 = ϵn¬Fn, then the
proof that F200 is a proof that (n)Fn, etc. We shall consider this matter further
in Section 5.

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
395
Forgetting the ﬁnitary equivalents of universal statements is not conﬁned to
Hilbert. Dunn and Belnap, for instance, forgot this in their well-known argument
about the Omega Rule and the substitutional interpretation of the quantiﬁers.
They said [Dunn and Belnap, 1968, p. 180]:
For let X be the set consisting of the sentences F(t′), F(t′′), . . . , where
t′, t′′, . . . are all the names in the language, and let A be (x)Fx. Clearly
then A is a logical consequence of X, but it cannot be deducible from
X. For if A were deducible from X it would be deducible from a ﬁnite
subset of X (by the deﬁnition of deduction).
But (x)Fx is deducible from Fϵx¬Fx, and so from even just one of F(t′), F(t′′),
. . . , if epsilon terms are in the language.
Even writers closer to the speciﬁc concerns of the epsilon calculus forget this
kind of ﬁnitary reduction. For it is common to see, for instance, the predicate logic
rule of universal quantiﬁer elimination, ‘(x)Fx/Fa’, merely reiterated in sequent
calculus, and natural deduction treatments of the epsilon calculus (e.g. [Leisenring,
1969, p. 115], [Routley, 1969, p. 131]). But this rule is instead best replaced
with two, namely ﬁrst ‘(x)Fx/Fϵx¬Fx’, and then ‘Fϵx¬Fx/Fa’, as we shall see.
Epsilon terms of the form ‘ϵx¬Fx’ Hilbert ﬁrst called tau terms [Hilbert, 1923;
Zach, 2003], and the ‘Transﬁnite Axiom’ which Hilbert ﬁrst employed, namely
FτxFx ⊃Fy,
is equivalent, in Classical Logic at least, to the epsilon axiom we have been con-
sidering,
Fy ⊃FϵxFx,
(see, for instance, [Bell, 1993a]). The ﬁnitary equivalents of existential statements,
in connection with the latter, however, are not so commonly forgotten, for the rule
‘(∃x)Fx/FϵxFx’, is obviously reversible, even though realising the consequence,
that one can go on to refer anaphorically to the individual thus identiﬁed in the
existential statement, took quite a while to dawn.
3
SOME EPSILON CALCULI
Bourbaki’s epsilon calculus with identity [Bourbaki, 1954, Book 1] is axiomatic,
and just adds to an axiomatic base for the propositional calculus the epsilon ax-
iom given above, and two laws of identity. He took Modus Ponens as the only
primitive rule, but derived several others, such as Conditional Proof, and Reductio
ad Absurdum. Thus, in eﬀect, we get:

396
Barry Hartley Slater
(XvX) ⊃X,
X ⊃(XvY ),
(XvY ) ⊃(Y vX),
(X ⊃Y ) ⊃((ZvX) ⊃(ZvY )),
Fy ⊃FϵxFx.
x = y ⊃Fx ≡Fy,
(x)(Fx ≡Gx) ⊃ϵxFx = ϵxGx.
Bourbaki, however, worked with axiom schemata, with all the variables syntactic
ones, and used tau rather than epsilon to form what we are calling ‘epsilon terms’.
He also, in places, had a polish preﬁx notation rather than the normal inﬁx one,
and he preferred (theoretically, if not in actual practise) a graphical system of
place bonding instead of the usual bound variables, which enabled him to obtain
such results as
ϵxFx = ϵyFy.
Bourbaki deﬁned the quantiﬁers in terms of his epsilon symbol as before, and in
his system the other usual law of identity, ‘x = x’, is derivable.
The immediate application Bourbaki had for his epsilon calculus was in his Set
Theory, although he made that, as was customary at the time, into a foundation
for all of mathematics. Bourbaki’s Set Theory is in the von Neumann-Bernays-
G¨odel style, although it does not explicitly introduce ‘classes’ as distinct entities
from ‘sets’. Like Boolos’ plural terms [Boolos, 1975; Boolos, 1984], classes, if they
were introduced, would merely provide an alternative way of making statements
involving predicates, and so the sole distinction Bourbaki needs is that some but
only some predicates determine sets, i.e. are ‘collectivisantes’. All the usual axioms
of set theory are found in Bourbaki’s theory, but he does not have an Axiom of
Choice, in any form, since its eﬀects can be generated using the epsilon symbol.
A similar point can be made about Bernays’ epsilon version of his set and class
theory [Bernays, 1958, Ch VIII], in which various versions of the Axiom of Choice
are considered.
Some care must be taken over the relation between axioms of choice and the
epsilon calculus, however (and see [Moore, 1982, pp. 253–255]).
Fraenkel and
Bar-Hillel, for instance, realised that the epsilon axiom provides for choice, since,
in general, the referent of the epsilon term, for any predicate, is indeterminate.
But they thought [Fraenkel and Bar-Hillel, 1958, p. 184] that the epsilon axiom
allowed for a single selection only. An epsilon term, however, may contain a free
variable, so there is no diﬃculty about catering for simultaneous choices; what is
not thereby established is whether the entities chosen by, say,
ϵyRxy,
form into a set, i.e. whether the associated predicate is collectivisante. In Bour-
baki’s system this is provable in certain cases because of the form of his axiom
schema of replacement [Bourbaki, 1954, Book 1, p66]. But epsilon terms merely

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
397
provide functions — Skolem functions, and Herbrand functions — which associate
a certain value with given arguments. However, they do so even when there are
no entities entering into the appropriate relation, e.g. in the illustrated case, even
when, for instance, ¬(∃y)Ray, or ¬(∃x)(∃y)Rxy (which is the former case with
a = ϵx(∃y)Rxy).
And they do so whenever the relation is universal — which
means that e.g. ϵyRay is deﬁned even when (y)Ray — so they are not dependent,
in such a case, on there being a universal set. Choice functions are commonly
deﬁned just over non-empty sets, but the notion of choice is signiﬁcantly extended
in connection with epsilon terms, because the choice is ﬁrst deﬁned with respect
to predicates, whether or not they are applicable, or applicable universally.
To make the choice extensional Bourbaki’s second epsilon axiom is needed:
(x)(Fx ≡Gx) ⊃ϵxFx = ϵxGx,
and then, for those predicates which are collectivisantes, the choice for any such
predicate is the choice for the associated set. If the ﬁrst epsilon axiom is a princi-
ple of natural reasoning, therefore, any philosophical doubts about the Axiom of
Choice, at least within an epsilon calculus setting, must devolve onto this second
axiom. And indeed, if the predicates are not collectivisantes then any choice is
not a choice from a set.
Furthermore, the second epsilon axiom, it has been claimed, is also crucially
involved in separating Intuitionistic Logic from Classical Logic, and so is philo-
sophically interesting on other grounds; indeed we shall inspect it very closely
later. But speciﬁcally, in the present connection, it can be proved that when both
of the epsilon axioms are added to Intuitionistic Propositional Logic then one can
obtain the Law of the Excluded Middle in any intuitionistic theory in which there
are two things which are provably non-identical. But if the second epsilon axiom
is not employed the Law of the Excluded Middle is not obtainable [Goodman and
Myhill, 1978; Bell, 1993a].
In fact, adding just the ﬁrst epsilon axiom to Intuitionistic Predicate Logic
enables, for instance, de Morgan’s Laws to be obtained [Bell, 1993b; DeVidi, 1995],
so even the addition of just the ﬁrst epsilon axiom is not conservative. Another
case is the classical theorem, which we saw before guarantees the introduction of
epsilon terms, namely,
(∃x)((∃y)Fy ⊃Fx).
This becomes provable when the ﬁrst epsilon axiom is added, although it is not
provable in standard Intuitionistic Predicate Logic. In a natural deduction form,
standard Intuitionistic Predicate Logic still has the same predicate rules as Clas-
sical Predicate Logic, viz:
Aw/(x)Ax, (x)Ax/At,
At/(∃x)Ax, ((∃x)Ax(At/P))/P,
where the proper term ‘w’, in the rule of universal introduction, should not oc-
cur free in any undischarged assumption above ‘Aw’, and the proper term ‘t’,

398
Barry Hartley Slater
in the rule of existential elimination, should not occur in ‘Ax’, in ‘P’, or in any
assumption other than ‘At’. But if
Fy ⊃FϵxFx,
then, with Modus Ponens we can get
Fy/FϵxFx,
and so, by existential quantiﬁer elimination
(∃x)Fx/FϵxFx,
whence by Conditional Proof
(∃x)Fx ⊃FϵxFx,
and by existential quantiﬁer introduction
(∃y)((∃x)Fx ⊃Fy).
A good deal of technical work has been done, as a result of such proofs, to create
epsilon extensions of Intuitionistic Logic which are conservative — see [Smirnov,
1971; Smirnov, 1978; Dragalin, 1974; Mints, 1974; Mints, 1977; Meyer Viol, 1995],
for instance. This is presumably in the hope of somehow ‘saving’ Intuitionistic
Logic. But it is doubtful whether these results are of any more than academic
interest. Certainly the various authors of these technical works rarely address any
of the immediately arising, philosophical questions about the various modiﬁcations
they have proposed to the ﬁrst epsilon axiom — centrally, of course, about whether
these modiﬁcations relate in any way to natural language constructions, and hence
their own, and others’ reasoning.
Mints has some appropriate criticisms of some other writers [Mints, 1977, p.
323]:
In a natural deduction system considered by Leivant [Leivant, 1973],
formulas cannot contain ϵ-quasiterms. For example, (x)PxϵyPxy will
not be a formula. Moreover, rather inconvenient restrictions are im-
posed on the rule for [Conditional Proof] (similar to the restriction in
[Smirnov, 1971]).
But Mints’ own, Gentzen-style system itself involves a curious notion, since it
requires all the sequents occurring in a proof to be ‘meaningful’ in a certain for-
malistic sense. An epsilon term, say ‘ϵxAxyz’, appearing in an occurrence of some
sequent is only ‘meaningful’, according to Mints [Mints, 1977, p. 318], if the for-
mula ‘(z)(y)(∃x)Axyz’ is either in the antecedent of the sequent, or some sequent
below that occurrence. Mints takes his idea from a natural deduction system of
Dragalin [Dragalin, 1974], which has, as quantiﬁer rules:

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
399
Aw/(x)Ax, (x)Ax/At,
At/(∃x)Ax, (∃x)Ax/AϵxAx,
((x)Bx.(∃x)Ax)/BϵxAx,
((∃x)Ax.BϵxAx)/(∃x)Bx,
where ‘w’ is a proper term as before, but ‘t’ is now a term other than an epsilon
term. So one can see here, in miniature, how the need for ‘(∃x)Ax’ is put in place,
and how it makes ‘ϵxAx’ ‘meaningful’ — in its presence the epsilon term operates
like an ordinary term. But the question which arises is what the meaning of such
signs is, in the ordinary sense of ‘meaning’: i.e. how are they to be read, how are
they to be translated into, say, English? Smirnov’s quantiﬁer rules are the same
as Dragalin’s except for the last, the rule of epsilon elimination, which becomes
BϵxAx/(∃x)Ax,
and he has a restriction on the use of subsidiary rules: epsilon symbols must
not occur in the eliminable assumptions or conclusion of a subsidiary deduction
[Smirnov, 1978, p. 45]. But while the result, in this, and every other case above,
is undoubtedly a conservative extension of Intuitionistic Predicate Logic, we are
faced with a generalisation of Frege’s Problem: what do any of the various epsilon
terms and rules in these cases correspond to, in valid natural language argument?
Meyer Viol’s several constructions of conservative extensions include one resem-
bling Leivant’s, which modiﬁes Conditional Proof in complex ways, and leads to
awkward complications, like the failure of Contraposition. It also requires epsilon
terms to be formally meaningful in a similar way to Mints. Summing up, Meyer
Viol says about this construction [Meyer Viol, 1995, p. 105]:
We cannot move an existential formula to the right of [a deduction
sign] if it leaves its proper term on the left unsupported. In fact, un-
supported ϵ-terms on the left should not be interpreted as ϵ-terms at
all: in order for an ϵ-term to get an ϵ-interpretation, its interpreta-
tion as a witness, it needs a licensing condition, the presence of an
introducing formula.
The notion of a witness Meyer Viol draws from Kripke’s semantics for Intuition-
istic Predicate Logic, and it is through direct modiﬁcations of this semantics that
he produces other conservative extensions, when approaching the matter non-
syntactically. He says [Meyer Viol, 1995, p. 110]:
Indeed, in semantics as in proof theory, the problem of ‘conservative
extension’ is not unambiguous. More speciﬁcally, there are several ways
of expanding Kripke models for intuitionistic logic with epsilon terms.
A ﬁrst strategy goes like the classical method...We choose witnessing
objects for ϵxFx in every node where an existential formula (∃x)Fx is
forced, while making arbitrary choices for ϵxFx in all other nodes. The
striking feature of this semantics is that it is non-persistent. That is,

400
Barry Hartley Slater
formulas involving epsilon terms may change from true to false when
going to nodes higher up, where the interpretation of their epsilon
terms has shifted. A second strategy maintains persistence, by going
partial: epsilon terms are only interpreted at those nodes where their
supporting existential formula is forced. This is not enough: we have to
stick with the same choice of a witness higher up. Both strategies solve
our problem. Both strategies pay a price: either non-persistence, or
partiality. Thus multiplicity of solutions, and their logical side eﬀects,
seems a general feature of constructive epsilon calculi.
Speciﬁcally, one side eﬀect with the ﬁrst strategy is that even many intuitionistic
propositional principles become schematically invalid, although all their epsilon-
free instances remain available.
And a side eﬀect with the second strategy is
that for formulas ‘F’ which are either atomic or built from atomic ones using just
conjunction and the existential quantiﬁer, then
FϵxGx,
entails
(∃x)(Fx.Gx).
Meyer Viol says about the latter entailment [Meyer Viol, 1995, p. 118]: ‘Thus
intuitionistic base logics can conservatively support stronger epsilon principles than
their classical counterparts!’ But the question he does not address is whether any
of those principles have any natural language counterparts.
One point bordering on a natural language justiﬁcation, however, is to be found
in Meyer Viol’s proposals for a further system.
His point is pertinent to the
principles of referential argument in modal contexts, and arises when he discusses
how one might avoid the last step in deriving the previous predicate logic existential
theorem, i.e. the move from
(∃x)Fx ⊃FϵxFx,
to
(∃y)((∃x)Fx ⊃Fy).
He makes the following remark [Meyer Viol, 1995, pp. 103, 113]:
...we can restrict abstraction [existential quantiﬁer introduction] over
the ϵ-term...This course is suggested by the analogy with modal pred-
icate logic with non-rigid terms, and, semantically, this analogy is of
course a natural one, given G¨odel’s translation of Intuitionistic Logic
into S4. In this case we can restrict [abstraction] to ‘non-modal’ con-
texts...
Indeed this is what Fitting actually did when constructing his epsilon calculus
system for ﬁrst-order S4 [Fitting, 1972; Fitting, 1975]. Fitting said about this
[Fitting, 1972, p. 103]:

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
401
A natural ﬁrst attempt at such a formulation would be to add S4
axioms and rules to a classical ϵ-calculus base.
This fails, and the
reason is not hard to ﬁnd. If X(x) is a formula with one free variable,
x, classically ϵxXx is intended to be the name of a constant such that,
if (∃x)Xx is true, XϵxXx is true. But in a Kripke S4 model, (∃x)Xx
may be true in two possible worlds but yet there may be no single
constant, c, such that Xc is true in both worlds. Thus ϵxXx cannot
be thought of as the name of a constant in an ϵ-calculus S4. Instead we
treat ϵxXx as a function deﬁned on the collection of possible worlds
and such that, if (∃x)Xx is true in some possible world, the value of
ϵxXx at that world is a constant, c, such that Xc is true there.
This is in tune not only with Kripke’s model theory but also Frege’s views about
reference in opaque, intensional contexts. We shall ﬁnd, however, that study of
the epsilon calculus substantially changes our view of Frege on this and related
matters, because, without epsilon terms, neither he nor Russell had a clear way
of separating individuals from their properties, which hindered each of them from
getting the logic of referential terms right. As a result, there is, in particular,
no reason to restrict abstraction on the above basis, and the further faith which
is then restored in the ﬁrst epsilon axiom shows Intuitionistic Logic is certainly
lacking in one basic reasoning principle, even if that does not settle the question
over the Law of the Excluded Middle.
Discussions of the philosophical import of Intuitionistic Logic do not commonly
investigate the lack of the ﬁrst epsilon axiom, and have been more concerned
with Brouwer’s school’s historic reasoning, and what can be said either for or
against it. But historical studies are not conﬁned to discussing authors just in
terms of the concepts they were conscious of, since further researches may well
unearth external facts which are still highly relevant. One banal external fact,
for instance, is the infrequency of use of double negative forms, even among the
originators and students of Intuitionistic Logic who claim double negative forms
have a diﬀerent content from the associated positive forms. ‘Double negative form’
does not mean, for instance, ‘it is not demonstrated that 777 does not occur in
the decimal expansion of π’, but ‘it is not the case that 777 does not occur in the
decimal expansion of π’, and the former is more commonly used than the latter.
If the postulated diﬀerence between ‘not-not-p’ and ‘p’ is properly a diﬀerence
between ‘not demonstrated that not p’ and ‘p’, then no doubts about the Law of
the Excluded Middle have been expressed.
But G¨odel’s translation of Intuitionistic Logic into S4 [G¨odel, 1969] is itself an
even more decisive external fact, since it shows that Intuitionistic Logic is properly
not an alternative propositional logic, but instead merely, as Meyer Viol realized,
a (mis-symbolised) modal logic. As Kneale and Kneale said [Kneale and Kneale,
1962, p. 681]:
Heyting’s calculus...has only been mistaken for an alternative logic be-
cause of the intuitionists’ unfortunate custom of talking of theorems

402
Barry Hartley Slater
as statements of provability. No doubt there may be theorems about
the provability of theorems, but there must be others which are not of
this kind although they involve logical notions such as those of condi-
tionality and universality.
Certainly no-one wants to assert ‘LpvL¬p’, or even ‘pvL¬p’, but that does not
show in any way that one should not assert ‘pv¬p’. Even with vague statements,
for instance, which independently give rise to questions about the Law of the
Excluded Middle, this is so, although to see this one has speciﬁcally to realise, as
Kneale and Kneale suggest, that somethings are necessarily true without it being
demonstrable that they are so. They are then true not for a reason, but just by
choice and decision — as formalised in epsilon terms governed just by the ﬁrst
epsilon axiom. For if a man with no hairs is bald, yet a man with 1000 hairs is
not bald, then one cannot have (n)(Bn ⊃Bsn), where sn is the successor of n.
Hence (∃n)(Bn.¬Bsn), and the only question is which number ‘ϵn(Bn.¬Bsn)’ is to
denote. The verbal choice is quite arbitrary, of course, since various precisiﬁcations
of our usage with ‘bald’ are possible; but once nominated the number in question
is synthetically necessary, to the concept of baldness then deﬁned.
4
THE TWO EPSILON THEOREMS
The epsilon calculus sketched in the Grundlagen was not seen as of great practical
use as a logic, and the early proofs of the First Epsilon Theorem and Second
Epsilon Theorem needed for theoretical, meta-logical purposes were formidably
complex.
But this was largely because the approach was axiomatic, and with
the development of Sequent Calculus, Natural Deduction, and other means of
presenting what are essentially the same logics we get progressively more tractable
and transparent calculi, and also meta-logical results.
This is maybe shown most pointedly in connection with proofs of the Second Ep-
silon Theorem, which shows, as before, that the epsilon calculus is a conservative
extension of the predicate calculus. For while the original lengthy proof in Hilbert
and Bernays is, seemingly, faultless, the somewhat diﬀerent, but still Hilbert-and-
Bernays-style proof in the standard English text by Leisenring [Leisenring, 1969,
pp. 69–79] contains an error, which was corrected by Flannagan [Flannagan, 1975],
but in whose corrected proof there is a further error, which Ferrari has corrected
in two ways [Ferrari, 1987; Ferrari, 1989]. Leisenring also provided a much shorter
proof in a Gentzen-style epsilon calculus ([Leisenring, 1969, p.
125], see also
[Wessels, 1977, p. 534], which was corrected in [Yashuhara, 1982]), although this
depends on the Cut Elimination Theorem for this calculus which is not straight-
forward. In place of these there is now a ﬁve-line semantical proof available ([da
Costa, 1980, 137], [Meyer Viol, 1995, p. 33]), and a one-line proof in a Truth Tree
setting. Truth Trees also provide a ﬁner insight into other meta-logical matters.
The basic diﬃculty in proofs of the Second Epsilon Theorem, in the old style,
is that, while constant epsilon terms play the same role in the epsilon calculus as

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
403
individual symbols play in the predicate calculus, more complex epsilon terms may
also be involved in an epsilon calculus proof, since they may be substituted into
the axioms. A systematic reduction of this complexity is needed, if it is capable
of being eliminated in a proof of a theorem expressible just in predicate calculus
language. Hilbert and Bernays [Hilbert and Bernays, 1970, Book 2, p23f] say that
one epsilon term ϵxFx is subordinate to another epsilon term ϵyGy if and only if
G contains ϵxFx, and a free occurrence of y lies within it. For instance,
ϵxRxy
is subordinate to
ϵySyϵxRyx.
Hilbert and Bernays then deﬁne the rank of an epsilon term to be 1 if there
are no epsilon terms subordinate to it, and otherwise to be one greater than
the maximal rank of the epsilon terms which are subordinate to it (the ranks
of the two formulas above are therefore 1, and 2 respectively). Using the same
general deﬁnitions Leisenring proves, or, at least, attempts to prove, two theorems
[Leisenring, 1969, p. 72f]. These are, ﬁrst, a rank reduction theorem which shows
that epsilon proofs of epsilon-free formulas in which the second epsilon axiom is
not used, but in which every term is of rank less than or equal to r, may be
replaced by epsilon proofs in which every term is of rank less than or equal to
r −1 (this is the theorem where Flannagan found the emendable error); and,
second, a theorem proving the eliminability of the second epsilon axiom in proofs
of epsilon-free formulas. Together, these two theorems show that if there is an
epsilon proof of an epsilon-free formula, then there is such a proof not using the
second epsilon axiom, and in which all epsilon terms have rank just 1. Even though
such epsilon terms still might contain free variables, replacing those that do with a
ﬁxed symbol ‘a’ (starting with those of maximal length) reduces the proof to one
in a form of epsilon calculus Leisenring calls the ‘epsilon star’ system, in which
there are only constant epsilon terms [Leisenring, 1969, p. 66f]. He shows that
proofs in this system can be converted to proofs in the predicate calculus, through
a replacement of the constant epsilon terms by individual symbols.
Leisenring’s sequent epsilon calculus does not admit a full Cut Elimination
Theorem, any more than do the sequent epsilon calculi of Maehara [Maehara,
1955], or Curry [Curry, 1963]. Nevertheless Leisenring proves a Cut Elimination
Theorem for epsilon-free sequents [Leisenring, 1969, p. 125] which is suﬃcient
to give him a version of the Second Epsilon Theorem as a consequence, since he
has shown that to relevant cut-free proofs there correspond proofs in the epsilon
star system [Leisenring, 1969, p. 121]. Wessels attempted to construct a sequent
epsilon calculus in which a full Cut Elimination Theorem was provable; she tried to
do so by simply adding the following epsilon rule to Gentzen’s well known system
LK [Gentzen, 1934–5]:
G, ¬Ba, Da; G, Bt/G, DϵxBx,

404
Barry Hartley Slater
in which ‘a’ is a free variable not occurring in the lower sequent, ‘t’ a term (i.e.
a free variable or an epsilon term), ‘B’ a formula, ‘G’ a sequence, and ‘Da’ a
non-empty sequence in which at least one member formula contains at least one
occurrence of ‘a’ [Wessels, 1978, p. 528]. Yasuhara, correcting her [Yashuhara,
1982, p. 311], replaces this rule with
G, ¬BϵxBx, DϵxBx; G, Bt/G, DϵxBx,
and then derives the full Cut Elimination Theorem, and the Second Epsilon The-
orem model theoretically. Yasuhara uses the semantics of Asser [Asser, 1957], and
shows that all provable sequents are valid with respect to this semantics, and that
all sequents are either provable without the use of the Cut rule, or are not valid.
He then shows that if there are no epsilon terms in a valid ﬁnal sequent, then it is
provable without the use of the epsilon rule, or epsilon terms.
Meyer Viol also uses a somewhat similar, semantical argument to prove the
Second Epsilon Theorem, although he does not use Asser’s semantics, but instead
takes epsilon terms simply to name Skolem functions [Meyer Viol, 1995, p. 24].
He supposes that a formula (more explicitly: a formula without epsilon terms) is
not derivable in predicate logic, which means that there is a standard predicate
logic countermodel to it. But this countermodel can be expanded with appropri-
ate Skolem functions, to produce a countermodel which does not aﬀect formulas
without epsilon terms. But that shows the formula is not derivable in the epsilon
calculus. Da Costa [da Costa, 1980] uses a similar proof, but generalises it to a
more general set of variable binding term operators besides the epsilon symbol.
But there is a much shorter, one-line proof of the Second Epsilon Theorem, and
it is even constructive. We come by that one-line proof of the Second Epsilon The-
orem if we modify appropriately the predicate calculus truth trees, as developed,
say, by Jeﬀrey (as in e.g. [Jeﬀrey, 1967]). Jeﬀrey uses the standard propositional
rules and the rules of quantiﬁer interchange, which do not need to be modiﬁed.
But he also uses the following rule of existential quantiﬁer elimination, namely
(∃x)Fx/Fa,
where ‘a’ must be new, and a rule of universal quantiﬁer elimination
(x)Fx/Fb,
where ‘b’ must be old, unless no other individual terms are available. By reducing
closed formulas of the form ‘P.¬C’ to absurdity he then can prove ‘P ⊢C’, and
validate ‘P, so C’ in this calculus. Clearly, once we have added epsilon terms to
the language, the ﬁrst of these rules must be changed to
(∃x)Fx/FϵxFx,
but also the second rule must be changed to

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
405
(x)Fx/Fϵx¬Fx,
Fϵx¬Fx/Fa,
(where ‘a’ is old) to produce an appropriate proof procedure. Steen reads ‘ϵxFx’
as ‘the most F-like thing’ [Steen, 1972, p. 162], and the corresponding reading
of ‘ϵx¬Fx’ then explains why Fϵx¬Fx entails, for every a, Fa, since if the most
un-F-like thing is in fact F, then the most plausible counter-example to the gen-
eralisation has proven not to be so.
But there is a more important reason why the rule of universal quantiﬁer elim-
ination must be broken up into two parts. For Jeﬀrey’s rules only allow ‘limited
upward correctness’ [Jeﬀrey, 1967, p. 167], since in order to show that if an initial
sentence is false in a valuation so also is one of its conclusions, Jeﬀrey has to say,
with respect to his universal quantiﬁer elimination rule, that the quantiﬁcation
there be limited merely to the universe of discourse of the path. The pair of ep-
silon calculus rules which replace this rule ensure, by contrast, that there is ‘total
upwards correctness’, since if it is false that everything is F then for sure one of
the stated consequences of the universal statement is false, namely the immedi-
ate one. The reverse form of improvement is also apparent with the existential
quantiﬁer elimination rule. For Jeﬀrey, with his rule, can only get ‘limited down-
wards correctness’ [Jeﬀrey, 1967, p. 165], since it is not a strict entailment. Thus,
in order to show that if an initial sentence is true in a valuation so is one of its
conclusions, Jeﬀrey has to stretch his ‘truth’ so that it is a matter of being true
either in the given valuation, or some nominal variant of it. The corresponding
epsilon rule gets round this diﬃculty by not using names, only descriptions, and
by being, therefore, totally downward correct: if there is an F then that F is F,
irrespective of what name is used to refer to it. In explication of the predicate
calculus rule it might be said: suppose there is an F, well, call that F ‘a’, then
Fa. But the epsilon calculus precedes any such naming ceremony; it gets hold
of the more primitive, original way we have of referring to objects, and on which
naming so evidently relies: by means of demonstratives, like ‘that F’.
It is now clear why the Second Epsilon Theorem immediately follows. This the-
orem [Leisenring, 1969, p. 79] states that any epsilon calculus deduction between
epsilon-free premises and conclusion may be replaced by a predicate calculus de-
duction between the same formulas. But in axiomatic and other treatments of the
epsilon calculus, as we have seen, even if the premises and conclusion are epsilon-
free, still epsilon terms, and epsilon terms of any complexity, might still enter the
deduction, making the fact that any such deduction can be transformed into, or
replaced by a predicate calculus deduction very hard to prove. But the trans-
formation required to get a predicate calculus proof is now quite patent: simply
change to new names all epsilon terms introduced in the epsilon calculus quantiﬁer
elimination rules. This proof rests on the fact that, given epsilon-free premises and
conclusion all epsilon terms entering the epsilon calculus deduction are constant
epsilon terms. So we have above a direct proof of the Second Epsilon Theorem by
considering epsilon proofs eﬀectively in Leisenring’s epsilon star system (see also
[Hazen, 1987, pp. 412–413]). Meyer Viol, in his discussion of Arbitrary Object

406
Barry Hartley Slater
Theory [Meyer Viol, 1995, p. 49], also demonstrates the computational equiva-
lence between constant epsilon terms and the arbitrary names Fine uses, in his
version of predicate logic [Fine, 1985].
Epsilon terms which are non-constant, by contrast, crucially enter the proof of
the First Epsilon Theorem, which is a relative of Herbrand’s Theorem. The First
Epsilon Theorem [Leisenring, 1969, p. 78] states that if C is a provable predicate
calculus formula, in prenex normal form, then a ﬁnite disjunction of instances of
C’s matrix is provable in the epsilon calculus. Herbrand’s Theorem states that, if
C is a provable predicate calculus formula, in prenex normal form, then a certain
ﬁnite disjunction of instances of C’s matrix is provable in propositional logic —
given that the language is enriched with Herbrand functions. The epsilon calculus
enables us to formulate Herbrand functions, which arise when universal quantiﬁers
are eliminated from formulas. Thus, for instance,
(∃y)(x)¬Fyx,
is equivalent to
(∃y)¬FyϵxFyx,
where the epsilon term, which contains a variable, is a Herbrand function. Using
similar reductions, all universal quantiﬁers can be eliminated from prenex formu-
las, and the additional fact that, so to speak, existential quantiﬁers symbolise
disjunctions makes all such formulas equivalent to disjunctions. The exact state-
ment of the additional fact comes through applying K¨onig’s Lemma, which means
that, if there is no open path through a truth tree then there is some ﬁnite stage at
which there is no open path. Thus we get, in the case above, that if no valuation
makes the second formula’s negation true, then the tree of its instances must close
in a ﬁnite length. But the negative is a universal formula, and, under the univer-
sal quantiﬁer elimination rule, that means that a ﬁnite conjunction of instances
of the matrix Fyx reduces to absurdity, by propositional logic reasoning. By de
Morgan’s Laws, that makes tautologous a ﬁnite disjunction of instances of ¬Fyx.
By generalisation we get the First Epsilon Theorem, and Herbrand’s Theorem.
The epsilon calculus, however, can take us beyond Herbrand’s Theorem, for
one has to beware of the impression Herbrand’s theorem may give that existential
statements are equivalent to disjunctions. Existential statements, it may seem,
are not individual statements, but say instead that one of a group of objects has
a certain property, without specifying which. The group of objects is customarily
called the ‘domain’ of the quantiﬁcation, which has to be detailed, it consequently
seems, when setting out the semantics of these matters. But the reductions avail-
able within the epsilon calculus require that we do away with such ‘domains’, and
indeed such semantics — except, maybe, for pedagogic, or pragmatic purposes.
For the example above is also equivalent to
¬FaϵzFaz,
where
a = ϵy¬FϵxFyx,

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
407
and so why the above disjunction of instances of ¬Fyx is true is because a certain
speciﬁable one of its disjuncts is true. Herbrand’s theorem does not show that
an existential statement is equivalent to a certain disjunction; it shows that an
existential statement is provable if and only if a certain disjunction is provable.
But what is ultimately provable is not just a statement about a series of objects,
as lack of epsilon terms might lead us to believe, but instead a statement about
one object. Indeed the existential statement is provably equivalent to it. This is
what allows the epsilon substitution method to proceed; and it is what permits
continued anaphoric reference to the same object by reiteration of the epsilon term.
The existential quantiﬁer is, as a result, misleadingly thought of if it is taken to
relate to a plural universe of individuals: an existentially quantiﬁed statement is
just another statement about an individual — merely a nameless one.
A comparable point goes for the universal quantiﬁer. For, as we saw when dis-
cussing Hilbert’s views on Induction, a universal statement is not the conjunction
of its instances, even though it implies them. But that does not make it simply
a free variable statement, since it is, in fact, equivalent to a certain one of its in-
stances — the one involving the prime putative counterexample to it. Lack of the
ability to specify that prime putative counterexample to a universal statement is
what leaves predicate logic theorists, like Jeﬀrey, saying that if such a statement is
false then one of its instances is false without a way of ensuring that that instance
has been drawn, in the truth tree below it, except by limiting the interpretation of
the universal claim just to the universe of discourse of the path. It therefore seems
necessary that there be a ‘model’ for the universal statement which restricts it to a
certain ‘domain’, so that it does not strictly include everything. But in the epsilon
calculus the universal quantiﬁer does, invariably, mean everything, and there is no
need to specify its range.
Certainly it might be convenient to do so, to aid comprehension in some cases,
just as it was convenient to call ϵy¬FϵxFyx, ‘a’ immediately above.
But the
provision of a name, in such circumstances, is only an illustration, and likewise with
the nomination of a domain. Indeed, since domains are sets of a kind, there might
not be a domain, because the things in question might not be collectivisantes. We
shall look at this question more generally now, in connection with the semantics
of epsilon terms.
5
THE SEMANTICS OF EPSILON TERMS
Although nowadays the semantics of epsilon terms is commonly provided by means
of choice functions deﬁned on sets generally, the ﬁrst interpretations given to them
were purely arithmetical. Hilbert and Bernays developed a formal arithmetic based
on the epsilon calculus [Hilbert and Bernays, 1970, Book 2, p85f], c.f. [Leisenring,
1969, p. 92], in which there is another epsilon axiom, as was mentioned before.
That axiom can be variously formulated; a convenient form is
ϵxAx = st ⊃¬At,

408
Barry Hartley Slater
where ‘t’ is taken to be a numeral, and ‘s’ a function. This constrains the interpre-
tation of the epsilon symbol so that it can be taken to be a least number operator,
although that reading is not strictly forced, even with st taken to be the successor
of t, since the axiom then only ensures that no number having the property A
immediately precedes ϵxAx.
Nevertheless, this axiom is suﬃcient to establish the principle of Mathematical
Induction, in the form
(A0.(x)(Ax ⊃Asx)) ⊃(x)Ax.
For assume the reverse, namely
A0.(x)(Ax ⊃Asx).¬(x)Ax,
and consider what happens when the term ‘ϵx¬Ax’ is substituted in
t = 0vt = sn,
which is derivable from the other axioms of number theory. If we had
ϵx¬Ax = 0,
then, since A0, we would have Aϵx¬Ax. But since,
Aϵx¬Ax ≡(x)Ax,
we know that ¬Aϵx¬Ax, which means we cannot have ϵx¬Ax = 0. Hence
ϵx¬Ax = sn,
for some n. But from the above axiom
ϵx¬Ax = sn ⊃An,
hence An, although we must also have
An ⊃Asn,
which requires the impossible Aϵx¬Ax again. Hence the further epsilon axiom is
suﬃcient to establish the principle of Induction.
Now, on the least number interpretation, all the axioms of Hilbert and Bernays’
system are in fact true in the standard model, but if there was a ﬁnitary proof of
this we would have a ﬁnitary proof of the consistency of the system, against G¨odel’s
results. Ackermann, however, did produce a ﬁnitary proof of the consistency of
a restricted arithmetic, where the least number axiom is weakened so that the
variable x does not have a free occurrence in Ax within the scope of an epsilon
symbol. That means that in the principle of induction x does not have a free
occurrence in Ax within the scope of a quantiﬁer. The consistency proof in this

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
409
case proceeds using a form of the epsilon substitution method, replacing each
epsilon term in a proof with an appropriate epsilon-free term in such a manner that
every formula in the proof converts into a numerically true formula [Leisenring,
1969, pp. 98–99].
But why cannot there be such a proof in the general case? One aspect of G¨odel’s
proof of the impossibility of a ﬁnitary proof in general bears closely on the relation
between epsilon terms and choice. Put formally, the situation as G¨odel described
it is as follows. We have, for a certain formula ‘Ax’ (see, e.g. [Kneebone, 1963,
pp. 238–239]):
¬Pr(x, ‘(y)Ay’) ⊃(∃z)Pr(z, ‘Ax’),
and
Pr(x, ‘(y)Ay’) ⊃(∃z)Pr(z, ‘¬Ax’),
where ‘Q’ is the G¨odel number of formula ‘Q’, and ‘Pr(x, ‘Q’)’ says that x is the
G¨odel number of a proof of that formula. So if
Pr(x, ‘(y)Ay’),
then
(∃z)Pr(z, ‘¬Ax’),
although also
(∃z)Pr(z, ‘Ax’),
since ‘(y)Ay’ entails ‘Ax’. Hence if the system is consistent we have
(x)¬Pr(x, ‘(y)Ay’),
which means that
(x)(∃z)Pr(z, ‘Ax’).
But this result is, signiﬁcantly, about formulas containing G¨odel numbers, which
are represented by numerals. And while there would also be derivable ‘(∃x)(x =
ϵy¬Ay)’, since every epsilon term has a reference, there would not be derivable
‘x = ϵy¬Ay’ for any speciﬁc numeral ‘x’, because any such identity could only be
based on choice. So we would not have
(∃x)((∃z)Pr(z, ‘Ax’).(∃z)Pr(z, ‘x = ϵy¬Ay’)),
where ‘x’ ranges over numerals, and while it would be true in the standard model
that
(∃x)((∃z)Pr(z, ‘Ax’).x = ϵy¬Ay),
it is precisely the fact that the ﬁrst part of the latter is about the numeral signs
themselves which prevents the transparent substitution of the second part, and

410
Barry Hartley Slater
so prevents the universal expression, which states the facts, being derivable. If
instead we had
(∃x) (there is a proof that Ax.x = ϵy¬Ay),
as we did when considering Hilbert’s views on Induction, then we would have a
proof in the standard model of the universal conclusion, since transparent sub-
stitution would be available. G¨odel’s proof, in other words, was a piece of meta-
mathematics, and employed as a result a proof predicate — a predicate of (the
names of) formulas. But, by contrast, provability in natural language is not a
predicate of formulas: in locutions like ‘it is provable that p’ formulas are not
mentioned but used (to describe models), and so provability there is, grammati-
cally, a propositional operator on the formulas, which, as we shall see later, removes
any referential opacity.
So now we can amplify the point made in Section 2 about the Omega Rule,
and see just what the crucial diﬀerence is between humans and formal systems. It
lies in our ability to give formal systems interpretations. For G¨odel constructed a
proposition which was true but unprovable in the sense that while proofs, within
the system, of certain formulas ‘Ax’ were available for every ‘x’, there was no
proof within the system of the formula ‘(y)Ay’ — if the system was consistent.
Within an epsilon calculus setting, the explanation is that, while there are proofs
of ‘Ax’ for every numeral ‘x’, there is no proof of ‘x = ϵy¬Ay’ for any numeral
‘x’ — since otherwise there would be a proof of ‘(y)Ay’. Nevertheless, within the
standard model it is true that x = ϵy¬Ay, for some natural number x, and so
from the appropriate facts about the standard model, namely that A0, A1, A2 . . .
etc., we can still deduce that (y)Ay, since we know that one of the premises is
equivalent to it. In short, by choosing the standard model we identify ϵy¬Ay with
a natural number; that identity is then necessary; but what is necessary is not
always provable, i.e. analytically a priori, since sometimes it is just a matter of
decision and choice, as we saw in the resolution of vagueness before.
The relation between epsilon terms and choice functions was ﬁrst set out by
Asser, although Asser’s semantics for an elementary epsilon calculus with just
the ﬁrst epsilon axiom interprets epsilon terms in this most general case as de-
noting certain rather complex functions. Meyer Viol, calling this kind of epsilon
calculus an ‘intensional epsilon calculus’, simply takes the epsilon terms to name
chosen Skolem functions, as was mentioned brieﬂy before. Skolem functions arise
in connection with Skolem’s Theorem, which states that, if a formula in prenex
normal form is provable in the predicate calculus, then a certain corresponding for-
mula, with the existential quantiﬁers removed, is provable in a predicate calculus
enriched with Skolem function symbols. A much stronger, and non-metalogical
version of this theorem is provable in the epsilon calculus from which Skolem’s
actual theorem follows, since we can get, for instance,
(x)(∃y)Fxy ≡(x)FxϵyFxy.
Hence if the left hand side is provable in the epsilon calculus the right hand side

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
411
is provable there. But the left hand side is provable in the epsilon calculus if it
is provable in the predicate calculus, by the Second Epsilon Theorem; and if the
right hand side is provable in the epsilon calculus it is provable in a predicate
calculus enriched with the appropriate function symbols. So, by generalisation,
we get Skolem’s original result.
When we add to the above intensional epsilon calculus Bourbaki’s second epsilon
axiom
(x)(Fx ≡Gx) ⊃ϵxFx = ϵxGx,
the interpretation of epsilon terms is commonly said to be extensional, i.e.
in
terms of sets, although that requires that the predicates be collectivisantes, as
when ‘Fx’ and ‘Gx’ are explicit set membership statements. The epsilon terms in
that case designate choice functions, i.e. functions which select one from a given
set [Leisenring, 1969, p. 19], [Meyer Viol, 1995, p. 42]. In the case where there
are no F’s the selection is taken arbitrarily from the universe at large, although
the selection is invariably the same, which means the second axiom then validates
Kalish and Montague’s rule for improper deﬁnite descriptions, in the form
ϵxFx = ϵx¬(x = x).
Kalish and Montague in fact prove a version of the second epsilon axiom in their
system [Kalish and Montague, 1964, p. 246]. The same axiom holds in Hermes’
system [Hermes, 1965], although there one also ﬁnds a third epsilon axiom,
ϵx¬(x = x) = ϵx(x = x),
for which there would seem to be no real justiﬁcation.
But the second epsilon axiom itself is a rather odd one, as we have noted before.
One strange thing about it is that both Leisenring and Meyer Viol forget to state
the assumption that the predicates in question must determine sets before their
semantics can apply (although see [Leisenring, 1969, p. 103, p108]). Indeed, they
merely presume this in their model theory, which is drawn from Asser, since ‘ϵxBx’
is just modelled by means of a choice from the set of things which in the model are
B. The case where there are no things which are B is then catered for in a special
clause dealing with the empty set; but there is no allowance for mass terms, for
instance, i.e. for the case where there is some B, although no discrete Bs, and
so no set of them. With continuous quantities there are no ﬁxed elements to be
counted (c.f. [Bunt, 1985, pp. 262–263 in particular]), even though numbers can
be associated with them, in terms of multiples of an arbitrary unit.
In fact, even when there is a set of the things in question, the second epsilon ax-
iom, in the form above, does not apply in general, for we must allow for intensional
discriminations between properties, as in, for instance, ‘There is a red-haired man,
and a Caucasian in the room, and they are diﬀerent’. In such a case, if there were
only red-haired Caucasians in the room, then, given the second epsilon axiom,
we could not extend the epsilon substitutions to discriminate the two people in
question.

412
Barry Hartley Slater
But not only that makes the second epsilon axiom debatable, for its addition to
the rest of the classical epsilon calculus with identity which we saw in Bourbaki is
not conservative (c.f. [Yashuhara, 1982]). In particular we can prove
QϵxPx ≡Qϵx(PxvPx),
by taking ‘Fx’ as ‘Px’, and ‘Gx’ as ‘PxvPx’ in the second epsilon axiom, and then
using the other identity axiom given before (Leibniz’ Law). But this new theorem
is even in the language of the intensional epsilon calculus without identity. This
may remind us that it is necessary co-extensionality which is the standard criterion
for property identity (c.f. [Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, pp. 209–210]), and so it
points to the coherence of an intermediate system, which adds just an intensional
version of the second epsilon axiom to the above intensional epsilon calculus, viz:
L(x)(Fx ≡Gx) ⊃ϵxFx = ϵxGx.
For then, within an appropriate modal logic, namely one which contains the rule
of Necessitation, at least all the predicate co-extensionalities which can be proved
will engender identities between the associated epsilon terms. So we can get the
above new theorem, and all others derivable in the same way.
Moreover the original second epsilon axiom is then provable, when the predicates
express explicit set membership. For if necessarily
(x)(x ∈y ≡x ∈z) ≡y = z,
and
y = z ≡L(y = z),
then
L(x)(x ∈y ≡x ∈z) ≡(x)(x ∈y ≡x ∈z),
and so, from the modalised second axiom we get
(x)(x ∈y ≡x ∈z) ⊃ϵx(x ∈y) = ϵx(x ∈z).
Adding the second epsilon axiom to the original intensional epsilon calculus
would therefore seem to be sensible only so long as all the predicates are understood
in terms of set membership. This is not uncommon, indeed it is pervasive in the
traditional semantics for predicate logic. But, as Russell’s Paradox showed, there
is a demonstrable ‘naivety’ about this understanding, unless it is taken just as an
illustration, since it presumes all predicates are collectivisantes. If, by contrast, we
respect the fact that not all predicates determine sets then we should remain with
just the ﬁrst epsilon axiom, placed in an appropriate modal setting, and with the
modalised version of the second epsilon axiom given above. Then we can apply that
epsilon calculus to the special case where the predicates express set membership
without any further epsilon axiom. The interpretation of epsilon terms is thus

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
413
invariably as Skolem functions, though in the special case of the membership of
sets, naturally those Skolem functions turn out to be choice functions.
But an epsilon system which is even more revealing of the distinction between
predicates and sets, and also the nature of numbers, can be obtained from the
arithmetic set out by Bostock in 1974. This deduces Peano’s axioms from Frege’s
deﬁnitions of the (exact) numerical quantiﬁers [Bostock, 1974, p. 21], starting
from [Bostock, 1974, p. 10]:
(0x)Fx ≡¬(∃x)Fx,
(1x)Fx ≡(∃x)(Fx.(0y)(Fy.¬(x = y))),
(2x)Fx ≡(∃x)(Fx.(1y)(Fy.¬(x = y))) . . .
and using quantiﬁcation over the resulting numeral places. Induction is then de-
duced from an axiom which ﬁxes the range of the numerical variables, requiring
that any positive number bears the ancestral of the successor relation to 0.
One has to be a triﬂe careful with the deﬁnitions of 0 and 1, however, once one
remembers the possibility of mass terms. For if there is no gold, then while the
number of ingots of gold, or rings of gold, is zero, there is still no number of gold;
and even if there is only one bit of gold, that does not mean there is one gold. A
number is always a number of Ps, where ‘P’ is a count term. But we can deﬁne a
count term in the following way: if ‘n’ ranges from 2 upwards then a count term
F is such that
(∃n)(nx)Fx
or
((∃x)(y)(Fy ≡y = x).M(∃n)(nx)Fx))
or
(¬(∃x)Fx.M(∃n)(nx)Fx),
and the second and third disjuncts in this deﬁnition are what may be abbreviated
to ‘(1x)Fx’, ‘(0x)Fx’. For a count term is only guaranteed if there can be two
or more of the items in question, and so the possibility of this must always be
inserted. Also, the restriction in the case of the number 1 is required not just
because of the possibility of mass terms, but also because of proper names: ‘is
Peter’, for instance, will hold of just one thing without ‘is one Peter’ holding.
That means that, allowing ‘n’ to range from zero upwards, ϵn(ny)Fy is then the
number of F’s, and, by the epsilon deﬁnition of the existential quantiﬁer, it is what
numbers them (i.e. ([ϵn(ny)Fy]x)Fx), if they have a number (i.e. if (∃n)(nx)Fx).
But in the opposite case it is the resultant arbitrariness of the referent of the
epsilon term which must be remembered. With the cows in a ﬁeld, for instance,
we can associate a determinate number, but with the beef there we cannot do
this without ﬁrst specifying some unit — pound, kilogram, etc. Thus it is not
that there is some non-ﬁnite, speciﬁc number in the opposite case, but merely
that there is no determinate number [Tiles, 1989, p. 63]. If ¬(∃n)(nx)Fx, then
¬((ϵn(ny)Fy)x)Fx, and so, although the number exists, it does not number the
F’s.

414
Barry Hartley Slater
Tiles has pointed out that the distinction between count terms and mass terms
is a distinction lacking in Frege’s logic [Tiles, 1989, p. 151], c.f. [Wright, 1983, pp.
2–3]:
...the basis on which Frege applies the concept of Number to a concept
is that of the existence of a one-one correspondence between the exten-
sions of concepts, and it is just not clear whether, within the framework
established by Frege, there could be a one-one correspondence between
the class of red things and some other class (the class of blue things,
for example). This is because the distinction between concepts which
do and concepts which do not determine a unit is not reﬂected in his
formal notation; the notation suggests, but does not assert, that the
concept of Number will be applicable to concepts without restriction.
But the case where no unit is determined, which deﬁnes mass terms, Bostock has
separated out, and handles in terms of amounts [Bostock, 1979]. As a result, only
in a case where a unit is determined do we have a determinate number of discrete
items, and thereby a set of them. Count nouns are the natural characterisation of
those predicates which are collectivisantes, and nouns more generally, it might be
said, are the natural expression for ‘classes’.
But if we are dealing just with predicates which are set membership expressions,
then, as before, we can prove a version of the second epsilon axiom in Bostock’s
language, viz
(n)((nx)Fx ≡(nx)Gx) ⊃ϵn(nx)Fx = ϵn(nx)Gx.
So what we give the name ‘9’ to, for instance, might as much be the number of the
planets as it is the number of any other, equinumerous set. The natural numbers
can thus be deﬁned by means of any series of appropriately sized sets, and are not
just identiﬁable from one such series, as Benacerraf previously showed [Benacerraf,
1965]. And the deﬁnition of 9 is possible in terms of what might otherwise seem
to be a physical contingency, since the identity
9 is the number of the planets,
i.e.
9 = ϵn(nx)Px,
is necessary, even though the related, predicative form
9 numbers the planets,
i.e.
(9x)Px,

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
415
is contingent. It is contingent that the number of the planets does number the
planets, because it is not necessary that ([ϵn(ny)Py]x)Px. Also there might have
been a diﬀerent set of planets, so that, for example, while in fact
(x)(x ∈p ≡Px),
with p the actual set of planets, and
ϵn(nx)(x ∈p) = ϵn(nx)Px = 9,
it is still possible that
(x)(x ∈p′ ≡Px),
with p’ the set of planets in some other possible world, and
ϵn(nx)(x ∈p′) ̸= 9.
We could not have this further contingency, however, if the unmodalised second
epsilon axiom held universally, since that requires that even if one only has con-
tingently
(x)(Fx ≡x ∈z),
then one can still get
ϵxFx = ϵx(x ∈z).
Using the modalised second axiom, if one only has contingently
(x)(Fx ≡x ∈z),
then one cannot get, on that basis,
ϵxFx = ϵx(x ∈z),
which allows the sets of F’s to vary from one possible world to another, while still
being sets of F’s.
6
DESCRIPTIONS AND IDENTITY
When one begins to investigate the predicative meaning of epsilon terms, it is per-
haps signiﬁcant that Leisenring does not discuss the epsilon substitution method,
or the general place of theorems of the epsilon calculus, outside of Hilbert’s phi-
losophy of Finitism.
He notes the ‘formal superiority’ of the epsilon calculus,
comparing some of its pedagogic features with the comparable ones in the pred-
icate calculus (see also [Routley, 1969; Hazen, 1987]); but he justiﬁes the epsilon
calculus as the better logic merely by reference to the Second Epsilon Theorem
[Leisenring, 1969, p. 63]. Apparently its main value, in Leisenring’s day, was that
it could prove all that was provable in the predicate calculus but in a smarter,

416
Barry Hartley Slater
and less tedious way. Epsilon terms, for Leisenring, were just clever calculating
instruments.
Evidently there is more to the epsilon calculus than this, but until more recent
times only the signiﬁcance and usefulness of the ﬁrst epsilon axiom itself has been
dwelt upon. There are a couple of further theorems within the epsilon calculus,
however, which will show its extended range of application: they are about the na-
ture and identity of individuals, as beﬁts a calculus which systematically provides
a means of reference to them.
The need to provide logically proper names for individuals only became gener-
ally evident some while after Russell’s work on the theory of descriptions (see e.g.
[Rosser, 1953]). The major diﬃculty with providing properly referential terms for
individuals, in classical predicate logic, is what to do with ‘non-denoting’ terms,
and Quine, following Frege, simply gave them an arbitrary, though speciﬁc referent
[Marciszewski, 1981, p. 113]. The approach was formalised perhaps most fully by
Kalish and Montague [Kalish and Montague, 1964, pp. 242–243], who gave the
two rules:
(∃x)(y)(Fy ≡y = x)/FιxFx,
¬(∃x)(y)(Fy ≡y = x)/ιxFx = ιx¬(x = x),
where, in explicitly epsilon terms, we would have
ιxFx = ϵx(y)(Fy ≡y = x).
Kalish and Montague were of the opinion, however, that their second rule ‘has
no intuitive counterpart, simply because ordinary language shuns improper def-
inite descriptions’ [Kalish and Montague, 1964, p. 244]. And certainly, in that
period, the revelations which Donnellan was to publish [Donnellan, 1966] about
non-attributive deﬁnite descriptions, were not well known. But ordinary language
does not, we now know, avoid non-attributive deﬁnite descriptions, although their
referents are not as constant as Kalish and Montague’s second rule requires. In
fact, by being improper their referents are not ﬁxed by semantics at all: like demon-
stratives the referents of logically proper names are found only in their pragmatic
use.
Stalnaker and Thomason were more appropriately liberal with their referential
terms [Stalnaker and Thomason, 1968; Thomason and Stalnaker, 1968]. And their
referential terms also had to apply, they knew, in every possible world [Thomason
and Stalnaker, 1968, p. 363]:
In contrast with the Russellian analysis, deﬁnite descriptions are treated
as genuine singular terms; but in general they will not be substance
terms [rigid designators]. An expression like ιxPx is assigned a refer-
ent which may vary from world to world. If in a given world there is
a unique existing individual which has the property corresponding to
P, this individual is the referent of ιxPx; otherwise, ιxPx refers to an
arbitrarily chosen individual which does not exist in that world.

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
417
Stalnaker and Thomason realised that ‘A substance term is much like what Russell
called a logically proper name’, but thought that an individual constant might or
might not be a substance term, depending on whether it was more like ‘Socrates’
or ‘Miss America’ [Thomason and Stalnaker, 1968, p.
362].
It was Stalnaker
and Thomason, however, who inspired Fitting’s S4 epsilon calculus, mentioned
before, in which substance terms were absent (see [Fitting and Mendelsohn, 1998,
p. 195]). A fuller coverage of identity and descriptions, in modal and general
intensional contexts, is to be found in [Routley et al., 1974], and [Routley, 1977],
see also [Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, Ch 11]. But, regretably, the epsilon theory
of descriptions presented in the ﬁrst edition of Hughes and Cresswell’s classic
text, as an alternative to Russell’s theory, does not appear in the second edition
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1996]; and there is no treatment of it at all in Fitting and
Mendelsohn’s recent treatise on ﬁrst order modal logic [Fitting and Mendelsohn,
1998]. With the Australian thinkers Routley, Meyer and Goddard, however, we
ﬁnd the explicit identiﬁcation of deﬁnite descriptions with epsilon terms, as in
ιxFx = ϵx(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x)),
([Goddard and Routley, 1973, p. 558], [Routley, 1980, p. 277], c.f. [Hughes and
Cresswell, 1968, p. 203]).
Which theorems in the epsilon calculus are behind these kinds of identiﬁcation?
There is one theorem in particular which demonstrates strikingly the relation
between Russell’s attributive, and some of Donnellan’s non-attributive ideas. For
(∃x)(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x).Gx)
is logically equivalent to
(∃x)(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x)).Ga,
where a = ϵx(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x)). For the latter is equivalent to
Fa.(y)(Fy ⊃y = a).Ga,
which entails the former. But the former is
Fb.(y)(Fy ⊃y = b).Gb,
with b = ϵx(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x).Gx), and so entails
(∃x)(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x)),
and
Fa.(y)(Fy ⊃y = a).
But then, from the uniqueness clause,
a = b,

418
Barry Hartley Slater
and so
Ga,
making the former entail the latter.
The former expression, as we have seen, encapsulates Russell’s Theory of De-
scriptions, in connection with ‘The F is G’; it involves the explicit assertion of
the ﬁrst two clauses, to do with the existence and uniqueness of an F. A pre-
suppositional account like that in Hilbert and Bernays, which was later popu-
larised by Strawson, would not involve the direct assertion of these two clauses:
on a pre-suppositional account they form the precondition without which ‘the F’
cannot be introduced into the language. But both of these accounts forget the use
we have for non-attributive deﬁnite descriptions. Since Donnellan, we now know
that there are no preconditions on the introduction of ‘the F’; and ‘The F is G’,
as a result, may always be given a truth value. Hence ‘Ga’ properly formalises
it. If the description is non-attributive, i.e. if the ﬁrst two clauses of Russell’s
account are not both true, then the referent of ‘The F’ is simply up to the speaker
to nominate.
But one detail about Donnellan’s actual account must be noted at this point.
He was originally concerned with deﬁnite descriptions which were improper in the
sense that they did not uniquely describe what the speaker took to be their referent.
And on that understanding the description might still be ‘proper’ in the above
sense — if there still was something to which it uniquely applied. Speciﬁcally,
Donnellan would originally allow ‘the man with martini in his glass’ to refer to
someone without martini in his glass whether or not there was some unique man
with martini in his glass. But someone talking about ‘the man with martini in
his glass’ can be rightly taken to be talking about who this phrase describes, if it
does in fact describe someone — Devitt and Bertolet pointed this out in criticism
of Donnellan [Devitt, 1974; Bertolet, 1980]. It is this latter part of our linguistic
behaviour which the epsilon account of deﬁnite descriptions respects, for it permits
deﬁnite descriptions to be referring terms without being attributive, but only so
long as nothing has the description in question. Hence it is not the ﬁrst quantiﬁed
statement above, but only, so to speak, the third part of it extracted which makes
the remark ‘The F is G’.
This becomes plain when we translate the two statements using relative and
personal pronouns:
There is one and only one F, which is G,
There is one and only one F; it is G.
For ‘it’ here is an anaphoric pronoun for ‘the (one and only) F’, and it still has
this reference even if there is no such thing, because that is just a matter of the
grammar of the language. Now the uniqueness clause is required for two such
statements to be equivalent — without it there would be no equivalence, as we
shall see — and that means that the relative pronoun ‘which’ is not itself equivalent
to the personal pronoun ‘it’. So it was because Russell’s logic could not separate

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
419
the (bound) relative pronoun from the (unbound) personal pronoun that it could
not formulate the logically proper name for ‘it’, and instead had to take the whole
of the ﬁrst expression as the meaning of ‘The F is G’. Using just the logic derived
from Frege, it could not separate out the cross-referential last clause.
But how can something be the one and only F ‘if there is no such thing’? That
is where a second theorem in the epsilon calculus is required:
(Fa.(y)(Fy ⊃y = a)) ⊃a = ϵx(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x)).
For the singular thing is that this entailment cannot be reversed, so there is a dif-
ference between the left hand side and the right hand side, i.e. between something
being alone F, and that thing being the one and only F. We get from the left
hand side to the right hand side once we see the left hand side entails
(∃x)(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x)),
and so
Fϵx(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x)).(z)(Fz ⊃z = ϵx(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x))).
By the uniqueness clause we get the right hand side. But if we substitute ‘ϵx(Fx.(y)
(Fy ⊃y = x))’ for ‘a’ in the whole implication then the right hand side is neces-
sarily true. But the left hand side is then equivalent to
(∃x)(Fx.(y)(Fy ⊃y = x)),
which is, in general, contingent; hence the implication cannot be logically reversed.
As we saw in connection with the number of the planets, having the property of
numbering the planets (being alone F) is contingent, but possessing the identity
of the number of the planets (being identical with the one and only F) is neces-
sary. The diﬀerence is not available in Russell’s logic, since only possession of the
property can be formalised there. In fact Russell confused the two forms, since
possession of an identifying property he formalised using the identity sign
a = ιxFx,
making it appear that some, maybe even all identities are contingent. But all
proper identities are necessary, and it is merely associated identifying properties
which are contingent. Ironically, Frege used a complete term for deﬁnite descrip-
tions in his extensional logic, as was mentioned before.
But Russell explicitly
argued against the arbitrariness of Frege’s deﬁnition, in the case where there isn’t
just one F, when setting up his alternative, attributive theory of descriptions, in
‘On Denoting’.
Had Frege’s complete term been more widely used, and, for a
start, used in his intensional logic, results like those above might have been more
widely known earlier.
Now Hughes and Cresswell appreciated that in addition to ‘contingent identities’
there were also necessary identities, and diﬀerentiated between them as follows
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, p. 191]:

420
Barry Hartley Slater
Now it is contingent that the man who is in fact the man who lives
next door is the man who lives next door, for he might have lived
somewhere else; that is living next door is a property which belongs
contingently, not necessarily, to the man to whom it does belong. And
similarly, it is contingent that the man who is in fact the mayor is the
mayor; for someone else might have been elected instead. But if we
understand [The man who lives next door is the mayor] to mean that
the object which (as a matter of contingent fact) possesses the property
of being the man who lives next door is identical with the object which
(as a matter of contingent fact) possesses the property of being the
mayor, then we are understanding it to assert that a certain object
(variously described) is identical with itself, and this we need have no
qualms about regarding as a necessary truth. This would give us a way
of construing identity statements which makes [(x = y) ⊃L(x = y)]
perfectly acceptable: for whenever x = y is true we can take it as
expressing the necessary truth that a certain object is identical with
itself.
There is more hangs on this matter, however, than Hughes and Cresswell appre-
ciated. For now that we have the logically proper names, i.e. complete symbols
to take the place of the variables in such expressions as ‘x = y′, not only do we
see better where the contingency of the properties of such individuals comes from
— just the linguistic possibility of improper deﬁnite descriptions — we also see,
contrariwise, why constant epsilon terms must be rigid — because identities in-
volving such terms are necessary. We shall see later that there is a further reason
why constant epsilon terms must be rigid.
Certainly Stalnaker and Thomason did not see the matter in this kind of way.
As before, they wanted to say there were two kinds of individual constants: ones
like ‘Socrates’ which can take the place of individual variables, and others like
‘Miss America’ which cannot. But, as we shall see, in the sense required it is the
function ‘Miss America in year t’ which is in question in the second case, and that
is not an individual constant — though it can still take the place of an individual
variable. Of course, constant epsilon terms being rigid is not entirely incompatible
with Fitting’s approach, since Fitting, although he denied there could be rigid
terms, at least was clear that he was analysing functional epsilon terms, for which
there is still a place. It was Routley, Meyer and Goddard who discussed most fully
the possibility of rigid individual terms, and sorted out many of their properties,
even while they were not completely convinced about them.
Routley presented several rigid intensional semantics, some objectival and some
substitutional [Routley, 1977, pp. 185–186]. One of these semantics, for instance,
simply took the ﬁrst epsilon axiom to hold in any interpretation, and made the
value of any epsilon term itself. Using such a rigid semantics, Routley, Meyer and
Goddard obtained what has been called ‘Routley’s Formula’, i.e.
L(∃x)Fx ⊃(∃x)LFx,

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
421
by means of the following transformations. Routley’s Formula, on such a seman-
tics, holds for any propositional operator and any predicate, but they illustrated
it in the case of necessity, and with ‘Fx’ as ‘x numbers the planets’. Then, with
‘ϵxFx’ as ‘the number of the planets’, they said that from
L(∃x)Fx,
we can get
LFϵxFx,
by the epsilon deﬁnition of the existential quantiﬁer, and so
(∃x)LFx,
by existential generalisation over the term [Routley et al., 1974, p. 308], see also
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, pp. 197, 204]. But Routley still had doubts about
whether a rigid semantics was philosophically unobjectionable [Routley, 1977, p.
186]:
Rigid semantics tend to clutter up the semantics for enriched systems
with ad hoc modelling conditions. More important, rigid semantics,
whether substitutional or objectual, are philosophically objectionable.
For one thing, they make Vulcan and Hephaestus everywhere indis-
tinguishable though there are intensional claims that hold of one but
not of the other. The standard escape from this sort of problem, that
of taking proper names like ‘Vulcan’ as disguised descriptions we have
already found wanting...Flexible semantics, which satisfactorily avoid
these objections, impose a more objectual interpretation, since, even if
[the domain] is construed as the domain of terms, [the value of a term
in a world] has to be permitted, in some cases at least, to vary from
world to world.
Accordingly, while Routley, Meyer and Goddard defended Routley’s Formula, and
said, for instance, that there was a number which necessarily numbers the planets,
namely the number of the planets (np), they thought that this was only in fact the
same as 9, so that one still could not argue correctly that as L(np numbers the
planets), so L(9 numbers the planets). ‘For extensional identity does not warrant
intersubstitutivity in intensional frames’ [Routley et al., 1974, p. 309].
This means that Routley, Meyer and Goddard denied the necessity of iden-
tity, but if, instead, one wants to use ‘=’ to embrace it, one merely again dis-
tinguishes ‘9 = ϵn(nx)Px’, from ‘(9x)Px’, and from ‘9 = ϵn(nx)(x ∈p)’, as we
shall see in even more detail shortly. Vulcan then is without doubt Hephaestos,
even though, for instance, stories about diﬀerent numbers of gods might be told
in Greek mythology as opposed to Roman mythology, putting the craftsman god
in diﬀerent contexts.
But to have the rigidity fully clear, the formal objections Routley had to his
rigid semantics above must also be met. Routley viewed the imposition of the ﬁrst

422
Barry Hartley Slater
epsilon axiom in any model as ‘ad hoc’. He therefore did not see it as logically
true, i.e. as a law applicable universally, determining what is a possible model.
Instead he thought of it as being something which itself is applicable in certain
models rather than others. Certainly the formula which expresses the ﬁrst epsilon
axiom might be given a variety of interpretations in diﬀerent worlds. But, as we
shall shortly see, rigidity requires that we move away from that meta-linguistic
way of thinking. Mention of the formula has to be eliminated, to be replaced by
its use. It is the ﬁrst epsilon axiom formula interpreted a certain, ﬁxed way which
necessarily is true in every model.
7
RIGID EPSILON TERMS
I will now discuss some further work, which is a part of this history, but which in
particular, I believe, has helped us to see just why reference in modal and general
intensional constructions must be rigid. I will explain how it relates to the other
formal, epsilon calculus work in this area, mentioned before, by Routley, Meyer
and Goddard, and how this intersects with the views of Fitting, also Stalnaker
and Thomason. It involves a re-ordering of our views on semantics, as has been
evident in a few places already, and it begins outside the area of predicate logic
altogether, in a review of the standard semantics of propositional logic.
When one thinks of ‘semantics’ one thinks of the valuation of formulas, but it
is only since the 1920s that this kind of study has supplemented the traditional
kind of proof theory, which before that had dominated Logic. In the truth tables
that Post and Wittgenstein introduced, for instance, it may indeed seem we get a
quite diﬀerent thing from any ‘proof theory’. Proof Theory we might, at one time,
have associated with axiomatic procedures, for one thing, but certainly, in all its
forms, nowadays, with ‘the object language’. The theory of truth which Tarski
developed depends centrally upon the separation of object and meta-languages
— and in fact we may seem obliged to make such a discrimination because of
the threat of contradictions from semantic paradoxes, if there was, by contrast,
‘semantic closure’ (c.f. [Priest, 1984]). Truth may thus appear to be inescapably
a meta-concept, and certainly to be a predicate of sentences. On the other hand,
because of Tarski’s Theorem, we know that what is true, in Tarski’s metalinguistic
sense, is not representable.
There is a quite diﬀerent way of looking at these things, however, which is
deliberately non-Tarskian, and which others have followed (see [Prior, 1971, Ch 7],
and, for instance, [Sayward, 1987]). This involves, at the propositional level, taking
‘it is true that’ as the basic truth locution. This is not a meta-predicate of object
level sentences, but an object level propositional operator, and its manipulations
in truth tables are then just another form of proof procedure — any completeness
and soundness results in connection with it merely show that there are two ways of
arriving at exactly the same theorems. Use of truth tables proves things, as does
use of truth trees; the proofs are not axiomatic ones, but that is another issue. In
fact, if there are proofs using the propositional operator notion of truth then this

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
423
notion is eliminable, producing immediately a non-‘semantical’ proof procedure.
For operator truth is deﬁnable, but eliminable, because of the necessity of
p ≡it is true that p,
since ‘it is true that’ is the null, identity modality.
The Liar Paradox is then avoided because self-reference is not obtainable with
propositional operators [Slater, 1992c]. It might be true or false of a certain subject
s that it is P, and so, in particular, that it is false might be true or false of the
thought that p. But for that it is false to be true or false of itself would be for it
to be true or false of the thought that it is false, i.e. something whose expression
still contains a waiting pronoun. Can it be said of something without a waiting
pronoun, such as the sentence ‘The sentence at the top of the page is false’, that
it is true or false of anything — in particular that it is true or false of itself, if it
is the sentence at the top of the page? No: for there is no place waiting in that
sentence for the name of any thing it might be true or false of to be inserted. That
it is false is the sort of thing which might be true or false of something — the
sentence at the top of the page, and even that sentence when it is the sentence
previously given — but that is a possibility only because ‘that it is false’ has a
space waiting to be ﬁlled in the appropriate way. And the presence of that space
is just what shows appropriate self-reference is not obtainable.
In fact, that it is false is false of the illustrated sentence (no matter where it
might be), because sentences are neither true nor false. What might be true or
false is that s is P, but ‘that s is P’ is not a sentence, it is a noun phrase — a
demonstrative referring phrase to a thought. The use of such referring phrases
most forcefully appears if the sentence at the top of the page is a Strengthened
Liar, like ‘The sentence at the top of the page is false, or neither true nor false’.
Then — since no sentence at the top of the page is either true or false, and so
any there is either false, or neither true nor false — wouldn’t we, contradictorily,
have to say that the sentence actually there was true, since it states the facts? No:
because what is true is simply that the sentence at the top of the page is false or
neither true nor false, not ‘the sentence at the top of the page is false or neither
true nor false’. Hence there is no problem with Liars, or Strengthened Liars; and
we shall see this point again, in even more detail, later.
Propositional operators include ‘it is provable that’, which is distinct from
G¨odel’s provability predicate, as G¨odel himself pointed out [G¨odel, 1980]. They
also include ‘it is necessary that’ and ‘it is believed that’, for instance, and the
attempt to see these, along with ‘it is true that’, as metalinguistic predicates was
a general feature of the philosophy of logic in the early decades of the last cen-
tury, for instance in Quine’s treatment of modality and intensionality. On that
approach, someone would be believing that the Morning Star is in the sky, but
the Evening Star is not, if, respectively, they did, and did not assent to the two
associated sentences. After Montague’s and Thomason’s work in the 1960’s and
1970’s [Montague, 1963; Thomason, 1977; Thomason, 1980] we are now more con-
vinced that ‘indirect discourse is not quotational’, as Thomason put it, but the

424
Barry Hartley Slater
earlier generation considered only what words the agent would use.
The change requires seeing the subordinate sentence in indirect speech as not
in the words of the agent, but instead in the words of the reporter. That is indeed
the core of what reported speech is about — putting something into one’s own
words rather than quoting them from another source. Thus someone may say
Celia believed a woman was in the room, but it was the man there.
contains a transparent intensional locution, with the same object ‘inside’ the belief
as ‘outside’ in the room. Here is where the rigid constant epsilon terms come in,
in symbolising the cross-reference:
Bc(∃x)(Wx.Rx).(y)((My.Ry) ≡y = ϵxBc(Wx.Rx)).
But to get a full grasp of the matter, we must parllel in the general case the
shift from meta-predicate to object language propositional operator which we saw
above with truth.
But to get a full grasp of the matter, we must parallel in the general case the
shift from meta-predicate to object language propositional operator which we saw
above with truth.
Routley, Meyer and Goddard, it will be remembered, saw that a rigid semantics
required treating the ‘x’ in such expressions as ‘BcWx’ as open for quantiﬁcation.
They derived, as before, ‘Routley’s Formula’, which in the case of necessity is
L(∃x)Fx ⊃(∃x)LFx.
But now we can see, in a better way than Routley, Meyer and Goddard, how the
number of the planets provides a clear illustration of the validity of this formula.
The fact that some concepts may not have a number is crucially what must be
appreciated, but also it must be remembered how the referential, and attributive
senses of individual terms are distinguished. For, with ‘Fx’ as ‘x = ϵn(ny)Py’ the
entailment holds because identities are necessary, making both sides of the formula
true. But if ‘Fx’ is ‘(xy)Py’ this is contingent, since, as before, it is contingent
that there is a number of planets, instead of just planetary material; and that
makes both sides of the formula false.
Hughes and Cresswell argue against Routley’s Formula, saying [Hughes and
Cresswell, 1968, p. 144]:
...let [Fx] be ‘x is the number of the planets’. Then the antecedent
is true, for there must be some number which is the number of the
planets (even if there were no planets at all there would still be such a
number, viz. 0): but the consequent is false, for since it is a contingent
matter how many planets there are, there is no number which must be
the number of the planets.

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
425
But this overlooks mass terms, which do not involve a unit without some arbitrary
nomination, with the consequence, as we have seen, that any number associated
with an amount does not number the amount, being related instead to the chosen
unit. The attempt to see continua in terms of a ﬁxed number has been central to
the development of Analysis, and Set Theory, and it has also inﬂuenced advanced
logic as well, supporting the set-theoretic semantics of predicate logic. Certainly
if the term involved is a count noun then there will be a number (maybe 0) of the
F’s then determined. But the number associated with some F does not number
any Fs, with the result that the antecedent of Routley’s Formula is not necessarily
true.
Quine, of course, considered the example of the number of the planets in his
famous argument against the possibility of quantiﬁcation into modal contexts. He
said [Quine, 1960, pp. 195–197]:
If for the sake of argument we accept the term ‘analytic’ as predicable
of sentences (hence as attachable predicatively to quotations or other
singular terms designating sentences), then ‘necessarily’ amounts to ‘is
analytic’ plus an antecedent pair of quotation marks. For example, the
sentence:
(1) Necessarily 9 is greater than 4
is explained thus:
(2) ‘9 is greater than 4’ is analytic...
So suppose (1) explained as in (2).
Why, one may ask, should we
preserve the operatorial form as of (1), and therewith modal logic,
instead of just leaving matters as in (2)? An apparent advantage is the
possibility of quantifying into modal positions; for we know we cannot
quantify into quotation, and (2) uses quotation...
But is it more legitimate to quantify into modal positions than into
quotation? For consider (1) even without regard to (2); surely, on any
plausible interpretation, (1) is true and this is false:
(3) Necessarily the number of major planets is greater than 4.
Since 9 = the number of major planets, we can conclude that the posi-
tion of ‘9’ in (1) is not purely referential and hence that the necessity
operator is opaque.
But Quine fails to distinguish the referential, and necessary ‘the number of the
major planets is greater than 4’ from the predicative, and contingent ‘There are
more than 4 major planets’. If
9 = ϵn(ny)Py,

426
Barry Hartley Slater
then
ϵn(ny)Py is greater than 4,
but it does not follow that
(∃n)((ny)Py.n is greater than 4).
Substitution of identicals in (1), therefore, does yield (3), in its correct interpre-
tation, even though it is not necessary that there are more than 4 major planets.
Comparable issues arise with respect to other putative counterexamples to substi-
tutivity, and Routley’s Formula, see [Slater, 1990].
But how does the ‘x’ in such a form as ‘LFx’ come to be open for quantiﬁcation?
Fitting and Mendelsohn only brieﬂy discuss rigid designators in their recent text
book [Fitting and Mendelsohn, 1998, pp.
217–219], and their work stays well
within the meta-linguistic paradigm, with no mention of propositional operators
at all. In particular that leaves them not only with Frege’s puzzle about Hesperus
being Phosphorus, but also a worry about whether everyone can be said to know
about this. Certainly not everybody can be expected to know that the sentence
‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’ expresses a necessary truth; but, as two-dimensional
modal logic has made clear, that is quite diﬀerent from knowing that Hesperus
is Phosphorus. The propositional operator expression involves the use, not the
mention of the given sentence.
In traditional, meta-linguistic modal semantics (see [Hughes and Cresswell,
1968, p. assim]) one ﬁnds formulas like
V (Fx, i) = 1
which are supposed to say that the valuation put on the formula ‘Fx’ is 1, in
world i. But there should be quotation marks around the ‘Fx’ in this formula, if
that is the intention. By a common convention, they are omitted. To move over
to the alternative point of view, one simply reads ‘V (Fx, i) = 1’ as it stands, in
which case it becomes the propositional operator form ‘it would be true in world
i that Fx’. The ‘Fx’ is then in reported speech rather than quoted speech, and
so the ‘x’ is in the words of the speaker, and the meta/object distinction has been
discarded. Any variable inside the subordinate sentence can then be quantiﬁed
over, just like any variable outside it, so there is unproblematic ‘quantifying in’,
and all standard predicate calculus, and identity rules apply. The epsilon term
‘ϵxFx’ is then rigid because, quite generally,
p ≡[V (p, a) = 1],
where a is the actual world, and therefore, necessarily
(x)(Fx ≡[V (Fx, a) = 1]),
which gives
ϵxFx = ϵx[V (Fx, a) = 1],

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
427
by the second epsilon axiom. More speciﬁcally, remembering the quotation from
Fitting before, suppose that in every world there are F’s, i.e.
A : (i)[V ((∃x)Fx, i) = 1],
then we know, by the necessary equivalence produced by the epsilon deﬁnition of
the existential quantiﬁer, that
B : (i)[V (FϵxFx, i) = 1],
and that means that
C : (i)(∃x)[V (Fx, i) = 1],
i.e. that in every world there is an object such that it is F. But that means, using
the deﬁnition of the quantiﬁer again, that
D : (i)[V (Fϵx[V (Fx, i) = 1], i) = 1].
Now from D we cannot obtain
E : (∃y)(i)[V (Fy, i) = 1],
since ‘ϵx[V (Fx, i) = 1]’ is not free for ‘y’ in ‘(i)[V (Fy, i) = 1]’.
But we can
get E from B, since ‘ϵxFx’ is a constant, and hence is obviously free for ‘y’ in
‘(i)[V (Fy, i) = 1]’. Nevertheless, if F is individuating, i.e. contains a uniqueness
clause, then from B and D we can get
(i)[V (ϵxFx = ϵx[V (Fx, i) = 1], i) = 1],
and so prove that, in all worlds, the F in fact is identical with the F in that
world. The respective objects are not thereby identical tout court, but their passing
identity can make it seem that what goes for one can hardly be separated from
what must go for the other. Yet if we think in terms of the functional epsilon term
there will be opacity, while with the now properly identiﬁed constant epsilon term
there clearly is transparency. And that holds even though, respectively, in each
world, they refer to the same thing.
A simple example illustrating this involves the winner of a race, and the runners
which might have won in other circumstances [Slater, 1988c, pp. 103–104], see
also [Slater, 1986a; Slater, 1988a; Slater, 1989; Slater, 1992b; Slater, 1994a; Slater,
1994b]. If the actual winner is Tom — so he is ϵxFx — but it is supposed the
winner is Dick — so he is ϵx[V (Fx, i) = 1], for the speciﬁc ‘i’ — then what would
have to be true for those circumstances to obtain would be for Tom to be Dick,
i.e.
ϵxFx = ϵx[V (Fx, i) = 1].
Tom is not in fact Dick, but that does not mean they cannot be identical in other
worlds (c.f. [Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, p. 190]). Certainly if there were several

428
Barry Hartley Slater
people variously thought to have been the winner, those other winners in the
various other supposed circumstances would not provide a constant c such that
Fc is true in all worlds. But that is because those other winners are functions of
the other possible worlds — they are ϵx[V (Fx, i) = 1] for other ‘i’s. It still remains
that there is a constant, c, such that Fc is true in all worlds — ϵxFx. Moreover,
that c is not an ‘intensional object’: Tom is just a straightforward extensional
object, the actual winner.
Routley, Meyer and Goddard did not appreciate this last point, wanting, in
their rigid semantics, the reference of individual terms to be ‘intensional objects’
([Goddard and Routley, 1973, p. 561], [Routley et al., 1974, p. 309], see also
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, p. 197]). But see [Slater, 1988c], again. And what
also might have misled Stalnaker and Thomason is that the temporal functionality
of ‘Miss America’, even if it is recognised, is of another sort. For if this year’s Miss
America is last year’s Miss America, that is only one thing being identical with
itself, unlike with Tom and Dick. Also there is nothing which can make this year’s
Miss America to be identical with last year’s diﬀerent Miss America, in the way
that the counterfactuality of the situation with the winners forces two actually
non-identical things to be the same. Other worlds are categorically diﬀerent from
other times, and other spaces, i.e., in general, other possible worlds must not been
seen ‘Realistically’.
Hughes and Cresswell describe the model which is misleading all parties [Hughes
and Cresswell, 1968, p. 197], and see also [Hughes and Cresswell, 1996, p. 332]:
Consider, for example, the expression ‘the top card in the pack’ as it
occurs in the rules of a card game. The rules may, without ambigu-
ity, specify that at a certain point in the play the top card is to be
dealt to a certain player; yet on one occasion the top card may be
the Ace of Spades and on another it may be the Queen of Hearts.
Thus ‘the top card in the pack’ does not designate any particular card
(individual piece of pasteboard), except in the context of a particular
state of the pack; yet we can in one sense think of it as standing for
a single object, contrasted with the bottom card in the pack, and so
forth...Such ‘objects’ are often called ‘intensional objects’, and...for a
logic in which...the individual variables range over intensional objects...
L(∃x)Fx ⊃(∃x)LFx would be valid...
But it is the top card in the pack at one point in the play which is the Ace of
Spades, and the top card in the pack at another point in the play which is the
Queen of Hearts. So the logic of such expressions requires a formalisation using
another variable: say ‘Fxt’ means ‘x is the top card in the pack at time t’. But
‘at every time there is some top card’ then gets symbolised,
(t)(∃x)Fxt,
and while this is
(t)F(ϵxFxt)t,

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
429
we cannot use existential generalisation to get
(∃x)(t)Fxt.
since
ϵxFxt
is not free for ‘y’ in
(t)Fyt.
Hence there are no ‘intensional objects’ as Hughes and Cresswell, and the others,
conceived them.
8
THE EPSILON CALCULUS’ PROBLEMATIC
Realism has had a pernicious inﬂuence, and delayed a proper construal of many of
these things. For, if you look at remarks like “the same object is ‘inside’ the belief
as ‘outside’ in the room” ontologically, then Realistic views about the mind —
as another space or time, where counterfactuality can get no proper purchase —
can start to interfere, and make it seem that only some counterpart of the outside
object can be inside the belief at the same time.
Edelberg is one prominent
theorist who is misled in this way (as, e.g. in [Edelberg, 1986; Edelberg, 1995]);
for, lacking a proper account of identity, he can only secure ‘counterparts’ of an
object in another place, since the ‘object’ is identiﬁed with its contingent properties
in this place or that, and so must be diﬀerent if those properties diﬀer. He says
[Edelberg, 1995, p. 316]:
The semantical theory developed here makes truth a relation between
sentences and theories, or belief systems...In the framework proposed
here, the theories or belief systems occupying one argument of the truth
relation will have three crucially important features. First, each such
theory will have an ontology, a set of objects that existaccording to
the theory. Second, although no object will ever grace the ontologies
of two diﬀerent theories, objects from distinct theories can be Coun-
terparts. The Venus of your theory can be a counterpart of the Venus
of mine, even if we disagree about its mass. Third, objects will have
an unconventional mereological structure: objects playing distinct the-
oretical roles in one theory will sometimes combine in another to form
a third, composite object playing all the theoretical roles of the former
objects, and containing them — or rather their counterparts — as sub-
objects. For instance, the Venus of modern astronomical theory will
be composite, containing as subobjects counterparts of the Hesperus
and Phosphorus of ancient astronomy.
But if what Edelberg is talking about is that BeMv but ByM ′v, i.e. that him
and another might think Venus has diﬀerent masses, then there are no diﬀerent

430
Barry Hartley Slater
objects of thought. On the other hand there is no diﬃculty, instead, in our talking
about, say, what Edelberg or some other believes rises in the morning, or sets in the
evening (ϵxBeRMx, ϵxBySEx), just as we talked about ϵx{V (Fx, i) = 1} before.
And maybe, indeed, in the ancient astronomy case, not only are the comparable
objects diﬀerent from Venus, but also they are diﬀerent from each other, i.e.
ϵxBaRMx ̸= ϵxBaSEx,
although the suggestion that these are mereological parts of Venus does seem very
‘unconventional’.
But one unfortunate consequence of Edelberg’s theory of such things, indeed any
theory of counterparts surely, is that there cannot be any intersubjective means
of referring to them, on that theory. For, on Edelberg’s theory, all the phrase
‘the Venus in my theory’ could put into a reader’s mind would be that reader’s
counterpart of the Venus in Edelberg’s theory, not the Venus in Edelberg’s theory
itself.
Contrariwise, however, the fact that Edelberg does successfully use an
intersubjectively meaningful term means that the very same object can be on his
mind as on his reader’s: the very same object may be ‘inside’ a belief as ‘outside’ in
the room. This shows that what is going on is simply that the same term — or one
term and a pronominal replacement for it — arises at two linguistic places in some
speech, and it has the same reference at each such linguistic place. Hence there is
no essential referential diﬀerence between an anaphoric remark about someone’s
mind, like
Celia believed there was a woman in the room, but it was a man,
i.e.
Bc(∃x)(Wx.Rx).MϵxBc(Wx.Rx).
and the cross reference, for instance, in
There was a woman in the room. She was hungry.
i.e.
(∃x)(Wx.Rx).Hϵx(Wx.Rx).
What has been the problem fundamentally, therefore, has been getting the cross-
reference formalised ﬁrst of all in this purely extensional kind of case. Yet this just
requires extending the epsilon substitution method for existential statements, by
means of a repetition of the appropriate epsilon term, as we saw before. The only
diﬀerence in the intensional case is that, to obtain the required crossreferencing
epsilon term one must ﬁrst move from ‘Bc(∃x)(Wx.Rx)’ to ‘(∃x)Bc(Wx.Rx)’ via
‘Bc(Wa.Ra)’ with a = ϵx(Wx.Rx). The ‘it’ required is not ‘that woman in the
room’, but ‘what Celis believed was a woman in the room’.
It is now better understood how the epsilon calculus allows us to do this [Purdy,
1994; Egli and von Heusinger, 1995; Meyer Viol, 1995].
The starting point is
the possibility illustrated in the theorem about Russellian deﬁnite descriptions

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
431
in Section 6, of separating out what otherwise, in the predicate calculus, would
be a single sentence into a two-sentence piece of discourse, leaving the existence
and uniqueness clauses in one place and putting the characterising remark in
another. The point really starts to bite when there is no way to symbolise some
anaphorically linked remarks in the predicate calculus, as in the above extensional
case, where there is no uniqueness clause. This is what became a problem for the
Fregean and Russellian logicians who woke up to the need to formalise anaphoric
reference in the 1960s.
It can be seen in retrospect how it was lack of the epsilon calculus which was
the major cause of the diﬃculty. Thus Geach, in an early discussion of the issue,
went to the extremity of insisting that there could be no syllogism of the following
form [Geach, 1962, p. 126]:
A man has just drunk a pint of sulphuric acid.
Nobody who drinks a pint of sulphuric acid lives through the day.
So, he won’t live through the day.
Instead, Geach said, there was only the existential conclusion:
Some man who has just drunk a pint of sulphuric acid won’t live
through the day.
Certainly one can only conclude
(∃x)(Mx.Dx.¬Lx)
from
(∃x)(Mx.Dx),
and
(x)(Dx ⊃¬Lx),
within Fregean predicate logic. But one can still conclude
¬Lϵx(Mx.Dx),
within its extension: Hilbert’s epsilon calculus.
And through inattention to that extension, Geach was entirely stumped later
[Geach, 1967], when he discussed his famous example (3)
Hob thinks a witch has blighted Bob’s mare, and Nob wonders whether
she (the same witch) killed Cob’s sow,
i.e.
Th(∃x)(Wx.Bxb).OnKϵxTh(Wx.Bxb)c.

432
Barry Hartley Slater
For he saw this could not be his (4)
(∃x)(Wx.ThBxb.OnKxc),
or his (5)
(∃x)(Th(Wx.Bxb).OnKxc).
But a reading of the second clause as
Nob wonders whether the witch who blighted Bob’s mare killed Cob’s
sow,
(c.f. Geach’s 18) in which ‘the witch who blighted Bob’s mare killed Cob’s sow’ is
analysed in the Russellian manner, as Geach’s (20):
just one witch blighted Bob’s mare and she killed Cob’s sow,
does not provide the required cross-reference — for one thing because of the
uniqueness clause then involved. Of course the descriptive replacement for the
personal pronoun ‘she’ in the Hilbertian expression, namely ‘what Hob thinks is a
witch that blighted Bob’s mare’ does not have any implication of uniqueness.
The inappropriateness of the uniqueness clause in Russellian analyses has been
widely discussed. However it did not deter Neale, who much later wrote a whole
book defending a largely Russellian account of deﬁnite descriptions, and cross-
sentential anaphora. But he got no further with Geach’s case above than proposing
that ‘she’ might be localised to ‘the witch we have been hearing about’ [Neale, 1990,
p. 221], thinking in general that deﬁnite descriptions merely should be relativised
to the context. But a greater change is needed than that. For it is not that, in
addition to any witches in the actual world, there are things in the actual world
that are thought or believed to be witches.
Geach’s ‘the same withch’ is also
inappropriate, on the same grounds.
Thus the second clause in his (3) is not
simply (as the present writer wrote in previous publication) ‘OnKϵx(Wx.Bxb)c’.
But a large amount of the important, initial work in this area was done by
another person very inﬂuenced by the Russellian tradition: Evans [Evans, 1977;
Evans, 1980]. He also explicitly separated from Russell over the matter of unique-
ness, for instance in connection with back-reference to a story about a man and a
boy walking along a road one day [Evans, 1977, pp. 516–517]:
One does not want to be committed, by this way of telling the story,
to the existence of a day on which just one man and boy walked along
a road. It was with this possibility in mind that I stated the require-
ment for the appropriate use of an E-type pronoun in terms of having
answered, or being prepared to answer upon demand, the question ‘He?
Who?’ or ‘It? Which?’
In order to eﬀect this liberalisation we should allow the reference of the
E-type pronoun to be ﬁxed not only by predicative material explicitly

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
433
in the antecedent clause, but also by material which the speaker sup-
plies upon demand.
This ruling has the eﬀect of making the truth
conditions of such remarks somewhat indeterminate; a determinate
proposition will have been put forward only when the demand has
been made and the material supplied.
It was Evans who popularised the name ‘E-type pronoun’ for the pronoun in such
cases as
A Cambridge philosopher smoked a pipe, and he drank a lot of whisky,
i.e.
(∃x)(Cx.Px).Dϵx(Cx.Px).
He also argued at length, in line with the above [Evans, 1977, p. 516], that what
was distinctive about E-type pronouns was that such a conjunction of statements
as this was not equivalent to
A Cambridge philosopher, who smoked a pipe, drank a lot of whisky,
i.e.
(∃x)(Cx.Px.Dx).
Obviously the epsilon account supports this, since the contrast illustrates the point
remarked before concerning cases which lack a uniqueness clause: only the ex-
pression which contains the relative pronoun can be symbolised in the predicate
calculus, since to symbolise the personal pronoun its epsilon extension is needed.
Dynamic Predicate Logic agreed that some extension of Fregean predicate logic
was needed, but took it that an existential quantiﬁer could reach further than its
scope, and in particular reach over further conjuncts, making, for instance,
((∃x)Px).Qx,
still grammatical. However such a form was not equivalent to
Qx.(∃x)Px,
[Groenendijk and Stokhof, 1991, p. 63], making dynamic conjunction non-commu-
tative. Natural language conjunction, however, is still commutative, even when
pronouns are involved. Thus we can say, for instance,
He may or may not be called Smith, but there is a murderer,
just as well as we can say
There is a murderer, although he may or may not be called Smith.

434
Barry Hartley Slater
And extended forms of this kind of inversion occur in riddles.
The dynamic approach has diﬃculties in other areas, as well. Thus Evans is
also noteworthy for realising [Evans, 1977, p. 517], that ﬁxing the reference of
an E-type pronoun can involve cancellation of explicit predicative material in the
antecedent as in,
A man jumped out of the crowd and fell in front of the horses. [Oh,
no] he didn’t jump, he was pushed.
Of course, the epsilon account has no diﬃculty with this feature, either, since this
is
(∃x)(Mx.Jx.Fx).¬Jϵx(Mx.Jx.Fx).Pϵx(Mx.Jx.Fx).
Indeed, in some ways, the epsilon calculus’ ability to formalise improper deﬁnite
descriptions is the most central one. But the dynamic approach does not see the
need for this facility. In fact, one theoretician in this area, van Eijck, has argued
explicitly against an epsilon account, saying that this is unintuitive in the case of
empty sets [van Eijck, 1993, p. 242], instead preferring an account which returns to
Hilbert and Bernays’ pre-suppositional iota and eta terms [van Eijck, 1993, p. 241].
Van Eijck forgets here the pragmatics of reference which Donnellan described, but
the basic problem with his approach is that he is expecting a representation of,
say,
A man is in the room,
just in terms of,
RηxMx,
which does not allow for the denial of the ‘pre-supposition’ as in Evans’ case. The
point confuses him elsewhere, as well, for to handle two entries of ‘a man’, as in
A man is in the room. A man is in the garden.
he thinks a dynamic logic is required, which employs diﬀerent choice functions for
‘a man’, as the discourse proceeds. But there is no diﬃculty discriminating the
two men by means of the two epsilon terms which naturally arise, in
(∃x)(Mx.Rx).(∃x)(Mx.Gx).
Gawron, Nerbonne and Peters moved some way in the direction of an epsilon
account, by introducing choice functions to analyse E-type pronouns, but they
also missed the crucial possibility of improper deﬁnite descriptions: in their case
by wanting the clause containing the E-type pronoun to be invariably false when
the antecedent is false [Gawron et al., 1991, p. 357]. Of course it can have, in
general, any truth value, since this is immaterial. Thus if the antecedent is false
in Evans’ story ‘One day, a man and a boy were walking along a road, and the
man said to the boy: “Would you like to be King?”’ then the story is a ﬁction,

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
435
and one can continue it as one likes. The falsity of the antecedent ensures that the
whole is entirely false, whatever truth value is attached to the remaining parts,
i.e. whatever is further asserted. The fact that the epsilon terms for the man and
the boy in question then refer to ﬁctions, it should be noted, does not mean
¬(∃y)(y = ϵx(∃z)(Mx.Bz.Wxz)),
or
¬(∃y)(y = ϵz(∃x)(Mx.Bz.Wxz));
it merely means that
¬(∃x)(∃z)(Mx.Bz.Wxz).
So the objects spoken of remain entirely extensional: it is only that their properties
are mis-judged. Faust, for instance, was in fact a real person, even though the
various stories about him were ﬁctional; but the point has a much wider application
(see [Slater, 1987; Slater, 1988a]).
Other grammarians have tried to handle this sort of issue in intensional contexts,
but have returned to Husserlian ‘intensional objects’, or the ‘counterparts’ of actual
individuals in doxastic alternative worlds. For example, Saarinen considers the
following case drawn from Husserl [Saarinen, 1978, p. 277]:
Bill believes that the lady on the stairs [is acquainted with] him, but
John knows she is only a wax ﬁgure.
About this Saarinen says ‘Both of the attitudes are of the wax lady, and yet all the
relevant individuals in the doxastic worlds are not wax ladies but human beings’
[Saarinen, 1978, p. 282]. However, as before, in addition to human beings in this
world it is not that there are also human beings elsewhere — in people’s mind
— merely, also, that there are things in this world which are taken to be human
beings, by people. Saarinen supports the opposite judgement with a Russellian, i.e.
attributive reading of ‘the lady on the stairs’, but more important is his retention
of the Meinongian idea that such an intensional object as the gold mountain has
to be made of gold, and even that an impossible intensional object, like the round
square, has to be both round and square. Thereby, of course, Saarinen misses the
possibility that what Bill believes is the one and only lady on the stairs need not
really be a lady on the stairs. But it is this possibility, exactly, which allows it to
be just the plain, and everyday, physical wax ﬁgure which is the object of Bill’s
and John’s attitudes. The form of Saarinen’s case, if ‘the lady on the stairs’ is
attributive, is
Bb(∃x)((y)(Ly ≡y = x).Abx).KjWϵxBb((y)(Ly ≡y = x).Abx),
but the second conjunct of this entails
¬Lϵx((y)(Ly ≡y = x).Abx),

436
Barry Hartley Slater
since knowledge entails truth, and being a wax ﬁgure entails not being a lady.
As was mentioned before, it is contingent that the lady on the stairs is a lady
on the stairs, but the source of this non-doxastic, and simply modal contingency
cannot be properly seen until we link it with the linguistic possibility of improper,
i.e.
non-attributive deﬁnite descriptions.
Seeing the source of this even more
radical contingency is thus essentially linked to seeing how there can be de re
attitudes. But it is also directly linked with the much more substantial programme
of replacing such a metaphysical view as Husserl’s simply with accurate linguistic
analysis: ‘philosophical problems arise through misconceptions of grammar’ said
Wittgenstein.
9
HIGHER-ORDER APPLICATIONS
Higher-order epsilon calculi have not been widely studied, although we met second-
order epsilon terms brieﬂy in Section 2, and epsilon numerical terms in Sections
5 and 6. Bernays’ use of the epsilon operator in his formulation of Set Theory
[Bernays, 1958] has been mentioned several times before — though he used sigma
to denote it. The epsilon operator was also used in a formulation of type theory
by Church [Church, 1940], and in the completeness proof built on that system
by Henkin [Henkin, 1950] — though they used iota to denote it.
The epsilon
operator in intuitionistic type theories has been studied by others more recently
[Bell, 1993b; DeVidi, 2004]. We can see the further need for higher-order calculi,
now, in connection with a variety of other matters.
Not all anaphoric reference is ﬁrst-order, for one thing, and epsilon terms of
higher orders must be brought in to handle other cases. Thus we may have propo-
sitional, predicative, or numerical cases where the cross-reference is to something
unspeciﬁc, as in
John had a pleasant thought, and Mary had that thought too,
John had a certain aloofness, and Mary had the same quality,
John had a number of apples, and Mary had that number, also.
But use of epsilon calculi with propositional, predicative, or numerical variables
is required, also, to solve a number of paradoxes which have arisen in these three
areas. It is the possibility of indeterminacy in the reference of epsilon terms which
does the trick.
In the ﬁrst area, Williams is noteworthy for providing an iota term account of
propositional referring phrases like ‘what John thought’, in extension of Prior’s
system of propositional quantiﬁcation, which is usually associated with proposi-
tional operator theory [Williams, 1976]. But that requires, amongst other things,
an implication of uniqueness which the corresponding epsilon term account does
not have. Furthermore, Prior’s propositional quantiﬁcation is naturally taken to
be substitutional, but there are some diﬃculties with this. In fact Loux [Loux,
1998, p. 150] has recently taken it to be ﬁnal against the substitutional account

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
437
of propositional quantiﬁcation that it cannot provide the truth conditions in such
a case as:
(∃p)(it cannot be said in English that p).
Certainly instantiation to an explicit English sentence is ruled out by the very
nature of this case, but that does not prevent the formation of an appropriate
propositional referring phrase, say ‘that thought which cannot be said in English’.
So, in a calculus in which the variables range over such referential phrases, a truth
condition for
(∃x)(x cannot be said in English),
can be formulated in terms of the equivalent
¬MSeϵx¬MSex.
An iota formalisation of ‘the thought which cannot be said in English’, somewhat
in Williams’ manner, would not be derivable, because of the lack of a uniqueness
clause. But the epsilon deﬁnition of the now objectival quantiﬁer, at this level,
provides the appropriate truth condition while still allowing for the ineﬀability.
A comparable point comes in, also, in further explication of the propositional
operator escape from propositional paradoxes such as the Liar, discussed before.
For the propositional operator form ‘it is true that p’ may be formulated as a
predication ‘that p is true’, and there are other truth predications of this kind
besides those involving explicit propositional subject terms of the form ‘that p’.
Thus we can say ‘what John thought is true’, etc.
The impossibility of self-
reference with propositional operators then shows that there is not an identiﬁable
proposition in connection with paradoxical sentences like
‘what this sentence says is not true’.
For, if we could say with respect to this, something of the propositional operator
form
what that sentence says is that p,
then we could get a contradiction. Hence what that sentence says cannot be made
explicit. The sentence lacks a determinate sense, and the resulting ambiguity is the
way the propositional operator approach therefore escapes the threat of paradox
with ‘semantic closure’ [Slater, 1986b].
An epsilon analysis reveals this explicitly. Writing ‘Sa|p’, now, for ‘a says that
p’, with ‘a’ naming the sentence in question, and ‘Sa’ a predicate of proposi-
tional referential phrases (not exclusively of the form ‘that p’), then we know that
Sa|¬TϵrSar, but only if (∃!r)Sar does that lead to ϵrSar = |¬TϵrSar, from
which to derive the contradiction TϵrSar ≡¬TϵrSar, using the propositional
truth scheme: T|p ≡p. It follow that ϵrSar, i.e. what a says, is indeterminate.

438
Barry Hartley Slater
It was Sayward who ﬁrst claimed that Tarski’s sentential T-Schema presumed
determinateness of sense [Sayward, 1987]. But a re-working of Goodstein’s original
propositional analysis of the Liar, which leads to a similar conclusion, is even more
revealing. Thus if A says that everything that A says is false, we have
Sa|(y)(Say ⊃¬Ty),
and then, following Goodstein [Goodstein, 1958], we can prove that something A
says is true, i.e.
(∃x)(Sax.Tx),
and something A says is false, i.e.
(∃x)(Sax.¬Tx).
But with the variables here ranging over referring phrases to propositions rather
than expressed sentences, as in Goodstein’s and Sayward’s presentations, what
emerges further is that these two sayings need not be identiﬁable by means of
expressed sentences.
Indeed A may just utter one sentence, which must, as a
result, carry both meanings. The result is that, while, in such a case, we might
still talk about ‘that sense of A’s sentence in which it is true’ (ϵx(Sax.Tx)) and
‘that sense of A’s sentence in which it is false’ (ϵx(Sax.¬Tx)) there need be no
way to specify these senses, in explicit speech. Language must come to an end
somewhere, in things which are, as a result, semantically ineﬀable, and we ﬁnd
that boundary here.
Thomason, in his argument against Fodor’s Language of Thought ([Thomason,
1980], see also [Thomason, 1977]) and Asher and Kamp, in their argument against
Montague’s Intensional Logic ([Asher and Kamp, 1989, p. 94], see also [Asher
and Kamp, 1986]), show that Fodor and Montague presume, by contrast, that a
semantic speciﬁcation of meaning is always available, since they take the expres-
sion relation between propositions and sentences to be 1-1. On this basis standard
self-referential paradoxes with sentences can be mapped onto parallel paradoxes
with propositions, making these writers’ compositional theories of meaning incon-
sistent. But if the expression relation is not 1-1, as in Goodstein’s case, then there
is no problem, and in fact Goodstein proves his formalisation of indirect speech is
consistent, at the end of his paper. Goodstein, however, forgot that the comple-
ments in propositional attitude constructions are not always phrases of the form
‘that p’: an epsilon account of general propositional referring phrases then allows
them to have the appropriate indeterminacy.
It is not always noted how such indeterminacy enters into other paradoxes, for
instance those involving predicates. In connection with the paradox of Heterolog-
icality, for instance, overlooking indeterminacy has been explicit in at least one
notable, and repeated place ([Copi, 1954, pp. 333–334], [Copi, 1967, pp. 346–347],
[Copi, 1973, p. 301]), and that seems to have obscured the, otherwise obvious,
exit to the paradox in question. For this paradox was introduced by Copi with

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
439
the deﬁnition “we shall use the word ‘heterological’ to designate the property pos-
sessed by words which designate properties not exempliﬁed by themselves’ . He
then formalised this in an iota term manner as
Hs = (∃F)(sDesF.(P)(sDesP ≡P = F).¬Fs),
and his proof of the contradiction goes in the following way. First, he shows that
H′H′ entails ¬H′H′. That is quite straightforward, given ‘H’ Des H. Then he
tries to show that ¬H′H′ entails H′H′ . But there is a further assumption needed
to obtain this: it is openly expressed in the next to the last line of Copi’s proof,
which receives the gloss from Copi “assuming ‘H’ is univocal’. Quite why Copi still
repeatedly thought he had derived a contradiction which was inescapable is not too
apparent, as a result, unless, by taking ‘heterological’ to ‘designate the property...’,
he took its univocality to be somehow guaranteed by its iota-term deﬁnition. But
he still needed a proof that there was one and only one such property. There is
nothing which forces the designation of predicates to be 1-1, and in fact the denial
of this is what must be concluded from the above proofs, by Reductio. For the
pair of assumptions cannot both be true, so if anything designates the above H,
it demonstrably does not do so uniquely — on pain of contradiction. The need
for, and yet the unavailability of a proof of the existence and uniqueness of the
property in question would have been more evident at the start if Copi had given
the deﬁnition of Heterologicality in an epsilon term form:
Hs = ¬[ϵF(sDesF.(P)(sDesP ≡P = F))]s.
For it is clear, in this explicit epsilon formulation of the property, that the property
is not a constant, but a function of what it is a property of.
In other words, if we write s is heterological if and only if s is not self applicable,
then we mask the proform ‘self’ which re-introduces ‘s’ into the predicate. The
constant expression ‘is heterological’ masks the variable in ‘is not self-applicable’.
The latter predicate is context-sensitive, because of the back-reference involved
in the pronoun ‘self’; as a result, ‘is heterological’ does not denote a constant
property.
The point clearly applies to the variable set associated with ‘is not
a member of itself’, in Russell’s Paradox, and the variable property associated
with ‘is a property which does not hold of itself’ in the Paradox of Predication.
The predicate ‘is not a member of itself’ involves a reﬂexive pronoun, which is
a constant syntactic item, but in diﬀerent applications it has a diﬀerent referent.
What is a set a member of iﬀit is not a member of itself? It is a member of its
complement.
What misleads is the fact that in the lambda abstraction, and set abstraction
expressions which are commonly taken to refer to the associated properties and
sets, all the variables are bound. Aren’t the properties and sets involved, therefore,
necessarily non-context-sensitive? But while we might try to represent Heterolog-
icality as λx(x does not possess ϵP(x stands for P)), this abstract is drawn from
a whole sentence, and it is only a part of that sentence, namely ‘does not possess

440
Barry Hartley Slater
the property it (sic) stands for’, which expresses the property involved, and which
relates, therefore, to any associated set. If x /∈x, that is not a property of x but
a truth about it, it must be remembered; and the property it then possesses is,
in fact, not only context-sensitive, but also ambiguous, since there are two ways
that simply ‘x’ can be its subject.
Taking the ﬁrst ‘x’ as subject, the related
property ‘being a member of its complement’ is ‘λy(y /∈x)’ in this context, while
taking the second ‘x’ as subject, the related property ‘being non-self-membered’ is
‘λy(x /∈y)’, in this context. The context sensitivity arises because words such as
‘its’ and ‘self’ have a variable reference, being pro-forms merely standing in place
of a repeat of the subject. What was missing in Fregean abstracts was, therefore,
ﬁrst of all, the identiﬁcation a single, subject place where the variable is bound.
To get a property which is not context sensitive, repeated variables must be repre-
sented by means of ordered sets. Thus Rxx says that the ordered pair x, x belongs
to the set of ordered pairs y, z such that Ryz, and then with ‘Ryz’ as ‘y /∈z’ there
is no contradiction.
A more general point about grammar, in this area, needs to be noted before
the corresponding resolution of the Paradox is Predication is clearly obtained. For
grammar requires that the predicate ‘is a P’ expresses a concept, while it is the
nominal phrase ‘being a P’ which refers to it [Kneale and Kneale, 1962, 585–587].
This is not a distinction customarily symbolised in second-order logic, which is to
that logic’s great cost, since, amongst other things, there is no way to question
whether what is expressed by some predicate is a single concept. Thus, if we write
(∃F)(F = x.¬Fx) ≡Gx,
then the double duty which terms like ‘F’ are doing — to express a concept, as
in ‘Fx’, and to refer to a concept, as in ‘F = x’ — makes it seem automatic, by
mere abbreviation, that there is a single concept, G, which the predicate on the
left is expressing, namely
λx(∃F)(F = x.¬Fx).
But it is this which leads to the Paradox of Predication, upon substituting ‘G’ for
‘x’. Let us therefore write ‘x has F’ in place of ‘Fx’, enabling ‘F’ throughout to
be a referring term, then there is nothing to guarantee that
(∃G)(x)((∃F)(F = x.¬(x has F)) ≡x has G).
Maybe ‘λx(∃F)(F = x.¬(x hasF))H’ is still equivalent to ‘(∃F)(F = H.¬(H has
F))’, but there is nothing to show there is a concept G for which this is equivalent
to ‘H has G’. Indeed, if there was then there would be a contradiction. So there
isn’t, and the epsilon term
ϵG(x)((∃F)(F = x.¬(x has F)) ≡x has G),
as a consequence, must have an indeterminate reference.
How is it that ‘(∃F)(F = a.¬(a has F))’, and ‘(∃F)(F = b.¬(b has F))’, do not
say a and b have the same property? The common predicate of a and b is ‘is a

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
441
property it does not possess’ and this contains an item with a variable reference,
namely ‘it’, like the ‘itself’, ‘its’, and ‘self’ before.
But the second-order epsilon calculus which might clarify these matters is even
further from full formulation. Gamut, for instance, had the following to say about
the semantics of standard second-order logic [Gamut, 1991, pp. 170–171]:
... how is quantiﬁcation over properties to be interpreted? Given that
properties are to be interpreted as subsets of the domain, and that the
quantiﬁers are supposed to apply to all properties, presumably quanti-
ﬁers must apply to all subsets of the domain D...So now an assignment
will assign elements of the domain D to individual variables, and sub-
sets of D,...to predicate variables. And how should second-order predi-
cate constants be interpreted? They express properties of, or relations
between, properties of entities. So just as a unary ﬁrst-order predicate
is interpreted as a set of entities, a unary second-order predicate is
interpreted as a set of sets of entities...I(C), the interpretation of the
second-order predicate constant is a color, is then {I(R), I(G), ...}, in
which R is the ﬁrst-order predicate constant is red, G is is green, and
so on.
The problem with this, and the largely similar Henkin semantics, is that it simply
ramiﬁes the problem with the standard set semantics of predicate logic.
For,
since there are predicates which do not determine a unit, i.e. whose instances
are not discrete, then for some predicates there is no determinate number, and
so no set associated with them. In fact both redness and colour are of this kind,
since red things may overlap, or even be entirely included one within another,
and it is arbitrary where one colour starts and another begins. One needs, for a
start, a symbolism which allows some predicates to have no determinate number
of instances — which the epsilon, intensional treatment of properties respects.
Indeterminacy of number enters into these matters in a variety of other ways, as
well. Cantor, for instance, realised that there could not be a determinate number
of all things because of his, Cantor’s Paradox, so the possibility of innumerability,
in principle, is a part of his Set Theory. Indeed, the crucial question, for Cantor,
of the ‘limitation of size’ was consequently a preoccupation of many contemporary
thinkers, wondering which inﬁnities might still be consistently numbered. Cantor
could, in the end, only oﬀer as a postulate that Aleph Zero is consistent [Hallett,
1984, p. 175], and it is necessary, of course, to incorporate the same assumption,
as an Axiom of Inﬁnity, in all inﬁnitary Set Theories. But a stronger point, more
in line with Hilbert’s ﬁnitism, was made by Tiles [Tiles, 1989, p. 63], who reminds
us that there is, properly, an inconsistency even in Aleph Zero once we attend not
to the ‘cardinality’ or ‘power’ of the natural numbers, but to the size or number of
them. For, we may argue, if there were a determinate number of natural numbers
it would be the same as the number of the even numbers, because of the 1-1
correspondence, but also it would be bigger, since the even numbers are a proper

442
Barry Hartley Slater
part of the natural numbers. Hence there is no determinate number of the natural
numbers, even though they have a determinate power (c.f. [Boolos, 1998, p. 306]).
The question of the number of the natural numbers was historically seen as
Galileo’s Paradox: it teased most number theorists until the end of the nineteenth
century, even if it has been forgotten by succeeding generations of set theoreticians.
But its resolution, in the above way, is in a similar manner to the resolution of
Cantor’s Paradox: a presupposition of the determinacy of the number of some
discrete elements must be negated.
Tiles thinks that Cantor’s proofs of non-
denumerability, nevertheless, still require us to discriminate between inﬁnities in
terms of their size [Tiles, 1989, p. 63]. But, as Crispin Wright has pointed out,
the diagonal argument merely shows that we need to discriminate amongst the
denumerable between what can be determinately enumerated, and what cannot
[Wright, 1985, p. 134]. Certainly the natural numbers and the even numbers have
the same power, since they can be put into 1-1 correspondence; but the natural
numbers and the ordinal numbers of those Turing Machines which halt, amongst
the totality of Turing Machines in some ordered, denumerable sequence, cannot
be put into 1-1 correspondence, and so they have diﬀerent powers while both are
denumerable. As Borel also saw, in connection with Richard’s Paradox [Martin-
L¨of, 1970, p. 44], in certain cases we are simply unable to specify an enumerating
function for the things in question, even though they are deﬁnitely denumerable.
Wittgenstein also realised that no diﬀerence in size is involved in connection with
diagonalisation [Rodych, 2000]. Diagonalisation merely allows us to generate a
further denumerable sequence given we can enumerate some others.
But indeterminacy of number, in yet another sense, is crucial to the resolution
of one ﬁnal paradox about numbers: Berry’s Paradox. Surely the least ordinal
not deﬁnable in less than 19 words is deﬁnable in less than 19 words, since ‘the
least ordinal not deﬁnable in less than 19 words’ has less than 19 words in it? In
Priest’s recent treatment [Priest, 1994, p. 29], there occurs the line
lon(x) /∈x,
which is meant to formalise the supposedly evident truth that the least ordinal
not in a set is not in that set. Reading ‘lon’ as ‘the least ordinal not in’ Priest
wants to say that
lon(x) /∈x
holds for all sets x, and so, in particular, it holds for
lon(DN19) /∈DN19,
where DN19 is the set of ﬁnite ordinals deﬁnable in less than 19 words. But he
also wants to say
lon(DN19) ∈DN19,
since ‘the least ordinal not in the set of ﬁnite ordinals deﬁnable in less than 19
words’ deﬁnes a ﬁnite ordinal in less than 19 words — because of its length.

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
443
Now certainly any least ordinal not in a set is not in that set, i.e. it is necessary
that
(x)(y)([Oy.y /∈x.(z)((Oz.z /∈x) ⊃y ≤z)] ⊃y /∈x).
But that does not employ a referential term ‘the least ordinal’. So if we want to
make a referential remark of the kind Priest had in mind, we must say, instead
(x)(ϵy[Oy.y /∈x.(z)((Oz.z /∈x) ⊃y ≤z)] /∈x),
but that is then no longer a universal truth, and so its instantiation to DN19 does
not follow. What would be a universal truth, following from the previous one,
would be
(x)([Oa.a /∈x.(z)((Oz.z /∈x) ⊃a ≤z)] ⊃ϵy[Oy.y /∈x.(z)((Oz.z /∈
x) ⊃y ≤z)] /∈x),
where
a = ϵy[Oy.y /∈x.(z)((Oz.z /∈x) ⊃y ≤z)].
But there is now no problem with
lon(DN19) /∈DN19,
since there is now no requirement to also aﬃrm the reverse. For the denial of
the antecedent of this last conditional, in speciﬁc cases, is quite possible, allow-
ing a way out from Berry’s Paradox through the associated epsilon term being
non-attributive, and so not having a determinate referent. Every ordinal is then
‘deﬁnable’ using the associated epsilon term in less than 19 words, and so there is
no determinate least ordinal not in the set so ‘deﬁnable’. The phrase then operates
non-semantically like a demonstrative such as ‘this’.
Priest may have thought to avoid such demonstrative reference, since he says
[Priest, 1994, p.
28] that ‘something is deﬁnable iﬀthere is a (non-indexical)
noun phrase that refers to it’. But the trouble is that that does not guarantee
that the referring expression ‘the least ordinal not in the set of those deﬁnable
in less than 19 words’ functions attributively, and so enables one to locate its
referent through its sense. In an earlier treatment of this same paradox Priest,
like Copi, Thomason, and Asher and Kamp, derived a contradiction assuming that
the denotation relation was 1-1 [Preist, 1983, p. 162]. But again the conclusion
must be that all that Priest has proved is that if the denotation relation is univocal
then there is a contradiction. Hence, we may deduce, the denotation relation is not
univocal — although we must also realise that that does not mean a more liberal
semantic denotation relation could be deﬁned. In brief, if ‘the least ordinal not
deﬁnable in less than 19 words’ deﬁned, i.e. uniquely referred to some object, then
that object both would and would not be deﬁnable in less than 19 words. Hence,
directly against Priest’s pre-supposition, some identifying descriptions cannot have
a unique denotation. But that does not mean that ‘the least ordinal not deﬁnable
in less than 19 words’ is, for instance, semantically ambiguous. To think so is to

444
Barry Hartley Slater
forget the function of demonstratives like ‘this’, and purely referential terms like
Donnellan’s ‘the man drinking Martini’, whose semantics does not determine, not
just a unique referent, but any referent at all.
For what these cases show instead is simply that there is something beyond
semantics: pragmatics.
In fact ‘the least ordinal not deﬁnable in less than 19
words’ is incapable of describing what it refers to, and so what it refers to has to be
semantically ineﬀable. But that merely means that the phrase is non-attributive,
and gains its reference pragmatically from the context in which it is used, just
like ‘the man drinking Martini’. It is in such pragmatic cases that we ﬁnd the
paradigms for where language comes to an end, and yet meaning is still expressed
— for instance, simply by means of the gesture which accompanies ‘this’, or some
other purely referential expression. Epsilon terms are the formal representation of
such demonstratives, as we have now seen in a very wide variety of cases.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Ackermann, 1924] W. Ackermann. Begr¨undung des tertium non datur mittels der hilbertischen
theorie der widerspruchsfreiheit. Mathematische Annalen, 93:1–36, 1924.
[Ackermann, 1937–8] W. Ackermann. Mengentheoretische begr¨undung der logik. Mathematis-
che Annalen, 115:1–22, 1937–8.
[Ackermann, 1940] W. Ackermann. Zur widerspruchsfreiheit der zahlentheorie. Mathematische
Annalen, 117:162–194, 1940.
[Asher and Kamp, 1986] N. Asher and H. Kamp. The knower’s paradox and representational
theories of the attitudes. In J. Halpern, editor, Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning about Knowl-
edge. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo CA, 1986.
[Asher and Kamp, 1989] N. Asher and H. Kamp.
Self-reference, attitudes and paradox.
In
G. Chierchia, B. H. Partee, and R. Turner, editors, Properties, Types and Meaning. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, 1989.
[Asser, 1957] G. Asser. Theorie der logischen auswahlfunktionen. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische
Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 3:30–68, 1957.
[Bell, 1993a] J. L. Bell. Hilbert’s ϵ-operator and classical logic. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
22:1–18, 1993.
[Bell, 1993b] J. L. Bell. Hilbert’s ϵ-operator in intuitionistic type theories. Mathematical Logic
Quarterly, 39:323–337, 1993.
[Benacerraf, 1965] P. Benacerraf. What numbers could not be. Philosophical Review, 75:47–73,
1965.
[Bernays, 1958] P. Bernays. Axiomatic Set Theory. North Holland, Dordrecht, 1958.
[Bertolet, 1980] R. Bertolet. The semantic signiﬁcance of donnellan’s distinction. Philosophical
Studies, 37:281–288, 1980.
[Boolos, 1975] G. Boolos. On second-order logic. The Journal of Philosophy, 72:509–527, 1975.
[Boolos, 1984] G. Boolos. To be is to be a value of a variable (or to be some values of some
variables). The Journal of Philosophy, 81:430–449, 1984.
[Boolos, 1998] G. Boolos. Logic, Logic, and Logic. Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA,
1998.
[Bostock, 1974] D. Bostock. Logic and Arithmetic, volume I. O.U.P., Oxford, 1974.
[Bostock, 1979] D. Bostock. Logic and Arithmetic, volume II. O.U.P., Oxford, 1979.
[Bourbaki, 1954] N. Bourbaki. ´El´ements de Math´ematique. Hermann, Paris, 1954.
[Bunt, 1985] H. C. Bunt. Mass Terms and Model-Theoretic Semantics. C.U.P., Cambridge,
1985.
[Church, 1940] A. Church. A formulation of the simple theory of types. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 5:56–68, 1940.
[Cocchiarella, 1988] N. B. Cocchiarella. Predication versus membership in the distinction be-
tween logic as language and logic as calculus. Synthese, 77:37–72, 1988.

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
445
[Copi, 1954] I. Copi. Symbolic Logic. Macmillan, New York, 2 edition, 1954.
[Copi, 1967] I. Copi. Symbolic Logic. Macmillan, New York, 3 edition, 1967.
[Copi, 1973] I. Copi. Symbolic Logic. Macmillan, New York, 4 edition, 1973.
[Curry, 1963] H. B. Curry. Foundations of Mathematical Logic. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1963.
[da Costa, 1980] N. C. A. da Costa.
A model-theoretical approach to variable binding term
operators. In A. I. Arruda et al., editors, Mathematical Logic in Latin America. North Holland,
Dordrecht, 1980.
[Detlefsen, 1986] M. Detlefsen. Hilbert’s Program. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1986.
[DeVidi, 1995] D. DeVidi. Intuitionistic ϵ- and τ- calculi. Mathematical Logic Quarterly, 41:523–
546, 1995.
[DeVidi, 2004] D. DeVidi. Choice principles and constructive logics. Philosophia Mathematica,
12:222–243, 2004.
[Devitt, 1974] M. Devitt. Singular terms. The Journal of Philosophy, 71:183–205, 1974.
[Donnellan, 1966] K. Donnellan.
Reference and deﬁnite descriptions.
Philosophical Review,
75:281–304, 1966.
[Dragalin, 1974] A. C. Dragalin.
Intuitionistic logic and hilbert’s ϵ-symbol.
In History and
Methodology of Sciences, XVI: Mathematics, Mechanics. MGU, Moscow, 1974.
[Dunn and Belnap, 1968] M. Dunn and N. D. Belnap. The substitution interpretation of the
quantiﬁers. Nous, 2:177–186, 1968.
[Edelberg, 1986] W. Edelberg. A new puzzle about intentional identity. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 15:1–25, 1986.
[Edelberg, 1995] W. Edelberg. A perspectivalist semantics for the attitudes. Nous, 29:316–342,
1995.
[Egli and von Heusinger, 1995] U. Egli and K. von Heusinger. The ϵ operator and e-type pro-
nouns. In U. Egli et al., editors, Lexical Knowledge in the Organisation of Language. Ben-
jamins, Amsterdam, 1995.
[Evans, 1977] G. Evans. Pronouns, quantiﬁers and relative clauses. Canadian Journal of Phi-
losophy, 7:467–536, 1977.
[Evans, 1980] G. Evans. Pronouns. Linguistic Inquiry, 11:337–362, 1980.
[Ferrari, 1987] P. L. Ferrari. A note on a proof of hilbert’s 2nd ϵ-theorem. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 52:214–215, 1987.
[Ferrari, 1989] P. L. Ferrari. The rank function and hilbert’s second ϵ-theorem. Zeitschrift f¨ur
Mathematische Logik, 35:367–373, 1989.
[Fine, 1985] K. Fine. Reasoning with Arbitrary Objects. Blackwell, Oxford, 1985.
[Fitting, 1972] M. Fitting.
An epsilon calculus system for ﬁrst order s4.
In Conference on
Mathematical Logic, Bedford College 1970. Springer Verlag, Munich, 1972.
[Fitting, 1975] M. Fitting. A modal logic epsilon calculus. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
16:1–16, 1975.
[Fitting and Mendelsohn, 1998] M. Fitting and R. L. Mendelsohn.
First-Order Modal Logic.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1998.
[Flannagan, 1975] T. B. Flannagan.
On an extension of hilbert’s ii ϵ-theorem.
Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 40:393–397, 1975.
[Fraenkel and Bar-Hillel, 1958] A. A. Fraenkel and Y. Bar-Hillel. Foundations of Set Theory.
North Holland, Amsterdam, 1958.
[Frege, 1971] G. Frege.
¨Uber die grundlagen der geometry.
In E. H. Kluge, editor, On the
Foundations of Geometry and Formal Theories of Arithmetic. Yale University Press, New
Haven, 1971.
[Gamut, 1991] L. T. F. Gamut. Logic, Language and Meaning, volume I. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 1991.
[Gawron et al., 1991] J. M. Gawron, J. Nerbonne, and S. Peters. The absorption principle and e-
type anaphora. In J. Barwise et al., editors, Situation Theory and its Applications, volume II.
CSLI, Stanford, 1991.
[Geach, 1962] P. T. Geach. Reference and Generality. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1962.
[Geach, 1967] P. T. Geach. Intentional identity. The Journal of Philosophy, 64:627–632, 1967.
[Gentzen, 1934–5] G. Gentzen. Untersuchungen ¨uber das logischen schliessen. Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 39:176–210, 405–431, 1934-5.
[Goddard and Routley, 1973] L. Goddard and R. Routley. The Logic of Signiﬁcance and Con-
text. Scottish Academic Press, Aberdeen, 1973.

446
Barry Hartley Slater
[G¨odel, 1969] K. G¨odel. An interpretation of the intuitionistic sentential calculus. In J. Hintikka,
editor, The Philosophy of Mathematics. O.U.P., Oxford, 1969.
[G¨odel, 1980] K. G¨odel. On a hitherto unexploited extension of the ﬁnitary standpoint. Journal
of Philosophical Logic, 9:133–142, 1980.
[Goodman and Myhill, 1978] N. Goodman and J. Myhill.
Choice implies excluded middle.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 24:461, 1978.
[Goodstein, 1958] R. L. Goodstein.
On the formalisation of indirect discourse.
Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 23:417–419, 1958.
[Groenendijk and Stokhof, 1991] J. Groenendijk and M. Stokhof. Dynamic predicate logic. Lin-
guistics and Philosophy, 14:39–100, 1991.
[Hallett, 1984] M. Hallett. Cantorian Set Theory and Limitation of Size. Clarendon, Oxford,
1984.
[Hazen, 1987] A. Hazen. Natural deduction and hilbert’s ϵ-operator. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 16:411–421, 1987.
[Henkin, 1950] L. Henkin.
Completeness in the theory of types.
Journal of Symbolic Logic,
15:81–91, 1950.
[Hermes, 1965] H. Hermes. Eine Termlogik mit Auswahloperator. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1965.
[Hilbert, 1923] D. Hilbert. Die logischen grundlagen der mathematik. Mathematische Annalen,
88:151–165, 1923.
[Hilbert, 1967] D. Hilbert. On the inﬁnite. In J. van Heijenhoort, editor, From Frege to G¨odel.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA, 1967.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1970] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik. Springer,
Berlin, 2 edition, 1970.
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1968] G. E. Hughes and M. J. Cresswell.
An Introduction to Modal
Logic. Methuen, London, 1968.
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1996] G. E. Hughes and M. J. Cresswell. A New Introduction to Modal
Logic. Routledge, London, 1996.
[Jeﬀrey, 1967] R. Jeﬀrey.
Formal Logic: Its Scope and Limits.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1
edition, 1967.
[Kalish and Montague, 1964] D. Kalish and R. Montague. Logic; Techniques of Formal Rea-
soning. Harcourt, Brace and World, Inc, New York, 1964.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1962.
[Kneebone, 1963] G. T. Kneebone. Mathematical Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics.
Van Nostrand, Dordrecht, 1963.
[Kreisel, 1951] G. Kreisel. On the interpretation of non-ﬁnitist proofs i. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 16:241–267, 1951.
[Kreisel, 1952] G. Kreisel. On the interpretation of non-ﬁnitist proofs ii. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 17:43–58, 1952.
[Kreisel, 1964] G. Kreisel.
Hilbert’s programme.
In P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam, editors,
Philosophy of Mathematics. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, 1964.
[Leisenring, 1969] A. C. Leisenring. Mathematical Logic and Hilbert’s ϵ-symbol. Macdonald,
London, 1969.
[Leivant, 1973] D. Leivant.
Existential Instantiation in a System of Natural Deduction for
Intuitionistic Arithmetic. Stichting Mathematical Centrum, Amsterdam, 1973.
[Loux, 1998] M. J. Loux. Metaphysics; a Contemporary Introduction. Routledge, London, 1998.
[Maehara, 1955] S. Maehara. The predicate calculus with ϵ-symbol. Journal of the Mathematical
Society of Japan, 7:323–344, 1955.
[Marciszewski, 1981] W. Marciszewski. Dictionary of Logic. Martinus Nijhoﬀ, The Hague, 1981.
[Martin-L¨of, 1970] P. Martin-L¨of. Notes on Constructive Mathematics. Almqvist and Wiksell,
Stockholm, 1970.
[Meyer Viol, 1995] W. P. M. Meyer Viol. Instantial Logic. ILLC, Amsterdam, 1995.
[Mints, 1974] G. E. Mints. Heyting’s predicate calculus with the epsilon symbol. In Notes of
Scientiﬁc Seminars, T40: Research in Constructive Mathematics, and Mathematical Logic,
volume 6. LOMI, Leningrad, 1974.
[Mints, 1977] G. E. Mints. Heyting predicate calculus with epsilon symbol. Journal of Soviet
Mathematics, 8:317–323, 1977.
[Mints, 1982] G. E. Mints.
Simpliﬁed consistency proof for arithmetic.
Proceedings of the
Estonian Academy of Sciences, Fiz-Math, 31:376–382, 1982.

Hilbert’s Epsilon Calculus and its Successors
447
[Mints, 1989] G. E. Mints. Epsilon substitution method for the theory of hereditarily ﬁnite sets.
Proceedings of the Estonian Academy of Sciences, Fiz-Math, 38:154–164, 1989.
[Mints, 1994] G. E. Mints. Gentzen-type systems and hilbert’s epsilon substitution method, i.
In D. Prawitz, B. Skyrms, and D. Westerstahl, editors, Logic, Methodology and Philosophy
of Science. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, ix edition, 1994.
[Mints, 1996] G. E. Mints. Strong termination for the epsilon substitution method. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 61:1193–1205, 1996.
[Mints, 1997] G. E. Mints. A method of epsilon substitution for predicate logic with equality.
Journal of Mathematical Sciences, 87:3234–3252, 1997.
[Mints and Tupailo, 1999] G. E. Mints and S. Tupailo. Epsilon substitution method for ram-
iﬁed languages and delta-1-1 comprehension axiom. In A Cantini et al., editors, Logic and
Foundations of Mathematics. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1999.
[Mints et al., 1996] G. E. Mints, S. Tupailo, and W. Buchholz. Epsilon substitution method for
elementary analysis. Archive for Mathematical Logic, 35:103–130, 1996.
[Montague, 1963] R. Montague. Syntactical treatments of modality, with corollaries on reﬂection
principles and ﬁnite axiomatisability. Acta Philosophica Fennica, 16:155–167, 1963.
[Moore, 1982] G. H. Moore. Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1982.
[Neale, 1990] S. Neale. Descriptions. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge MA, 1990.
[Priest, 1979] G. G. Priest. Indeﬁnite descriptions. Logique et Analyse, 22:5–21, 1979.
[Preist, 1983] G. G. Priest. The logical paradoxes and the law of the excluded middle. Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 33:160–165, 1983.
[Priest, 1984] G. G. Priest. Semantic closure. Studia Logica, XLIII 1/2:117–129, 1984.
[Priest, 1994] G. G. Priest. The structure of the paradoxes of self-reference. Mind, 103:25–34,
1994.
[Prior, 1971] A. N. Prior. Objects of Thought. O.U.P, Oxford, 1971.
[Purdy, 1994] W. C. Purdy. A variable-free logic for anaphora. In P. Humphreys, editor, Patrick
Suppes: Scientiﬁc Philosopher, volume 3. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1994.
[Quine, 1960] W. V. O. Quine. Word and Object. Wiley, New York, 1960.
[Rasiowa, 1956] H. Rasiowa. On the ϵ-theorems. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 43:156–165, 1956.
[Rodych, 2000] V. Rodych.
Wittgenstein’s critique of set theory.
The Southern Journal of
Philosophy, 38:281–319, 2000.
[Rosser, 1953] J. B. Rosser. Logic for Mathematicians. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1953.
[Routley, 1969] R. Routley. A simple natural deduction system. Logique et Analyse, 12:129–152,
1969.
[Routley, 1977] R. Routley. Choice and descriptions in enriched intensional languages 2, and 3.
In E. Morscher, J. Czermak, and P. Weingartner, editors, Problems in Logic and Ontology.
Akademische Druck und Velagsanstalt, Graz, 1977.
[Routley, 1980] R. Routley.
Exploring Meinong’s Jungle.
Philosophy Department, R.S.S.S.,
A.N.U., Canberra, 1980.
[Routley et al., 1974] R. Routley, R. Meyer, and L. Goddard. Choice and descriptions in en-
riched intensional languages 1. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 3:291–316, 1974.
[Saarinen, 1978] E. Saarinen.
Intentional identity interpreted: A case study of the relations
among quantiﬁers, pronouns, and propositional attitudes. In E Saarinen, editor, Game The-
oretical Semantics. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1978.
[Sayward, 1987] C. Sayward. Prior’s theory of truth. Analysis, 47:83–87, 1987.
[Slater, 1986a] B. H. Slater. E-type pronouns and ϵ-terms. Canadian Journal of Philosophy,
16:27–38, 1986.
[Slater, 1986b] B. H. Slater. Prior’s analytic. Analysis, 46:76–81, 1986.
[Slater, 1987] B. H. Slater. Fictions. British Journal of Aesthetics, 27:145–155, 1987.
[Slater, 1988a] B. H. Slater. Excluding the middle. Critica, XX:55–71, 1988.
[Slater, 1988b] B. H. Slater. Hilbertian reference. Nous, 22:283–297, 1988.
[Slater, 1988c] B. H. Slater. Intensional identities. Logique et Analyse, 121–2:93–107, 1988.
[Slater, 1989] B. H. Slater. Modal semantics. Logique et Analyse, 127–8:195–209, 1989.
[Slater, 1990] B. H. Slater. Using hilbert’s calculus. Logique et Analyse, 129–130:45–67, 1990.
[Slater, 1992a] B. H. Slater. Review of m. detlefsen’s hilbert’s program (reidel, dordrecht 1986).
Nous, 26:513–514, 1992.
[Slater, 1992b] B. H. Slater. Routley’s formulation of transparency. History and Philosophy of
Logic, 13:215–224, 1992.

448
Barry Hartley Slater
[Slater, 1992c] B. H. Slater. Self-reference with operators. Logique et Analyse, 139–140:335–340,
1992.
[Slater, 1994a] B. H. Slater. The epsilon calculus’ problematic. Philosophical Papers, XXIII:217–
242, 1994.
[Slater, 1994b] B. H. Slater. Intensional Logic. Avebury, Aldershot, 1994.
[Smirnov, 1971] V. A. Smirnov. Elimination des terms ϵ dans la logique intuitioniste. Revue
Internationale de Philosophie, 98:512–519, 1971.
[Smirnov, 1978] V. A. Smirnov. Theory of quantiﬁcation and ϵ-calculi. In J. Hintikka, I. Ni-
iniluoto, and E. Saarinen, editors, Essays on Mathematical and Philosophical Logic. Reidel,
Dordrecht, 1978.
[Stalnaker and Thomason, 1968] R. C. Stalnaker and R. H. Thomason.
Abstraction in ﬁrst-
order modal logic. Theoria, 3:203–207, 1968.
[Steen, 1972] S. W. P. Steen. Mathematical Logic. C.U.P., Cambridge, 1972.
[Tait, 1965] W. Tait. The substitution method. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 30:175–192, 1965.
[Tait, 1981] W. Tait. Finitism. Journal of Philosophy, 78:524–546, 1981.
[Thomason, 1977] R. Thomason.
Indirect discourse is not quotational.
Monist, 60:340–354,
1977.
[Thomason, 1980] R. Thomason.
A note on syntactical treatments of modality.
Synthese,
44:391–395, 1980.
[Thomason and Stalnaker, 1968] R. Thomason and R. C. Stalnaker. Modality and reference.
Nous, 2:359–372, 1968.
[Tiles, 1989] M. Tiles. The Philosophy of Set Theory. Blackwell, Oxford, 1989.
[Tiles, 1991] M. Tiles. Mathematics and the Image of Reason. Routledge, London, 1991.
[van Eijck, 1993] J. van Eijck. The dynamics of description. Journal of Semantics, 10:239–267,
1993.
[von Heusinger and Egli, 2000] K. von Heusinger and U. Egli, editors. Reference and Anaphoric
Relations. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 2000.
[von Neumann, 1927] J. von Neumann.
Zur hilbertishen beweistheorie.
Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 26:1–46, 1927.
[Wang, 1962] H. Wang. A Survey of Mathematical Logic. Science Press, Peking, 1962.
[Wessels, 1977] L. Wessels.
Cut elimination in a gentzen-style ϵ-calculus without identity.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 23:527–538, 1977.
[Wessels, 1978] L. Wessels. A cut-free sequent calculus for hilbert’s ϵ-symbol. Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, 43:525–536, 1978.
[Weyl, 1944] H. Weyl.
David hilbert and his mathematical work.
Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 50:612–654, 1944.
[Williams, 1976] C. J. F. Williams. What is Truth? C.U.P., Cambridge, 1976.
[Wright, 1983] C. Wright.
Frege’s Conception of Numbers as Objects.
Aberdeen University
Press, Aberdeen, 1983.
[Wright, 1985] C. Wright.
Skolem and the skeptic.
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
59:117–37, 1985.
[Yashuhara, 1982] M. Yasuhara.
Cut elimination in ϵ-calculi.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische
Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 28:311–316, 1982.
[Zach, 2003] R. Zach.
The practice of ﬁnitism:
Epsilon calculus and consistency proofs in
hilbert’s program. Synthese, 137:211–259, 2003.

G¨ODEL’S LOGIC
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
The emphasis will be on G¨odel’s concrete theorems in mathematical logic. For
his work in set theory, we refer to Volume 6 of this Handbook. The ﬁrst part of the
present chapter, on G¨odel’s work in classical logic, was written by Kennedy, the
second part, on G¨odel’s work in intuitionistic logic, by van Atten. Responsibility
for the chapter as a whole is accepted by both, as the two parts have been subjected
to mutual discussion, criticism, and emendations. In the references to G¨odel’s own
papers, we have followed the usage in the Collected Works.
G¨odel ﬁrst published a result in 1930 (his completeness theorem), and did so for
the last time in 1958 (the Dialectica Interpretation); the latter was largely based on
ideas he had already presented in a lecture seventeen years earlier [G¨odel, *1941].
1
G¨ODEL’S RESULTS IN CLASSICAL LOGIC AND ARITHMETIC
1.1
Introduction
In this part of our chapter we consider G¨odel’s principal theorems in classical logic.
The section is not comprehensive; not treated here is G¨odel’s work on cases of the
decision problem for predicate logic,1 as well as the results for propositional logic
1932c, 1933, 1933a.2 Also not treated are the myriad of results and observations
contained in G¨odel’s reviews. Finally, we also fail to include a discussion of G¨odel’s
‘Ontologische Beweis.’ Though it is, at ﬁrst glance, an exercise in modal logic, in
the authors’ opinion it is more properly treated in a discussion of G¨odel’s philo-
sophical work (although the distinction in G¨odel’s work between the philosophical
and the technical must nearly always remain an artiﬁcial one.)
1.2
The Completeness Theorem
Introduction
The completeness question for the ﬁrst order predicate calculus was stated precisely
and in print for the ﬁrst time in 1928 by Hilbert and Ackermann in their text
Grundz¨uge der theoretischen Logik.3 The question Hilbert and Ackermann pose
1See [G¨odel, 1986].
2All reprinted in [G¨odel, 1986].
3See [Hilbert and Ackermann, 1972], though the question was anticipated as far back as 1837
by Bolzano in his Wissenschaftslehre, see [Bolzano, 1992].
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

450
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
is whether a certain axiom system for the ﬁrst order predicate calculus ‘. . . is
complete in the sense that from it all logical formulas that are correct for each
domain of individuals can be derived.’4
Given that the relevant concepts had long been in place by then, and given
that proving the theorem presents comparatively little in the way of mathematical
diﬃculties, it is surprising that the question was stated as late as 1928. Even
more surprising is the failure on the part of Hilbert and Ackermann and other
contemporary logicians to notice that the theorem follows, in G¨odel’s words, ‘al-
most trivially’ from Skolem 1923 — which in turn builds on L¨owenheim 1915 and
Skolem 1920.5 The reasons for this are interesting and accordingly the matter will
be discussed below. Van Heijenoort and Dreben remark6 that ‘Throughout much
of the 1920s it was not completeness but the decision problem for quantiﬁcational
validity, a problem originating from the work of Schr¨oder and L¨owenheim, that
was the dominant concern in studying quantiﬁcation theory.’ Perhaps this serves
as a partial explanation. Examples of such results would include the semantic
completeness of the propositional calculus due to Post in 1921 as well as a more
general completeness theorem for the same due to Bernays in 1926, as well as the
decision procedure for the ﬁrst order monadic predicate calculus due to Behmann.7
G¨odel’s proof of the Completeness Theorem
We outline G¨odel’s proof as given in his 1929 thesis.8 The deductive system is
that of Hilbert and Ackermann 1928.
G¨odel begins by giving a precise deﬁnition of all the terms involved. In partic-
ular the terms ‘contradictory’ and ‘consistent’ are deﬁned in syntactic terms, by
reference to derivability of a contradiction, rather than in semantic terms. This is
an essential point of diﬀerence with L¨owenheim 1915 and Skolem 1920 and 1923.
As for the word ‘provable,’ ‘the rules of inference yield (its) meaning’ (a remark
G¨odel omitted from the subsequent article based on his thesis). A formula is valid
if it is true in every model. The case in which identity is taken as part of the
language is treated separately, as is the case in which the set of formulas whose
satisﬁability is considered is (countably) inﬁnite.9 The Completeness Theorem is
as follows:
THEOREM 1. Every valid formula of the restricted functional calculus is provable.
But G¨odel will actually prove the equivalent:
THEOREM 2. Every formula of the restricted functional calculus is either
refutable or satisﬁable,
4This translated quote is from [van Heijenoort, 1967], p.48.
5All English translations of the papers of Skolem and of L¨owenheim cited here are from [van
Heijenoort, 1967] See also [Skolem, 1970].
6See their introduction in [G¨odel, 1986], p.47.
7See [Behmann, 1922].
8Reprinted and translated in [G¨odel, 1986], to which we refer also for G¨odel 1930.
9This latter extension was given in Skolem 1920 also, see below.

G¨odel’s Logic
451
where a formula is ‘refutable’ if its negation is provable. G¨odel deﬁnes the degree
of a formula in prenex normal form beginning with universal quantiﬁers, to be
the number of alternating blocks of quantiﬁers. He proves that if every formula of
degree k is either satisﬁable or refutable then so is every formula of degree k + 1.
This is not particularly diﬃcult, and it is in this part of the proof that G¨odel uses
Skolem Normal Form.10 It then remains to prove the assertion for formulas F of
degree 1, i.e. of the form:
∀x1 . . . ∀xr∃y1 . . . ∃ysA(x1, . . . , xr, y1, . . . , ys)
(1)
For ease of exposition we sketch the proof in the special case of a sentence
(P)A = ∀x1∃y1A(x1, y1), with A(x1, y1) quantiﬁer free, instead of the more general
(1). G¨odel deﬁnes a sequence of formulas
(Pn)An = ∃x0∃x1∃x2 . . . ∃xn(A(x0, x1) ∧(A(x1, x2) . . . ∧A(xn−1, xn)).
He then proves, by induction on n, that (P)A →(Pn)An is provable. This is a
crucial lemma, as we explain below. Thinking of An as a propositional formula,
with the atomic formulas considered as diﬀerent propositional symbols, he then
considers two cases:
Case 1: For some n, the propositional formula An is not satisﬁable. In this case
¬An can be derived in propositional logic, and hence in the (Hilbert-Ackermann)
predicate calculus. Hence ¬(Pn)An can be derived. But then ¬(P)A is derivable,
i.e. our original sentence is refutable, as (P)A →(Pn)An was derivable.
Case 2: For all n, the propositional formula An is satisﬁable by some assignment
sn of truth-values to the atomic formulas. Let us note that, owing to the special
form of An, the restriction sn ↾m of sn to the atomic formulas of Am is a satisfying
assignment for Am. Now G¨odel forms a tree of all possible assignments satisfying
the various An. A node s satisfying An is deﬁned to be an extension of each of
its restrictions s ↾m. An assignment of An is said to be on level n. This tree
is ﬁnitely branching since there are only two truth-values and only ﬁnitely many
atomic formulas in any single An. Since there is, by assumption, an assignment on
each level of the tree, the tree is inﬁnite. By an argument familiar nowadays from
the textbook proof of K¨onig’s Lemma11 G¨odel concludes that there must be an
inﬁnite branch s0 < s1 < . . . in the tree. Taken together the assignments or nodes
of this branch form a single assignment satisfying each An. From this assignment
one readily deﬁnes a model of the original sentence (P)A, and thereby (P)A is
satisﬁable.
Building the tree T in the general case requires a carefully chosen order in which
all sequences are handled. Regarding the general case also it should be pointed
10This is relevant to the discussion about G¨odel and Skolem below.
11Later G¨odel told Wang that at the time he did not know this [then only recently published]
lemma [Wang, 1996, p.82]. Incidentally, in that conversation with Wang G¨odel mistakenly iden-
tiﬁes D´enes K¨onig, who formulated the Lemma, with his father Julius, who had worked on the
continuum problem.

452
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
out that the crucial lemma asserting the provability of (P)A →(Pn)An is the
step missing from the earlier versions of the proof due to L¨owenheim and Skolem.
Essentially the lemma builds the bridge from semantics back to provability.
We note that the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem, which states that the model in
the satisﬁability case can always be taken to be countable, is a corollary of G¨odel’s
Completeness Theorem.
In 1930 G¨odel published the paper based on his thesis, notable as an extension
of his 1929 mainly for the statement of the compactness theorem (only implicit in
his 1929): a countably inﬁnite set of quantiﬁcational formulas is consistent if and
only if every ﬁnite subset of it is consistent.12
The compactness theorem, one of the two or three main tools in (the then
ﬂedgling subject of) model theory, seems not to have drawn much interest at the
time. As it turns out, compactness is quite a strong property for a logic to have, in
the sense that no proper extension of ﬁrst order logic satisﬁes both the compactness
and L¨owenheim-Skolem theorems.13
The formal vs. the informal notion of decidability
In the introduction to his thesis, G¨odel observes that one might advance the follow-
ing objection to his Completeness Theorem: doesn’t the use of the law of excluded
middle in its proof ‘invalidate the entire completeness proof’?14 The Completeness
Theorem asserts ‘a kind of decidability,’ namely every quantiﬁcational formula is
either provable or a counterexample to it can be given, whereas ‘the principle of
the excluded middle seems to express nothing other than the decidability of ev-
ery problem.’ Thus the proof may be circular: one uses the decidability of every
question in order to prove just that assertion. But, G¨odel remarks, what he has
shown is the provability of a valid formula from ‘completely speciﬁed, concretely
enumerated inference rules,’15 not merely from all rules imaginable; whereas the
law of excluded middle is used informally (in the metalanguage as one would say
nowadays), meaning that the notion of decidability or solvability asserted by the
law is left unspeciﬁed. As G¨odel puts it:
. . . what is aﬃrmed (by the law of excluded middle) is the solvability
not at all through speciﬁed means but only through all means that are
in any way imaginable . . . 16
The step forward provided by G¨odel is therefore that if we assume solvability by
all means imaginable, then we have, in the case of a sentence of ﬁrst order predicate
12The theorem was extended to the case of uncountable vocabularies by Maltsev in 1936, from
which the Upward L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem immediately follows. See [Mal′cev, 1971].
13This is a result due to Per Lindstr¨om, see [Lindstr¨om, 1969].
14See p.63 of [G¨odel, 1986].
15Italics G¨odel’s.
16G¨odel remarks in a footnote to this passage that the notion of provability by any means
imaginable is perhaps ‘too sweeping.’ Nevertheless, this does not aﬀect the basic distinction that
G¨odel wishes to make, between the formal and informal notions of provability.

G¨odel’s Logic
453
calculus, solvability by very speciﬁc means laid out carefully beforehand.17
Forerunners
Noteworthy in connection with the Completeness Theorem are the cases of L¨owen-
heim and of Skolem. In a 1920 paper entitled ‘Logisch-kombinatorische Unter-
suchungen ¨uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit oder Beweisbarkeit mathematischer S¨atze nebst
einem Theoreme ¨uber dichte Mengen,’ Skolem proved what is now called the
L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem, a kind of semantic version of the Completeness The-
orem:18
THEOREM 3. Every ﬁrst order formula of the restricted predicate calculus is
either not satisﬁable, or is satisﬁed in a countable domain.
The statement of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem diﬀers from that of G¨odel’s
Completeness Theorem. With soundness, the latter states that provability in a
ﬁrst order theory is equivalent to truth in all of its models; whereas the former
says nothing about provability. Still the argument L¨owenheim and Skolem use
does not diﬀer in its mathematical essentials from the satisﬁability part of the
theorem in G¨odel’s dissertation. Skolem ﬁrst proves that quantiﬁcational formulas
in what is now known as Skolem normal form, i.e. of the form ΠΣR, where R is
quantiﬁer free and Π and Σ represent blocks of universal and existential quantiﬁers
respectively, constitute a reduction class for ﬁrst order predicate calculus. (This
means that corresponding to every quantiﬁcational formula F there is a formula
G in Skolem normal form, such that F is satisﬁable in a given domain if and only
if G is.)
He then constructs a tree whose ﬁnite levels consist of satisfying assignments or-
dered in the appropriate way. In the case that the formula is satisﬁable, Dedekind’s
theory of chains is used to obtain an inﬁnite branch through the tree and hence a
countable domain in which the formula is satisﬁed. Otherwise at some ﬁnite level
of the tree there is no satisfying assignment, and then the formula is not satisﬁable
in any domain, countable or uncountable.
Skolem 1920 is a ‘clariﬁcation’ or ‘simpliﬁcation’ (in van Heijenoort’s and
Skolem’s words respectively) of L¨owenheim’s 1915 ‘¨Uber M¨oglichkeiten im Rel-
ativkalk¨ul.’19 L¨owenheim’s is apparently the ﬁrst paper to state and prove the
L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem. In L¨owenheim normal form the blocks of existen-
tial quantiﬁers are inﬁnite in length20 — they quantify over the domain element
by element, so to speak, considerably complicating the exposition.21 L¨owenheim
17For another interesting argument in the introduction to G¨odel’s thesis see below.
18The paper originally appeared in [Skolem, 1920].
19A ‘pioneer work in logic,’ according to van Heijenoort. See [van Heijenoort, 1967], which
contains a translation. It appeared originally in [L¨owenheim, 1915].
20Recently Badesa has argued that contrary to appearances, L¨owenheim’s proof does not make
use of inﬁnitary formulas. See [Badesa, 2004].
21The real defect introduced by using inﬁnitary formulas though, according to Skolem, is the
fact that L¨owenheim thereby ‘takes a detour through the inﬁnite.’
Skolem’s objection is in
keeping with his ﬁnitism, which we discuss below.

454
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
proves that the normal form formulas represent a reduction class, and then proves
the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem for ﬁrst order logic. The proof proceeds by the
same method as given in Skolem 1920; that is, by constructing a tree of satisfying
assignments which is either ﬁnite, in which case the formula is not satisﬁable, or
inﬁnite, in which case a satisfying assignment can be obtained from the tree. A
drawback of the proof and the second diﬀerence with Skolem’s clariﬁcation is that
L¨owenheim simply asserts the existence of an inﬁnite branch through the tree in
the satisﬁability case. The type of reasoning now familiar from K¨onig’s lemma is
missing.
The second paper of Skolem’s in which the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem can
be found dates from 1922, and is based on a lecture entitled ‘Einige Bemerkun-
gen zur axiomatischen Begr¨undung der Mengenlehre,’ given to the Fifth Congress
of Scandinavian Mathematicians in Helsinki in 1922.22 Here Skolem reproves the
L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem for the predicate calculus, using a construction which
anticipates to a somewhat greater degree the satisﬁability part of G¨odel’s Com-
pleteness Theorem. This time Skolem was able to eliminate the use of the axiom
of choice in the theorem, which he saw as an improvement. The paper emphasizes
what Skolem called the ‘relativity in set theory,’ and is accordingly entitled ‘An
Observation on the Axiomatic Foundations of Set Theory.’ ‘Relativity in set the-
ory’ is now known as the Skolem paradox: categoricity fails for Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory, i.e. it has countable (as well as uncountable) models.23 Skolem remarks
that he had pointed relativity out to Bernstein already in the winter of 1914-15
(this was presumably after seeing L¨owenheim’s paper, though the dates allow for
the conversation to have taken place also before the publication of L¨owenheim
1915), but did not publish his observation to Bernstein before 1923 as:
. . . ﬁrst, I have in the meantime been occupied with other problems;
second, I believed that it was so clear that axiomatization in terms of
sets was not a satisfactory ultimate foundation of mathematics that
mathematicians would, for the most part, not be very much concerned
with it. But in recent times I have seen to my surprise that so many
mathematicians think that these axioms of set theory provide the ideal
foundation for mathematics; therefore it seemed to me that the time
had come to publish a critique.24
Skolem’s 1928 lecture ‘¨Uber die Mathematische Logik’ comes closer to a proof of
the Completeness Theorem in various ways.25 A proof procedure is given for which
it can be shown, if one includes his earlier results, that it is sound and complete.
22The conference proceedings were published the following year, see [Skolem, 1923]. Skolem’s
paper was reprinted in [Skolem, 1970] and a partial translation can be found in [van Heijenoort,
1967].
23A theory is said to be categorical if it has only one model up to isomorphism; it is λ-categorical
if it has only one model of cardinality λ, up to isomorphism.
24[van Heijenoort, 1967], p. 300.
25The lecture was delivered to the Norwegian Mathematical Society on October 22, 1928 and
originally published in [Skolem, 1928].

G¨odel’s Logic
455
Speciﬁcally it gives an eﬀective procedure for determining for a given formula F in
prenex normal form, for each n whether or not there is a satisfying assignment at
the nth level of the tree. If there fails to be a satisfying assignment at some level of
the tree, then ¬F is valid. Noteworthy is the fact that the proof procedure Skolem
has in mind is in modern terminology cut-free and has the subformula property,
anticipating Herbrand and Gentzen.
This brings us to Herbrand’s 1930, which we will treat in the context of the
ﬁnitary viewpoint.
Herbrand’s Completeness Theorem in relation to Finitism
As mentioned the question whether ﬁrst-order logic is complete had been intro-
duced in 1928 in the Grundz¨uge der theoretischen Logik by Hilbert and Acker-
mann. They advocated the ﬁnitary standpoint, which at the time was the dom-
inant view in the foundations of mathematics. This circumstance has led Hao
Wang to make an interesting observation on the interaction between philosophical
views and mathematical thought. Wang ﬁrst points out that ‘the very concept
of completeness involves the nonﬁnitary component of being true in “arbitrary
domains” ’; this is non-ﬁnitary because there is no ﬁnitary construction method
to construct all possible domains. He then continues:
Viewed from such a perspective, what is surprising is not how late
the concept was introduced, but that it was introduced at all. To use
a fashionable term, one could say that the ‘paradigm’ [namely, the
ﬁnitary standpoint] at that time could not accommodate either the
formulation of the problem or its solution. While it is plausible to say
that G[¨odel] initiated a new paradigm, the fact that the problem was
raised in [Hilbert and Ackermann [1972]] which belonged to the old
paradigm, shows that paradigms are not as rigid or insular as many
enthusiasts of ‘incommensurable paradigms’ have suggested.26
Herbrand’s notion of ﬁnitary reasoning, which he called ‘intuitionistic reason-
ing’, a conﬂation characteristic of the times, is as follows:
By an intuitionistic argument we understand an argument satisfying
the following conditions: in it we never consider anything but a given
ﬁnite number of objects and of functions; these functions are well-
deﬁned, their deﬁnition allowing the computation of their value in a
univocal way; we never state that an object exists without giving the
means of constructing it; we never consider the totality of all the ob-
jects x of an inﬁnite collection; and when we say that an argument (or
a theorem) is true for all these x, we mean that, for each x taken by
itself, it is possible to repeat the general argument in question, which
26See p. 269 of [Wang, 1987].

456
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
should be considered to be merely the prototype of these particular
arguments.27
It is clear that neither L¨owenheim’s 1915 completeness proof nor that of Skolem
1920 falls under Herbrand’s notion of a ﬁnitary proof. This is the ﬁrst objection
to their proofs stated by Herbrand in his 1930. The second objection has to do
with their use of normal, or what he calls ‘canonical,’ forms,28 and the third is the
following:
L¨owenheim and Skolem implicitly assume that, once we have a model
of ¬P, P cannot be provided; but this means that the consistency
of mathematics (or at least of arithmetic) is implicitly assumed; our
theorem, on the contrary, will allow us to investigate the consistency
of arithmetic.29
A remark in another paper of Herbrand’s sheds further light on this:
We could say that L¨owenheim’s proof was suﬃcient in mathematics;
but, in the present work, we had to make it ‘metamathematical’ . . . so
that it would be of some use to us.30
Herbrand’s emphasis here on the distinction between a mathematical and a
metamathematical view of L¨owenheim’s proof is reminiscent of a remark of G¨odel’s
to Wang about Skolem, in a letter of March 7, 1968:
That he [i.e.
Skolem] used non-ﬁnitary reasoning for Loewenheim’s
Theorem proves nothing, because pure model theory, where the concept
of proof does not come in, lies on the borderline between mathematics
and metamathematics, and its applications to special systems with a
ﬁnite number of axioms actually belongs to mathematics, at least for
the most part.31
G¨odel remarks above that in pure model theory the concept of proof does not
‘come in,’ meaning perhaps that the objects with which one is principally con-
cerned in pure model theory are structures rather than proofs. Correspondingly,
then, in proof theory32 the notion of ‘truth’ or ‘model’ does not ‘come in.’ In
Herbrand’s particular case, he simply identiﬁes the truth of a quantiﬁcational
27See pp.288–289, footnote 5, of [Herbrand, 1971].
28An objection hard to make sense of since the use of those forms do not impose a restriction
on the generality of those proofs.
29P.289, [Herbrand, 1971].
30See p. 176 of [Herbrand, 1971].
31See [G¨odel, 2003b], p.494. Incidentally, in the preceding line, G¨odel had written that ‘More-
over, what he [i.e. Skolem] tried to accomplish on p.29 of his paper of 1929 (see the last paragraph
of my letter of December 7, 1967) evidently was to eliminate transﬁnite arguments from meta-
mathematics (in a manner quite similar to Herbrand’s).’
32Herbrand’s thesis is called ‘Investigations in Proof Theory.’

G¨odel’s Logic
457
proposition with its provability in quantiﬁcation theory. In a similar syntactic
vein, a domain, or champ, is a ﬁnite ‘collection of letters’ and an ‘inﬁnite domain,’
so to speak, is a ﬁnite domain together with some attached functions, proposi-
tional functions and logical values. ‘Inﬁnite domains’ are a mechanism which yield
a series of expanding ﬁnite domains. This is the machinery needed to carry out
Herbrand’s view of universal formulas: ‘. . . and when one says that an argument
(or a theorem) is true for all these x, that means that for each x taken individually,
it is possible to repeat the general argument in question, which should be consid-
ered nothing but the prototype of these particular arguments.’ Thus Herbrand’s
is a ﬁnitary approximation to a full completeness theorem. In modern terms, it is
as follows:
THEOREM 4. A ﬁrst order formula A is valid if and only if A has a Herbrand
proof. More generally, if T is a universal theory, then T |= A if and only if A has
a Herbrand T-proof.33
Herbrand’s thesis presented ideas which were to become central in proof the-
ory.34 It includes a theorem very close to the cut-elimination theorem. The main
theorem has a gap. This was repaired in an unpublished manuscript by G¨odel,35
in the sense that a weaker statement suﬃcient for the theorem was extracted and
proved. The same proof of the weaker statement was discovered independently and
published in a series of papers published in 1963 and 1964 by Dreben, Anderaa and
Andrews.36 The latter also gives counterexamples to Herbrand’s original assertion.
We have seen that any full completeness proof for ﬁrst-order logic in the original
sense of the question has to be non-ﬁnitary. For G¨odel, because of his platonism
or objectivism, this transﬁnite character presented no problem at all.37 But for
Herbrand, the non-ﬁnitary notion of an arbitrary domain would not have been
meaningful.38
For further discussion of the relation of Herbrand 1930, Skolem’s three papers
discussed above, as well as that of L¨owenheim 1915 to G¨odel 1929, see Hao Wang’s
introduction to Skolem’s Selected Works, as well as Dreben and van Heijenoort’s
33See ‘On Herbrand’s Theorem,’ Sam Buss, math.ucsd.edu/ sbuss/ResearchWeb /herbrandthe-
orem/paper.pdf
34Though Kreisel was to remark of Herbrand’s thesis in his review of [Dreben et al., 1963]:
‘There is no indication of a clear conception of the completeness problem in the thesis.’
35Van Heijenoort writes in his introduction to Herbrand’s ´Ecrits (translations ours):
In 1939 Bernays wrote that the proof Herbrand gives of his Fundamental Theorem
is ‘diﬃcult to follow’ (Hilbert and Bernays 1939, p.158, note 1), without claiming
that it is erroneous. In 1943 G¨odel convinced himself that Herbrand’s argument
contains a gap; he wrote a note on this for private use, but didn’t publish anything.
and adds a footnote (j) to the second sentence: ‘This information was communicated to me by
G¨odel in the course of a conversation in Autumn 1963.’ (p.8). The manuscript itself is in the
G¨odel Nachlaß, Arbeitshefte volumes IV and V.
36In particular, see [Dreben et al., 1963].
37See his letter to Wang of December 7, 1967 [G¨odel, 2003b, p.398].
38For a discussion of the philosophical and historical context of Herbrand’s theorem see van
Dalen’s review of [Herbrand, 1971] in [van Dalen, 1974].

458
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
exhaustive discussion in [G¨odel, 1986] already cited, as well as the various intro-
ductions to those papers by van Heijenoort et al., in ‘From Frege to G¨odel’.39 See
also Goldfarb’s extensive introduction to Herbrand 1971.
G¨odel’s interaction with and account of his forerunners
L¨owenheim and Skolem arrived at the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem for the ﬁrst-
order predicate calculus in 1923, based on their respective 1915 and 1920 (with
1928 as a supplement).
In the part of the Completeness Theorem where one
constructs a model for a satisﬁable sentence, their construction was more or less
the same as appears in G¨odel 1929. What then was G¨odel’s contribution to the
Completeness Theorem? The L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem was stated in semantic
terms as we saw: a contradictory sentence is a sentence that is not satisﬁable,
rather than one leading to a contradiction by a ﬁnite derivation. No deductive
system is given, nor is there any speciﬁcation of the syntax. Thus the question of
completeness (and therefore any proof of it) remains, at best, implicit. This is be-
cause the step from non-satisﬁability of a formula to the provability of its negation
cannot be given without specifying the rules of proof. Accordingly Dreben and
van Heijenoort40 see G¨odel’s contribution as tantamount to ‘. . . the replacement
of an informal notion of ‘provable’ by a formal one . . . and the explicit recognition
that there is a question to be answered.’ But this assessment misses an essential
aspect of G¨odel’s contribution; it also fails to take Skolem’s point of view suﬃ-
ciently into account. For both Herbrand and Skolem the notion of ‘all models’ of
a theory would not have been a meaningful one. I.e., there was not so much a lack
of recognition at work as a conscious wish to avoid inﬁnitary reasoning. Moreover,
for Skolem his version of the completeness theorem (i.e. the L¨owenheim-Skolem
theorem) is ﬁrst and foremost a theorem about the failure of categoricity in set
theory, as was noted above. He drew from it what was to him the inevitable con-
clusion that Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory cannot be the right, ﬁrst order way to
formalize ﬁnitary reasoning.41 This is because for Skolem, any theory which cap-
tured ﬁnitary reasoning in the right way would have to be ﬁrst order, and would
have to be categorical. Thus pursuing the syntactic aspect of the proof would have
meant, it seems, taking a step in the opposite direction of what would have been
the natural one for him.
As for G¨odel’s contribution to the Completeness Theorem, it was simply to
solve the inﬁnitary Hilbert-Ackermann question. This required seeing that both
the refutation procedure and the satisfaction procedure can be incorporated into a
single framework, as distinct from L¨owenheim, Skolem and Herbrand, who, as we
pointed out, saw these as cases to be handled separately, if at all. It should also be
noted that G¨odel solved the Hilbert-Ackermann question in such a deﬁnitive way
39[van Heijenoort, 1967]
40See [G¨odel, 1986].
41For Skolem’s account of this view see Skolem 1958 in [Skolem, 1970], a retrospective view of
the 1920’s.

G¨odel’s Logic
459
as to dampen objections42 concerning the inﬁnitary aspects either of the statement
of the theorem, or of its proof—objections which could easily have arisen in the
general logical community, given the times.43 And such was to become G¨odel’s
trademark in his logical work: the vindication of inﬁnitary methods in meta-
mathematics by showing they can be handled in an exact way, that is to say:
mathematically. G¨odel put it this way:
The Completeness Theorem, mathematically, is indeed an almost triv-
ial consequence of Skolem 1923a. However, the fact is that, at that
time, nobody (including Skolem himself) drew this conclusion (neither
from Skolem 1922 nor, as I did, from similar considerations of his own
. . . This blindness (or prejudice, or whatever you may call it) of logi-
cians is indeed surprising. But I think the explanation is not hard to
ﬁnd. It lies in the widespread lack, at that time, of the required episte-
mological attitude toward metamathematics and toward non-ﬁnitary
reasoning.44
As an aside, completeness as such seems not to have been very much in the air
in the early and mid-1920’s. For example Fraenkel in his 1923 review of Skolem
1923 does not mention completeness at all, never mind that it might follow from
Skolem’s paper.45
Also, the very fact that completeness is stated as an open
question in Hilbert and Ackermann 1928 implies that, if Hilbert and Ackermann
read the relevant papers of L¨owenheim and Skolem before they published their
text, they obviously did not obtain from them a solution of their problem.
As a ﬁnal word on the interesting history of the Completeness Theorem (a very
brief account of which has been given here), the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem as
given especially in Skolem 1923, has raised a number of questions as to when G¨odel
might have come across that paper. If one might speculate that it was not known
to Hilbert and Ackermann, as we do above, then one might speculate in turn
that it was also not known to G¨odel. Library slips from the G¨odel Nachlaß(which
have been reexamined just recently) indicate that G¨odel requested the proceedings
volume containing Skolem 1923 once in November 1928, before he turned in his
dissertation in July 1929, and twice afterwards. He was not able to obtain Skolem
1923 from any of the libraries he requested the volume from before November 1929
at the earliest, though. Indeed the proceedings volume which contains the paper
was not owned by the National or University libraries in Vienna at the time (nor
do they own it now).46
42At least the objections of those whose view of the issue was not already ﬁrmly ﬁxed in the
ﬁnitist camp.
43As we have seen, L¨owenheim’s version of the theorem had been seen as far from deﬁnitive.
44Letter to Wang, Dec. 7, 1967. See [G¨odel, 2003b].
45Indeed Skolem himself, in his 1938 review of the second edition of Hilbert-Ackermann, notes
their inclusion of theorems proved since the previous 1928 edition appeared; among these new
theorems he includes the Completeness Theorem.
46See van Atten, ‘On G¨odel’s awareness of Skolem’s Helsinki lecture,’ [van Atten, 2005].

460
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
One could also wonder about Herbrand’s contact with Skolem 1923. Van Hei-
jenoort writes,
Herbrand himself writes (see below, p.217) that he has found his
method ‘by taking up again an idea of Loewenheim’s’. As the many
references in his writings indicate, Herbrand knew Loewenheim 1915
very well. Let us indicate what seems to have been Herbrand’s read-
ings in logic. The ﬁrst book on logic he read seems to be Zaremba
1926. Next he read Principia Mathematica (ﬁrst edition), at least the
ﬁrst volume, the papers of the German school (Hilbert, von Neumann,
Bernays, Ackermann), Hilbert and Ackermann 1928. He read G¨odel
1931 when it appeared. It is diﬃcult to say whether he knew Skolem
1920 ﬁrst hand or through the references to it given by Hilbert and
Ackermann. He never knew, it seems to me, Skolem 1928 and 1929.
There is in his writing no reference at all to G¨odel 1930, which he
cannot have failed to know.47
Van Heijenoort says nothing about Skolem 1923; presumably Herbrand did not
know it.
Selected Observations and Corollaries
Categoricity fails also for other theories.
For example, the existence of non-
standard models of the Peano axioms follows from completeness (together with
compactness).48 This fact was not pointed out by G¨odel in any of the publica-
tions connected with the Completeness Theorem from that time, and it seems not
to have been noticed by the general logic community until much later. Skolem’s
deﬁnable ultrapower construction from 1933 gives a direct construction of a non-
standard model of True Arithmetic (which of course extends Peano Arithmetic
(henceforth PA)).49 But Skolem never mentions that the existence of such models
follows from the completeness and compactness theorems. G¨odel in his review
Skolem of 1933 also does not mention this fact, rather observing that the exis-
tence of non-standard models of True Arithmetic follows from the incompleteness
theorem. One obtains the non-standard models more directly from incompleteness
than from completeness and compactness, so perhaps this is natural.
On the ﬂip side of the coin so to speak, completeness emphasizes the uniformity
of the models of a given theory: if a ﬁrst order sentence holds in all models, it
must be because of a uniform reason (proof) and not for an accidental reason
47See p.3, footnote b of van Heijenoort’s introduction to [Herbrand, 1968].
48These are models with inﬁnitely large integers in them.
One constructs these models as
follows: add a new constant symbol c to the language of arithmetic. Extend P to a new theory
P ∗by adding to it the inﬁnite collection of axioms: {c > 0, c > 1, . . .}. P ∗is ﬁnitely consistent
hence consistent, hence by the Completeness Theorem it has a model.
49True Arithmetic is the set of arithmetic sentences true in the natural numbers.

G¨odel’s Logic
461
which happens in each model or in each case for a diﬀerent reason.50
Finally the Completeness Theorem gives the practitioner of informal rigor a
powerful new tool: to check whether a sentence is provable in a theory, one needs
only to check whether the sentence holds in an arbitrary model of the theory.
An Observation in the Introduction to G¨odel’s Thesis
Before going on to the Incompleteness Theorem, we take note of an observation
G¨odel makes in the introduction to his 1929 thesis. It would seem to be the very
ﬁrst occasion on which G¨odel aims to prove an assertion which is metaphysical in
nature from mathematical considerations. The argument was not included in the
subsequent article G¨odel published, based on the thesis. Apart from its content,
its interest lies in showing that G¨odel had gone some way toward thinking about
incompleteness already by 1929.
As background, G¨odel is reacting to a tenet of formalism, that consistency is
a suﬃcient ground for existence. Another way of putting this is, one needs only
to establish the consistency of an axiom with one’s preferred axiom system, say,
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory, to infer the existence of those objects to which the
axioms refer. G¨odel argues against this assertion as follows:
L.E. Brouwer, in particular, has emphatically stressed that from the
consistency of an axiom system we cannot conclude without further ado
that a model can be constructed. But one might perhaps think that the
existence of the notions introduced through an axiom system is to be
deﬁned outright by the consistency of the axioms and that, therefore,
a proof has to be rejected out of hand.
This deﬁnition (if only we
impose the self-evident requirement that the notion of existence thus
introduced obeys the same operation rules as does the elementary one),
however, manifestly presupposes the axiom that every mathematical
problem is solvable. Or, more precisely, it presupposes that we cannot
prove the unsolvability of any problem.
For, if the unsolvability of
some problem (in the domain of real numbers, say) were proved, then,
from the deﬁnition above, there would follow the existence of two non-
isomorphic realizations of the axiom system for the real numbers, while
on the other hand we can prove the isomorphism of any two realizations
. . .
For emphasis we restate the argument: suppose Hilbert’s principle — consis-
tency implies existence—is true. Then assuming that there is a proposition φ about
the reals, such that both φ and ¬φ are consistent with Hilbert’s second order ax-
iomatization, it then follows that there must be two non-isomorphic models M and
N of those axioms, by the principle. But Hilbert’s second order axiomatization of
50This observation is due to Andreas Blass, see ‘Some Semantical Aspects of Linear Logic,’
[Blass, 1998].

462
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
the reals is categorical,51 meaning there is only one model up to isomorphism. We
thus obtain a contradiction. So Hilbert’s principle must be false. Note that the
existence of M and N would follow also from G¨odel’s own Completeness Theorem,
if a ﬁrst order axiomatization of the reals were used. But then we would not have
categoricity and no contradiction would follow.
It is at this point important to observe that we made above also the assumption
of the existence of a proposition φ such that both φ and ¬φ are consistent with the
axioms. Should we not abandon this assumption rather than Hilbert’s Principle,
that is, isn’t this a proof of the completeness of Hilbert’s axiomatization? The
answer turns out to be no, although it is puzzling how G¨odel could have known
this. We know now that an axiomatization of the reals cannot be at the same time
eﬀective and categorical, as follows from G¨odel’s Incompleteness Theorem. Thus
no eﬀective second order axiomatization of the reals can be complete, unless we
resort to the non-standard models of Henkin, in which case, however, we lose cat-
egoricity. Interestingly enough, G¨odel could not have known this without knowing
his own incompleteness theorem, as such an eﬀective categorical axiomatisation
would induce an eﬀective complete axiomatization of number theory, ruled out by
First Incompleteness Theorem. So either he was already close to the incomplete-
ness theorem and the related observation in 1929, or he simply made a guess that
the unsolvability of some problem about the reals could be proved. Such a guess
would have been a reasonable one to make in 1929, as a considerable amount of
discussion about the possible independence of, for example, the continuum hy-
pothesis had taken place by then among for example Tarski, Bernays, Skolem
and others.52 The independence would of the continuum hypothesis would not be
shown until 1963.
1.3
The Incompleteness Theorems
Finally, we must also consider that it was not the controversy regarding
the foundations of mathematics that caused the problem treated here53
to surface (as was the case, for example, for the problem of the con-
sistency of mathematics); rather, even if it had never been questioned
that ‘naive’ mathematics is correct as to its content, this problem would
have been meaningfully posed within this naive mathematics (unlike,
for example, the problem of consistency) . . . 54
How did G¨odel arrive at his undecidability results? As we saw, G¨odel ruminated
over the possibility that a question about the reals might be unsolvable already in
the introduction of his thesis; a possibility which, he argued there, may constrain
51This fact was claimed by Hilbert about his axiomatization in ‘¨Uber den Zahlbegriﬀ,’ and
there are indications of a proof in unpublished lecture notes from the late 1890’s. By the late
1920’s it had become ‘folklore.’
52See [Kennedy and van Atten, 2004].
53The completeness of the ﬁrst order predicate calculus.
54See [G¨odel, 1986], p.65.

G¨odel’s Logic
463
the principle that consistency is a criterion for existence. Showing the consistency
of analysis was a key desideratum of the Hilbert program, and accordingly it was
G¨odel’s turn to this question which led him to the two incompleteness theorems;
two lectures of Brouwer, given in Vienna in 1928 also had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
G¨odel’s thinking of incompleteness.55 We now brieﬂy discuss the Hilbert program.
The Hilbert Program
The origins and aims of the Hilbert program are complex. Nevertheless we will
describe here only those of its aspects which impinge directly on our discussion.
The literature on the Hilbert program is extensive and we refer the reader to it.56
In the above quote G¨odel refers to the controversy regarding the foundations
of mathematics. This had arisen already in the nineteenth century in response
to Cantor’s theory of transﬁnite numbers, if not before, and was exacerbated
by various set-theoretic and linguistic paradoxes which emerged later. Hilbert’s
proposal was that the axiomatic method should be used to eﬀect ﬁnitary reductions
of mathematical theorems and proofs, whenever these refer to inﬁnite entities or
use inﬁnitary reasoning. From his 1925 ‘On the Inﬁnite’:
There is, however, a completely satisfactory way of avoiding the para-
doxes without betraying our science.
1. Wherever there is any hope of salvage, we will carefully investi-
gate fruitful deﬁnitions and deductive methods. We will nurse them,
strengthen them, and make them useful. No one shall drive us out of
the paradise which Cantor has created for us.
2.
We must establish throughout mathematics the same certitude
for our deductions as exists in ordinary elementary number theory,
which no one doubts and where contradictions and paradoxes arise
only through our own carelessness.57
More precisely, Hilbert formulated the program58 in (essentially) two parts.
First, a set of indubitably self-evident axioms together with a ﬁnitary proof cal-
culus are to be identiﬁed and expressed in a ﬁxed language. This means that the
symbols of the language are ﬁxed and the axioms together with ﬁnitary rules of
proof are stated explicitly in the language. The question of what constitutes a
ﬁnitary rule of proof, or what constituted a ﬁnitary rule of proof then, e.g. for the
Hilbert school, is not an uncontroversial one, as is the question of what is meant by
an indubitably self-evident axiom. By a ﬁnitary system Hilbert could have meant,
55See the section on G¨odel’s results in intuitionistic logic and arithmetic below.
56Some of the main references are Sieg: [Sieg, 1990] and its sequel [Sieg, 1988], as well as [Sieg,
1999; Mancosu, 1998], and [Zach, Fall 2003].
57Originally appeared in [Hilbert, 1925] and was reprinted in e.g. [Benacerraf and Putnam,
1983].
58See for example [Hilbert, 1922], English translation in [Mancosu, 1998] and [Ewald, 1996].
For further references see [Zach, Fall 2003].

464
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
for example, what is now called Primitive Recursive Arithmetic.59 The resulting
system is a so-called formal system regarding which it is required that ﬁrst, it is
sound, i.e. any formal theorem provable in the system is true, and second, it is
complete: meaning that any true mathematical statement should be provable in
the system; and any false statement correspondingly should be refutable in the
system.
The second part of the program asks for an elementary or ﬁnitary consistency
proof for the system introduced in the ﬁrst part.60
Carrying out the ﬁrst part of the program would show that the ‘ideal part’ of
mathematics, as they called it, namely the part which refers to inﬁnite totalities,
was conservative over what they called the ‘contentual’61 or ‘real’ part, i.e. the
ﬁnitary part.62 It would thereby reduce inﬁnitary constructions and concepts to
ﬁnitary ones.
Some formulations of the program were reductive in a strong sense: theorem-
checking altogether should be reduced to scanning a ﬁnite number of slashes on
both sides of an equality sign, checking whether their number was the same on both
sides. This would mean that mathematical reasoning, in the end, rests merely on
a capacity to distinguish one symbol from another. As Hilbert famously remarked:
‘In the beginning was the sign.’ Accordingly a slogan which came into use at the
time attributed to the Hilbert school the aspiration to reduce mathematics to a
‘formal game of symbols,’ where again the reduction applies to semantic notions
that might occur in a theorem such as truth or meaning, if not the mathematical
objects themselves to which a theorem might refer, insofar as these are inﬁnitary
in nature.
It is important to note that the translation does not entail an ontological reduc-
tion, necessarily, and in fact the degree of commitment within the Hilbert school
to an ontological reduction may not have been very pronounced.63
A contemporary expression of the thought which emphasizes the privileged role
of ﬁnitism in mathematical reasoning is due to Tait, who sees that
The special role of ﬁnitism consists in the circumstance that it is a
minimal kind of reasoning presupposed by all nontrivial mathematical
reasoning about numbers. And for this reason it is indubitable in a
Cartesian sense that there is no preferred or even equally preferable
ground on which to stand and criticize it. Thus ﬁnitism is fundamental
to mathematics even if it is not a foundation in the sense that Hilbert
wished.64
59See Tait’s discussion of the thesis that the ﬁnitist functions are precisely the primitive re-
cursive functions, a thesis he likens to Church’s thesis, in ‘Finitism,’ reprinted in [Tait, 2005].
60The Hilbert program taken together with G¨odel’s theorems made urgent the question,
whether elementary proofs are coextensive with ﬁnitary ones.
61‘Inhaltlich’ in German.
62A theory A is a conservative extension of a theory B if any statement involving the lower
system B which is provable in A can also be proved in B.
63See [Mancosu, 1998].
64[Tait, 2005], p. 22.

G¨odel’s Logic
465
For G¨odel, ‘the Hilbert program, if successful, would have been of enormous
epistemological value.’65 The qualiﬁer ‘epistemological’ is signiﬁcant.
Expunging reference to inﬁnite entities from mathematics will, if it succeeds,
have the epistemological advantage of leaving a kind of mathematics that is evident
to a higher degree.66 But for G¨odel there would be no concomitant ontological
point to be drawn: mathematical objects are ‘independent of our deﬁnitions and
constructions.’67
The First Incompleteness Theorem provides a counterexample to completeness
by exhibiting an arithmetic statement which is neither provable nor refutable in
arithmetic. The Second Incompleteness Theorem shows that the consistency of
(for example) arithmetic cannot be proved in arithmetic itself.
At ﬁrst glance, G¨odel’s theorems would seem to demonstrate the unfeasibility
of the Hilbert program. Von Neumann, for example, took this position.68 In fact
von Neumann went much further, asserting in a 1931 letter to G¨odel:
Thus, I think that your result has solved negatively the foundational
question: there is no rigorous justiﬁcation for classical mathematics.69
G¨odel took a less drastic view of the situation both as regards classical math-
ematics and as regards the Hilbert program, though about the latter he would
eventually come around to von Neumann’s point of view.70 As he wrote in his
1931,
I wish to note expressly that theorem XI71 . . . does not contradict
Hilbert’s formalistic viewpoint. For this viewpoint presupposes only
the existence of a consistency proof in which nothing but ﬁnitary means
of proof is used, and it is conceivable that there exist ﬁnitary proofs
that cannot be expressed in the formalism of P.
65Hao Wang in the 1960’s
66See, for example, 7.1.9 on p.216 and 9.2.35 on p.302 of [?].
67See ‘What is Cantor’s Continuum Problem?’, both the 1947 and 1964 versions as reprinted
in [G¨odel, 1990].
68As he wrote to Carnap in June of 1931 (Rudolf Carnap Nachlaß: RC 029-08-01, English
translation in [Mancosu, 1999]):
Thus today I am of the opinion that 1.
G¨odel has shown the unrealizability of
Hilbert’s program. 2. There is no more reason to reject intuitionism (if one disre-
gards the aesthetic issue, which in practice will also for me be the decisive factor).
Therefore I consider the state of the foundational discussion in K¨onigsberg to be
outdated, for G¨odel’s fundamental discoveries have brought the question to a com-
pletely diﬀerent level.
(Von Neumann is referring to the meeting on Logicism,
Finitism and Intuitionism which took place in K¨onigsberg in September of 1930,
where G¨odel announced his First Incompleteness Theorem, during a roundtable
discussion on foundations.)
69[G¨odel, 2003b], p. 339.
70See [Mancosu, 2004], p.117.
71Asserting the unprovability of consistency.

466
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
From the present perspective it would appear that the Hilbert program was not
unfeasible. All that was needed is a wider notion of ‘ﬁnitary.’ We discuss relativised
Hilbert programs below. Of course for some those relativizations represent too
radical a diversion from the program in its original formulation. The reader is
referred to the contemporary discussion of these matters. Also, Detlefsen72 has
argued, that because there are non-standard consistency predicates with respect
to which the associated consistency statements are provable within the theory,73
the second part of the program was not overthrown.
The First and Second Incompleteness Theorems
Under the inﬂuence of the Hilbert program then, in 1930 (if not already in 1929)
G¨odel turned to the problem of proving the consistency of analysis.
In his ‘Logical Journey’ Hao Wang published the full text of material G¨odel had
written (at Wang’s request) about his discovery of the incompleteness theorems.
This material had formed the basis of Wang’s paper ‘Some Facts about Kurt
G¨odel,’ which was read and approved by G¨odel:
In the summer of 1930 I began to study the consistency problem of clas-
sical analysis. It is mysterious why Hilbert wanted to prove directly the
consistency of analysis by ﬁnitary methods. I saw two distinguishable
problems: to prove the consistency of number theory by ﬁnitary num-
ber theory and to prove the consistency of analysis by number theory
. . . Since the domain of ﬁnitary number theory was not well-deﬁned,
I began by tackling the second half. . . I represented real numbers by
predicates in number theory. . . and found that I had to use the concept
of truth (for number theory) to verify the axioms of analysis. By an
enumeration of symbols, sentences and proofs within the given system,
I quickly discovered that the concept of arithmetic truth cannot be
deﬁned in arithmetic. If it were possible to deﬁne truth in the system
itself, we would have something like the liar paradox, showing the sys-
tem to be inconsistent. . . Note that this argument can be formalized to
show the existence of undecidable propositions without giving any in-
dividual instances. (If there were no undecidable propositions, all (and
only) true propositions would be provable within the system. But then
we would have a contradiction.). . . In contrast to truth, provability in
a given formal system is an explicit combinatorial property of certain
sentences of the system, which is formally speciﬁable by suitable ele-
mentary means. . .
Rephrasing G¨odel’s remarks: He began by trying to reduce the consistency
problem for analysis to that of arithmetic. But this required a truth deﬁnition
72See [Detlefsen, 1979].
73This is a result due to Feferman. See his ‘Metamathematics in a General Setting,’ [Feferman,
1960/1961].

G¨odel’s Logic
467
for arithmetic, which in turn led to paradoxes, such as the Liar paradox: ‘This
sentence is false’ and the Richard paradox, a paradox about deﬁnability. G¨odel
then noticed that if truth were replaced by provability, he could avoid the para-
doxes. But this means that arithmetic truth, which is undeﬁnable in arithmetic,
and arithmetic provability, which is so deﬁnable, are not co-extensive. The First
Incompleteness Theorem now follows, as the set of sentences provable in arith-
metic is a (proper) subset of the set of arithmetic truths.74 But, as G¨odel wrote to
Zermelo about this argument: ‘This proof has, however, the disadvantage that it
furnishes no construction of the undecidable statement and is not intuitionistically
unobjectionable.’75
Judging from G¨odel’s account of the heuristics behind the theorem, it is appar-
ent that he obtained a form of Tarski’s 1935 theorem on the undeﬁnability of truth
in arithmetic in 1930.76 He never published the result, though. The contemporary,
vehement bias against semantics, biases which came to the fore, for example, when
Tarski announced his results on the undeﬁnability of truth in formal systems in
1935, served as a deterrent, perhaps, to G¨odel’s publicizing this result.
How does the deﬁnability of truth lead to paradoxes? We can think of any
formula φ as deﬁning a real as a set S of natural numbers, i.e. x ∈S ↔φ(x)
holds in arithmetic.
If one tries to interpret reals by deﬁnable sets of natural
numbers then it is possible that one deﬁnition may code a lot of deﬁnitions of
other reals - maybe even a deﬁnition of the real one is deﬁning. In particular, if
truth were deﬁnable, we would get a contradiction, as follows: deﬁne a sequence
of reals Sm by stipulating that n is in the set Sm if and only if the mth formula
A(v) of arithmetic is true at v = n. Then consider the following formula F(v):
‘v /∈Sv.’ If this is the mth formula then m is in Sm if and only if m is not in Sm,
a contradiction.
We now describe the proofs of the two theorems, formulating G¨odel’s results
in PA, denoted in what follows by P. G¨odel used the system deﬁned in Principia
Mathematica with the Peano axioms imposed on elements of type 0, the natural
numbers.
G¨odel gives the informal argument ﬁrst,77 and then proves the ﬁrst
theorem (only) in complete detail.
The informal argument is insuﬃcient as it
appeals to the notion of truth in an interpretation, a step contemporary logicians
would have taken issue with, as we have noted.
Accordingly such semantical
notions as truth or meaning are expunged from the formal proof. As G¨odel puts
it, ‘The purpose of carrying out the above proof with full precision in what follows
is, among other things, to replace the second of the assumptions (every provable
formula is true in the interpretation considered) by a purely formal and much
74For a contemporary account, see G¨odel’s correspondence with Zermelo, see pp.427 and 429
of [G¨odel, 2003b]; see also G¨odel’s draft letter to Yossef Balas [G¨odel, 2003a, pp.–11] and Wang’s
discussion in [Wang, 1987, pp.84–85].
75[G¨odel, 2003b], p.429.
76See G¨odel’s 1931 correspondence with Zermelo and also with Bernays in p. 97 of [G¨odel,
2003a], in which he outlines the truth deﬁnition in some detail.
77We take as our source for the two theorems G¨odel 1931 as reprinted in [G¨odel, 1986].

468
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
weaker one.’78
Another, related reason for proving the theorem in detail is to
insure that it is ‘intuitionistically acceptable,”79 as G¨odel remarks in a 1931 letter
to Zermelo, by which is meant ‘ﬁnitistically unobjectionable.’80 Yet another reason
for carrying out the informal argument is to make more apparent its applicability
to systems other than Principia.
But G¨odel frequently relied on informal arguments. As we will see, for those
logical theorems whose proofs are similar to the First Incompleteness Theorem,81
G¨odel never gave detailed proofs—if he gave any proof at all.
Before proceeding to the details of the formal proof, we deﬁne the notion of ω-
consistency used by G¨odel in the First Incompleteness Theorem. It is as follows:
P is ω-consistent if P ⊢¬φ(n) for all n implies P ⊬∃xφ(x). Naturally this implies
consistency and follows from the assumption that the natural numbers satisfy the
axioms of PA.
One of the main technical tools used in the proof is arithmetization, a mechanism
which assigns natural numbers to terms and formulas of our formal theory P.
This is nothing more than an injective mapping from the strings of symbols of
our language into the natural numbers. The natural number corresponding to
a formula φ is called its G¨odel number and denoted by ⌜φ⌝. Similarly we can
assign a G¨odel number to a sequence of formulas, most notably, a proof. The
essential point here is that when a formula is construed as a natural number, then
that natural number can occur as the argument of a formula, thus enabling the
syntax to refer to itself. This will eventually allow G¨odel to formalize the Liar
paradox by substituting into the formula which says, ‘the formula whose code is x
is unprovable,’ its own natural number code (or more precisely what is substituted
is the formal term corresponding to the natural number).
Another concept required to carry out the formalization is the concept of numer-
alwise expressibility of number theoretic predicates. A number-theoretic formula
R(n1, . . . , nk) is numeralwise expressible in P if for each tuple of natural numbers
(n1, . . . , nk):
R(n1, ..., nk)
⇒
P ⊢R(n1, ..., nk)
¯R(n1, ..., nk)
⇒
P ⊢¬R(n1, ..., nk),
where n is the formal term which denotes the natural number n.82 One of the
principal goals is to numeralwise express the predicate Prf(x, y): ‘the sequence
78Insertion ours.
79See below for what G¨odel means by ‘constructively acceptable.’ See also Tait’s discussion
of G¨odel 1933b ([G¨odel, 1986]) in ‘G¨odel’s Unpublished Papers in Foundations of Mathematics,’
[Tait, 2001].
80See also [Mancosu, 2004], where G¨odel’s 1931 letter to Zermelo is also used to illustrate this
point.
81For example those which involve the construction of a ﬁxed point, like the Speed-up Theo-
rems.
82In P this is S(S(. . . S(0) . . .)), where n is the number of iterations of the successor function
applied to the constant symbol 0.

G¨odel’s Logic
469
with G¨odel number x is a proof of the sentence with G¨odel number y.’ Reaching
this goal involves deﬁning forty-ﬁve relations we now call primitive recursive,83
each deﬁned in terms of the preceding ones. Relations needed are, among others,
those which assert of a natural number that it codes a sequence, or a formula,
or an axiom, or that it is the code, denoted by Sb(ru1
... un
Z(x1)···Z(xn)), of a formula
obtained from a formula with code r by substituting for its free variable ui the
xith numeral for i = 1, ..., n. The forty-ﬁfth primitive recursive relation deﬁned
is Prf(x, y), and the forty-sixth is Prov(x)—‘the sentence with G¨odel number x is
provable in P’—which without being primitive recursive, is however obtained from
Prf(x, y) by existentially quantifying x. (Prov(x) satisﬁes only the ‘positive’ part
of numeralwise expressibility, and not the negative part, but the negative part is
not needed.)
In Theorem V of his paper, G¨odel proves that any number theoretic predicate
which is primitive recursive is numeralwise expressible in P. Thus since Prf(x, y)
and substitution are primitive recursive, these are decided by P. This is the heart
of the matter as we will see. Another key point about numeralwise expressibility
is that although we informally interpret, for example, Prov(Sb(ru1
... un
Z(x1)···Z(xn))), by:
‘the formula with G¨odel number r is provable if the G¨odel number for the xith
numeral is substituted in place of the ith variable,’ neither the formal statement
within the theory P nor anything we prove about it appeals to such meanings.
On the contrary Prov(Sb(ru1
... un
Z(x1)···Z(xn))) is a meaningless string of logical and
arithmetical symbols.
As G¨odel puts it in his introduction to his theorem V,
‘the fact that can be formulated vaguely by saying that every recursive relation is
deﬁnable in the system P (if the usual meaning is given to the formulas of this
system) is expressed in precise language, without reference to any interpretation
of the formulas of P’.84
The First Incompleteness Theorem (Theorem VI in his paper) may be stated
THEOREM 5 G¨odel’s First Incompleteness Theorem. If P is ω-consistent, then
there is a sentence which is neither provable nor refutable85 from P.
By judicious coding of syntax referred to above, G¨odel is able to write a formula
Prf(x, y)86 of number theory, representable in P, so that
n codes a proof of φ
⇒
P ⊢Prf(n, ⌜φ⌝)
(2)
n does not code a proof of φ
⇒
P ⊢¬Prf(n, ⌜φ⌝).
(3)
Let Prov(y) denote the formula ∃xPrf(x, y).87 By an ingenious use of substitu-
83G¨odel uses the word ‘recursive’ in place of primitive recursive. For a deﬁnition of the terms
‘recursive’ and ‘primitive recursive’ see [Rogers, 1967]. The use of recursive functions apparently
goes back to Grassmann, see p. 147 of [Wang, 1957].
84[G¨odel, 1986], p.171, italics G¨odel’s.
85A sentence is refutable from a theory if its negation is provable.
86G¨odel uses the notation B(x, y) for Prf(x, y).
87G¨odel uses the notation Bew(y) for Prov(y).

470
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
tion G¨odel is able to write down a sentence φ with the property
P ⊢(φ ↔¬Prov(⌜φ⌝)).
(4)
This method is an instance of what is called G¨odel’s Fixed Point Theorem.88 Thus
φ says ‘I am not provable.’ We observe, if P ⊢φ, then by (2) there is n such that
P ⊢Prf(n, ⌜φ⌝), hence P ⊢Prov(⌜φ⌝), hence P ⊢¬φ, so P is inconsistent. Thus
P ⊬φ.
(5)
Furthermore, by (5) and (3), we have P ⊢¬Prf(n, ⌜φ⌝) for all natural numbers n.
By ω-consistency P ⊬∃xPrf(x, ⌜φ⌝). Thus (4) gives P ⊬¬φ. We have shown that
if P is ω-consistent, then φ is independent of P.
On concluding the proof of the ﬁrst theorem, G¨odel remarks, ‘we can readily see
that the proof just given is constructive; that is. . . proved in an intuitionistically
unobjectionable manner. . . ’89 This is because, as he remarks, all the existential
statements are based on his theorem V (giving the numeralwise expressibility of
primitive recursive relations), which is intuitionistically unobjectionable.
Before turning to the Second Incompleteness Theorem, G¨odel proves Theorem
X of the paper, which states that the undecidable sentence can be written by
means of plus and times only. Later G¨odel improved the result by showing that
the undecidable sentence can even be taken to be of the form
∀x1, . . . , xn∃y1, . . . , ymR(x1, . . . , xn, y1, . . . , ym),
where R is Diophantine. He also shows that the class of such formulas, which
he calls class A, is undecidable, presciently making use of the Pell equation and
other machinery used later in the proof of the undecidability of Hilbert’s Tenth
Problem.90 This result, known as the MRDP theorem,91 states the undecidability
of the simpler class of formulas of the form: ∃y1, . . . , ymR(y1, . . . , ym), where R is
Diophantine.
Let Con(P) be the sentence ¬Prov(⌜0 = 1⌝).
THEOREM 6 G¨odel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem. If P is consistent, then
Con(P) is not provable from P.
Let φ be as in (4).
By the proof of (5) above, if P ⊢φ, then P ⊢0 ̸= 1.
The reasoning used to infer ‘if P ⊢φ, then P ⊢0 ̸= 1’ does not go beyond
elementary number theory, and can therefore be formalized in P. This yields:
P ⊢(Prov(⌜φ⌝) →¬Con(P)), and thus by (4), P ⊢(Con(P) →φ). Since P ⊬φ,
88Note that although G¨odel constructs a ﬁxed point in the course of proving the incompleteness
theorem, he does not state the ﬁxed point theorem explicitly.
89[G¨odel, 1986], p.177.
90These results were found in an unpublished manuscript in G¨odel’s Nachlaß. Denoted 193?
they were subsequently published in [G¨odel, 1995]. The manuscript likely formed the basis for a
lecture that was to be given at the 1940 ICM, an event which was cancelled due to the war.
91The theorem is due to Matiyasevic, Robinson, Davis and Putnam.

G¨odel’s Logic
471
we must have P ⊬Con(P). The bulk of the proof, which we omit here, is the step
involving the formalization.
This concludes the proof of G¨odel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem.
It is
noteworthy that ω-consistency is not needed. Also note that neither is ¬Con(P)
provable, by the consistency of P and the fact, now known as L¨ob’s theorem, that
P ⊢Prov(⌜φ⌝) implies P ⊢φ.
The assumption of ω-consistency in the First Incompleteness Theorem was
eliminated by Rosser in 1936, and replaced by the weaker notion of consistency.
Rosser’s generalization involves applying the ﬁxed point theorem to the formula
R(x): ‘for all z: either z is not the G¨odel number of a proof of the formula with
G¨odel number x or there is a proof shorter than z of the negation of (the formula
with G¨odel number) x.’ 92
With regard to the Second Incompleteness Theorem, the argument relies in part
on formalizing the proof of the First Incompleteness Theorem as we saw. This step
is omitted in G¨odel 1931. He planned to include the step in what would have been
part II,93 but instead of writing it he turned to the continuum problem.94 (Part
II of his 1931 was to elaborate on other points of his 1931 too: the ‘true reason
for incompleteness,’ see below, and the applicability of the two theorems to other
systems.) Having speciﬁed both the arithmetization and the numeralwise express-
ibility of the required primitive recursive functions in complete detail, he perhaps
did not feel compelled to attend to what looked like an exercise in formalization,
relying instead on the informal argument to convince (in which it succeeded).
However this step turned out to be somewhat non-trivial.95 Eventually a com-
plete proof of the Second Theorem was given by Hilbert and Bernays in some
seventy pages in their 1939. A much more succinct treatment of the theorem was
given by L¨ob in his 1955, and subsequently Feferman, in his 1960 ‘Arithmetization
of Metamathematics in a General Setting,’96 gave a succinct and completely gen-
eral treatment of both the First and Second97 Theorems. Feferman’s paper is also
92See [Rosser, 1936].
93See footnote 48a of G¨odel 1931.
94‘Jetzt, Mengenlehre!’—and now, [on to] set theory!—G¨odel is alleged to have said around
that time (see p.128 of Hao Wang, Popular Lectures on Mathematical Logic, [Wang, 1981],
as well as J. Dawson, Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work of Kurt G¨odel, [Dawson, 1997].)
G¨odel’s interest in set theory may have begun to develop as early as 1928 when he requested at
the library the volume containing Skolem’s Helsinki lecture (as was mentioned earlier). It is very
likely G¨odel did not actually get the volume, see above and [van Atten, 2005]. Be that as it may,
Dawson goes on to mention that in 1930 G¨odel requested works by Fraenkel (Einleitung in die
Mengenlehre, in which G¨odel will have noticed Fraenkel’s skepticism about Hilbert’s attempted
proof of the continuum hypothesis), von Neumann, and the paper in which Hilbert had put the
problem of deciding the continuum hypothesis on the agenda of twentieth century mathematics.
95As Kleene puts it in his excellent 1986 introduction to G¨odel 1931, of the informal presen-
tation, ‘Certainly the idea of the argument for Theorem XI (consistency) was very convincing;
but it turned out that the execution of the details required somewhat more work and care than
had been anticipated.’ See pp.126-141 of [G¨odel, 1986].
96[Feferman, 1960/1961]
97There is an interesting human story behind this theorem: G¨odel had announced the First
Incompleteness Theorem on September 7th, 1930, during a roundtable discussion that took place

472
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
noteworthy for his identiﬁcation of non-standard consistency predicates with re-
spect to which the associated consistency statement is provable, as was mentioned
above.
on the penultimate day of a meeting in K¨onigsberg, where he presented his thesis result on the
completeness of ﬁrst order quantiﬁcational logic. (The meeting is also notable for occasioning
the famous retirement address of David Hilbert, ‘Naturerkennen und Logik,’ which ends with
the impassioned assertion:
Der wahre Grund warum es Comte nicht gelang, ein unl¨osbares Problem zu ﬁnden,
besteht meiner Meinung noch darin, dass ein unl¨osbares Problem ¨uberhaput nich
gibt. Wir m¨ussen wissen; wir werden wissen. [Hilbert, 1965]
(The real reason why Comte was not able to ﬁnd an unsolvable problem, in my
view, is that there are no unsolvable problems. We must know; we will know.)
Von Neumann attended the roundtable discussion, and sought G¨odel out afterwards. A con-
versation ensued in which von Neumann pressed G¨odel for the mathematical details of the latter’s
announced result. (In particular he asked if the undecidable sentence could be arithmetic, which
G¨odel would show in G¨odel 1931.) G¨odel returned to Vienna after the meeting and wrote the
manuscript which was eventually to become G¨odel 1931, submitting an abstract for it to the
Vienna Academy of Sciences on October 23rd, 1930 through Hans Hahn, and submitting the full
paper for publication on November 17th, 1930. A few days later, G¨odel received a letter from
von Neumann dated November 20th in which von Neumann wrote (see pages 336 and 337 of
[G¨odel, 2003b]):
I have recently concerned myself again with logic, using the methods you have
employed so successfully in order to exhibit undecidable properties. In doing so I
achieved a result which seems to me remarkable. Namely, I was able to show the
consistency of mathematics is unprovable.
Von Neumann went on to describe the informal proof of the result, ‘by a somewhat diﬀerent
method’ from that of G¨odel’s (as he wrote in his second letter to G¨odel). G¨odel, in a letter that
has been lost, replied he had proved the second theorem already, and enclosed a reprint of G¨odel
1930b (see [G¨odel, 1986]). As 1930b does not contain a proof of the second theorem, G¨odel must
have given the argument for the theorem in his lost reply, as on November 29th von Neumann
wrote to G¨odel: ‘As you have established the theorem on the unprovability of consistency as
a natural continuation and deepening of your earlier results, I clearly won’t publish on the
subject.’ It is a matter of occasional speculation whether the theorem would have been thought
of as a joint one under the conventions governing such issues in the present day. Opinions vary
somewhat on this point. The phrasing in von Neumann’s reply—clearly—indicates that he may
not have considered the step from the ﬁrst theorem to the second to be so signiﬁcant, as later
commentators have held it to be (on the grounds that the formalizing the informal argument is
non-trivial), as to warrant joint authorship. Relevant to the contemporary speculation perhaps is
the fact that in both G¨odel’s and von Neumann’s case, the proof that was given was an informal
one, indeed more in the way of a heuristic than a proof. Perhaps conventions regarding rigor in
mathematical logic proofs have shifted toward a more strict standard since that time.
Relevant to the overall question of when G¨odel proved the Second Incompleteness Theorem
is the fact that G¨odel had discussed what appears to be both theorems with Carnap in the
Cafe Reichsrat on the August 26th and 29th prior to the K¨onigsberg meeting, see p.
86 of
[Dawson, 1991]. One cannot be completely sure about the second theorem having been discussed
as Carnap’s diary notations concern G¨odel’s remarks on ‘the diﬃculty of proving consistency’;
Carnap seems not to have understood G¨odel’s remarks that day in any case, see p. 86 of [Dawson,
1991].

G¨odel’s Logic
473
Two corollaries
Just as G¨odel did not point out certain consequences of his completeness and
compactness theorems, here too G¨odel refrains from pointing out some corollaries
of the First Incompleteness Theorem and the ﬁxed point construction. The ﬁrst
we discuss is the undecidability of P. A theory is said to be undecidable if the set
of G¨odel numbers of its theorems is not recursive.
THEOREM 7. P is undecidable.
Proof. Suppose the set of G¨odel numbers of theorems of P were recursive. Then
by the representability of recursive relations98 in P, there is a formula ψ(x) of
number theory such that
P ⊢φ ⇒P ⊢ψ(⌜φ⌝),
(6)
P ⊬φ ⇒P ⊢¬ψ(⌜φ⌝).
(7)
By a ﬁxed-point construction applied to ψ there is a sentence θ with the property:
P ⊢(θ ↔¬ψ(⌜θ⌝)).
Now observe that if P ⊢θ, then (6) gives P ⊢ψ(⌜θ⌝), hence P ⊢¬θ, so P is
inconsistent. Thus P ⊬θ. But in this case by (7) P ⊢¬ψ(⌜θ⌝). Thus P ⊢θ,
contrary to the above. We have reached a contradiction and therefore we conclude
that P is undecidable.99
■
A consequence of this theorem is a result due to Church, published in 1936, and
is as follows:
THEOREM 8. Predicate logic is undecidable.
Proof. As is easily shown, if a number theoretic relation is numeralwise expressible
in P, it is numeralwise expressible in a ﬁnitely axiomatized fragment of arithmetic
such as Robinson’s arithmetic Q. Thus we can replace P above by Q, and hence
Q is also undecidable. Now suppose θ is the conjunction of the axioms of Q. For
any sentence φ of number theory
Q ⊢φ ⇐⇒⊢(θ →φ).
Thus predicate logic is decidable only if Q is; but Q is not decidable so therefore
neither is predicate logic.
■
98G¨odel used only the representability of primitive recursive relations in his 1931 but the
representability of the wider class is easily shown.
99In fact, P is essentially undecidable in the sense that every consistent extension of P is
undecidable.

474
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
This simple observation was published by Church in 1936.100 The ﬁnite unde-
cidable theory he constructed was diﬀerent from Q.
A second corollary of the incompleteness theorems has to do with the existence
of non-standard models of PA (denoted P in the above, as mentioned). Their
existence follows already from the completeness and compactness theorems as we
saw. But incompleteness (together with completeness as before) gives new kinds
of non-standard models, those of the theory PA + Con(PA), or PA + ¬Con(PA).
(Though of course the theory PA + Con(PA) also has among its models the
standard model.) In fact this process of adding independent statements can be
iterated into the transﬁnite. Taking all ﬁnite iterations yields the result that there
are at least continuum many non-isomorphic countable non-standard models of
arithmetic, as iterating the addition of both Con(T) and ¬Con(T) can be used to
construct a full binary tree of consistent but inequivalent theories extending P.
Although G¨odel commented about systems which prove false theorems at K¨onigs-
berg, he did not pursue the matter. The nature of these models is mysterious: a
model of P + ¬Con(P) for example, contains a non-standard element101 which is
the G¨odel number of a(n inﬁnitely long) proof of 0 = 1. As was proved later, if
the addition and multiplication in a countable non-standard model of arithmetic
are construed as ternary operations over the integers, such a model cannot be
recursive.102
The ‘true reason for incompleteness’
In footnote 48a of his 1931 paper G¨odel expresses the real reason for the incom-
pleteness of formal systems:
As will be shown in Part II of this paper, the true reason for the in-
completeness inherent in all formal systems of mathematics is that the
formation of ever higher types can be continued into the transﬁnite
(see Hilbert 1926, page 184), while in any formal system at most de-
numerably many of them are available. For it can be shown that the
undecidable propositions constructed here become decidable whenever
appropriate higher types are added (for example, the type ω to the
system P). An analogous situation prevails for the axiom system of
set theory.
G¨odel’s types are those in the sense of the type hierarchy given in Principia. He
seems to be referring to the fact that the satisfaction predicate for a formal system
can be deﬁned in a formal system of higher type, which satisfaction predicate can
then be used to decide G¨odel sentences of the system of lower type.103 What is
100‘A Note on the Entscheidungproblem,’ reprinted in [Davis, 2004].
101I.e. an inﬁnitely large integer.
102This is known as Tennenbaum’s theorem, see for example [Kaye, 1991].
103For a detailed proof of this result see Craig, ‘Satisfaction for n-th order languages deﬁned in
n-th order languages,’ [Craig, 1965].

G¨odel’s Logic
475
interesting about G¨odel’s observation is that it reduces the incompleteness of a
theory to the barest of syntactical considerations: one needs only to look at what
types the syntax allows, and then go up one level in the type hierarchy to decide
the G¨odel sentences.
Relativised Hilbert Programs
One could ask, given that PA does not admit of a ﬁnitary consistency proof, how
should ﬁnitary reasoning be supplemented in order to prove the consistency of
arithmetic? This was settled by Gerhard Gentzen in his landmark 1936 paper
‘Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie,’104 in which he showed that
what was needed was transﬁnite induction up to the countable ordinal ϵ0, the
countable ordinal obtained by taking the countable limit of the iterated exponential
series ω, ωω, ωωω, . . . The result is the best possible in that no smaller ordinal
suﬃces; by coding one can speak about ordinals within arithmetic.
One then
proves that transﬁnite induction up to ordinals smaller than ϵ0 is provable. The
result inaugurated the era of ordinal analysis in proof theory, which, among other
things, seeks to assign to a theory the least ordinal up to which transﬁnite induction
is provable in the theory, and such that induction up to the ordinal proves the
consistency statement for the theory. For an interesting discussion of G¨odel’s view
that ϵ0 is the precise limit of ﬁnitary reasoning see Tait’s ‘Finitism.’105
A kind of converse to Gentzen’s theorem is known as the Turing Completeness
Theorem: 106 Consider the sequence of theories P, P + Con(P), P + Con(P) +
Con(P + Con(P)), . . ., iterated into the transﬁnite. Turing proved that at level
ω+1 the theory one obtains is Π1-complete for arithmetic, meaning that the theory
proves, not only the Π1-sentence Con(P) added to it, but in fact all Π1-sentences in
the language of arithmetic which are true in the standard model. The theorem went
some way toward ‘bridging the gap,’ as Feferman puts it, between recursive theories
like PA and its highly non-recursive extension True Arithmetic107. This idea was
considerably elaborated by Feferman in his ‘Transﬁnite Recursive Progressions of
Axiomatic Theories’108 and opened up yet another branch of proof theory.
Another program inaugurated by Feferman and also by Kreisel in the spirit of
a relativized Hilbert’s program involves ﬁnding proof-theoretic reductions. This
means showing for a given theory T the existence of a seemingly weaker theory T ′
over which the ﬁrst theory is conservative. Feferman has argued that if T ′ is taken
to be Primitive Recursive Arithmetic supplemented with Weak K¨onig’s Lemma,
then this meets the conservativity criterion of the Hilbert program, at least for all
practical purposes; meaning that if one expands the notion of ‘ﬁnitary’ to include
Weak K¨onig’s Lemma, then the bulk of mathematics can be carried out within
104See [Gentzen, 1967]. English translation in [Gentzen, 1969].
105[Tait, 2005].
106See A.M. Turing, ‘Systems of Logic based on Ordinals,’ [Turing, 1939].
107True Arithmetic is the set of all sentences in the language of arithmetic true in the standard
model.
108[Feferman, 1962, pp.259–316].

476
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
this theory. It is still incomplete but this does not aﬀect conservativity.
Another outgrowth of the Hilbert program is the ‘reverse mathematics’ program
of Simpson109 and Friedman, which carries out the Feferman program piecewise,
meaning the proof-theoretic reductions are given theorem by theorem.110
Finally, G¨odel’s Dialectica translation of 1958 gives a consistency proof for arith-
metic. But this will be discussed at length below.
Other Developments: A Partial List
We mention just a few more theorems related to incompleteness. A comprehensive
account of the theorems related to G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems will not be
given here.
A natural question to ask after the publication of G¨odel’s 1931 results was,
do self-reference phenomena exhaust incompleteness? That is, do all statements
which are independent of the canonical systems we wish to consider involve some
form of self-reference, or are there statements tied more closely to mathematical
practice itself, which are also independent? The answer depends on the theory
under consideration. While for set theory there is now a wide variety of seemingly
natural statements which are independent, for arithmetic they are comparatively
few. The ﬁrst to appear was the landmark result from 1977 due to JeﬀParis and
Leo Harrington,111 who found a ﬁnite combinatorial statement independent of PA.
Paris and Harrington called their paper ‘A mathematical incompleteness in Peano
Arithmetic’ in order to emphasize the naturality of the statement, in contrast to
the independent statements G¨odel had found. Theirs is a generalized version of
the ﬁnite Ramsey theorem, and a consequence of the Inﬁnite Ramsey Theorem. It
is independent because it is equivalent in PA to the uniform Σ1-reﬂection principle
for that theory.
It turned out to be diﬃcult to obtain other natural independence results for
arithmetic. Mostowski had already conjectured that this would be the case, be-
cause of their non-recursiveness, in his ‘Thirty years of foundational studies’:112
All these results113 explain why it is so diﬃcult to establish indepen-
dence of number-theoretical sentences from the arithmetical axioms by
the use of nonstandard models: In order to ﬁnd such applications one
should have a much better knowledge of the structure of these mod-
els and more direct methods of their constructions than we have at
present.
As for independence results in set theory there are many. The forcing method
109See, for example [Simpson, 1985].
110This subsection on Hilbert’s program has relied in part on the Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy article ‘Hilbert’s Program’ by Richard Zach, see [Zach, Fall 2003].
111‘A Mathematical Incompleteness in Peano Arithmetic,’ see [Barwise, 1977].
112Lectures Mostowski gave in 1964, see [Mostowski, 1966].
113Referring to Tennenbaum type theorems, see above.

G¨odel’s Logic
477
is nothing else but a method for producing such theorems. We discuss this further
below, in the context of the question whether mathematics is incomplete.
The last development we mention concerns the hierarchy of weak arithmetic
theories. For example, Robinson’s ﬁnite arithmetic theory Q does not prove its
own consistency statement; but surprisingly even the seemingly stronger theory
IΔ0, which restricts the induction in Peano’s axioms to formulas containing only
bounded quantiﬁers, does not prove Con(Q).114
Is mathematics incomplete?
The incompleteness theorems make exigent the following question: are there mean-
ingful or natural mathematical assertions which are absolutely undecidable, that
is to say, undecidable by any proof the human mind could possibly conceive?115 If
one’s notion of provability is restricted to provability in a particular formal system,
then the answer is obviously yes—if one takes the G¨odel sentences as meaningful.
As it turns out, for G¨odel provability is not to be restricted in this way. In a 1962
letter to Leon Rappaport G¨odel wrote:
I have not proved that there are mathematical questions undecidable
for the human mind, but only that there is no machine (or blind formal-
ism) that can decide all number theoretic questions (even of a certain
very special kind).
As we have seen, already in his 1929 thesis G¨odel separated the notion of the
absolute provability of an assertion from the concept of its formal provability. In
a number of papers written in the 1930’s he continued this train of thought, with
remarks on absolute undecidability vs. formal undecidability, absolute vs. formal
consistency, and so on.116 If the realist’s minimal position holds that any mean-
ingful mathematical proposition must admit of a yes or no answer, i.e., simply
put, will (in principle) be decidable, then interestingly for the author of the First
Incompleteness Theorem, G¨odel settled on the minimal position by 1947, if not
earlier.117 Thus for G¨odel, the incompleteness of certain formal systems, in partic-
ular the type of incompleteness which emerges from his 1931 method for producing
independent statements of those formal systems, is merely, in the end, a residuum
of formalization;118 it does not emerge naturally in mathematical practice—at
least insofar as that practice avoids the study of formal systems.
114See‘On the scheme of induction for bounded arithmetic formulas,’ [Wilkie and Paris, 1987].
115This is G¨odel’s deﬁnition of absolute undecidability given in the Gibbs lecture, see [G¨odel,
1995].
116For a detailed analysis of G¨odel’s position on absolute undecidability as it evolved from this
period, see [Kennedy and van Atten, 2004].
117In the Grandjean questionaire, G¨odel dates his Platonism from 1925: [G¨odel, 2003a, pp.444,
447, 450].
118In set theory circles this is referred to as ‘residual incompleteness.’ See Dehornoy’s ‘Recent
progress on the Continuum Hypothesis, after Woodin,’ [Dehornoy, 2004].

478
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
A distinction that needs clarifying at this stage is that between statements that
do play a role in mathematical practice and those that do not.
The undecid-
able sentences constructed in the proofs of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems are
manifestly diﬀerent from anything found in mathematical practice so far, and in
that speciﬁc sense not mathematically meaningful. To a realist, the mathemati-
cal meaningfulness of a statement simply means that it has mathematical content
(or is equivalent to one that does), in the sense that the terms in the statement
refer.119 To a (Hilbertian) formalist a certain statement may well be relevant to
mathematics without being contentual (think of any practically relevant part of
classical mathematics that is not ﬁnitary). On the other hand, this kind of back-
ground commitment associated with the realist and the formalist is often lacking
in the colloquial use of the phrase ‘mathematically meaningful’ among mathemati-
cians. That use rather emphasizes typical aspects (often of an aesthetic nature)
such as being ‘natural’, ‘fundamental’, ‘elementary’, or ‘interesting’.
For G¨odel the continuum problem120 is indubitably meaningful.
In a 1947
paper entitled ‘What is Cantor’s Continuum Problem’ 121 he describes it as a
question ‘from the “multiplication table” of cardinal numbers’ and one of ‘the
most fundamental questions in the ﬁeld.’122
So the analysis of the phrase ‘how many’ unambiguously leads to a
deﬁnite meaning for the question stated in the second line of this paper:
The problem is to ﬁnd out which one of the ℵ’s is the number of points
of a straight line or (which is the same) of any other continuum (of any
number of dimensions) in a Euclidean space.123
G¨odel predicts in this paper, correctly as it turned out,124 that the continuum
hypothesis will be shown to be independent of the axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory. He argues forcefully in the paper that the continuum problem will
nevertheless be solved, as it is a meaningful question. The independence, rather
than precluding a solution of the problem, only shows that those axioms, though
suﬃcient to decide almost any question from the core areas of mathematics like
analysis and algebra, are insuﬃcient to decide all meaningful mathematical ques-
tions.
Thus one must ﬁnd a proper extension of them, or possibly a series of
extensions iterated into the transﬁnite, so as to decide in principle any meaningful
mathematical question.
What sort of extension should one seek?
In the 1946 ‘Remarks before the
Princeton bicentennial conference on problems in mathematics’125 G¨odel mentions
119G¨odel simply deﬁnes meaningfulness as being part of mathematics proper (or translatable
into mathematics proper). See *1940a, [G¨odel, 1995], p.176.
120I.e., the question as to the cardinality of the continuum
121Reprinted in [G¨odel, 1990].
122See pp.256 and 257 respectively of [G¨odel, 1990].
123[G¨odel, 1990], p. 257.
124Though independence was not shown until 1961 with the work of Paul Cohen, see [Cohen,
1963].
125See pp.150-153 of [G¨odel, 1990].

G¨odel’s Logic
479
‘largeness principles’ in connection with solving the continuum hypothesis. He
suggests that they might be added in a cumulative fashion, with some ‘domain of
propositions in which you are interested’ becoming decided at some level of this
cumulative procedure:
Let us consider, e.g, the concept of demonstrability. It is well known
that, in whichever way you make it precise by means of a formalism,
the contemplation of this very formalism gives rise to new axioms which
are exactly as evident and justiﬁed as those with which you started,
and that this process of extension can be iterated into the transﬁnite.
So there cannot exist any formalism which would embrace all these
steps; but this does not exclude that all these steps (or at least all of
them which give something new for the domain of propositions in which
you are interested) could be described and collected together in some
non-constructive way. In set theory, e.g., the successive extensions can
most conveniently be represented by stronger and stronger axioms of
inﬁnity. It is certainly impossible to give a combinatorial and decidable
characterization of what an axiom of inﬁnity is; but there might exist,
e.g., a characterization of the following sort: An axiom of inﬁnity is a
proposition which has a certain (decidable) formal structure and which
in addition is true. Such a concept of demonstrability might have the
required closure property, i.e., the following could be true: Any proof
for a set-theoretic theorem in the next higher system above set theory
(i.e., any proof involving the concept of truth which I just used) is re-
placeable by a proof from such an axiom of inﬁnity. It is not impossible
that for such a concept of demonstrability some completeness theorem
would hold which would say that every proposition expressible from set
theory is decidable from the present axioms plus some true assertion
about the largeness of the universe of all sets. (emphasis ours)
For a further analysis of G¨odel’s views on extensions of the Zermelo-Fraenkel
axioms, also in relation to the present developments in set theory, see [Kennedy
and van Atten, 2004].
1.4
Speed-up Theorems
G¨odel submitted an abstract in 1936 for what came to be known as the ‘speed-up’
theorem, entitled ‘On the length of proofs.’126 This result says that while some
sentences of arithmetic are true but unprovable, there are other sentences which
are provable but even the shortest proof is longer than any bound given in advance.
More exactly:
THEOREM 9. Given any recursive function f there are provable sentences φ of
arithmetic such that the shortest proof is greater than f(⌜φ⌝) in length.
126See [G¨odel, 1986].

480
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
The Speed-up Theorem is the result of contemplating and elaborating the proof
of the incompleteness theorem. It applies the ﬁxed-point technique to the concept
of unprovability by a short proof, as opposed to the original idea of applying the
ﬁxed-point theorem to mere unprovability. The proof has very much the same
ﬂavor as the proof of the incompleteness theorem.
Interestingly, it dates from
the same year as the construction, due to Rosser, that eliminates the use of ω-
consistency in the ﬁrst Incompleteness Theorem; like the Speed-up Theorem of
G¨odel, Rosser’s construction exploits the issue of short and long proofs.
G¨odel never submitted a proof for the Speed-up Theorem.
Over the years
several related proofs were published, but the ﬁrst full proof of G¨odel’s original
result was given only in 1994 by Sam Buss in his ‘On G¨odel’s theorems on lengths
of proofs I: Number of lines and speedups for arithmetic.’127 Buss also gives a
second proof of the theorem which avoids self-reference, following a technique of
Statman.
G¨odel measures the length of proofs by the number of formulas. There are also
other possibilities, like the number of symbols in the proof. The case of the Speed-
up Theorem where the length of proof is measured by the number of symbols, was
proved by Mostowski in 1952.128 Though both measures may be equally natural
candidates for measuring the length of a proof, proving the theorem for length
measured by the number of symbols avoids a technical complication introduced
by the other measure: there are only ﬁnitely many proofs with a given number of
symbols, whereas there are inﬁnitely many proofs with a given number of formulas.
G¨odel states the Speed-up Theorem diﬀerently from the above. Let Sn be the
system of logic of the n-th order, the variables of the ﬁrst level being thought of as
ranging over natural numbers. In this setting, variables of the second level range
over sets of natural numbers and so on. G¨odel’s formulation is:
THEOREM 10. Let n be a natural number > 0. If f is a computable function,
then there are inﬁnitely many formulas A, provable in Sn, such that if k is the
length of the shortest proof of A in Sn and l is the length of the shortest proof of
A in Sn+1, then k > f(l).
We note that the theorem depends on the fact that the notion of computable
function is absolute, i.e. independent of n. We now sketch the proof measuring
length as the number of symbols:
To prove Theorem 9, let f be total recursive function. By G¨odel’s Fixed Point
theorem there is a formula φ(n) stating ‘φ(n) has no proof in PA shorter than
f(n)’. This is tenable if the length is measured by number of symbols, because we
only need to search through ﬁnitely many proofs shorter than f(n).
Note that φ(n) is true for all n, for if φ(n) were false, then there would be a
short proof of φ(n), and hence by soundness φ(n) would be true, a contradiction:
φ(n) would both true and false. This can be formalized in PA and thus we get
127See [Buss, 1994].
128See [Mostowski, 1982]. For proofs of similar results see [Ehrenfeucht and Mycielski, 1971],
and [Parikh, 1971].

G¨odel’s Logic
481
the result that for each n the sentence φ(n) is provable in PA. Since φ(n) is true
for all n, it cannot have a proof in PA which is shorter than f(n).
For Theorem 10, suppose we have a higher type system in which we can prove
∀xφ(x). This proof is of constant length. Thus each φ(n) is derivable from this
universal statement by one application of the logical rule ∀xφ(x) →φ(t). Thus
φ(n) has in that system for all n a short proof. What kind of stronger system can
we have in which ∀xφ(x) is provable? We may consider second order logic in which
we can deﬁne a predicate N(x) for the set of natural numbers and furthermore can
prove of a new predicate symbol Tr(x) that it satisﬁes the inductive clauses of the
truth deﬁnition of ﬁrst order formulas of arithmetic, relativized to N. Then the
stronger system can prove that provable ﬁrst order sentences of arithmetic satisfy
the predicate Tr. By the above argument, we can prove in the stronger system
that ∀xφ(x) satisﬁes Tr.
Then by adding a few lines we can prove each φ(n)
satisﬁes Tr. Because of the nature of φ(n), this implies the stronger system has a
(short) proof of φ(n). An alternative system is Peano’s axioms PA in an extended
language where we have a new predicate symbol Tr and axioms stating that the
predicate Tr codes the satisfaction relation for all sentences of the vocabulary not
containing Tr.
The proof we have outlined is sensitive to the particular concept we use for the
length of a proof. Another possibility, and the one that G¨odel has in mind as we
saw, is the number of formulas in the proof. Buss proves the theorem in either
case, so both cases are resolved.
An alternative way of getting speed-up is to take any unprovable sentence as a
new axiom. The new axiom shortens dramatically proofs of some sentences. Those
sentences used to be provable anyway but are now provable with a much shorter
proof.129
THEOREM 11. Suppose P ̸⊢φ. Let f be a recursive function. Then there is a
sentence ψ such that P ⊢ψ, and a proof p of ψ in P ∪{φ}, such that there is no
proof of ψ from P which is shorter (in symbols) than f(n) where n is the length
of p.
Proof. Suppose there is no such ψ. Then for all ψ such that P ⊢ψ, let h(ψ) be
some proof of φ∨ψ in P ∪{φ}. Now for all ψ, P ∪{¬φ} ⊢ψ if and only if P ⊢φ∨ψ
if and only if there is a proof of φ ∨ψ from P of length ≤f(h(φ ∨ψ)). But this
means that P ∪{¬φ} is decidable, contrary to the essential undecidability of P.
■
2
G¨ODEL’S RESULTS IN INTUITIONISTIC LOGIC AND ARITHMETIC
Abbreviations
Following [Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988], we will use these
abbreviations:
129See also [Statman, 1981].

482
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
IPC
intuitionistic propositional logic
IQC
intuitionistic predicate logic
CPC
classical propositional logic
CQC
classical predicate logic
PA
Peano Arithmetic
HA
Heyting Arithmetic (PA with IQC instead of CQC as the underlying logic)
MP
Markov’s Principle
G¨odel’s results
The results on intuitionistic systems obtained by G¨odel and
published by him are, in chronological order of publication:
1932
IPC is not a ﬁnitely-valued logic
1933
PA is translatable into HA
1933
IPC is translatable into classical S4
1958
HA is interpretable in terms of computable functionals of ﬁnite type
A result due to him and published by Kreisel is
1957
Semantical completeness of IQC implies validity of MP (published in 1962)
Background: Heyting’s Proof Interpretation
A characteristic feature of
the published results is that none of them is concerned with the intuitionists’
intended interpretation of IPC, IQC, or HA (except in the sense of wishing to
avoid it). The intended interpretation of IQC was given by Heyting and is known
as ‘the Proof Interpretation’, where proofs are understood as mental objects:130
1. A proof of A ∧B is given by presenting a proof of A and a proof of B.
2. A proof of A ∨B is given by presenting either a proof of A or a proof of B.
3. A proof of A →B is a construction which permits us to transform any proof
of A into a proof of B.
4. Absurdity ⊥(contradiction) has no proof; ¬A is deﬁned as A →⊥, so a proof
of ¬A is a construction which transforms any hypothetical proof of A into a
proof of a contradiction.
5. A proof of ∀xA(x) is a construction which transforms any d in the domain
into a proof of A(d).
6. A proof of ∃A(x) is given by presenting a speciﬁc d from the domain and a
proof of A(d).
130[Heyting, 1930a], [Heyting, 1956, section 7.1.1], [Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988, 1.3.1]

G¨odel’s Logic
483
Discussion
IPC is not a ﬁnitely-valued logic
Answering a question posed by Hahn131—
and apparently without knowing Becker’s [1927]; see below—, in his note 1932
G¨odel demonstrates two propositions:
1. IPC cannot be viewed as a logic with ﬁnitely many truth values.
and
2. There is an inﬁnite, monotonically decreasing sequence of logics that are
weaker than CPC but stronger than IPC.
The question to which the ﬁrst result (which is a consequence of the second132)
provides an answer had been topical for some years. In 1927, Barzin and Errera
had proposed a conception of IPC according to which it is three-valued; moreover,
they argued that, given the principles they considered valid for propositions having
the third truth value, IPC is inconsistent.133
Also in 1927, Oskar Becker had
made the contrary conjecture that in intuitionistic logic there is no ‘n-tum non
datur’.134 That Barzin and Errera’s argument was incorrect was quickly pointed
out by Church.135
G¨odel’s argument settled the general question in a deﬁnitive and completely
formal manner. Like his incompleteness theorem, this was a limitative result; this
led Heyting to remark, in a letter to G¨odel dated November 24 and 26, 1932,
‘It is as if you had a malicious pleasure in showing the purposelessness of others’
investigations’—adding that ‘In the sense of economy of thought this work is cer-
tainly useful, and in addition to that comes the particular beauty of your short
proof’.136
PA is translatable into HA
In [1933e], reporting on the meeting of Menger’s
colloquium of June 28, 1932, G¨odel presents a translation ′ from PA into HA such
that
If PA ⊢A then HA ⊢A′
(G¨odel does not actually use PA but the system of Herbrand.137) The converse
also holds, as PA ⊢A ↔A′. The translation ′ G¨odel deﬁned as follows:
131See [G¨odel, 1933] and [G¨odel, 1933n].
132[G¨odel, 1986, p.223]
133[Barzin and Errera, 1927]
134[Becker, 1927, pp.775–777]
135[Church, 1928]. For a discussion of the whole episode, see [Hesseling, 2003, pp.260–266].
136[G¨odel, 2003b, p.67]
137[Herbrand, 1931]

484
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
(¬A)′
:=
¬A (A atomic)
(A →B)′
:=
¬(A′ ∧¬B′)
(A ∨B)′
:=
¬(¬A′ ∧¬B′)
(A ∧B)′
:=
A′ ∧B′
∀xA(x)′
:=
∀xA′(x)
The translation is also known as ‘the negative translation’ as its range is in the
negative fragment of intuitionistic logic (i.e., the fragment not containing ∃or ∨,
and in which atomic formulas only appear with a negation sign in front of them).
G¨odel’s actual clause for ∀is a little more complicated, as HA as we know it is
really an extract from Heyting’s original system of wider scope, which had only
variables for arbitrary objects and none speciﬁcally for numbers. No clause for ∃
is given by G¨odel, but classically it can of course be deﬁned in terms of ∀and ¬.
Hesseling138 notes that, ﬁrst, the translation G¨odel proposes is incomplete, for
it omits atomic formulas; and second, that this is not resolved in the introductory
note in the Collected Works, for it contains the misprint ‘P ′ := P (P atomic)’
instead of (¬P)′ := ¬P (P atomic)’. Two solutions are proposed by Hesseling: to
limit the domain of the translation and consider only negated atomic formulas, or
to add the clause
A′
:=
¬¬A (A atomic)
This clause is motivated by a wish for generality with an eye on applications of
′ also outside arithmetic, but in the speciﬁc (and original) case of arithmetic, one
could also leave atomic formulas unchanged, because HA ⊢¬¬(a = b) ↔a = b.
That equivalence can be used to show that for A not containing ∨or ∃, one even
has
PA ⊢A if and only if HA ⊢A
i.e., without need for translation.
If we denote derivability in IQC by ⊢i and derivability in CQC by ⊢c, and deﬁne
the translation of a set of formulas by Γ′ = {B′|B ∈Γ}, then the translation ′
serves to show
Γ ⊢c A if and only if Γ′ ⊢i A′
This way, G¨odel’s note extends work by Kolmogorov and Glivenko;139 only the
latter paper was known to G¨odel at the time.140
G¨odel goes further by turning to arithmetic. He shows that if A is provable in
PA, then A′ is provable in HA, and observes that this provides an intuitionistic
consistency proof of classical arithmetic and number theory. This is because (0 ̸=
0)′ is 0 ̸= 0.
138[Hesseling, 2003, pp.287–288]
139[Kolmogorov, 1925], [Glivenko, 1929]
140See [van Atten, 2004b, p.426] for some remarks on the historical relation between these two
Russian papers.

G¨odel’s Logic
485
G¨odel’s result had been obtained independently by Gentzen (with a contribution
by Bernays); Gentzen leaves atomic formulas unchanged, and preserves implica-
tion by deﬁning (A →B)′ := A′ →B′. Upon learning of G¨odel’s forthcoming
paper, Gentzen stopped the publication of his own, of which galley proofs had
already been made. In a letter to Heyting of May 16, 1933, G¨odel writes that
in G¨ottingen his result should have been known since June 1932, because Veblen
had been present at his presentation at Menger’s colloquium and then travelled to
G¨ottingen;141 Heyting, who had received Gentzen’s manuscript before (an oﬀprint
of) G¨odel’s, replies on August 24, 1933, ‘I must assume that the report about your
lecture had not suﬃciently got through to G¨ottingen after all’.142
Diﬀerent aspects of the G¨odel-Gentzen translation may be selected for emphasis:
it shows that, whatever advantages HA may (in a foundational debate) be claimed
to have over PA, these must reside in its interpretation and not in its safety; it
also shows that HA can be used as a means to establish consistency of PA. No
doubt intuitionists will pay more attention to the ﬁrst, classical mathematicians
to the second aspect.
Kreisel has noticed the contrast between G¨odel’s and Gentzen’s views on the
ﬁrst aspect: G¨odel takes his translation to show that intuitionistic logic involves
only ‘eine etwas abweichende Interpretation’,143 whereas Gentzen stressed that
the sense in which intuitionistic logic is part of classical logic has only formal
signiﬁcance, thereby drawing attention to the (semantical) richness of intuitionistic
logic.144 Later G¨odel became, in Kreisel’s words, ‘supersensitive about diﬀerences
in meaning’.145 (In analysis the situation is diﬀerent even purely formally, as there
the intuitionistic formal systems are not proper parts of classical ones.)
Regarding the second aspect, Bernays wrote that it convinced the Hilbert school
that, ‘contrary to the prevailing views at the time’, intuitionism was stronger than
the ﬁnitary standpoint, and that new methods of reasoning could be looked for
that are non-ﬁnitary but all the same ‘of a constructive character’.146 Gentzen
would soon give his consistency proof using transﬁnite induction up to ϵ0, and later
G¨odel would devise another constructive but non-ﬁnitary method in his Dialectica
Interpretation (see below).
IPC is translatable into classical S4
The note [1933f] communicates a result
that G¨odel had presented in Menger’s colloquium, at an unknown date in the
academic year 1931–1932:
If IPC ⊢A then S4 ⊢A′
141[G¨odel, 2003b, p.71]
142[G¨odel, 2003b, p.71]
143[G¨odel, 1933e, p.294]
144[Kreisel, 1971, p.257]
145[Kreisel, 1987, p.82]
146[Bernays, 1967, p.502]; Bernays had made a remark to this eﬀect in print already [Bernays,
1935, p.271].

486
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
where ′ is a translation from IPC to S4 deﬁned as follows (the connectives in S4
are to be taken classically):
(¬A)′
:=
¬□A′
(A →B)′
:=
□A′ →□B′
(A ∨B)′
:=
□A′ ∨□B′
(A ∧B)′
:=
A′ ∧B′
G¨odel conjectured that the implication also holds in the other direction, and
planned to work on this during his stay in Princeton in 1933–1934;147 eventually,
the conjecture was veriﬁed by McKinsey and Tarski.148
As is characteristic for G¨odel’s work on intuitionism, this translation provided
him with a means to study IPC while steering clear of its intuitionistic interpreta-
tion;149 equally characteristic is the formal nature of the alternative interpretation,
and in this respect, G¨odel himself notes, his result diﬀers from Kolmogorov’s paper
of 1932.150 A forerunner that is closer in spirit to G¨odel’s translation is Becker’s
‘Zur Logik der Modalit¨aten’,151 which he also cites. Becker discussed Heyting’s
formalization of intuitionistic logic from 1930,152 and attempted (but failed) to
clarify the diﬀerences between classical and intuitionistic logic by interpreting the
latter in a system of modal logic that anticipated S4.153 In particular, this system
included what is sometimes called (also by G¨odel in this note) ‘Becker’s axiom’,
□A →□□A. As the axiom ‘4’ it was then adopted by Lewis and Langford in
1932,154 when presenting the extension of Lewis’ original system of 1918 that they
baptized S4. G¨odel however does not actually describe his system as a (new) ax-
iomatization of S4, but as an equivalent of ‘Lewis’ system of strict implication’
when the latter is supplemented by Becker’s axiom.
A translation of IPC into a modal logic (anticipating S4) had been given before
Becker and G¨odel, who evidently were unaware of this fact, by the Russian logician
I.E. Orlov.155
As pointed out by Troelstra in his introduction to G¨odel’s translation,156 at the
time G¨odel certainly knew the content of [Heyting, 1931]. He had attended the
K¨onigsberg conference, at which Heyting had presented that text, and published
a review of the printed version.157
In that text, Heyting identiﬁes the notions
of being intuitionistically true and being intuitionistically provable. Heyting also
explicitly discusses a provability operator (but does not go on to present a modal
logic for it). Hence, as Troelstra concludes, it may well have been Heyting’s lecture
147See his letter to von Neumann, March 14, 1933 [G¨odel, 2003b, pp.346–347].
148[McKinsey and Tarski, 1948]
149See also G¨odel’s remarks on this in the Lecture at Zilsel’s [G¨odel, 1995, pp.100–101].
150[Kolmogorov, 1932]
151[Becker, 1930]
152[Heyting, 1930a],[Heyting, 1930b]
153See for a discussion of Becker’s work [Peckhaus, 2002].
154[Lewis and Langford, 1932]
155See [Doˇsen, 1992], [Bazhanov, 2003].
156[G¨odel, 1986, p.299]
157[G¨odel, 1932f]

G¨odel’s Logic
487
that led G¨odel to develop this interpretation (in particular, one may add, if at the
same time G¨odel was aware of the problems left in [Becker, 1930]). In a letter
of January 12, 1931, von Neumann had suggested a kind of provability logic to
G¨odel,158 where ‘provability’ is taken in the sense of G¨odel’s predicate ‘Bew’ in
[G¨odel, 1931]. As a matter of psychology, this suggestion may or may not have
been instrumental in making G¨odel’s discovery of his interpretation of IPC; but,
for the reason given in the next paragraph, what von Neumann suggested is not
at all what G¨odel has in mind here.
G¨odel concludes his note by observing that his provability operator cannot be
interpreted by ‘being provable in a certain formal system’: □(□A →A) is a theo-
rem of this provability logic, but for no formal system that satisﬁes the appropriate
conditions one has □(0 ̸= 0) →0 ̸= 0, as its immediate consequence ¬□(0 ̸= 0)
would contradict the second incompleteness theorem. Thus, the desideratum of a
truth-function style semantics for this provability logic based on S4 remained; it
was ﬁrst met by Artemov.159
The interpretation of IPC in terms of a provability operator will diﬀer from
the intended intuitionistic one if one wishes to leave open the possibility that a
proposition A is provable without this being known. For in that case, to say that
A is provable is to say that there exists a proof of it in a sense that transcends
the realm of the mathematician’s observations on his own constructional activity;
but according to intuitionists, mathematics should not go beyond that realm. On
their conception, as Heyting says, ‘the possibility of a construction can be proved
only by its actual execution’ (which is not incompatible with introducing certain
idealisations of the notion of actual execution). But in that case, Heyting points
out, an explicit provability operator is redundant.160
Semantical completeness of IQC implies validity of MP
Although from
a principled intuitionistic point of view Heyting’s Proof Interpretation provides a
perfectly adequate semantics, several alternatives have been proposed that lend
themselves more easily to formal study, with the aim of arriving at an intuitionis-
tic counterpart to classical model theory. Examples are Beth models and Kripke
models, with the corresponding notions of validity. Another option is to deﬁne
intuitionistic validity analogously to the set-theoretical notion of classical validity;
call this ‘structural validity’. Let A be a formula of IQC containing the predicate
symbols P1 . . . Pk. Then A(P1 . . . Pk) is valid if for all intuitionistically meaning-
ful domains (species) D∗and all relations P ∗
1 . . . P ∗
k deﬁned on D∗, A(P ∗
1 . . . P ∗
k )
holds intuitionistically, where all quantiﬁers in A are relativized to D∗and Pi is
interpreted by P ∗
i ; notation ⊨A. The intended interpretation of the connectives
is presupposed. IQC is said to be (semantically) complete for a formula A if ⊨A
implies ⊢A; it is said to be (semantically) complete if it is (semantically) complete
158[G¨odel, 2003b, pp.340–345]
159[Artemov, 2001]
160[Heyting, 1931, p.60]

488
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
for every A.161
G¨odel demonstrated that completeness of IQC with respect to structural validity
constructively implies MP in the form
∀α0,1¬¬∃xA(α, x) →∀α0,1∃xA(α, x)
(MPα)
and, as a corollary, also in the form
¬¬∃xA(x) →∃xA(x)
(MPPR)
where in both A is primitive recursive, and α0,1 ranges over choice sequences (not:
lawless sequences) chosen from {0, 1} (the restriction to 0 and 1 is convenient but
not essential).
A proof of G¨odel’s result was published in 1962 by Kreisel, who speciﬁes that
G¨odel related his arguments to him in conversation in 1957;162 Kreisel simpli-
ﬁed G¨odel’s own proof, using suggestions by Kleene, and investigated it further.
G¨odel’s argument combines theorem X of his incompleteness paper163 with the
constructive proof of Herbrand’s Theorem.164
On the Proof Interpretation, MPPR is not acceptable. ¬¬∃xA(x) means that
it is contradictory to assume that one cannot prove A(n) for some n; but the
contradictoriness of that assumption in general may be too little information to
enable one to construct an n such that A(n), in which case such an n cannot, in
the intuitionistic sense, be said to exist.165
G¨odel’s argument, which also holds for the notions of validity deﬁned by Beth
and Kripke semantics, seems to show that the intuitionist cannot hope ever to
establish completeness of IQC. (It is a diﬀerent question whether an intuitionist
would attach the same signiﬁcance to completeness of a formal system as birds of
diﬀerent feathers would.) Is this indeed the case? We note three diﬀerent views.
1. The most widely held view seems to be that principles such as MPPR are
not intuitionistically valid, that the notions of validity for which G¨odel’s
argument goes through are in some sense correct, and that therefore that
argument rules out an intuitionistic argument for completeness of IQC.166
2. McCarty does not question these notions of validity either, but attempts to
argue—speciﬁcally, against Dummett—that MPPR is intuitionistically ac-
ceptable after all, not as a principle of logic but as a principle of arith-
metic.167
161For discussion of structural validity in an intuitionistic context, see [Troelstra, 1977, pp.102–
104], [Dummett, 2000, pp.154–159], as well as the references in footnote 168.
162[Kreisel, 1962], in particular p.142. See also the abstract [Kreisel, 1958].
163[G¨odel, 1931, pp.186–187]
164See also [Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988, ch.13, section 3] and [Dummett, 2000, pp.177–180].
A diﬀerent kind of proof is in [McCarty, 1994].
165See [Dummett, 2000, pp.174–175] for an elaboration of this argument.
166[Dummett, 2000, pp.14, 174, 186]
167[McCarty, 1994, pp.105–106]

G¨odel’s Logic
489
3. Some intuitionists reject MPPR and also question the intuitionistic appro-
priateness of the notions of structural, Beth and Kripke validity.168 In par-
ticular, they have pointed out that G¨odel’s argument depends on the way
in which negation is treated in these three types of model (i.e., negation as
absence of models), and have argued that an intuitionist is not committed
to treating it that way. For example, Veldman showed how, by generalizing
the notion of a Kripke model a little (by allowing ⊥actually to hold at some
nodes, while strengthening the condition on validity of negated sentences), a
constructive completeness proof for IQC can be given that escapes G¨odel’s
argument.169
De Swart showed that a similar result can be obtained by
generalizing Beth models.170 But Veldman also indicated that, from an in-
tuitionistic point of view, the Henkin-style semantics he arrived at is a formal
artiﬁce and does not much to clarify the notion of an intuitionistically true
sentence.171 De Swart then went on to propose yet another notion of model,
argued that this one does yield an intuitionistically natural semantics, gave
a completeness proof relative to this semantics, and pointed out that here
too G¨odel’s argument does not go through.172 This semantics seems natural
indeed, but this remains a matter of some debate.
HA is interpretable in terms of computable functionals of ﬁnite type
In his paper [1958] (written in honour of Bernays’ 70th birthday), G¨odel presents
a system T (a theory of ﬁnite types) and a translation ′ of formulas F from HA
to T such that
(i) F ′ is of the form ∃y∀zA(y, z, x)
(ii) If HA ⊢F, then in T functions Q can be deﬁned such that T ⊢A(Q(x), z, x)
(This is not actually proved in the paper.)
Here x refers to all free variables of F, y and z are ﬁnite sequences of variables of
any type, and A(y, z, x) contains no quantiﬁers and no variables that are not in x,
y or z; we will remark on the idea behind this particular form of F ′ after deﬁning
′ and giving the intended interpretation of T.
The translation F ′ of a formula F is deﬁned by induction on the number k
of logical operators in F (s . . . z and V . . . Z stand for ﬁnite (possibly empty)
sequences of, respectively, arbitrary type and higher type; in particular, x and u
denote the sequences of free variables in A and B):
For k = 0 (i.e., F atomic), F ′ := F
168[Lopez-Escobar and Veldman, 1975, p.201], [de Swart, 1977a, p.565]
169[Veldman, 1976]; see also [Lopez-Escobar and Veldman, 1975].
170[de Swart, 1977a]
171[Veldman, 1976, p.159]
172[de Swart, 1977b]

490
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
For the induction step, suppose F ′ = ∃y∀zA(y, z, x) and G′ = ∃v∀wB(v, w, u);
then
(F ∧G)′
:=
∃yv∀zw[A(y, z, x) ∧B(v, w, u)]
(F ∨G)′
:=
∃yvt∀zw[t = 0 ∧A(y, z, x) ∨t = 1 ∧B(v, w, u)]
(F →G)′
:=
∃V Z∀yw[A(y, Z(yw), x) →B(V (y), w, u)]
(∃sF)′
:=
∃sy∀zA(y, z, x)
(∀sF)′
:=
∃Y ∀szA(Y (s), z, x)
(¬F)′
:=
∃Z∀y¬A(y, Z(y), x)
Clearly, PA can be shown to be consistent by showing that T is, because one
already has a consistency proof of PA relative to HA (see above). To establish
consistency of T, G¨odel takes the computable functionals of ﬁnite type as a model.
In the revised version [1972], ﬁrst published in the Collected Works, two further
models are proposed, the hereditarily recursive operations and a term model, with
which we will not be concerned. The computable functionals of ﬁnite type are a
generalization of Turing’s computable functions. G¨odel deﬁnes them as follows:173
1. The computable functionals of type 0 are the natural numbers
2. If t0, t1, . . . , tk are previously deﬁned types (k ≥1), then also (t0, t1, . . . , tk)
is a type, namely, the type of computable functionals that assign to every
k-tuple of computable functionals of types t1, . . . , tk a computable functional
of type t0. This assignment is to take place by an operation that is always
performable and is constructively recognizable as such.
The general notion of computable functional of ﬁnite type is then arrived at by
considering the type t as a variable. This notion is to be taken as primitive, and
is, as G¨odel says, abstract in that it does not ‘involve properties or relations of
concrete objects (for example, combinations of signs)’. In Hilbert’s conception
of ﬁnitary mathematics, evidence which is abstract in this sense is not admitted.
The properties involved in abstract notions are ‘essentially of higher order’ and
pertain for example to meanings of terms. In 1958, G¨odel describes this by saying
that abstract notions relate to ‘mental constructs’; in 1972, he has replaced this
term by ‘thought structures or thought contents’.174 Even though further on in the
sentence he refers to ‘mental objects’ again, arguably the replacement made ﬁts an
objectivist conception of mathematics somewhat better. In any case the reference
to the ‘mental’ both in 1958 and in 1972 should not be taken in the sense in which
Brouwer holds that mathematics essentially is nothing but a mental construction
(on this issue, see also Bernays’ distinction between ‘reserved intuitionism’ and
‘far-reaching intuitionism’ in his letter to G¨odel of March 16, 1972.175) We will
have occasion to come back to this below.
To see the idea behind the deﬁnition of the clauses of the translation, consider
the constructive meaning of ∃xA(x) →∃uB(u): one has a construction that, given
173[G¨odel, 1990, p.245]
174[G¨odel, 1990, p.241] and [G¨odel, 1990, p.273]
175[G¨odel, 2003a, pp.294–295]

G¨odel’s Logic
491
an object a such that A(a), yields an object b such that B(b). Assuming that A
and B are atomic, the translation of this formula is ∃U∀x(A(x) →B(U(x))). If
we interpret U as a computable functional, this translation impeccably meets the
constructive requirement. The higher-order functions reﬂect the interplay between,
on the one hand, the connectives and, on the other, the ﬁrst-order quantiﬁers
as constructively construed, and thereby serve to remove quantiﬁers from the
connected statements. In this particular sense, the Dialectica Interpretation is
a form of quantiﬁer elimination. As statements without quantiﬁers are decidable,
the connectives between them become simple truth functions.
The point of the paper is an epistemological one, and ﬁts G¨odel’s general interest
in the investigation of the limits (approached from both sides, so to speak) of
formal methods in capturing intuitive concepts.176 Soon after publishing his two
incompleteness theorems, G¨odel had come to accept the view that the second
demonstrates that Hilbert’s original goal of establishing the consistency of PA by
ﬁnitary means is unattainable.177 But, as Bernays has written (see above), the
proofs by G¨odel and Gentzen that PA is translatable into HA inspired hope that
the consistency of PA could be established by means that, although not ﬁnitary,
are still constructive. With his Dialectica Interpretation, G¨odel introduces the
abstract notion of his computable functionals as such a means, as an alternative to
Heyting’s Proof Interpretation as well as to Gentzen’s induction up to ϵ0. The odd
impression that a consistency proof of arithmetic in terms of a notion that includes
the natural numbers themselves as a special case may make, is removed by realizing
that (interpreted) PA and HA appeal to either non-constructive or abstract notions
via their logic, which is after all also part of these systems: through the use of
computable functionals of ﬁnite type, logical complexity is traded in for ontological
complexity.
In the following, we will be speciﬁcally concerned with the comparison of the
Dialectica Interpretation with Heyting’s Proof Interpretation.178
From G¨odel’s 1958 paper it is clear (with a minimum of reading between the
lines) that he considered his interpretation to be superior to Heyting’s, the notion
of computable functional being more evident than the intuitionistic notion of proof.
In the revision from 1972 this aspect is made more explicit, in particular in footnote
h:179
The interpretation of intuitionistic logic, in terms of computable func-
tions, in no way presupposes Heyting’s and . . . moreover, it is construc-
tive and evident in a higher degree than Heyting’s. For it is exactly
the elimination of such vast generalities as ‘any proof’ which makes for
greater evidence and constructivity.
176Yourgrau [2005, p.182] calls this ‘G¨odel’s Program’.
177Compare [G¨odel, 1931, p.195] with [G¨odel, *1933o, p.52 (G¨odel’s page 26)]. See also [Man-
cosu, 1999].
178For G¨odel’s view on Gentzen’s approach, see e.g. footnotes 3, 4 and f in the version of 1972
[1972, pp.273–274], as well as sections VI and VII of his lecture at Zilsel’s [*1938a, pp.102–113].
179[G¨odel, 1990, p.276]

492
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
This is one of the diﬀerences between the two versions that reﬂect, as G¨odel wrote
to Bernays in 1968 while working on the revision, how in 1958 he ‘placed no
particular value on the philosophical matters’ because he was ‘mainly concerned
with the mathematical result,’ while ‘now it is the other way around’.180
It is
quite likely that the increase in sensitivity to questions of evidence that G¨odel
displays in the 1972 version is due to his wide reading in phenomenology that he
had begun shortly after completing the original version from 1958.
G¨odel’s qualm with Heyting’s Proof Interpretation, as voiced in his Cambridge
lecture in 1933, is that the clause for negation (more generally, the clause for
implication) involves the notion of arbitrary intuitionistic proof in an essential way,
and that this notion is too indeterminate. It does not comply with a condition he
(at the time) poses on constructivity:181
Heyting’s axioms concerning absurdity and similar notions . . . violate
the principle, which I stated before, that the word ‘any’ can be ap-
plied only to those totalities for which we have a ﬁnite procedure for
generating all their elements . . . The totality of all possible proofs cer-
tainly does not possess this character, and nevertheless the word ‘any’
is applied to this totality in Heyting’s axioms . . . Totalities whose el-
ements cannot be generated by a well-deﬁned procedure are in some
sense vague and indeﬁnite as to their borders. And this objection ap-
plies particularly to the totality of intuitionistic proof because of the
vagueness of the notion of constructivity.
An intuitionist might reply that we recognize a proof when we see one (Kreisel); the
clause for implication (and hence that for negation) is not to be taken as quantify-
ing over an actual totality of intuitionistic proofs, but rather as a schema: ‘I have
a construction that, whenever you give me something recognizable as a proof of
the antecedent of A →B, will transform this into a proof of the consequent.’ This
can be expected to work because in proofs of implications usually nothing more is
assumed about a proof of the antecedent than that it indeed is one (see also the
remark on impredicativity, below). The prime example of an intuitionistic theorem
that goes beyond that assumption is Brouwer’s proof of the bar theorem.182 This
(classically trivial, but constructively remarkable) theorem basically says that, if
a tree contains a subset of nodes such that every path through the tree meets it
(a ‘bar’), then there is a well-ordered subtree that contains a bar for the whole
tree. Brouwer’s extraction of additional information from the hypothesis that we
have a proof of the antecedent (i.e., that we have a proof that the tree contains
a bar) is based on his analysis, perfectly in accord with his general conception of
mathematics, of proofs in terms of mental structures. That analysis enables him
to formulate a necessary condition on proofs of the antecedent, namely, that they
admit of being put into a canonical form;183 on the basis of that form, a proof
180[G¨odel, 2003a, pp.260–261]
181[G¨odel, *1933o, p.53]
182[Brouwer, 1924], [Brouwer, 1927]
183[Brouwer, 1927, p.64]

G¨odel’s Logic
493
of the consequent is obtained. Thus, it is by devising a transcendental argument
that Brouwer avoids issues of impredicativity here (see [Sundholm and van Atten,
in print]). To G¨odel however, relying on properties of mental structures must have
amounted to introducing a non-mathematical element. More on this below.
Here we note that G¨odel’s dissatisfaction with the Proof Interpretation was at
the root of the development of the Dialectica Interpretation. That development
can roughly be traced as follows:184
1933: Lecture ‘The present situation in the foundations of mathematics’.185 G¨odel formulates
his objection to the Proof Interpretation, which interpretation he considers ‘of doubtful value’
in proving the consistency of PA. He expresses the hope that ‘in the future one may ﬁnd other
and more satisfactory methods of construction’ that go beyond ﬁnitary reasoning.
1938: ‘Lecture at Zilsel’s’.186 G¨odel suggests that higher types may be used to arrive at a consis-
tency proof of PA. However, there is no indication of a method, nor of a (possible) interpretation
of HA in higher types. However, G¨odel does add that with a ﬁxed ﬁnite number of higher types,
consistency cannot be shown.
1941: Lecture ‘In what sense is intuitionistic logic constructive?’.187 This time, G¨odel phrases his
objection to the Proof Interpretation by saying that the clause for implication requires that ‘the
notion of derivation or of proof must be taken in its intuitive meaning as something directly given
by intuition, without any further explanation being necessary. This notion of an intuitionistically
correct proof or constructive proof lacks the desirable precision.’188 Then G¨odel presents, in an
informal manner, an interpretation of HA in a system of higher types Σ, and explains the motiva-
tion behind the interpretation and behind its clauses. G¨odel introduces the schemata of Explicit
Deﬁnition and Recursive Deﬁnition to deﬁne the constructive operations referred to in the deﬁ-
nition of the computable functionals. Some applications are given, for example, if HA ⊢∃xφ(x),
then from the corresponding proof of ∃xφ′(x) in Σ one obtains a witness; this is then used to
show that if PA ⊢∃φ(x), where φ is decidable (contains no quantiﬁers), then there is a t such that
Σ ⊢φ(t). Finally, G¨odel suggests the interpretation may be extended from arithmetic to analysis.
1958: First publication of the interpretation.189 The system T is very similar to the system Σ
of 1941, but G¨odel no longer tries to deﬁne the notion of constructive operation and takes it as
primitive instead. G¨odel now claims superiority over the Proof Interpretation by saying, as we
saw above, that his own interpretation is ‘constructive and evident in a higher degree’ because
of its ‘elimination of such vast generalities as “any proof” which makes for greater evidence and
constructivity’.
Philosophically, this diﬀerence between the approaches in 1941 and 1958—trying
to ﬁnd suitable schemata for deﬁning the constructive operations used in the deﬁ-
nition of computable function versus taking the notion as primitive—marks a sea
change. In footnote 6, G¨odel writes in defence of the latter approach:190
184For extensive discussion, see Troelstra’s introductions to [G¨odel, *1941] and [G¨odel, 1958;
G¨odel, 1972] in [G¨odel, 1990], and ‘G¨odel’s Dialectica Interpretation and its Two-Way Stretch’
in [Feferman, 1998].
185[G¨odel, *1933o]
186[G¨odel, *1938a]
187[G¨odel, *1941]
188[G¨odel, *1941, p.190]
189Kreisel, who had learned of the essentials of the interpretation from G¨odel himself in 1955,
had made it public (again) in lectures at Cornell and at Amsterdam in 1957 [Kreisel, 1987,
pp.104, 109].
190[G¨odel, 1990, p.245n.6]

494
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
As is well known, A.M. Turing, using the notion of a computing ma-
chine, gave a deﬁnition of the notion of computable function of the ﬁrst
order. But, had this notion not already been intelligible, the question
whether Turing’s deﬁnition is adequate would be meaningless.
Mutatis mutandis, he could have written this about his former self. In G¨odel’s view
as expressed in 1958, what Turing did was to deﬁne (and in that sense see sharper)
an objective concept that we had been perceiving all along, albeit less sharply.191
Similarly, G¨odel holds, there is an objective concept ‘computable functional’, that
we may not yet (and possibly never) be able to make completely explicit, but that
at the same time we see enough of to determine some of its properties. As he
wrote in the preceding footnote:192
One may doubt whether we have a suﬃciently clear idea of the content
of this notion [of computable functional], but not that the axioms [given
in this paper] hold for it. The same apparently paradoxical situation
also obtains for the notion, basic to intuitionistic logic, of a proof that
is informally understood to be correct.
The point G¨odel makes in this footnote is reminiscent of paragraph XXIV in
Leibniz’ Discours de M´etaphysique, where attention is drawn to the fact that we
may have ‘clear’ or even ‘distinct’ knowledge of things of which we do not yet have
(and may well never have) a complete analyis into primitive terms.193 Whether
G¨odel had this passage in Leibniz, which he surely knew, in mind when writing
this footnote, remains an open question.
The philosophical position G¨odel takes up in 1958 also explains why, unlike in
1933 and 1941, he no longer actually questions that it would be appropriate to
consider the Proof Interpretation constructive, but only claims higher degrees of
evidence and constructiveness for his interpretation. For example, G¨odel’s objec-
tions to the intuitionistic notion of proof from 1933 and 1941 that we quoted above
would equally apply to the primitive notion he substitutes for it in 1958. By that
time he had relaxed the stringent conditions he had put on constructivity in the
1930s, and, correspondingly, had come to see room for a constructive but ‘hitherto
unutilized extension of the ﬁnitary standpoint’.
Regarding the epistemological advantages over the Proof Interpretation that
G¨odel claims in 1958, an intuitionist could say the following: ‘If one considers the
Proof Interpretation, not in general, but limited to a particular topic, it is only to
be expected that it can be turned into something more speciﬁc; the computable
functionals are an example of just this for the case of arithmetic.’194 This idea
was used above when motivating the clause for the translation of implications.
(Kleene’s realizability interpretations of HA may be motivated in the same way,
but a diﬀerence is that the Dialectica Interpretation aims for interpretations that
191[Wang, 1974, pp.84–85]
192[G¨odel, 1990, p.245n.5]
193[Leibniz, 1880, p.449], where also the terms ‘clear’ and ‘distinct’ are deﬁned.
194See also pp.231–232 of Troelstra’s introduction in [G¨odel, 1990].

G¨odel’s Logic
495
are more evident than the original statements.) G¨odel does not go into this issue,
but seems to leave open the possibility: ‘Obviously, we do not claim that [the
clauses of the translation] reproduce the meaning of the logical particles introduced
by Brouwer and Heyting. Further investigation is needed to see how far these can
be replaced by our deﬁnitions.’195
In 1972, G¨odel pointed out that the Dialectica Interpretation validates MP in
the form (equivalent to MPPR as stated above)
¬∀xA(x) →∃x¬A(x)
for primitive recursive A; he adds that, in a more general setting, the principle is
provable for any decidable property A of any objects x, and he takes this as an
independent argument for the higher degree of constructiveness of the Dialectica
Interpretation.196 But as Troelstra points out,197 this argument seems doubtful
because of the combined facts that MP is refutable in the theory of lawless se-
quences (a decidable notion)198 and that G¨odel considers such sequences as close
to Hilbert’s ﬁnitism.199 The matter is quite delicate. In a draft letter to Bernays
from July 1969, G¨odel reports that ‘it now seems to me, after more careful con-
sideration, that choice sequences are something concretely evident and therefore
are ﬁnitary in Hilbert’s sense, even if Hilbert himself was perhaps of another opin-
ion’.200 He also plans to include a footnote to this eﬀect in his revision of the 1958
paper.201 In a letter to Bernays of July 25, 1969, which he actually sent, he says
that choice sequences seem to him ‘to be quite concrete, but not to extend ﬁnitism
in an essential way’.202
As functionals of a given type may well be deﬁned by referring to (arbitrarily)
more complex types, the Dialectica Interpretation seems to be highly impredica-
tive.
Something similar could be suggested about the Proof Interpretation, as
proofs may involve references to (arbitrarily) more complex proofs. However, this
worry may be alleviated if one accepts that the notion of computable functional
(respectively, intuitionistic proof) is truly primitive and that it suﬃces that one
recognize one when one sees one. We will not go further into this issue here, and
refer to the literature.203
195[G¨odel, 1990, pp.249–251]
196[G¨odel, 1990, p.276, footnote h]
197[G¨odel, 1990, p.232]
198MP here is taken in the form ¬¬∃x(α(x) = 0) →∃x(α(x) = 0); the lawless character of α
ensures both that the antecedent is true and that no proof of the consequent can be extracted
from this.
199[G¨odel, 1990, p.272, footnote c]
200[G¨odel, 2003a, p.269]
201[G¨odel, 2003a, p.269–270]
202[G¨odel, 2003a, p.271]. See also [Kreisel, 1980, p.202].
203E.g. Bernays’ letter to G¨odel of March 16, 1972 [G¨odel, 2003a, pp.294–295], G¨odel’s letter
to Bernays of December 26, 1972 [G¨odel, 2003a, pp.298–301], [Kreisel, 1987, p.111], Troelstra’s
introduction to both versions of the Dialectica paper [G¨odel, 1990, pp.233, 235–236], [Tait, 2001],
and, in particular, [Dummett, 2000, pp.269–274].

496
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
In his lectures and writings on functional interpretations, G¨odel showed, as he
also did in his paper on Kant,204 his talent for exploring and further developing a
philosophical position (here, the ﬁnitary position) that is not his own.
The Dialectica Interpretation and its oﬀspring have found many applications in
proof theory.205
Inﬂuences of intuitionism on G¨odel’s work
In the draft of an unsent letter to Dirk van Dalen from 1969, G¨odel wrote:206
My relationship with Intuitionism consists primarily in some theorems
I proved about certain parts of intuitionistic mathematics in particular
that published in Dial[ectica] 12.
The question as to whether this
paper is important for the foundations of Intuitionism I must leave for
Intuitionists to answer. I did not write the paper from this point of view
and some supplementation would be necessary in order to clarify it’s
[sic] relevance for the foundations of Intuitionism. [G¨odel’s emphasis.]
The view on the Dialectica Interpretation expressed here seems to be valid for
G¨odel’s work on intuitionistic systems in general. He recognized the epistemologi-
cal advantages of constructivism, and looked for interpretations of formal systems
for intuitionistic logic and arithmetic. What he did not do was to explore and de-
velop the interpretations intended by the intuitionists themselves. As intuitionistic
analysis involves objects (choice sequences) that are not accepted in classical math-
ematics (because they depend for their existence on the mathematician’s mind),
this may also explain why G¨odel never worked or lectured in that domain.207 This
is a further illustration of the observation made above on Brouwer’s proof of the
bar theorem: to G¨odel this way of doing mathematics must amount to making the
notions of mathematical truth and existence dependent on something that they
should not be. Indeed, according to Sue Toledo’s notes of her conversations with
G¨odel in the mid-1970s, he explained that
[in intuitionism] statements involve [an] extra-mathematical element.
Namely, the mind of the mathematician + his ego.
Statements
of int[uitionism] are psychol[ogical] statements, but not of empirical
psy[chology],—essential a priori psychology / not formal.208
Yet, his view that intuitionism involves extra-mathematical elements (which, as
will be clear, also induce various constraints compared to classical mathematics)
did not keep G¨odel from getting something out of Brouwer’s typically intuitionistic
204[G¨odel, *1946]
205For an overview and references, see [G¨odel, 1990, pp.238–239], [Feferman, 1998] and [Avigad
and Feferman, 1999].
206G¨odel Nachlaß, Firestone Library, Princeton, item 012891.
207In particular, the lectures on intuitionism (Princeton 1941?) mentioned on p. 537 of [G¨odel,
2003b] do not discuss analysis.
208[Toledo, unpublished, p.42]

G¨odel’s Logic
497
thinking; we mention the following three cases where G¨odel’s concrete work in logic
was directly inﬂuenced by Brouwer’s ideas.
In conversation with Hao Wang, G¨odel claimed, ‘In 1942 I already had the
independence of the axiom of choice [in ﬁnite type theory].
Some passage in
Brouwer’s work, I don’t remember which, was the initial stimulus.’209
In Ar-
beitsheft 14, which contains his notes on the proof from 1942, one sees that G¨odel
used Brouwer’s continuity principle for choice sequences to deﬁne a notion of ‘intu-
itionistic truth’ for propositions about inﬁnite sequences (of natural numbers).210
Choice sequences are potentially inﬁnite objects and depend in their development
on the mathematician’s choices; as a consequence, one generally has no complete
information about them (except in the case where the mathematician commits
herself to following an algorithm). On this, Brouwer based his continuity princi-
ple, which states that if to every choice sequence a natural number is assigned,
then for each sequence this number is already determined by an initial segment of
it (which is ﬁnite).211 By 1942, G¨odel may have seen the statement of the principle
in [Brouwer, 1918, p.13], [Brouwer, 1924, p.189] or [Brouwer, 1927, p.63].212 In
his proof, G¨odel thinks of classical sets as given by sequences, and treats these
sequences as if they were choice sequences.
G¨odel also said to Wang that the
method he used in 1942 was ‘related’ to Cohen’s.213 Behind that remark must
be the fact that in Cohen’s forcing, too, truth values for propositions (in an ap-
propriately restricted language, here the ﬁrst-order language of pure set theory)
about certain inﬁnite objects (here, generic sets) are always already determined
by information about a ﬁnite part of such an object. Forcing therefore involves a
notion of continuity analogous to that for choice sequences; this analogy explains
why the logic imposed by choice sequences, and the logic that corresponds to the
clauses of the deﬁnition of forcing, are the same, i.e. intuitionistic logic.214 (To
point out this analogy is of course not to suggest that G¨odel invented forcing be-
209[Wang, 1996, p.86]. G¨odel’s attempts in 1966 and 1967 to reconstruct this proof from his
notes failed; see his letters to Alonzo Church of September 29, 1966 [G¨odel, 2003a, p.372] and
to Wolfgang Rautenberg of June 30, 1967 [G¨odel, 2003b, p.183]. Charles Parsons [G¨odel, 2003b,
p.180] has drawn attention to the following. To Church, G¨odel only said that he had an inde-
pendence proof of the axiom of constructibility in type theory but added that ‘I believed (and I
think rightly) that I could extend my proof to this case [i.e., the axiom of choice] without serious
diﬃculty’; a year later, to Rautenberg he claimed, as he would do later to Wang, that he actually
had been in possession of an independence proof of the axiom of choice in type theory.
210Arbeitsheft 14 is item 030032 in the G¨odel Nachlaß, Firestone Library, Princeton. See e.g.
p.14 (clause 1), p.15 (clause 6), p.16 (in ‘Df. ‘W”).
211For a discussion of problems and possibilities in justiﬁcations of this principle, see [van Atten
and van Dalen, 2002].
212Reading notes referring to the latter two papers are in item 050066 in the G¨odel Nachlaß,
Firestone Library, Princeton. These notes are not dated. On the otherwise empty back G¨odel
wrote ‘Brouwer bar theorem’; that English term was introduced only in [Brouwer, 1954]. But it
is not excluded that G¨odel made these notes before or in 1942 and then added that jotting on
the back later.
213[Wang, 1996, p.251]
214For continuity as a motivation of forcing, see [Wang, 1981, section 7.11]. On the theme of
interpretations of intuitionistic logic and forcing, see for example [Kripke, 1965, pp.118–120],
[Vopˇenka, 1965] and [Fitting, 1969].

498
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
fore Cohen: much more than the idea of ﬁnite approximations is needed to arrive
at that.) Finally, G¨odel also described to Wang ‘a metamathematical consistency
proof of the axiom of choice’ that he had obtained in 1940.215 Of that proof, which
G¨odel did not manage to reconstruct for Wang from his old notes, he said that ‘it
uses ﬁnite approximations. Only the initial segment is known. Ask whether, say,
2 will occur: yes or no’, and this again points to Brouwer’s continuity principle.
The second case of Brouwer inﬂuencing G¨odel is of a heuristic rather than a
technical nature and concerns the (ﬁrst) incompleteness theorem. In 1928, Brouwer
gave two lectures in Vienna: on March 10, on general philosophy and intuitionistic
foundations of mathematics; and on March 14, on the intuitionistic theory of the
continuum.216 According to Hao Wang, ‘it appears certain that G¨odel must have
heard the two lectures’; indeed, G¨odel wrote to Menger on April 20, 1972 that ‘I
only saw [Wittgenstein] once in my life when he attended a lecture in Vienna. I
think it was Brouwer’s’.217 An entry in Carnap’s diary for December 12, 1929,
states that G¨odel talked to him that day ‘about the inexhaustibility of mathematics
(see separate sheet) He was stimulated to this idea by Brouwer’s Vienna lecture.
Mathematics is not completely formalizable. He appears to be right’.218 On the
‘separate sheet’, Carnap wrote down what G¨odel had told him:
We admit as legitimate mathematics certain reﬂections on the gram-
mar of a language that concerns the empirical. If one seeks to formalize
such a mathematics, then with each formalization there are problems,
which one can understand and express in ordinary language, but can-
not express in the given formalized language.
It follows (Brouwer)
that mathematics is inexhaustible: one must always again draw afresh
from the ‘fountain of intuition’. There is, therefore, no characteristica
universalis for the whole mathematics, and no decision procedure for
the whole mathematics. In each and every closed language there are
only countably many expressions. The continuum appears only in ‘the
whole of mathematics’ . . . If we have only one language, and can only
make ‘elucidations’ about it, then these elucidations are inexhaustible,
they always require some new intuition again.219
This record contains in particular elements from the second of Brouwer’s lectures,
in which one ﬁnds the argument that G¨odel refers to: on the one hand, the full
continuum is given in a priori intuition, while on the other hand, it cannot be
exhausted by a closed language with countably many expressions.
215[Wang, 1996, p.86]
216Published as [Brouwer, 1929] and [Brouwer, 1930].
217[Wang, 1987, p.80] and [G¨odel, 2003b, p.133]. In a letter of January 19, 1967 to George W.
Corner of the American Philosophical Society (carbon copy in G¨odel-Nachlass, item 021257),
G¨odel, requested to write a biography of Brouwer, wrote that ‘I have seen Brouwer only on one
occasion, in 1953, when he came to Princeton for a brief visit’; perhaps G¨odel meant that he had
never actually talked to Brouwer before 1953 (more on that visit below).
218[Wang, 1987, p.84]
219As quoted, in translation, in [Wang, 1987, p.50].

G¨odel’s Logic
499
In fact, Brouwer must have realized already around 1907 that one can diagonal-
ize out of formal systems. In his dissertation of that year he noted that the totality
of all possible mathematical constructions is ‘denumerably unﬁnished’; by this he
meant that ‘we can never construct in a well-deﬁned way more than a denumer-
able subset of it, but when we have constructed such a subset, we can immediately
deduce from it, following some previously deﬁned mathematical process, new ele-
ments which are counted to the original set’.220 In one of the notebooks leading up
to his dissertation, Brouwer stated that ‘The totality of mathematical theorems is,
among other things, also a set which is denumerable but never ﬁnished’.221 This
explains why Brouwer could say (e.g. to Freudenthal and to Wang) that he was
not surprised by G¨odel’s (ﬁrst) incompleteness theorem.222
Of course, in the theorems that G¨odel, after having been inspired by Brouwer’s
lectures, eventually arrived at, he went considerably beyond Brouwer. As G¨odel
stressed (without reference to Brouwer’s lectures) in his letter to Zermelo of Oc-
tober 12, 1931:
I would still like to remark that I see the essential point of my result not
in that one can somehow go outside any formal system (that follows
already according to the diagonal procedure), but that for every formal
system of metamathematics there are statements which are expressible
within the system but which may not be decided from the axioms of
that system, and that those statements are even of a relatively simple
kind, namely, belonging to the theory of the positive whole numbers.223
Brouwer never explicitly commented on G¨odel’s theorems in print, but clearly had
the (second) incompleteness theorem in mind when he wrote, in 1952, that
The hope originally fostered by the Old Formalists that mathematical
science erected according to their principles would be crowned one day
with a proof of non-contradictority, was never fulﬁlled, and, nowadays,
in view of the results of certain investigations of the last few decades,
has, I think, been relinquished.224
And when Brouwer admitted, in 1955, that ‘the sumptuous symbolic logic of
the twentieth century . . . at present is continually raising the most captivating
problems and making the most surprising and penetrating discoveries’,225 it is
more than likely that he was thinking of, among other things, G¨odel’s work.
220[Brouwer, 1907, p.82]
221Brouwer, Notebook VIII, p.44. Brouwer Archive, Dept. of Philosophy, Utrecht; translation
from the Dutch ours. By ‘theorem’, Brouwer will not have meant a derivation in a(n interpreted)
formal system, but rather a report (by the ideal mathematician) on a successful mathematical
construction in the mind.
222For Freudenthal, see [van Dalen, 2001, p.359]; for Wang, [Wang, 1987, p.88].
223[G¨odel, 2003b, p.429]; original emphases.
224[Brouwer, 1952, p.508]. As examples of ‘Old Formalists’ Brouwer mentions Dedekind, Cantor,
Peano, Hilbert, Russell, Zermelo, and Couturat. Note the qualiﬁcation ‘I think’.
225[Brouwer, 1955, p.554]

500
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
The third case of an intuitionistic notion that G¨odel had use for is that of the
weak (or ‘Brouwerian’) counterexample; for instance, intuitionistically, there is no
reason to assume ∀x ∈R(x ∈Q ∨x ̸∈Q).226
This notion was illustrated by
Brouwer in the ﬁrst Vienna lecture; it inspired G¨odel in his refutation in 1930
of Behmann’s claim, advanced earlier that year, that classical existence proofs
(not involving the uncountable inﬁnite) can always be made constructive.227 It
is in their reconstruction of analysis that intuitionists arrive at so-called ‘strong
counterexamples’ to principles of classical logic. For example, Brouwer showed
that actually ¬∀x ∈R(x ∈Q ∨x ̸∈Q).228 Such phenomena are possible because
of the interaction between ontology and logic that occurs in intuitionistic analysis;
but G¨odel always stayed away from characteristically intuitionistic ontology. This
last remark would need some qualiﬁcation to the (apparently varying) extent that
G¨odel was ready to accept lawless sequences as objects of ﬁnitary mathematics (see
the discussion of the Dialectica Interpretation, above). Note that to accept them
as such would imply that ﬁnitary mathematics is not a proper part of classical
mathematics. In so far as ﬁnitary mathematics is conceived of as a (schematic)
theory of our handling of intuitive objects, this may indeed be the case.229 We will
not develop this theme further here; but we note that this would go together well
with G¨odel’s view, as reported in a letter from Shen Yuting to Hao Wang of April 3,
1974, that ‘classical mathematics does not “include” constructive mathematics’.230
For all the diﬀerences between platonism and intuitionism, G¨odel and Brouwer
also had certain philosophical views in common. Both held that mathematics has
content, and in particular describes entities that are not of a linguistic nature. It
is therefore not surprising that their respective views on the role of language in
mathematics are quite similar.231 Language has a practical, supporting role to
play, but in no way determines the nature of mathematics itself. This holds in
particular for formal systems; see for example, G¨odel’s reaction to Cohen’s work.232
Kreisel reports that, in October 1955, G¨odel spoke to him of the ‘Aussichtlosigkeit’
of ‘doing anything decisive in foundations by means of mathematical logic’;233 and
in a note from the period May 1941–April 1942, G¨odel had already remarked:
Perhaps the reason why no progress is made in mathematics (and there
are so many unsolved problems), is that one conﬁnes oneself to the
ext[ensional]—thence also the feeling of disappointment in the case of
many theories, e.g. propositional logic and formalisation altogether.234
226[Brouwer, 1929, section III]
227[G¨odel, 2003a, p.17], [G¨odel, 2003b, pp.565–567] and [Mancosu, 2002].
228[Brouwer, 1928, §2]
229[van Atten, 2004b, p.425]
230G¨odel Nachlaß, Firestone Library, Princeton, item 013133; compare [Kreisel, 1980, p.202].
231For a statement of Brouwer’s views, see e.g. [Brouwer, 1907, ch.3], [Brouwer, 1929] and the
introduction to [Heyting, 1930a]; for G¨odel’s, e.g. [Wang, 1996, pp.180–181]
232[G¨odel, 2003b, p.372, letter 6]; see also [Kennedy and van Atten, 2004, section 5.3].
233[Kreisel, 1987, p.107]; p.104 for the date.
234Notebook Max IV, p.198 (G¨odel Nachlaß, Firestone Library, Princeton, item 030090). Tran-
scription Cheryl Dawson; translation from the German ours; amendment ours.

G¨odel’s Logic
501
On both the platonist and the intuitionist view, foundational progress will have
to come mainly from informal analysis of intuitive concepts. To that end, G¨odel
eventually made an explicit turn to phenomenology as a method;235 Brouwer did
not, but his work easily lends itself to phenomenological interpretation.236 (This
suggests a common domain in which to describe and, perhaps, in some sense
resolve the obvious conﬂict between their foundational views.
Ultimately, the
conﬂict between G¨odel’s platonism and Brouwer’s intuitionism is one between two
kinds of idealism, not unlike the conﬂict between the views of Kant and Hegel.237)
Given this emphasis on the intuitive and the intensional, it is not surprising that,
as Kreisel informed us, G¨odel encouraged his developing and advocating the notion
of informal rigour—at the same time warning him that mathematicians would not
be enamoured of the idea.238 G¨odel was pleased by its successful application to
the intuitionistic notion of lawless sequence, and hoped for a similar success when
applied to the classical notion of set (here Kreisel was more skeptical).239
G¨odel’s contacts with Brouwer and Heyting
As we saw, G¨odel derived signiﬁcant stimulation for his technical work from some
of Brouwer’s lectures and papers. On a more personal level, little love seems to
have been lost between the two. When Brouwer visited Princeton in 1953, G¨odel
invited him once for lunch and once for tea. From G¨odel’s remarks on these visits in
a letter to his mother of October 31, 1953,240 one gathers that G¨odel only did this
because he felt obliged to. Indeed, Kreisel reports that ‘G¨odel was utterly bored by
Brouwer’, in spite of the latter’s ‘probably genuine exuberance’.241 Brouwer, in a
letter to Morse of January 4, 1955,242 sent his best wishes to several people at the
Institute for Advanced Study, but did not include G¨odel. A more positive, though
less direct, connection between Brouwer and G¨odel is that Hendrik Poutsma, the
author of a handbook on English grammar that G¨odel considered authoritative,243
was an uncle of Brouwer’s.
G¨odel ﬁrst met Brouwer’s former student and then foremost collaborator, Arend
Heyting, at the K¨onigsberg conference, where the latter gave a talk on the in-
tuitionistic foundations of mathematics.244 When Heyting, soon after, received
from G¨odel an oﬀprint of the incompleteness paper, he wrote back, ‘Little could
I imagine in K¨onigsberg that your remark that there could be means of proof in
intuitionistic mathematics that do not occur in Hilbert’s system concealed such a
235[G¨odel, *1961/?] and its introduction, [Tieszen, 1998], and [van Atten and Kennedy, 2003].
236See e.g. [van Atten, 2004a], especially ch.6, and [van Atten et al., 2002].
237See [van Atten and Kennedy, 2003], in particular section 3.2.
238Letter of Kreisel to van Atten, January 10, 2005. For the notion of ‘informal rigour’, see
[Kreisel, 1967]; the term, according to the letter referred to, is Kreisel’s.
239[Kreisel, 1987, p.166] and [Troelstra, 1985].
240[Schimanovich-Galidescu, 2002, p.197]
241[Kreisel, 1987, p.146]
242Brouwer Archive, Dept. of Philosophy, Utrecht.
243[Poutsma, 1914–1929]; G¨odel [2003b, p.303] refers to the second edition of vol.2.
244[Heyting, 1931]

502
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
deep background’.245 Like Brouwer, Heyting will not have been surprised by the
incompleteness of formal systems for arithmetic, but Heyting acknowledged more
explicitly the work behind it.
Plans in the early 1930s for a joint book by Heyting and G¨odel, which was to
present an overview of contemporary research in the foundations of mathematics,
never quite materialized.
Eventually, Heyting published his part separately,246
and G¨odel never completed his.247
In December 1957, G¨odel and Heyting met again, when Heyting came to Prince-
ton to give two lectures at the Institute for Advanced Study and one at Princeton
University; the former were on G¨odel’s invitation.248 In his invitation letter, G¨odel
expressed the hope that Heyting would ‘be able to stay in Princeton for some days
in addition to those when you will be giving the lectures so that we may discuss
foundational questions with you’.249 Because of Heyting’s further commitments,
he actually had to leave Princeton immediately. But according to a little diary
that he kept of his American tour,250 on December 9 G¨odel and he did have a
discussion on impredicative deﬁnitions. This may have included a discussion of
the clause for implication in the Proof Interpretation; no further notes on that
conversation seem to exist.251 Perhaps G¨odel also informed Heyting of his result
on Markov’s Principle (see above), but, again, no conﬁrmation has been found that
he did. A third topic they could have discussed, but apparently did not (and which
was not addressed in Heyting’s three lectures), is the remarkably similar views on
the relations between various forms of constructive or intuitionistic mathematics
and classical mathematics, in terms of a scale of degrees of evidence, that both had
arrived at in the almost three decades since their meeting in K¨onigsberg; compare
G¨odel’s lecture for the Mathematical Association of America from 1933252 with
Heyting’s inaugural lecture from 1949.253 The most important diﬀerence between
G¨odel and Heyting is that G¨odel embraces the metaphysical component in clas-
sical mathematics (and logic) while Heyting eschews it. One can only wish that
their renewed acquaintance would have led to, ﬁnally, joint work.
245[G¨odel, 2003b, p.35]
246[Heyting, 1934]
247For the full story, see the many exchanges between Heyting and G¨odel, as well as Parsons’
introduction to their correspondence, in [G¨odel, 2003a].
248The lectures were:
‘Intuitionistic theory of measure and integration’, IAS, December 9;
‘The interpretation of intuitionistic logic’, IAS, December 10; and ‘On the fundamental ideas of
intuitionism’ in the Louis Clark Vanuxem Lectures series, Princeton University, December 11. In
his lecture on intuitionistic logic, Heyting restricts himself to discussing the ‘originally intended
interpretation’, i.e., the Proof Interpretation; in particular, he does not discuss G¨odel’s work.
So far, these lectures have not been published, but their manuscripts are kept in the Heyting
Nachlaß, Rijksarchief Noord-Holland, Haarlem, as items V57B, V57A and V57, respectively.
249G¨odel to Heyting, October 7, 1957 (Heyting Nachlaß, item V57E-b-6).
250Heyting Nachlaß, item V57E-r.
251The diary also mentions an otherwise unspeciﬁed conversation with G¨odel in the entry for
December 6–7 and lunch with G¨odel on December 8.
252[G¨odel, *1933o, p.51, ﬁrst whole paragraph]
253[Heyting, 1949, p.13]; for an English translation of the relevant passage, see [Kennedy and
van Atten, 2004, p.322].

G¨odel’s Logic
503
The last contact between Heyting and G¨odel seems to have been in 1969, when
Heyting inquired if G¨odel were interested, as was rumoured, in publishing his
collected works. If true, Heyting continued, he would very much like to have them
appear in the series Studies in Logic (North-Holland), of which he was one of the
editors.
But G¨odel replied that he actually had no such interest, and that he
considered such a project not very useful, as his important papers were all readily
available.254
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.
Thanks are due to Jouko V¨a¨an¨anen for discussions of the material in part one,
particularly in clarifying some of the technical issues relevant to G¨odel’s argument
in section 1.2.
For comments and discussion, we are grateful to Sam Buss, Wilfrid Hodges, Ro-
man Kossak, Per Martin-L¨of, Wilfried Sieg, G¨oran Sundholm, Robert Tragesser,
Anne Troelstra, and Dirk van Dalen. Two interviews with Georg Kreisel (February
2005), as well as correspondence with him, have been helpful in further developing
our own views on G¨odel.
Many thanks to the staﬀof the Department of Rare Books and Special Col-
lections at the Firestone Library of Princeton University, to Marcia Tucker of the
Library of the Institute for Advanced Study, to the staﬀof the Rijksarchief Noord-
Holland, Haarlem (Heyting Nachlaß), and to Dirk van Dalen and John Kuiper at
the Brouwer Archive, Utrecht, for facilitating our research.
Cheryl Dawson kindly made available to us her transcriptions of G¨odel’s note-
book Max IV and of Arbeitsheft 14.
For permission to quote unpublished material from the sources mentioned, we
thank the Institute for Advanced Study (G¨odel Nachlaß), the Brouwer Archive,
Sue Toledo, and Cheryl Dawson.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Artemov, 2001] S. Artemov. Explicit provability and constructive semantics. Bulletin of Sym-
bolic Logic, 7(1):1–36, 2001.
[Avigad and Feferman, 1999] J. Avigad and S. Feferman. G¨odel’s functional (‘Dialectica’) in-
terpretation. In S. Buss, editor, Handbook of proof theory, pages 337–405. North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1999.
[Badesa, 2004] C. Badesa. The birth of model theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, 2004. L¨owenheim’s theorem in the frame of the theory of relatives, Translated from the
Spanish by Michael Maudsley.
[Barwise, 1977] J. Barwise, editor. Handbook of mathematical logic. North-Holland Publishing
Co., Amsterdam, 1977. With the cooperation of H. J. Keisler, K. Kunen, Y. N. Moschovakis
and A. S. Troelstra, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Vol. 90.
[Barzin and Errera, 1927] M. Barzin and A. Errera. Sur la logique de M. Brouwer. Acad´emie
Royale de Belgique, Bulletin de la classe des sciences, 13:56–71, 1927.
254[G¨odel, 2003b, pp.74–75]

504
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
[Bazhanov, 2003] V.A. Bazhanov. The scholar and the ‘Wolfhound Era’: The fate of Ivan E.
Orlovs ideas in logic, philosophy, and science. Science in context, 16(4):535–550, 2003.
[Becker, 1927] O. Becker. Mathematische Existenz. Untersuchungen zur Logik und Ontologie
mathematischer Ph¨anomene. Jahrbuch f¨ur Philosophie und ph¨anomenologische Forschung,
VIII:439–809, 1927.
[Becker, 1930] O. Becker.
Zur Logik der Modalit¨aten.
Jahrbuch f¨ur Philosophie und
ph¨anomenologische Forschung, 11:497–548, 1930.
[Behmann, 1922] H. Behmann.
Beitr¨age zur Algebra der Logik, insbesondere zum Entschei-
dungsproblem. Mathematische Annalen, 86:419–432, 1922.
[Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983] P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam, editors. Philosophy of mathe-
matics: selected readings (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983.
[Bernays, 1935] P. Bernays. Sur le platonisme en math´ematique. L’enseignement math´ematique,
XXIV(1–2):52–69, 1935. Page reference to English translation ‘On platonism in mathematics’
in [Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983, pp.258–271].
[Bernays, 1967] P. Bernays. Hilbert, David. In P. Edwards, editor, The encyclopedia of philos-
ophy, volume 3, pages 496–504. Macmillan and The Free Press, New York, 1967.
[Blass, 1998] A. Blass. Some semantical aspects of linear logic. J. Interest Group in Pure and
Applied Logic, 5:115–126, 1998.
[Bolzano, 1992] B. Bolzano. Bernard Bolzano—Gesamtausgabe. Reihe I. Schriften. Band 13.
Teil 3. Friedrich Frommann Verlag G¨unther Holzboog GmbH & Co., Stuttgart, 1992. Wis-
senschaftslehre. §§349–391. [Theory of science. Sections 349–391], Edited and with an intro-
duction by Jan Berg.
[Brouwer, 1907] L.E.J. Brouwer. Over de grondslagen der wiskunde. PhD thesis, University of
Amsterdam, 1907. Page references to English translation ‘On the foundations of mathematics’
[Brouwer, 1975, pp.13–101].
[Brouwer, 1918] L.E.J. Brouwer. Begr¨undung der Mengenlehre unabh¨angig vom logischen Satz
vom ausgeschlossenen Dritten. Erster Teil, Allgemeine Mengenlehre. KNAW Verhandelingen,
5:1–43, 1918. Also in [Brouwer, 1975, pp.150–190].
[Brouwer, 1924] L.E.J. Brouwer. Bewijs dat iedere volle functie gelijkmatig continu is. KNAW
Verslagen, 33:189–193, 1924. English translation ‘Proof that every full function is uniformly
continuous’ [Mancosu, 1998, pp.36–39].
[Brouwer, 1927] L.E.J. Brouwer.
¨Uber Deﬁnitionsbereiche von Funktionen.
Mathematische
Annalen, 97:60–75, 1927. English translation [van Heijenoort, 1967, pp.457–463].
[Brouwer, 1928] L.E.J. Brouwer. Intuitionistische Betrachtungen ¨uber den Formalismus. KNAW
Proceedings, 31:374–379, 1928. Also [Brouwer, 1975, pp.409–414]. References are to the En-
glish translation [Mancosu, 1998, pp.40–44].
[Brouwer, 1929] L.E.J. Brouwer.
Mathematik, Wissenschaft und Sprache.
Monatshefte f¨ur
Mathematik und Physik, 36:153–164, 1929. Also [Brouwer, 1975, pp.417–428]. English trans-
lation [Mancosu, 1998, pp.45–53].
[Brouwer, 1930] L.E.J. Brouwer.
Die Struktur des Kontinuums.
Komitee zur Veranstaltung
von Gastvortr¨agen ausl¨andischer Gelehrter der exakten Wissenschaften, Wien, 1930. Also
[Brouwer, 1975, pp.429–440]. English translation [Mancosu, 1998, pp.54–63].
[Brouwer, 1952] L.E.J. Brouwer. Historical background, principles and methods of intuitionism.
South African journal of science, 49:139–146, 1952. Quoted from [Brouwer, 1975, pp.508–515].
[Brouwer, 1954] L.E.J. Brouwer. Points and spaces. Canadian journal of mathematics, 6:1–17,
1954. Cited from [Brouwer, 1975, pp.522–538].
[Brouwer, 1955] L.E.J. Brouwer. The eﬀect of intuitionism on classical algebra of logic. Proceed-
ings of the Royal Irish Academy, 57:113–116, 1955. Quoted from [Brouwer, 1975, pp.551–554].
[Brouwer, 1975] L.E.J. Brouwer. Collected works I. Philosophy and foundations of mathematics
(ed. A. Heyting). North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Buss, 1994] S.R. Buss.
On G¨odel’s theorems on lengths of proofs. I. Number of lines and
speedup for arithmetics. J. Symbolic Logic, 59(3):737–756, 1994.
[Church, 1928] A. Church. On the law of the excluded middle. Bulletin of the American Math-
ematical Society, 34:75–78, 1928.
[Cohen, 1963] P. Cohen. The independence of the continuum hypothesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A., 50:1143–1148, 1963.
[Craig, 1965] W. Craig. Satisfaction for n-th order languages deﬁned in n-th order languages.
J. Symbolic Logic, 30:13–25, 1965.

G¨odel’s Logic
505
[Davis, 2004] M. Davis, editor. The undecidable. Dover Publications Inc., Mineola, NY, 2004.
Basic papers on undecidable propositions, unsolvable problems and computable functions,
Corrected reprint of the 1965 original [Raven Press, Hewlett, NY; MR0189996].
[Dawson, 1991] J.W. Dawson, Jr.
The reception of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems [see
MR0964491 (89m:01068)]. In Perspectives on the history of mathematical logic, pages 84–100.
Birkh¨auser Boston, Boston, MA, 1991.
[Dawson, 1997] J.W. Dawson, Jr. Logical dilemmas. A K Peters Ltd., Wellesley, MA, 1997. The
life and work of Kurt G¨odel.
[de Swart, 1977a] H.C.M. de Swart. Another intuitionistic completeness proof. Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, 41(3):644–662, 1977.
[de Swart, 1977b] H.C.M. de Swart. An intuitionistically plausible interpretation of intuitionistic
logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 42(4):564–578, 1977.
[Dehornoy, 2004] P. Dehornoy. Progr`es r´ecents sur l’hypoth`ese du continu (d’apr`es Woodin).
Ast´erisque, (294):viii, 147–172, 2004.
[Detlefsen, 1979] M. Detlefsen.
On interpreting G¨odel’s second theorem.
J. Philos. Logic,
8(3):297–313, 1979.
[Doˇsen, 1992] K. Doˇsen. The ﬁrst axiomatization of relevant logic. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 21:339–356, 1992.
[Dreben et al., 1963] B. Dreben, P. Andrews, and S. Aanderaa. False lemmas in Herbrand. Bull.
Amer. Math. Soc., 69:699–706, 1963.
[Dummett, 2000] M. Dummett. Elements of intuitionism (2nd, rev. edition). Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 2000.
[Ehrenfeucht and Mycielski, 1971] A. Ehrenfeucht and J. Mycielski.
Abbreviating proofs by
adding new axioms. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 77:366–367, 1971.
[Ewald, 1996] W. Ewald, editor. From Kant to Hilbert: a source book in the foundations of
mathematics. Vol. I, II. Oxford Science Publications. The Clarendon Press Oxford University
Press, New York, 1996.
[Feferman, 1960/1961] S. Feferman. Arithmetization of metamathematics in a general setting.
Fund. Math., 49:35–92, 1960/1961.
[Feferman, 1962] S. Feferman. Transﬁnite recursive progressions of axiomatic theories. J. Sym-
bolic Logic, 27:259–316, 1962.
[Feferman, 1998] S. Feferman. G¨odel’s Dialectica Interpretation and its two-way stretch. In In
the light of logic, pages 209–225. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998. Slightly modiﬁed
and updated version of the paper of the same title published in G. Gottlob et al., eds.,
Computational logic and proof theory, Lecture notes in computer science 713, Heidelberg:
Springer 1993, pp.23–40.
[Fitting, 1969] M. Fitting. Intuitionistic logic, model theory, and forcing. North-Holland, Am-
sterdam, 1969.
[Gentzen, 1967] G. Gentzen. Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie. Libelli, Band
185. Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, 1967.
[Gentzen, 1969] G. Gentzen. The collected papers of Gerhard Gentzen. Edited by M. E. Sz-
abo. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland Publishing Co.,
Amsterdam, 1969.
[Glivenko, 1929] V. Glivenko.
Sur quelques points de la logique de M. Brouwer.
Acad´emie
Royale de Belgique, Bulletin de la classe des sciences, 5(15):183–188, 1929.
[G¨odel, 1931] K. G¨odel.
¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I.
Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 38:173–198, 1931.
Page
references are to [G¨odel, 1986, pp.144–195].
[G¨odel, 1932] K. G¨odel. Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalk¨ul. Anzeiger der Akademie der
Wissenschaften in Wien, 69:65–66, 1932. Also in [G¨odel, 1986, pp.222–225].
[G¨odel, 1932f] K. G¨odel. Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalk¨ul. Zentralblatt f¨ur Mathematik
und ihre Grenzgebiete, 2:321–322, 1932. Also in [G¨odel, 1986, pp.246–247].
[G¨odel, 1933] K. G¨odel. [On Parry’s axioms]. Ergebnisse eines mathematischen Kolloquiums,
4:6, 1933. Also in [G¨odel, 1986, pp.266–267].
[G¨odel, 1933e] K. G¨odel. Zur intuitionistischen Arithmetik und Zahlentheorie. Ergebnisse eines
mathematischen Kolloquiums, 4:34–38, 1933. Page references are to [G¨odel, 1986, pp.286–295].
[G¨odel, 1933f] K. G¨odel. Eine Interpretation des intuitionistischen Aussagenkalk¨uls. Ergebnisse
eines mathematischen Kolloquiums, 4:39–40, 1933. Also in [G¨odel, 1986, pp.300–303].

506
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
[G¨odel, 1933n] K. G¨odel. Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalk¨ul. Ergebnisse eines mathemati-
schen Kolloquiums, 4:40, 1933. Slightly modiﬁed reprint of [G¨odel, 1932].
[G¨odel, *1933o] K. G¨odel. The present situation in the foundations of mathematics. Lecture in
Cambridge, MA (published in [G¨odel, 1995, pp.45–53]), 1933.
[G¨odel, *1938a] K. G¨odel. Vortrag bei Zilsel. Lecture in Vienna (published in [G¨odel, 1995,
pp.86–113]), 1938.
[G¨odel, *1941] K. G¨odel. In what sense is intuitionistic logic constructive?
Lecture at Yale
(published in [G¨odel, 1995, pp.189–200]), 1941.
[G¨odel, *1946] K. G¨odel. Some observations about the relationship between theory of relativity
and Kantian philosophy. Manuscript (published in [G¨odel, 1995, pp.230–259]), 1946.
[G¨odel, 1958] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber eine bisher noch nicht benutzte Erweiterung des ﬁniten Stand-
punktes. Dialectica, 12:280–287, 1958. References are to the reprint [G¨odel, 1990, pp.241–251].
[G¨odel, *1961/?] K. G¨odel. The modern development of the foundations of mathematics in the
light of philosophy. Manuscript (published in [G¨odel, 1995, pp.374–387]), 1961.
[G¨odel, 1972] K. G¨odel. On an extension of ﬁnitary mathematics which has not yet been used.
Translation and revision of [G¨odel, 1958], meant for publication in Dialectica, eventually
published in [G¨odel, 1990, pp.271–280], 1972.
[G¨odel, 1986] K. G¨odel. Collected Works. I: Publications 1929–1936. (eds. S. Feferman et al.).
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1986.
[G¨odel, 1990] K. G¨odel. Collected Works. II: Publications 1938–1974. (eds. S. Feferman et al.).
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1990.
[G¨odel, 1995] K. G¨odel. Collected Works. III: Unpublished essays and lectures. (eds. S. Feferman
et al.). Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1995.
[G¨odel, 2003a] K. G¨odel. Collected Works. IV: Correspondence A-G. (eds. S. Feferman et al.).
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003.
[G¨odel, 2003b] K. G¨odel. Collected Works. V: Correspondence H-Z. (eds. S. Feferman et al.).
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003.
[Herbrand, 1931] J. Herbrand. Sur la non-contradiction de l’arithm´etique. Journal f¨ur die reine
und angewandte Mathematik, 166:1–8, 1931.
Also [Herbrand, 1968, pp.221–232]. English
translation [van Heijenoort, 1967, pp.618–628].
[Herbrand, 1968] J. Herbrand. ´Ecrits logiques (ed. J. van Heijenoort). Presses Unversitaires de
France, Paris, 1968.
[Herbrand, 1971] J. Herbrand. Logical writings (ed. W. Goldfarb). Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1971.
[Hesseling, 2003] D. Hesseling. Gnomes in the fog. Birkh¨auser, Basel, 2003.
[Heyting, 1930a] A. Heyting. Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik I. Sitzungsberich-
te der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, pages 42–56, 1930. English translation
[Mancosu, 1998, pp.311–327].
[Heyting, 1930b] A. Heyting. Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik II. Sitzungsbe-
richte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, pages 57–71, 1930.
[Heyting, 1931] A. Heyting. Die intuitionistische Grundlegung der Mathematik. Erkenntnis,
2:106–115, 1931. Quoted from English translation [Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983, pp.52–61].
[Heyting, 1934] A. Heyting. Mathematische Grundlagenforschung, Intuitionismus, Beweistheo-
rie. Springer, Berlin, 1934.
[Heyting, 1949] A. Heyting. Spanningen in de wiskunde. Noordhoﬀ, Groningen, 1949. Inaugural
lecture, University of Amsterdam.
[Heyting, 1956] A. Heyting. Intuitionism, an introduction. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1956.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1972] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann.
Grundz¨uge der theoretischen
Logik. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1972. Sechste Auﬂage, Die Grundlehren der mathematischen
Wissenschaften, Band 27.
[Hilbert, 1922] D. Hilbert. Neubegr¨undung der Mathematik: Erste Mitteilung. Abhandlungen
aus dem Seminar der Hamburgischen Universit¨at, 1:157–177, 1922.
[Hilbert, 1925] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber das Unendliche. Mathematische Annalen, 95:161–190, 1925.
[Hilbert, 1965] D. Hilbert.
Gesammelte Abhandlungen. Dritter Band. Analysis, Grundlagen
der Mathematik, Physik, Verschiedenes, nebst einer Lebensgeschichte. Chelsea Publishing
Co., New York, 1965.
[Kaye, 1991] R. Kaye. Models of Peano arithmetic, volume 15 of Oxford Logic Guides. The
Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, New York, 1991. Oxford Science Publications.

G¨odel’s Logic
507
[Kennedy and van Atten, 2004] J. Kennedy and M. van Atten.
G¨odel’s modernism: on set-
theoretic incompleteness. Graduate Faculty Philosophy Journal, 25(2):289–349, 2004. Erra-
tum in 26(1).
[Kolmogorov, 1925] A.N. Kolmogorov. O principe tertium non datur. Matematicheskii Sbornik,
32:646–667, 1925. Quoted from English translation ‘On the principle of excluded middle’ [van
Heijenoort, 1967, pp.416–437].
[Kolmogorov, 1932] A.N. Kolmogorov. Zur Deutung der intuitionistischen Logik. Mathematis-
che Zeitschrift, 35:58–65, 1932. Quoted from English translation [Mancosu, 1998, pp.328–334].
[Kreisel, 1958] G. Kreisel. Non-derivability of ¬(x)A(x) →(∃x)¬A(x), A primitive recursive, in
intuitionistic formal systems (abstract). Journal of Symbolic Logic, 23(4):456–457, 1958.
[Kreisel, 1962] G. Kreisel. On weak completeness of intuitionistic predicate logic. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 27(2):139–158, 1962.
[Kreisel, 1967] G. Kreisel.
Informal rigour and completeness proofs.
In I. Lakatos, editor,
Problems in the philosophy of mathematics, pages 138–186. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1967.
[Kreisel, 1971] G. Kreisel. Book review. The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen. Ed. M.E.
Szabo. Journal of Philosophy, 68(8):238–265, 1971.
[Kreisel, 1980] G. Kreisel. Kurt G¨odel. 28 April 1906–14 January 1978. Biographical Memoirs
of Fellows of the Royal Society, pages 149–224, 1980.
[Kreisel, 1987] G. Kreisel. G¨odel’s excursions into intuitionistic logic. In P. Weingartner and
L. Schmetterer, editors, G¨odel remembered, pages 67–179. Bibliopolis, Napoli, 1987.
[Kripke, 1965] S. Kripke.
Semantical analysis of intuitionistic logic I.
In M.A.E. Dummett
and J.N. Crossley, editors, Formal systems and recursive functions, pages pp.92–130. North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
[Leibniz, 1880] G.W. Leibniz. [Discours de m´etaphysique]. In C.I. Gerhardt, editor, Die phi-
losophischen Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz vol. IV, pages 427–463. Weidmann,
Berlin, 1880. English translation in G.W. Leibniz, Philosophical papers and letters (ed. L.E.
Loemker), 2nd ed., D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1969, pp.303–330.
[Lewis and Langford, 1932] C.I. Lewis and C.H. Langford. Symbolic logic. Century, New York,
1932.
[Lindstr¨om, 1969] P. Lindstr¨om. On extensions of elementary logic. Theoria, 35:1–11, 1969.
[Lopez-Escobar and Veldman, 1975] E. Lopez-Escobar and W. Veldman.
Intuitionistic com-
pleteness of a restricted second-order logic. In A. Dold and B. Eckmann, editors, Proof theory
symposion. Kiel 1974, pages 198–232. Springer, Berlin, 1975.
[L¨owenheim, 1915] L. L¨owenheim. ¨Uber M¨oglichkeiten im Relativkalk¨ul. Mathematische An-
nalen, 76:447–470, 1915.
[Mal′cev, 1971] A. I. Mal′cev.
The metamathematics of algebraic systems. Collected papers:
1936–1967. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1971. Translated, edited, and pro-
vided with supplementary notes by Benjamin Franklin Wells, III, Studies in Logic and the
Foundations of Mathematics, Vol. 66.
[Mancosu, 1998] P. Mancosu. From Brouwer to Hilbert. The debate on the foundations of math-
ematics in the 1920s. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998.
[Mancosu, 1999] P. Mancosu. Between Vienna and Berlin: the immediate reception of G¨odel’s
incompleteness theorems. History and Philosophy of Logic, 20:33–45, 1999.
[Mancosu, 2002] P. Mancosu.
On the constructivity of proofs. A debate among Behmann,
Bernays, G¨odel and Kaufmann. In W. Sieg, R. Sommer, and C. Talcott, editors, Reﬂections
on the foundations of mathematics: Essays in honor of Solomon Feferman, pages 349–371.
Association for Symbolic Logic, Urbana, 2002.
[Mancosu, 2004] P. Mancosu. Kurt G¨odel, Collected Works, volumes IV and V. Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, 45:109–125, 2004.
[McCarty, 1994] D.C. McCarty. On Theorems of G¨odel and Kreisel: completeness and Markov’s
Principle. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 35(1):99–107, 1994.
[McKinsey and Tarski, 1948] J.C.C. McKinsey and A. Tarski. Some theorems about the sen-
tential calculi of Lewis and Heyting. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 13(1):1–15, 1948.
[Mostowski, 1966] A. Mostowski. Thirty years of foundational studies. Lectures on the develop-
ment of mathematical logic and the study of the foundations of mathematics in 1930–1964.
Acta Philosophica Fennica, Fasc. XVII. Barnes & Noble, Inc., New York, 1966.
[Mostowski, 1982] A. Mostowski. Sentences undecidable in formalized arithmetic. Greenwood
Press, Westport, CT, 1982 (ﬁrst edition 1952).

508
Mark van Atten and Juliette Kennedy
[Parikh, 1971] R. Parikh. Existence and feasibility in arithmetic. J. Symbolic Logic, 36:494–508,
1971.
[Peckhaus, 2002] V. Peckhaus. Oskar Beckers Stellung in der Geschichte der Modallogik. In
V. Peckhaus, ed., Die Philosophie und die Wissenschaften. Zum Werk Oskar Beckers, pages
161–184. Wilhelm Fink Verlag, M¨unchen, 2002.
[Poutsma, 1914–1929] H. Poutsma.
A grammar of late modern English, for the use of con-
tinental, especially Dutch, students (two parts, in ﬁve volumes; two editions). Noordhoﬀ,
Groningen, 1914–1929.
[Rogers, 1967] H. Rogers, Jr.
Theory of recursive functions and eﬀective computability.
McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1967.
[Rosser, 1936] J.B. Rosser.
Extensions of some theorems of G¨odel and Church.
Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 1(3):87–91, 1936.
[Schimanovich-Galidescu, 2002] M.E. Schimanovich-Galidescu. Archivmaterial zu G¨odel’s Wie-
ner Zeit, 1924–1940. In Kurt G¨odel. Wahrheit und Beweisbarkeit. Band 1: Dokumente und
historische Analysen, pages 135–147. ¨obv & hpt, Wien, 2002.
[Sieg, 1988] W. Sieg. Hilbert’s Program sixty years later. J. Symbolic Logic, 53(2):338–348,
1988.
[Sieg, 1990] W. Sieg. Relative consistency and accessible domains.
Synthese, 84(2):259–297,
1990.
[Sieg, 1999] W. Sieg. Hilbert’s programs: 1917–1922. Bull. Symbolic Logic, 5(1):1–44, 1999.
[Simpson, 1985] S. G. Simpson. Reverse mathematics. In Recursion theory (Ithaca, N.Y., 1982),
volume 42 of Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., pages 461–471. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
1985.
[Skolem, 1920] T. Skolem. Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen ¨uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit oder
Beweisbarkeit mathematischer S¨atze nebst einem Theoreme ¨uber dichte Mengen. Skrifter utgit
av Videnskappsselskapet i Kristiania, 1920.
[Skolem, 1923] T. Skolem. Einige Bemerkungen zur axiomatischen Begr¨undung der Mengenleh-
re. Matematikerkongressen i Helsingfors 4-7 Juli 1922, Den femte skandinaviska matematik-
erkongressen, Redog¨orelse, 1923.
[Skolem, 1928] T. Skolem. ¨Uber die mathematische Logik. Norsk Matematisk Tidskrift, 10:125–
142, 1928.
[Skolem, 1970] T. Skolem. Selected works in logic. Edited by Jens Erik Fenstad. Universitets-
forlaget, Oslo, 1970.
[Statman, 1981] R. Statman. Speed-up by theories with inﬁnite models. Proc. Amer. Math.
Soc., 81(3):465–469, 1981.
[Sundholm and van Atten, in print] G. Sundholm and M. van Atten. The proper explanation
of intuitionistic logic: on Brouwer’s demonstration of the Bar Theorem. In M. van Atten et
al., eds. One hundred years of Intuitionism (1907–2007), pages 60–77. Birkh¨auser, Basel, in
print.
[Tait, 2001] W.W. Tait. G¨odels unpublished papers on foundations of mathematics. Philosophia
Mathematica, 9:87–126, 2001.
[Tait, 2005] W.W. Tait. The provenance of pure reason. Logic and Computation in Philosophy.
Oxford University Press, New York, 2005. Essays in the philosophy of mathematics and its
history.
[Tieszen, 1998] R. Tieszen.
Kurt G¨odel’s path from the incompleteness theorems (1931) to
phenomenology (1961). Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 4(2):181–203, 1998.
[Toledo, unpublished] S. Toledo. [Notes on conversations with G¨odel, 1972–1975], unpublished.
[Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988] A.S. Troelstra and D. van Dalen.
Constructivism in Mathe-
matics (2 vols.). North–Holland, Amsterdam, 1988.
[Troelstra, 1977] A.S. Troelstra.
Choice sequences. A chapter of intuitionistic mathematics.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1977.
[Troelstra, 1985] A.S. Troelstra. Choice sequences and informal rigour. Synthese, 62:217–227,
1985.
[Turing, 1939] A.M. Turing. Systems of logic based on ordinals. Proceedings of the LMS, series
2, 45:161–228, 1939.
[van Atten, 2004a] M. van Atten. On Brouwer. Wadsworth, Belmont, CA, 2004.
[van Atten, 2004b] M. van Atten. Review of D.E. Hesseling, ‘Gnomes in the fog. The reception
of Brouwer’s intuitionism in the 1920s’. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 10(3):423–427, 2004.

G¨odel’s Logic
509
[van Atten, 2005] M. van Atten. On G¨odel’s awareness of Skolem’s Helsinki lecture. History
and Philosophy of Logic, 2005.
[van Atten and Kennedy, 2003] M. van Atten and J. Kennedy. On the philosophical develop-
ment of Kurt G¨odel. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 9(4):425–476, 2003.
[van Atten and van Dalen, 2002] M. van Atten and D. van Dalen. Arguments for the continuity
principle. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 8(3):329–347, 2002.
[van Atten et al., 2002] M. van Atten, D. van Dalen, and R. Tieszen.
Brouwer and Weyl:
the phenomenology and mathematics of the intuitive continuum. Philosophia Mathematica,
10(3):203–226, 2002.
[van Dalen, 1974] D. van Dalen.
Review of Herbrand:
Logical writings (ed. W. Goldfarb).
Journal of Philosophy, 71(15):544–549, 1974.
[van Dalen, 2001] D. van Dalen. L.E.J. Brouwer 1881–1966. Een biograﬁe. Het heldere licht
van de wiskunde. Bert Bakker, Amsterdam, 2001.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, editor. From Frege to G¨odel: A sourcebook in mathe-
matical logic, 1879–1931. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1967.
[Veldman, 1976] W. Veldman. An intuitionistic completeness theorem for intuitionistic predicate
logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 41(1):159–166, 1976.
[Vopˇenka, 1965] P. Vopˇenka. The limits of sheaves and applications on constructions of models.
Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences, s´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astrono-
miques et Physiques, 13:189–192, 1965.
[Wang, 1957] H. Wang. The axiomatization of arithmetic. J. Symb. Logic, 22:145–158, 1957.
[Wang, 1974] H. Wang. From mathematics to philosophy. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London,
1974.
[Wang, 1981] H. Wang. Popular lectures on mathematical logic. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New
York, 1981.
[Wang, 1987] H. Wang. Reﬂections on Kurt G¨odel. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1987.
[Wang, 1996] H. Wang. A logical journey. From G¨odel to philosophy. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1996.
[Wilkie and Paris, 1987] A.J.. Wilkie and J.B. Paris. On the scheme of induction for bounded
arithmetic formulas. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 35(3):261–302, 1987.
[Yourgrau, 2005] P. Yourgrau. A world without time. The forgotten legacy of G¨odel and Ein-
stein. Basic Books, New York, 2005.
[Zach, Fall 2003] R. Zach. Hilbert’s program. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Ency-
clopedia of Philosophy. Fall 2003.


TARSKI’S LOGIC
Keith Simmons
1
INTRODUCTION
Alfred Tarski was born in Warsaw on January 14th 1902, under the family name of
Tajtelbaum.1 He studied at the University of Warsaw from 1918 to 1924, when he
received his PhD in mathematics. His doctoral dissertation O wyrazie pierwotnym
logistyki (On the primitive term of logistic) was written under the supervision of S.
Le´sniewski.2 Appointed Docent in 1926 and later Adjunct Professor, Tarski taught
at the University of Warsaw until 1939. During that year, Tarski visited the US
for a lecture tour, but was prevented from returning to Poland by the outbreak of
war. Between 1939 and 1942 Tarski was at Harvard University, the City College of
New York, and the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. In 1942, he was ap-
pointed lecturer in mathematics at the University of California at Berkeley, where
he remained for the rest of his career. He became professor of mathematics there in
1946, when his family joined him from Poland. In 1958, Tarski founded the Group
in Logic and the Methodology of Science. He retired in 1968, though he taught for
several more years, and continued his research throughout his retirement. Tarski
died in Berkeley on October 27th 1983.
Tarski’s work has had an enormous inﬂuence on the development of logic and
mathematics over the last eighty years. He broke new ground with his work on
metamathematics and semantics. His methods and results in those ﬁelds and many
others — including algebra, geometry, and set theory — have become part of the
fabric of modern logic and mathematics. The very divisions between these various
ﬁelds appear somewhat artiﬁcial in the light of Tarski’s work.
I have attempted to make this chapter accessible to the non-mathematician
who is familiar with basic logic. I have focussed more on Tarski’s work in logic,
semantics and metamathematics, and less on Tarski’s more purely mathematical
work. Nevertheless, I hope that the reader will come away with a sense of Tarski’s
achievements in each of the many areas to which he contributed. My aim has been
to make this chapter as self-contained as possible. For the reader who wants to
follow out the formal details of a deﬁnition or a proof, I have endeavored to provide
1The family name Tarski was adopted in 1924. There is disagreement in the literature about
Tarski’s birthdate. I have followed Mostowski [Tarski, 1967] and the Encyclopedia Britannica,
but other sources given the year of his birth as 1901 (see, for example, [Hodges, 1986]).
2The dissertation was submitted in 1923, and the essential part of it was published as the
paper [Tarski, 1923]. An English translation of the paper appears in [Tarski, 1983a].
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

512
Keith Simmons
explanations in footnotes. And where the formal material goes beyond the scope
of this chapter, I have provided further references. I quote often from Tarski, since
it is very hard to improve upon Tarski’s own words — no-one who is familiar with
Tarski’s work can fail to be struck by the clarity of his writing. Works by Tarski
and others are referred to by the year of publication.3 Throughout I have tried to
provide some historical context for Tarski’s work and its signiﬁcance.
The chapter is divided into the following sections: (2) Metamathematics; (3)
Formal deﬁnability; (4) Semantics: deﬁnability, truth, consequence, model theory;
(5) Decidability and undecidability; (6) More on logic and algebra; (7) More on
geometry; (8) Set theory; (9) Concluding remarks.
2
METAMATHEMATICS
We turn ﬁrst to what Tarski initially called the methodology of the deductive sci-
ences — though he later preferred the label “metalogic and metamathematics”,4
and often just used the term “metamathematics”. Its objects of study are theories
of a certain kind — formalized deductive theories. They constitute the subject
matter of metamathematics just as
“spatial entities constitute the subject matter of geometry and animals
that of zoology” [Tarski, 1930d, p. 60].5
One task of metamathematics is to construct its objects of study. The construction
of formalized deductive theories proceeds in accordance with the deductive method.
When we study or advance any science, Tarski says,
“a method would be ideal, if it permitted us to explain the meaning
of every expression occurring in this science and to justify each of its
assertions” [Tarski, 1941a, p. 117]
Tarski points out that this ideal can never be realized — since we must use ex-
pressions to explain the meaning of an expression, we have to take some terms as
primitive, on pain of an inﬁnite regress.
“When we set out to construct a given discipline, we distinguish, ﬁrst
of all, a certain small group of expressions of this discipline that seems
to us to be immediately understandable; the expressions of this group
we call primitive terms or undeﬁned terms.” (p. 118)
3To reduce the number of footnotes, I refer to Tarski’s work parenthetically in the main text.
When the work of Tarski’s from which I am quoting is clear from the context, I provide only a
page number. For a full bibliography of Tarski, including all his papers, abstracts, monographs,
exercises and problems, contributions to discussions, reviews, publications as editor, project
reports and letters, see [Givant, 1986].
4See [Tarski, 1941a, p. 140].
5Compare this remark in [Tarski, 1941a]: “The methodology of the deductive sciences became
a general science of deductive sciences in an analogous sense as arithmetic is the science of
numbers and geometry is the science of geometrical conﬁgurations.” (p. 138)

Tarski’s Logic
513
All other expressions are deﬁned via the primitive terms. And we proceed similarly
with the asserted statements of the theory:
“Some of these statements which to us have the appearance of evidence
are chosen as the so-called primitive statements or axioms. . . ” (p. 118)
And further:
“we agree to accept any other statement as true only if we have suc-
ceeded in establishing its validity, and to use, while doing so, nothing
but axioms, deﬁnitions and such statements of the discipline the valid-
ity of which has been established previously.” (p. 118)
The method of constructing a theory in accordance with these principles is the
deductive method,6 and the theory so constructed is a formalized deductive theory.7
So one task of metamathematics is the construction of formalized deductive
theories via the deductive method. Now, as a result of the application of this
method “deductive theories acquire certain interesting and important features”
[Tarski, 1941a, p. 120]. It is a further task of metamathematics to uncover these
features.
This further task can be carried out at two distinct levels. One can investigate
speciﬁc deductive theories. In the 1920s, Tarski carried out metamathematical
investigations into a number of deductive theories - for example, the sentential
calculus (see [Tarski, 1930c]), the algebra of logic, the arithmetic of real numbers,
the geometry of straight lines, the theory of order, and the theory of groups.8
Tarski writes in [Tarski, 1930d]:
6Tarski points out that logic occupies a special position in regard to the deductive method.
In using the method to construct any other discipline or theory, we cannot but presuppose logic.
In Tarski’s terminology, given a target discipline, logic will be a discipline preceding the given
discipline. And it may be convenient to presuppose other disciplines too. Tarski writes:
“Thus logic itself does not presuppose any preceding discipline; in the construction
of arithmetic as a special mathematical discipline logic is presupposed as the only
preceding discipline; on the other hand, in the case of geometry it is expedient
— though not unavoidable — to presuppose not only logic but also arithmetic.”
[Tarski, 1941a, p. 119]
So, whenever we apply the deductive method, we must be sure to enumerate the preceding
disciplines.
7The phrase ‘formalized deductive discipline’ appears in the early papers [Tarski, 1930b] and
[Tarski, 1930d]. In [Tarski, 1930d], Tarski writes:
“Naturally not all deductive systems are presented in a form suitable for objects of
scientiﬁc investigation. Those, for example, are not suitable which do not rest on a
deﬁnite logical basis, have no precise rules of inference, and the theorems of which
are formulated in the usually ambiguous and inexact terms of colloquial language
— in a word those which are not formalized.” (p. 60)
8See [Tarski, 1983a, p. 205, fn. 2], where Tarski mentions that he investigated these last ﬁve
theories during 1926–8.

514
Keith Simmons
“Strictly speaking metamathematics is not to be regarded as a single
theory. For the purpose of investigating each deductive discipline a
special metadiscipline should be constructed.” (p. 60)
But one can also proceed at a more abstract level, and explore concepts that
are common to all these special metadisciplines. In [30d], Tarski proceeds at this
higher level of generality, and we will start with Tarski’s study of general deductive
systems.
2.1
General deductive systems
In his paper “Fundamental Concepts of the Methodology of the Deductive Sci-
ences” [Tarski, 1930d], Tarski’s aim is
“to make precise the meaning of a series of important metamathemat-
ical concepts which are common to the special metadisciplines, and to
establish the fundamental properties of these concepts.” (p. 60, original
emphases)
Tarski starts out with the fundamental concept of consequence, and provides the
ﬁrst rigorous axiomatic characterization of this notion. Tarski goes on to deﬁne
a number of further concepts, including logical equivalence, axiomatizability, inde-
pendence, consistency, and completeness. Tarski thus provided the ﬁrst precise,
systematic treatment of these basic metamathematical concepts.
The axiomatic system (or theory) that Tarski presents in [Tarski, 1930d] con-
tains just two primitive concepts, sentence and consequence. Sentences are certain
inscriptions of a well-deﬁned form. And a deductive discipline is a set of (mean-
ingful) sentences. Let S be the set of all meaningful sentences of a given language,
and let A be an arbitrary set of sentences from S that compose a particular deduc-
tive discipline. ‘Cn(A)’ denotes the set of consequences of set A, those sentences
derived from A via rules of inference. The schema of a deﬁnition of consequence
can be given as follows: the set of all consequences of the set A is the intersec-
tion of all sets which contain the set A and are closed under the given rules of
inference. But we are working at too high a level of generality to give an exact
deﬁnition of consequence; it is the task of a speciﬁc metadiscipline to establish
rules of inference, and thereby an exact deﬁnition of consequence. Instead, we are
to regard the notion of consequence as primitive, and characterized only through
the axioms. From just these two primitive concepts, sentence and consequence,
“almost all basic concepts of metamathematics can be deﬁned; on the
basis of the given axiom system various fundamental properties of these
concepts can be established.” (p. 69)
Tarski presents an axiom system composed of four axioms which express basic
properties of the primitive concepts and “are satisﬁed in all known formalized
disciplines” (p. 63). The axioms are as follows

Tarski’s Logic
515
Axiom 1.
¯¯S ≤ℵ0 (where “S” is the cardinality of the set S)
Axiom 2.
If A ⊆S, then A ⊆Cn(A) ⊆S.
Axiom 3.
If A ⊆S, then Cn(Cn(A)) = Cn(A).
Axiom 4.
If A ⊆S, then Cn(A) = ∪{Cn(X) : X is a ﬁnite subset of A}.
Axiom 1, Tarski says, “scarcely requires comment” (p. 63), though he does ac-
knowledge the challenge that S cannot be denumerably inﬁnite if sentences are
regarded as physical inscriptions.9 Axiom 2 tells us that consequences of A are
sentences, and Axiom 3 tells us that consequences of consequences of A are con-
sequences of A. According to Axiom 4, any consequence of A is a consequence of
a ﬁnite subset of A — and this respects the idea that “in concrete disciplines” (p.
64) rules of inference operate on a ﬁnite number of sentences.
Tarski goes on to single out “an especially important category of sets of sentences
. . . namely, the deductive systems.” A deductive system, or “closed system” or
“simply a ‘system’” (p. 70), is a set of sentences that is closed under consequence
— that is, it contains all of its consequences. Tarski writes:
“Deductive systems are, so to speak, organic units which form the
subject matter of metamathematical investigations. Various important
notions, like consistency, completeness, and axiomatizability, which we
shall encounter in the sequel, are theoretically applicable to any sets
of sentences, but in practice are applied chieﬂy to systems.” (p. 70)
The bulk of [Tarski, 1930d] is a detailed examination of the properties of (de-
ductive) systems. Tarski deﬁnes a number of fundamental metamathematical con-
cepts. Two sets of sentences are logically equivalent if they have all their con-
sequences in common (p. 72). An axiom system of a set of sentences is a ﬁnite
set which is equivalent to that set, and a set of sentences which has at least one
axiom system is called axiomatizable (p. 72). A set of sentences is independent
if it is not equivalent to any of its proper subsets (p. 83). A basis of the set A
is an independent set of sentences which is equivalent to the set A (p. 88). A
set of sentences is consistent if it is not equivalent to the set of all meaningful
sentences (p. 90).10 The decision domain of a set A of sentences is the set of all
9Of the assumption that S is denumerably inﬁnite, Tarski writes:
“. . . it may be noted here that I personally regard such an assumption as quite
sensible, and that it appears to me even to be useful from a metamathematical
standpoint to replace the inequality sign by the equality sign in Ax. 1.” [Tarski,
1930d, p. 64]
Throughout his career, Tarski never showed any ﬁnitistic qualms.
10Tarski points out that his deﬁnition of consistency departs from the usual one, according
to which a set of sentences is consistent if there is no sentence which together with its negation
belongs to the consequences of this set. Tarski notes that the two deﬁnitions are equivalent for
all disciplines based on the system of sentential calculus — indeed, this is the content of Theorem
9* of Tarski’s paper [Tarski, 1930b]. Tarski also notes that his deﬁnition is much more general,
since it applies to theories without negation, and to theories in which negation does not have the
usual properties. Tarski cites Post as the source of this deﬁnition [Tarski, 1921].

516
Keith Simmons
sentences that are either consequences of A or which, when added to A, yield an
inconsistent set of sentences; and A is said to be complete if its decision domain
contains all meaningful sentences (p. 93).11 The cardinal degree of completeness
of the set A of sentences is the number of all systems which include the set A (pp.
100–101). And the ordinal degree of completeness is the smallest ordinal number
π for which there is no strictly increasing sequence of type π of consistent systems
which include the set A (p. 101).12
[Tarski, 1930d] contains proofs of a large number of seminal theorems on ax-
iomatizability, independence, and consistency and completeness.
For example,
Corollary 37 (p. 87) tells us that if a system includes an inﬁnite independent set
of sentences, then it has uncountably many subsystems, of which only countably
many are ﬁnitely axiomatizable. Tarski writes:
“It is to be noted that within almost all deductive disciplines, and in
particular within the simplest of them — the sentential calculus — it
has been found possible to construct a set of sentences which is both
inﬁnite and independent, and thus to realize the hypothesis of the last
corollary [Corollary 37]. Hence it turns out that in all these disciplines
there are more unaxiomatizable than axiomatizable systems; the de-
ductive systems are, so to speak, as a rule unaxiomatizable, although in
practice we deal almost exclusively with axiomatizable systems. This
paradoxical circumstance was ﬁrst noticed by Lindenbaum in applica-
tion to the sentential calculus.” (p. 88)
(Tarski’s use of the term ‘paradoxical’ indicates that unaxiomatizable theories
came as a surprise.) For another example, Tarski establishes (by Corollary 44)
that “every axiomatizable set of sentences possesses at least one basis” (p. 90).
This result does not extend to unaxiomatizable sets of sentences on the basis of
Axioms 1–4 (though as we will see below, it does extend to deductive disciplines
that presuppose the sentential calculus).
Another result, Theorem 56 (p. 98),
tells us that “every consistent set of sentences can be extended to a consistent
and complete system” (ibid.), a generalization of Lindenbaum’s lemma for the
sentential calculus.
2.2
Classical deductive systems
While in [Tarski, 1930d] Tarski investigated the broadest category of deductive sys-
tems, in his paper “On some fundamental concepts of metamathematics” [Tarski,
1930b], Tarski investigated a certain subcategory — the classical systems.
In
11As with the deﬁnition of consistency, this deﬁnition of completeness departs from the usual
one, and does not rest on the concept of negation. Tarski again cites Post [1921] as the source
of this deﬁnition of completeness. Theorem 10* of Tarski’s [1930b] states the equivalence of the
two deﬁnitions for systems based on the sentential calculus.
12That is, there is no increasing sequence of type π of the form ⟨X, . . . , Xν, . . . , Xη, . . . ,⟩, where
Xν ⊆Xη ⊆S and Cn(Xν) ̸= Cn(Xη) for ν < η < π. Or, in the now-standard terminology,
there exists no chain of consistent theories of type π beginning with X.

Tarski’s Logic
517
[Tarski, 1930b], Tarski lays out two groups of axioms. The ﬁrst contains Axioms
1–4, together with a ﬁfth:
Axiom 5.
There exists a sentence x ∈S such that Cn({x}) = S.
The axioms in the second group are “of a more special nature”:
“In contrast to the ﬁrst group of axioms those of the second group
apply, not to all deductive disciplines, but only to those which presup-
pose the sentential calculus, in the sense that in considerations relating
to these disciplines we may use as premises all true sentences of the
sentential calculus.” (p. 31)
These additional axioms contain two new primitive concepts: the conditional and
negation. Axiom 6 tells us that if x and y are meaningful sentences, so are x →y
and ¬x. The remaining four axioms are as follows (where ‘Ø’ below denotes the
empty set):
Axiom 7.
If X ⊆S, y ∈S, z ∈S and y →z ∈Cn(X), then z ∈Cn(X ∪{y}).
Axiom 8.
If X ⊆S, y ∈S, z ∈S and z ∈Cn(X ∪{y}), then y →z ∈Cn(X).
Axiom 9.
If x ∈S, then Cn({x, ¬x}) = S.
Axiom 10.
If x ∈S, then Cn({x}) ∩Cn({¬x}) = Cn(∅).
Axiom 7 is the rule of detachment, or modus ponens. Tarski takes Axiom 8 to be
one formulation of the so-called deduction theorem, a discovery of Tarski’s. Tarski
writes:
“This theorem, in its application to the formalism of Principia Math-
ematica, was ﬁrst established by the author as far back as 1921 . . . .
Subsequently the deduction theorem was often applied in metamathe-
matical discussion.”13
Axiom 9 is the classical law of non-contradiction, in the form “Everything follows
from a contradiction”. Axiom 10 is a formulation of the classical law of excluded
middle.
So the axiomatic system of [Tarski, 1930b] applies to a subcategory of deductive
systems, the classical deductive systems, encompassing the sentential calculus and
all classical systems that extend it, including the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus.
13Tarski [1983a, p. 32, fn. †]. Tarski reports that he established the theorem in connection with
a discussion in the monograph of Ajdukiewicz [Tarski, 1921], and discussed the result in a lecture
to the Warsaw Philosophical Institute, listed by title in Ruch Filozoﬁczny, vol. 6 (1921–2). As
to applications of the deduction theorem, Tarski mentions that it was essential to the proofs of
theorems in Lindenbaum and Tarski’s note [Tarski, 1927b] and Tarski’s note [Tarski, 1929b]. In
1933, Tarski outlined a proof of the deduction theorem for a particular formalized theory (see
[Tarski, 1933b, Theorem 2(a), p. 286]). The deduction theorem is often attributed to Herbrand,
who published the result in [Herbrand, 1928].

518
Keith Simmons
Tarski deﬁnes for this subcategory nearly all of the metamathematical notions
that he deﬁned in [Tarski, 1930d]] for deductive systems generally, and in much
the same way.14 He also states without proof a dozen or so theorems. Among these
are the ﬁrst published statement of Lindenbaum’s lemma (Theorem 12, p. 34), and
the result that every (countable) set of sentences possesses a base (Theorem 17,
p. 35) — a result that holds for the present subcategory but not generally, as we
noted above.
2.3
The sentential calculus
Another subcategory of deductive systems — the sentential calculus — is inves-
tigated in Lukasiewicz and Tarski’s “Investigations into the sentential calculus”
[Tarski, 1930c]. The authors remark that
“as the simplest deductive discipline, the sentential calculus is particu-
larly suitable for metamathematical investigations. It can be regarded
as a laboratory in which metamathematical methods can be discovered
and mathematical concepts constructed which can then be carried over
to more complicated mathematical systems.” (p. 59)
[Tarski, 1930c] is “a compilation of theorems and concepts belonging to ﬁve diﬀer-
ent persons” (p. 38, fn ‡), namely, Lukasiewicz, Tarski, Lindenbaum, Sobocinski,
and Wajsberg — all members of the Warsaw School of Logic.
At the outset of [Tarski, 1930c], Lukasiewicz and Tarski refer the reader to the
conceptual apparatus and notation developed in [Tarski, 1930b]. The concepts of
sentential variable, conditional and negation are taken as primitive. The meta-
mathematical expressions ‘c(x, y)’ and ‘n(x)’ denote respectively the conditional
with antecedent x and consequent y, and the negation of x.
The set S of all
sentences is deﬁned as follows:
“The set S of all sentences is the intersection of all those sets which
contain all sentential variables (elementary sentences) and are closed
under the operations of forming implications [conditionals] and nega-
tions.” (p. 39)
Lukasiewicz and Tarski go on to deﬁne the notion of consequence in terms of
substitution and detachment (or modus ponens).
“The set of consequences Cn(X) of the set X of sentences is the in-
tersection of all those sets which include the set X ⊆S and are closed
under the operations of substitution and detachment.” (p. 40)
From this deﬁnition it follows that S and Cn(X) satisfy the axioms 1–5 of [Tarski,
1930b] (see above). Now consider X such that X ⊆S and X is closed under con-
sequence (that is, Cn(X) = X). Then by Tarski’s characterization of a deductive
14The only exceptions are the notions of decision domain and cardinal degree of completeness.

Tarski’s Logic
519
system, X is a deductive system. It is these deductive systems that Lukasiewicz
and Tarski investigate in [Tarski, 1930c].
Lukasiewicz and Tarski identify two methods of constructing such a deductive
system. One is the familiar axiomatic method, according to which
“an arbitrary, usually ﬁnite, set X of sentences — an axiom system —
is given, and the set Cn(X), i.e. the smallest deductive system over
X, is formed.” (p. 40)
The second method is the matrix method. The following deﬁnition of a matrix is
due to Tarski:
“A (logical) matrix is an ordered quadruple M = [A, B, f, g] which
consists of two disjoint sets (with elements of any kind whatever) A
and B, a function f of two variables and a function g of one variable,
where the two functions are deﬁned for all elements of the set A ∪B
and take as values elements of A ∪B exclusively.” (p. 41)15
The elements of the set B are called the designated elements (following Bernays).
For an example of a matrix, set A, B, f, g as follows: A = {0}, B = {1}, f(0, 0) =
f(0, 1) = f(1, 1) = 1, f(1, 0) = 0, g(0) = 1, g(1) = 0. This is the matrix associated
with the classical sentential calculus (and the designated value is 1). The idea
is that the functions f and g correspond to the syntactic operations of forming
conditionals and negations.16
This correspondence is made precise by Tarski’s
recursive deﬁnition of a value function:
“The function h is called a value function of the matrix M = [A, B, f, g]
if it satisﬁes the following conditions:
1. the function h is deﬁned for every x ∈S;
2. if x is a sentential variable, then h(x) ∈A ∪B;
3. if x ∈S and y ∈S, then h(c(x, y)) = f(h(x), h(y));
4. if x ∈S then h(n(x)) = g(h(x)).” (p. 41)
Given the notion of a value function, Tarski deﬁnes the notion of satisfaction of a
sentence by a matrix:
15I have replaced Tarski’s symbol ‘+’ for set-theoretical union by the more familiar ‘∪’.
16The functions f and g may be captured by the these tables for ‘→’ and ‘¬’:
x
y
x →y
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
x
¬x
1
0
0
1
Replacing ‘1’ and ‘0’ by ‘T’ and ‘F’ yields the familiar truth tables (where T is the designated
value).

520
Keith Simmons
“The sentence x is satisﬁed (or veriﬁed) by the matrix M = [A, B, f, g]
. . . if the formula h(x) ∈B holds for every value function h of this
matrix.” (p. 41)
In order to construct a deductive system of the sentential calculus we proceed as
follows: we set up a matrix and consider all those sentences satisﬁed by it.17
In [Tarski, 1930c], the matrix method is used to construct not only the classical
(two-valued) system of the sentential calculus, but also an entire class of many-
valued systems. The deﬁnition of the classical system L of the sentential calculus
has already been anticipated:
“The ordinary [classical] system L of the sentential calculus is the set
of all sentences which are satisﬁed by the matrix M = [A, B, f, g]
where A = {0}, B = {1} and the functions f and g are deﬁned by the
formulas: f(0, 0) = f(0, 1) = f(1, 1) = 1, f(1, 0) = 0, g(0) = 1, g(1) =
0.” (p. 42)
Lukasiewicz and Tarski observe that the consistency and completeness of L follows
easily from this deﬁnition. They also deﬁne L by the axiomatic method, presenting
an axiom system due to Lukasiewicz, namely the set {(p →q) →((q →r) →(p →
r)), (¬p →p) →p, p →(¬p →q)}.
Tarski proved the following noteworthy theorem about L:
The system L, as well as every axiomatizable system of the sentential
calculus which contains the sentences ‘p →(q →p)’ and ‘p →(q →
((p →(q →r)) →r))’, possesses a basis consisting of a single sentence.
(Theorem 8, p. 44.)
A generalization of this theorem is also stated:
The system L, as well as every axiomatizable system of the sentential
calculus which contains the sentences ‘p →(q →p)’ and ‘p →(q →
((p →(q →r)) →r))’, possesses for every natural number m a basis
containing exactly m elements. (Theorem 10, p. 45.)18
Lukasiewicz and Tarski also use the matrix method to deﬁne a class of many-
valued systems founded by Lukasiewicz — the so-called “n-valued systems”:
17This procedure rests on the following theorem:
If M is a normal matrix, then the set of all sentences satisﬁed by M is a deductive system, where
a matrix is normal if the formulas x ∈B and y ∈A always imply f(x, y) ∈A.
The generality of the matrix method is established by a converse of this theorem, due to
Lindenbaum. Lindenbaum’s theorem runs as follows:
For every deductive system X there exists a normal matrix M = [A, B, f, g], with an at most
denumerable set A ∪B, which satisﬁes exactly the sentences of X.
(See [Tarski, 1930c, pp.
41–42].)
18The proof of the theorem for L is credited to Sobocinski, and the generalizations to other
systems to Tarski.
Tarski also proved the following theorem, which provides a contrast between L and other
systems of the sentential calculus: “Theorem 11. For every natural number m, systems of the
sentential calculus exist every basis of which contains exactly m elements.” [Tarski, 1930c, p. 45]

Tarski’s Logic
521
“The n-valued system Ln of the sentential calculus (where n is a natural
number or n = ℵ0) is the set of all sentences which are satisﬁed by the
matrix M = [A, B, f, g] where, in the case n = 1 the set A is null, in
the case 1 < n < ℵ0 A consists of all fractions of the form k/n −1 for
0 ≤k < n−1, and in the case n = ℵ0 it consists of all fractions k/l for
0 ≤k < l; further the set B is equal to {1} and the functions f and g
are deﬁned by the formulas: f(x, y) = min(1, 1 −x + y), g(x) = 1 −x.”
(pp. 47–8)19
Lukasiewicz and Tarski report a number of signiﬁcant results about these systems.
They include the following:
(i)
For every n, 1 ≤n < ℵ0, Ln is axiomatizable. (Theorem 22, p. 49).20
(ii) Let M = [A, B, f, g] be a normal matrix [see fn. 17] in which the set A ∪B
is ﬁnite. If the sentences ‘(p →q) →((q →r) →(p →r))’, (q →r) →((p →
q) →(p →r)), (p →q) →(¬q →¬p), ¬q →((p →q) →¬p) are satisﬁed by
M, then the set of all sentences satisﬁed by M is axiomatizable. (Theorem
24, p. 50. Tarski notes that Theorem 24 is a generalization of Theorem 22.)
(iii) Every system Ln, where 2 ≤n < ℵ0, possesses, for every natural number
m (and in particular for m = 1), a basis which has exactly m elements.
(Theorem 26, p. 50.)
In comparing the axiomatic method and the matrix method, Tarski writes:
“Each of the two methods has its advantages and disadvantages. Sys-
tems constructed by means of the axiomatic method are easier to in-
vestigate regarding their axiomatizability, but systems generated by
matrices are easier to test for completeness and consistency.” (p. 42)
19For example, consider the case n = 3. Then A = {0, 1
2} and B = {1}. The functions f and
g may be captured by the following tables for →and ¬ respectively:
p
q
p →q
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
0
0
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
1
0
1
2
1
0
0
1
p
¬p
1
0
1
2
1
2
0
1
Given values m for p and n for q, the value of p →q is min(1, 1 −m + n), and the value of ¬p is
1 −m.
In the given deﬁnition, A is the set of all proper fractions. Lindenbaum showed that any other
denumerably inﬁnite subset of the interval ⟨0, 1⟩will serve as well.
20This theorem was proved by Wajsberg for n = 3 and for all n for which n −1 is a prime
number, and later extended to all natural numbers by Lindenbaum.

522
Keith Simmons
Tarski was keenly aware of the value of the matrix method as an alternative to the
axiomatic method. Blok and Pigozzi point out that although Tarski was not the
ﬁrst to use matrices to construct deductive systems (or ‘logics’), he was responsible
for recognizing the importance of matrices for general metamathematics. They
continue:
“It is diﬃcult to overestimate their importance in this regard. They
provided a means of deﬁning logics that were not a priori ﬁnitely ax-
iomatizable, and this led naturally to the question of the existence
of logics that are not ﬁnitely axiomatizable. They were used ﬁrst by
Bernays and then extensively by Lukasiewicz to establish the indepen-
dence of various axiom systems. Finally, they provided a natural way
of deﬁning the equivalence of deductive systems with diﬀerent primi-
tive connectives. All three of these topics proved to be a rich source of
problems.” [Blok and Pigozzi, 1988, p. 421])
In addition, there is fruitful interplay between the two methods. Corcoran observes
that [Tarski, 1930c]
“contains results achieved by interrelating axiomatic and matrix meth-
ods for deﬁning sentential calculi, an interrelation that clearly fore-
shadows what will later be seen as the interrelation of proof-theoretic
(syntactic) and model-theoretic (semantic) methods.” [Tarski, 1983a,
p. xix]
2.4
The algebraization of logic
Tarski’s paper “Foundations of the Calculus of Systems” [Tarski, 1935+1936] ex-
tends the metamathematical investigations of [Tarski, 1930b; 1930c] and [Tarski,
1930d]. Like [Tarski, 1930b], the paper considers only those theories “whose con-
struction presupposes a logical basis of a greater or lesser extent, and at least the
whole sentential calculus” (p. 342). But the axiom system of [Tarski, 1930b] is
replaced by a “simpler”, “more natural” one [Tarski, 1935+1936, p. 342]. Let ‘L’
denote the smallest deductive system deﬁned by Axioms 1–10 of [Tarski, 1930b] —
that is, the system C(∅), the set of consequences of the empty set. In the axiom
system of [Tarski, 1935+1936], the symbol ‘L’ is taken as a primitive expression
instead of ‘Cn(X)’ — the concept of consequence is no longer a primitive notion.
The new axiom system consists of the following ﬁve axioms:
Axiom 1.
0 < S ≤ℵ0 (where S is the set of meaningful sentences)
Axiom 2.
If x, y ∈S, then ¯x ∈S and x →y ∈S (where ‘¯x’ is the negation of
x).
Axiom 3.
L ⊆S.

Tarski’s Logic
523
Axiom 4.
If x, y, z ∈S, then (¯x →x) →x ∈L, x →(¯x →y) ∈L and
(x →y) →((y →z) →(x →z)) ∈L.
Axiom 5.
If x, x →y ∈L (where y ∈S), then y ∈L.
L can be interpreted as the set of all logically valid sentences. It is straightforward
to deﬁne the concept of consequence, once we have deﬁned the concepts of the
sum and the product of sentences:
Deﬁnition. x + y = ¯x →y, x.y = (x →¯y) for all x, y ∈S.21
Tarski goes on to show that this system of axioms and primitive concepts is equiv-
alent to that of [Tarski, 1930b].
At the heart of [Tarski, 1935+1936] are two deductive systems, each presented
as an interpretation of Boolean algebra. Tarski writes:
“[T]wo calculi can be constructed which are very useful in metamath-
ematical investigations, namely the calculus of sentences and the cal-
culus of deductive systems; the ﬁrst is a complete and the second a
partial interpretation of the formal system which is usually called the
algebra of logic or Boolean algebra.” (p. 347)
Tarski identiﬁes eight primitive concepts: ‘B’ is ‘the universe of discourse’, ‘<’ de-
notes the relation of inclusion, ‘=’ denotes identity, ‘+’ and ‘.’ denote respectively
the sum of and product operations, ‘0’ denotes the zero (or empty) element, ‘1’
denotes the unit (or universal) element, and ‘¯x’ denotes the complement of the
element x. There are seven postulates that suﬃce for Boolean algebra:
Postulate I.
(a) If x ∈B, then x < x; (b) if x, y, z ∈B, x < y and y < z, then
x < z.
Postulate II.
If x, y ∈B, then x = y if and only if both x < y and y < x.
Postulate III. If x, y ∈B, then (a) x + y ∈B; (b) x < x + y and y < x + y; (c) if
z ∈B, x < z and y < z, then x + y < z.
Postulate IV. If x, y ∈B, then (a) x.y ∈B; (b) x.y < x and x.y < y; (c) if
z ∈B, z < x and z < y, then z < x.y.
Postulate V.
If x, y, z ∈B, then (a) x.(y + z) = x.y + x.z and (b) x + (y.z) =
(x + y).(x + z).
21In order to deﬁne the concept of consequence, the deﬁnition of the sum and the product of
sentences is extended by recursion to an arbitrary ﬁnite number of disjuncts and conjuncts:
Deﬁnition.
Pn
i=1 xi = Qn
i=1 xi = x1 if n = 1 and x1 ∈S; Pn
i=1 xi = Pn−1
i=1 xi + xn and
Qn
i=1 xi = Qn−1
i=1 xi.xn, if n is an arbitrary natural number > 1 and x1, x2, . . . , xn ∈S.
The deﬁnition of consequence is as follows:
Deﬁnition For an arbitrary set X ⊆S the set Cn(X) consists of those, and only those,
sentences y ∈S which satisfy the following condition: either y ∈L, or there exist sentences
x1, x2, . . . , xn ∈X such that (Qn
i=1 xi →y) ∈L.

524
Keith Simmons
Postulate VI. (a) 0, 1 ∈B; (b) if x ∈B, then 0 < x and x < 1.
Postulate VII. If x ∈B, then (a) ¯x ∈B, (b) x.¯x = 0, and (c) x + ¯x = 1.
These are the axioms for the general, abstract theory of Boolean algebra.
Boolean algebra is an abstraction from Boolean set algebra, in which B is the uni-
verse of sets, ‘<’ denotes set-theoretical inclusion, ‘+’ and ‘.’ denote respectively
set-theoretical union and intersection, 0 and 1 are the empty set and universal set
respectively, and ‘¯x’ is the set-theoretical complement of x.
Tarski turns ﬁrst to the calculus of sentences (which he also calls “the senten-
tial algorithm” to avoid confusion with the expression ‘sentential calculus’). Its
universe of discourse is S, and two relations are deﬁned on S: the relation of
implication, denoted by ‘⊃’, and the relation of equivalence, denoted by ‘≡’.
Deﬁnition. (a) x ⊃y if and only if x, y ∈S and x →y ∈L; (b) x ≡y if and only
if both x ⊃y and y ⊃x.
Now Tarski states the following (easily checked) theorem:
Theorem.
Postulates I–VII are satisﬁed under the following replacements: the
symbols ‘B’, ‘<’, and ‘=’ are replaced respectively by ‘S’, ‘⊃’, and ‘≡’; and ‘0’ is
replaced by the variable ‘u’ and ‘1’ by the variable ‘v’, where it is assumed that
u ∈S, ¯u ∈L, and v ∈L. [Tarski, 1935+1936, Theorem 4, p. 348].
This theorem shows that the Boolean algebra of Postulates I–VII can be derived
from the Axioms 2–5.22 And the result holds in the other direction. Tarski sums
up:
“We can thus assert that Axs. 2–5 form a system of statements which
is equivalent to the system of postulates for the ordinary algebra of
logic” [Tarski, 1935+1936, p. 349].
In making fully precise the relation between the system L and Boolean algebra,
Tarski sets the stage for algebraic logic. The calculus of systems can now be seen as
an interpretation of Boolean algebra. As Blok and Pigozzi put it, “. . . here for the
ﬁrst time can be found all the essential features of modern algebraic logic” [Blok
and Pigozzi, 1988, pp. 45–6]; and as Vaught puts it, “. . . Tarski introduced here
the now well-known Boolean algebra B(L) canonically associated with a theory L;
and he initiated the still continuing study of the algebras B(L)” [Vaught, 1986, p.
873]. Tarski observes that the present interpretation of Boolean algebra is easily
modiﬁed so as to avoid the replacement of identity by another equivalence relation
(viz.
≡).
This modiﬁcation yields a very early instance of an important and
now-familiar category of Boolean algebras: the Lindenbaum-Tarski algebras.23
22Axiom I plays no part in the proof of the theorem.
23Tarski details the modiﬁcation in [Tarski, 1935+1936, fn.
1, p. 349].
Given any x ∈S,
consider its equivalence class X ⊆S — viz., the set of all sentences y such that y ≡x. For these
equivalence classes the relations and operations ⊃, +, ., etc. are deﬁned in the appropriate way;
for example, ‘X ⊃Y ’ says that x ⊃y for all x ∈X and y ∈Y . 0 is the set of all sentences x ∈S

Tarski’s Logic
525
Despite the lasting signiﬁcance of the calculus of systems, the “chief subject” of
[Tarski, 1935+1936] is another calculus, the calculus of deductive systems, or for
short, the calculus of systems. Recall that a deductive system is a system closed
under consequence. Given the deﬁnition of consequence (see fn. 21), the notion of
a deductive system can be characterized as follows:
X is a deductive system iﬀL ⊆X ⊆S and if x, x →y ∈X (where
y ∈S), then y ∈X.
In the calculus of systems, there is a correlate of each primitive concept of Boolean
algebra.
The universe of discourse is the class of deductive systems.
L is the
zero system and S is the unit system.
Inclusion and identity are interpreted
in the ordinary set-theoretical way — and, similarly, the product of systems is
interpreted as set-theoretical intersection.
However, the addition of systems is
not set-theoretical union — the union of two systems does not in general yield
a new deductive system. Instead, the addition of systems X and Y , denoted by
‘X ˙+Y ’, is deﬁned as Cn(X ∪Y ). Similarly, complementation is not set-theoretical
complementation; instead, the complement ¯X of system X is the sum of all systems
Y disjoint with X (i.e. such that X ∩Y = L). The calculus of systems is a partial
interpretation of Boolean algebra. Consider the postulates I–VII, and replace the
variables ‘x’, ‘y’, ‘z’ respectively by ‘X’, ‘Y ’, ‘Z’, and the constants ‘B’, ‘<’, ‘+’,
‘0’ and ‘1’ respectively by ‘D’, ‘⊆’, ‘ ˙+’, ‘L’ and ‘S’. Then every postulate except
VIIc is satisﬁed. And the following consequence of VIIc is also satisﬁed:
VIId.
If X, Y ⊆D, and X ∩Y = L, then Y ⊆¯X. (See Theorem 6, p. 351.)
So the law of excluded middle — X ˙+ ¯X = S — fails in the calculus of systems,
and it is here that the calculus of systems diﬀers essentially from the ordinary
calculus of classes or sets. Tarski observes:
“The formal resemblance of the calculus of systems to the intuitionistic
sentential calculus of Heyting is striking: we might say that the formal
relation of the calculus of systems to the ordinary calculus of classes is
exactly the same as the relation of Heyting’s sentential calculus to the
ordinary sentential calculus” (p. 352)
In other words, the system of Postulates I–VI and VIIa,b,d is
“a suﬃcient basis for a system of the algebra of logic which has the
intuitionistic calculus as one of its interpretations” (ibid.)24
such that ¯x ∈L, and 1 is the set L. (Observe that the identity relation is left unchanged.) The
set of equivalence classes is a Boolean algebra — the Lindenbaum-Tarski algebra determined by
L.
24For a more detailed elaboration of these remarks, Tarski refers the reader to his paper [Tarski,
1938b] (in particular section 5) and Stone [1937–38]. (The references are given in [Tarski, 1983a,
p. 352, fn. †], where a typographical error appears — ‘X and VII” should read “XVII”.)

526
Keith Simmons
Tarski goes on to state a large number of results about the calculus of systems
that are important both for metamathematics and model theory.25 In section 3,
Tarski investigates axiomatizable and non-axiomatizable systems. In section 4,
he studies irreducible26 and complete27 systems, and shows how to characterize
certain classes of systems in terms of cardinality and structure. In section 5 and the
appendix, Tarski applies these general results to particular deductive theories.28
We have seen, then, that Tarski’s metamathematical investigations in [Tarski,
1935+1936] are carried out in the framework of Boolean algebra; they “do not
transcend the boundary of the algebra of logic” (p. 350). In a footnote later added
to [Tarski, 1935+1936], Tarski observes:
“In fact the calculus of deductive systems outlined in this paper proves
to coincide with what was somewhat later developed as the calculus of
Boolean-algebraic ideals. . . ”29
Subsequently, it was the study of Boolean algebras that took center stage for
Tarski, not the calculus of systems. In his paper [Tarski, 1938b], for example,
Tarski refers to “general metamathematics, i.e. the theory of deductive systems”
as “[a]nother important realization of Boolean algebra” [Tarski, 1938b, p. 454].30
For more on Tarski and algebraic logic, see Section 6 below.
2.5
Metamathematics and models
In Chapter VI of [Tarski, 1941a], Tarski provides a clear, textbook account of the
methodology of the deductive sciences which is strikingly semantic in character.
As we have just seen, the semantic concepts of interpretation and realization ﬁgure
in [Tarski, 1935+1936] — but in [Tarski, 1941a] they are at the heart of Tarski’s
presentation of metamathematics.
25For a summary of some of these results, see Blok and Pigozzi [1988, p. 44], and Vaught [1986,
p. 873].
26X is an irreducible system iﬀX ̸= L and for every deductive system Y such that Y ⊆X, Y =
L or Y = X.
27X is a complete system iﬀX is a deductive system, X ̸= S and for all deductive systems Y
such that X ⊆Y, Y = X or Y = S.
28These theories include the theory of dense orders, the theory of discrete orders, the theory of
identity, the theory of atomistic Boolean algebras, the general theory of order, and the general
theory of binary relations.
29Fn.1, p. 350. Given a Boolean algebra characterized by Postulates I–VII, an ideal is a non-
empty subset K of B such that (1) if x ∈K and y ∈K, then x + y ∈K, and (2) if x ∈K and
y ∈B, then x.y ∈K.
Tarski refers the reader to Stone [1936; 1937], with which there is signiﬁcant overlap or con-
nection.
30As Tarski observes (in fn †, p. 352 of [Tarski, 1935+1936]), [Tarski, 1938b] contains “a more
exact and detailed formulation” of the relation mentioned above between the calculus of systems
and the intuitionistic sentential calculus.
But [Tarski, 1938b] proceeds in terms of Boolean
algebra, and not at all in terms of the calculus of systems. It is only at the very end of the paper
that Tarski remarks that the results shown to hold for the formal system of Boolean algebra also
hold for every realization of this system, such as the theory of ﬁelds of sets and the calculus of
systems. (For a summary of results in [Tarski, 1938b], see Blok and Pigozzi [1988, pp. 46–7]).

Tarski’s Logic
527
Tarski starts out with a concrete example of a simple deductive theory, the
theory of the congruence of line segments. Let the variables x, y, z range over line
segments. There are two primitive terms ‘S’ and ‘∼=’, where ‘S’ denotes the set
of all line segments, and ‘∼=’ denotes the relation of congruence. There are two
axioms:
Axiom I.
For all x ∈S, x ∼= x.
Axiom II. For all x, y, z ∈S, if x ∼= z and y ∼= z, then x ∼= y.
Tarski goes on to derive two theorems: the ﬁrst says that the congruence relation
is symmetric, the second that the relation is transitive.
Tarski observes that though our knowledge of segments and congruence goes
a long way beyond the axioms, this additional knowledge plays no role in the
construction of the theory.
“In particular, in deriving theorems from the axioms, we make no
use whatsoever of this knowledge, and behave as though we did not
understand the content of the concepts involved in our considerations,
and as if we knew nothing about them that had not been expressly
asserted in the axioms.
We disregard, as it is commonly put, the
meaning of the primitive terms adopted by us, and direct our attention
exclusively to the form of the axioms in which these terms occur.” (p.
122)
Accordingly, we can abstract away from our particular theory by replacing ‘S’
by a variable ‘K’ that ranges over all classes, and ‘∼=’ by a variable ‘R’ that ranges
over all (2-place) relations, so as to obtain:
Axiom I ′. For all x ∈K, xRx, and
Axiom II ′ For all x, y, z ∈K, if xRz and yRz, then xRy.
Now the statements of the theory are logical statements; for example, Axiom I′
says that the relation R is reﬂexive on K. And any theorem about congruent
segments is now correlated with a general law in the domain of logic (for example,
that any relation R for which the generalized Axioms I′ and II′ hold is symmetric).
At this point, Tarski introduces the notion of a model (or realization) of the
axiom system.
If, in a set K, a relation R is reﬂexive and has the property
expressed by Axiom II′, then K and R together form a model of the axiom system
I′ and II′.
One model is, of course, formed by the class of segments and the
congruence relation — but this is not in any way privileged. Another model of
the axiom system is provided by the universal class and the relation of identity.
And another is formed by the set of all numbers — or any set of numbers —
and the relation given by ‘the diﬀerence between numbers x and y is an integer’.
Every model of the axiom theory will also satisfy all theorems deduced from these
axioms.

528
Keith Simmons
These general facts, Tarski says, “have many interesting applications in method-
ological researches” [Tarski, 1941a, p. 124]. For example, it may be proved from
these facts that certain sentences cannot be deduced from the axiom system I and
II. Consider the following sentence:
A.
There exist two elements x and y of the set S for which it is not the case
that x ∼= y. (There exist two segments that are not congruent).
Though A is true, attempts to prove it from the axioms fail. Can we show that
the attempt must fail? We can, by applying what Tarski here calls the method of
proof by interpretation.31
“If sentence A could be proved on the basis of our axiom system, then,
as we know, every model of this system would satisfy that sentence; if,
therefore, we succeed in indicating such a model of the axiom system
which will not satisfy Sentence A, we shall prove thereby that this
sentence cannot be deduced from Axioms I and II.” (p. 125)
And such a model is easy to ﬁnd — for example, consider the model formed by
the set of integers, together with the relation ‘the diﬀerence between numbers x
and y is an integer’.
Abstracting away from any particular axiom system and its models, Tarski goes
on to state “a general law from the domain of the methodology of the deductive
sciences”.32
“Every theorem of a given deductive theory is satisﬁed by any model of
the axiom system of this theory; and moreover, to every theorem there
corresponds a general statement which can be formulated and proved
within the framework of logic and which establishes the fact that the
theorem in question is satisﬁed by any such model.” (p. 127)
This law — a version of what Tarski calls the law of deduction — has “tremendous
practical importance” (p. 127). Given an axiom system of a given theory, we will
often ﬁnd that the constants of another deductive theory form a model of that
axiom system — that is, we ﬁnd an interpretation of the axiom system of the
original theory within the other theory.33 And the validity of the theorems of the
31As we shall see, the method here is based on Tarski’s deﬁnition of logical consequence in
terms of models — see Section 3.4 below. The deﬁnition runs as follows:
The sentence X follows logically from the sentences of the class K if and only if every model
of the class K is also a model of the sentence X. [Tarski, 1936b, p. 417].
We show that A does not follow logically from Axioms I and II by constructing a model of the
axiom system which is not a model of A.
32In leading up to the statement of this law, Tarski makes the simplifying assumption that
logic is the only theory preceding the given theory (see footnote 6 above).
33For example, the axiom system of arithmetic may be interpreted within geometry (enabling
us to obtain a visual images of various facts in the ﬁeld of arithmetic); and conversely, the axiom
system of geometry has an interpretation within arithmetic (giving rise to analytic geometry,
in which geometrical facts are investigated with the help of arithmetical or algebraic methods).
Further, arithmetic is interpretable within logic (and hence, so is geometry). See [Tarski, 1941a,
pp. 129–130].

Tarski’s Logic
529
ﬁrst theory carries over to those of the second: ‘All theorems proved on the basis of
a given axiom system remain valid for any interpretation of the system.” (p. 128)
So in proving a theorem of the original theory we prove any number of others:
“Every proof within a deductive theory contains — potentially, so to
speak — an unlimited number of other analogous proofs.” (p. 128)
These facts demonstrate “the great value of the deductive method from the
point of view of economy of human thought” (ibid). They are also of far-reaching
theoretical importance, since
“they establish a foundation for various arguments and researches within
the methodology of deductive sciences” (p. 128).
For example, the law of deduction is the theoretical basis for all proofs by inter-
pretation.
In the ﬁnal section of Chapter VI, Tarski stresses the broad scope of the method-
ology of the deductive sciences. As we have seen throughout the present section,
it goes beyond the study of methods used in the construction of deductive sci-
ences, and incorporates the study of deductive theories as wholes; consider, for
example, investigations into the consistency and completeness of theories. Better,
says Tarski, to call it “metalogic and metamathematics”. Rather than the study
of methods, it is become a general science of deductive sciences, requiring its own
precise methods. Tarski writes:
“Methodology has become like those sciences which constitute its own
subject matter - it has assumed the form of a deductive discipline”.
(p. 140)
2.6
Some historical remarks
Understood in this suitably broad way, the methodology of the deductive sciences
is, Tarski says, “a very young discipline”.
“Its intensive development began only twenty years ago — simultane-
ously (and, as it seems, independently) in two diﬀerent centers: Got-
tingen under the inﬂuence of D. Hilbert and P. Bernays, and War-
saw, where S. Le´sniewski and J. Lukasiewicz, among others, worked.”
[Tarski, 1941a, p. 19]
Its roots, however, go back a very long way. We can ﬁnd an analysis of the de-
ductive sciences in Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics.34 Much more recent, but still of
34[Tarski, 1935]. For example, according to Aristotle every demonstrative science has three
elements: (1) what is posited, (2) the axioms, and (3) the attributes. Consider for illustration the
case of geometry. In geometry, points and lines are posited, and their attributes are demonstrated
“by means of the axioms and from previous conclusions as premisses” (76b9–10, Bk.1, Ch.10,
Posterior Analytics, McKeon [1941, p. 24]).

530
Keith Simmons
historical signiﬁcance for the methodology of the deductive sciences, are Bolzano’s
Wissenschaftslehre [1837], Pasch [1882], Hilbert’s Grundlagen der Geometrie, and
Veblen and Young [1910].
Applications of the deductive method have a very long history too. Of Euclid’s
Elements, Tarski writes:
“For 2200 years, mathematicians have seen in Euclid’s work the ideal
and prototype of scientiﬁc exactitude.” [Tarski, 1941a, p. 120, fn. 1]
Tarski continues:
“An essential progress in this ﬁeld occurred only in the last 50 years,
in the course of which the foundations of the basic mathematical disci-
plines of geometry and arithmetic were laid in accordance with all re-
quirements of the present-day methodology of mathematics.” (p. 120,
fn. 1)
Tarski mentions in particular Peano’s Formulaire de Mathematiques, and Hilbert’s
Grundlagen der Geometrie. As they stood, Peano’s and Hilbert’s theories failed
to meet one of the requirements of methodology, that the deductive theory be
formalized. The development of formalized deductive theories started with Frege:
“The ﬁrst attempts to the present the deductive theories in a formal-
ized form are due to Frege. . . .
A very high level in the process of
formalization was achieved in the works of the late Polish logician S.
Le´sniewski. . . .” (p. 133)
It is clear that Tarski’s work in metamathematics continued a long tradition,
and that even the “young discipline” of the methodology of the deductive sciences
was not original with Tarski. But it is also clear that Tarski took metamathematics
to a new level. Corcoran writes:
“The modern conception, and perhaps the very existence, of the method-
ology of deductive science as a separate science and in particular as a
formalizable deductive science, is largely due to Tarski in that it was he
who collected, analyzed, and codiﬁed emerging concepts and results,
and it was he who most clearly and forcefully articulated and defended
the possibility of such a science.” (Corcoran, editor’s introduction to
[Tarski, 1983a, p. xvi]
3
FORMAL DEFINABILITY
As we have seen, one of the tasks of the methodology of the deductive sciences is to
“make precise the meaning . . . of important metamathematical concepts” [1930e].
In a series of papers published in the 1930s, Tarski carried out this project for a

Tarski’s Logic
531
number of fundamental concepts — most notably deﬁnability, truth, and logical
consequence. Tarski constructed precise deﬁnitions of each of these concepts.
Tarski distinguished two kinds of deﬁnition:
“The words ‘deﬁne’, ‘deﬁnable’, etc., are used in two distinct senses: in
the ﬁrst sense it is a question of a formal relation of certain expressions
to other expressions of a theory. . . ; in the second sense of a semantical
relation between objects and expressions.” [Tarski, 1934–35, fn. 1, p.
386]
Broadly speaking, formal deﬁnitions involve only ‘syntactic’ notions, such as deriv-
ability, while semantic deﬁnitions involve word-world relations. In [Tarski, 1934],
Tarski provided a formal deﬁnition of deﬁnability. In his papers [Tarski, 1931a;
Tarski, 1933a] and [Tarski, 1936b], Tarski constructed semantic deﬁnitions for
deﬁnability, truth, and logical consequence respectively. In this section, we will
explore Tarski’s formal treatment of deﬁnability, and its ramiﬁcations. In Section
IV below, we turn to Tarski’s semantic treatment of semantic deﬁnability, truth,
and logical consequence.
The formal sense of ‘deﬁnability’ is investigated in Tarski’s paper “Some method-
ological investigations on the deﬁnability of concepts” [Tarski, 1934]. Tarski con-
structs a formal deﬁnition of deﬁnability that draws on earlier work of Padoa’s
[Padoa, 1900].
Padoa takes a deductive theory to be a system of undeﬁned symbols (or un-
interpreted primitive terms) and a system of unproved propositions (or axioms).
Padoa’s chief aim is to characterize an irreducible system of undeﬁned symbols,
that is, a system in which no undeﬁned symbol can be deﬁned in terms of the
others:
“We say that the system of undeﬁned symbols is irreducible with respect
to the system of unproved propositions when no symbolic deﬁnition
of any undeﬁned symbol can be deduced from the system of unproved
propositions, that is, when we cannot deduce from the system a relation
of the form x = a, where x is one of the undeﬁned symbols and a is a
sequence of other such symbols (and logical symbols).” (pp. 121–22)35
Padoa’s deﬁnition of an irreducible system contains an informal characterization
of formal deﬁnability that Tarski makes explicit and precise in [Tarski, 1934].
Tarski considers deductive theories with the simple theory of types as their logical
basis, and directs his attention to the extra-logical constants, or terms, of a given
35As Padoa observes, there is a parallel deﬁnition of an irreducible (or “absolutely indepen-
dent”) set of propositions — viz, a set where no member can be derived from the other members.
(Padoa points out that a method of proving this irreducibility is already well-known: we can say
that a proposition is not a logical consequence of the others if there is an interpretation in which
it is false, and the others are true. The method is now standard in independence proofs. Padoa
cites Peano [1899, p. 30], which contains a proof of the absolute independence of the axioms of
arithmetic.) Like Padoa, Tarski presses the analogy between the concept derivable sentence on
the one hand and deﬁnable concept on the other.

532
Keith Simmons
deductive theory. Let ‘a’ be a term, and B any set of terms. A deﬁnition of the
term ‘a’ by means of the terms of the set B is a sentence of the following form:
(I)
(x)[x = a ↔φ(x, b′, b′′, . . .)]
where ‘φ(x, b′, b′′, . . .)’ is a sentential function with the sole free variable x, and in
which no extra-logical constants other than b′, b′′, . . . of the set B occurs. Now let
X be a set of sentences in which all terms of B occur. Tarski deﬁnes the notion
of (formal) deﬁnability as follows:
Deﬁnition. The term ‘a’ is deﬁnable by means of the terms of the set B on the
basis of the set X of sentences if a deﬁnition of the term ‘a’ by means of the terms
of B is derivable from the sentences of X. (See [Tarski, 1934, p. 299].)
Observe that this notion of deﬁnability involves only formal or ‘syntactic’ notions,
in particular those of derivability, sentential function, and term.
Having deﬁned the notion of formal derivability, Tarski goes on to characterize
and justify Padoa’s method for determining the irreducibility of a system of un-
deﬁned symbols (or, equivalently, the undeﬁnability of a term by means of other
terms). Padoa oﬀers only a sketch of this method:
“Let us assume that, after an interpretation of the system of undeﬁned
symbols that veriﬁes the system of unproved propositions has been
determined, all these propositions are still veriﬁed if we suitably change
the meaning of the undeﬁned symbol x only. Then, since the meaning
of x is not individualized once we have chosen an interpretation of the
other undeﬁned symbols, we can assert that it is impossible to deduce
a relation of the form x = a, where a is a sequence of other undeﬁned
symbols, from the unproved propositions.” [Padoa, 1900, p. 122]
Tarski describes Padoa’s method this way:
“In order, by this method, to show that a term ‘a’ cannot be deﬁned
by means of the terms of a set B on the basis of a set X of sentences, it
suﬃces to give two interpretations of all extra-logical constants which
occur in the sentences of X, such that (1) in both interpretations all
sentences of the set X are satisﬁed and (2) in both interpretations all
sentences of the set B are given the same sense, but (3) the sense of
‘a’ undergoes a change.” [Tarski, 1934, p. 300]
Tarski goes on to present some results “which provide a theoretical justiﬁca-
tion for the method of Padoa” (ibid). Consider again a term a, and a set B of
terms b′, b′′, . . ., where a is not a member of B. Let c′, c′′, . . . be the terms other
than a, b′, b′′, . . . that occur in the sentences of X.
The conjunction of all the
sentences of X is represented in the schematic form: ‘ψ(a; b′, b′′, . . . ; c′, c′′, . . .)’.
Suppose that in every sentence of X, variables are uniformly substituted for some
or all terms, where it is assumed that none of these variables become bound. In

Tarski’s Logic
533
this way, sentential functions are formed. The conjunction of all these senten-
tial functions is represented schematically by making the same substitutions in
‘ψ(a; b′, b′′, . . . ; c′, c′′, . . .)’. Tarski proves the following theorems:
Theorem. The term ‘a’ is deﬁnable by means of the terms of the set B on the
basis of the set X of sentences if and only if the formula
II.
∀x(x = a ↔∃z′, z′′, . . . ψ(x; b′, b′′, . . . ; z′, z′′, . . .))
is derivable from the sentences of X. (This is Theorem 1, in [Tarski, 1934, p. 301].)
Theorem. The term ‘a’ is deﬁnable by means of the terms of the set B on the
basis of the set X of sentences if and only if the formula
III. ∀x′, x′′, y′, y′′, . . . , z′, z′′, . . . t′, t′′, . . . (ψ(x′; y′, y′′, . . . ; z′, z′′, . . .)
& ψ(x′′; y′, y′′, . . . ; t′, t′′, . . .) →x′ = x′′)
is derivable. (This is Theorem 2 in [Tarski, 1934, p. 303].)
Theorem. The term ‘a’ is not deﬁnable by means of the terms of the set B on the
basis of the set X of sentences if and only if the formula
IV. ∃x′, x′′, y′, y′′, . . . , z′, z′′, . . . t′, t′′, . . . (ψ(x′; y′, y′′, . . . ; z′, z′′, . . .)
& ψ(x′′; y′, y′′, . . . ; t′, t′′ . . .) & x′ ̸= x′′)
is consistent. (This is Theorem 3 in [Tarski, 1934, p. 304].)
Theorem 3 follows immediately from Theorem 2.36
Theorem 3 “constitutes the proper theoretical foundation for the method of
Padoa” [Tarski, 1934, p. 305]. For suppose that we want to establish that the term
‘a’ is not deﬁnable by the means of the terms of the set B. We apply the following
procedure (see [Tarski, 1934, p. 305]). Take a deductive system Y , either shown to
be consistent or assumed to be so. Look for terms ¯a, a, ¯b′, ¯b′′, . . . , ¯c′, ¯c′′, . . . , c′, c′′, . . .
which satisfy the following three conditions:
(i)
Replacing the terms a, b′, b′′, . . . c′, c′′, . . . by ¯a, ¯b′, ¯b′′, . . . , ¯c′, ¯c′′, . . . in all sen-
tences of X yields sentences of Y .
(ii) Replacing the terms b′, b′′, . . . by the terms ¯b′, ¯b′′, . . ., and the terms a, c′, c′′, . . .
by the terms a, c′, c′′, . . . in all sentences of X yields sentences of Y .
(iii) The system Y contains the formula ¯a ̸= a.
If these conditions are met, then the following conjunction belongs to Y :
ψ(¯a; ¯b′, ¯b′′, . . . ; ¯c′, ¯c′′, . . .) & ψ(a; ¯b′, ¯b′′, . . . ; c′, c′′, . . .) & ¯a ̸= a.
36To show that Theorem 3 follows from Theorem 2, Tarski observes that formula IV is equiv-
alent to the negation of formula III, and applies the principle that a formula is not provable if
and only if its negation is consistent.

534
Keith Simmons
Formula IV of Theorem 3 is an easy consequence of this conjunction, and so
formula IV belongs to Y . And since Y is consistent, formula IV is consistent. So
by Theorem 3, the term ‘a’ is not deﬁnable by means of the terms of B. And here
is Padoa’s method (somewhat extended, since the procedure accommodates the
occurrence of terms in the sentences of X that are diﬀerent from ‘a’ and the terms
in B.)
Thus Tarski has shown that we are justiﬁed in using Padoa’s method in the
simple theory of types. (As Tarski remarks in a footnote subsequently added to
[Tarski, 1934, p. 300, fn. 2], Beth later made a very signiﬁcant advance, proving
Theorems 2 and 3 for a much wider class of deductive theories — the theories
of ﬁrst-order logic.)37 The method has signiﬁcant practical importance. Suppose
we are considering the primitive terms of a given deductive theory. By applying
Padoa’s method as many times as there are primitive terms, we may determine
whether or not the terms are mutually independent (or in Padoa’s terminology,
whether or not they form an irreducible system.) If the terms are not mutually
independent, then we may eliminate the unnecessary ones — and this may lead
to a simpliﬁcation of the axiom system.
To illustrate this, Tarski considers n-dimensional Euclidean geometry. We may
take the terms ‘equidistant’ and ‘lying between’ as the sole primitive terms of
an axiom system of geometry. (The term ‘equidistant’ is the metrical primitive
term and ‘lying between’ is the descriptive primitive term of geometry.) Tarski
announces that by Padoa’s method it can be shown that the term ‘equidistant’ is
not deﬁnable by means of the term ‘lying between’. However, for 2 dimensions
and higher, the term ‘lying between’ is deﬁnable by means of the term ‘equidis-
tant’38 — and the deﬁnition may be constructed according to the formula II in
Theorem 1 above. Accordingly, Padoa’s method yields a simpler axiom system for
n-dimensional geometry (n > 1) in which ‘equidistant’ is the only primitive term.
So the formally deﬁned notion of deﬁnability is the key to Tarski’s presentation
and justiﬁcation of Padoa’s method. In the second half of [Tarski, 1934], Tarski
takes the notion of deﬁnability in another direction, using it to characterize what
he calls “the problem of the completeness of concepts”. This requires the notion
of an “essentially richer” set, which rests on the notion of deﬁnability. Let Y be a
set of sentences, and let X ⊆Y . Then Y is essentially richer than X if and only
if there are terms in Y (i.e. occurring in the sentences of Y ) that are not in X,
and these terms are not deﬁnable by means of the terms in X (not even on the
basis of Y ). Now we can deﬁne the notion of a set of sentences being complete
with respect to its terms.
Deﬁnition.
A set X of sentences is complete with respect to its terms if it is
impossible to construct a categorical set Y of sentences which is essentially richer
than X with respect to speciﬁc terms. (See [Tarski, 1934, p. 311].)39
37[Beth, 1953].
38See Lindenbaum and Tarski [1927b]. Tarski credits Lindenbaum with the result that the two
terms are independent of each other only in the case of one-dimensional geometry.
39Notice the restriction here to categorical sets of sentences, where a set is categorical if any

Tarski’s Logic
535
The problem of the completeness of concepts can now be stated: given a set of
sentences, is it complete or incomplete with respect to its speciﬁc terms?
For
speciﬁc examples, Tarski again turns to geometry.
Consider descriptive one-
dimensional geometry, the geometry of points and subsets of a straight line in
which the only primitive concept is that of lying between. Consider the (easily for-
mulated) categorical system X1 which contains ‘lying between’ as its only primitive
term. Now we can extend X1 to the full metrical geometry of the straight line by
adding ‘equidistant’ as a primitive term. Call this extended system X2. As we
saw above, the concept of equidistance cannot be deﬁned in terms of the concept
of lying between. Since X2 is categorical and essentially richer than X1, it follows
that X1 is not complete with respect to its terms.
Now the system X2, like X1, is not complete with respect to its terms. But
we can extend X2 to a system that is. We extend X2 to an essentially richer
categorical set of sentences X3 by adding two new primitive terms, say ‘0’ and
‘1’, together with an axiom saying that these terms denote two distinct points. It
turns out that X3 is complete with respect to its terms. (X3 is, in fact, formally
identical to the arithmetic of the real numbers.)40
As a whole, Tarski’s paper [Tarski, 1934] may be regarded as an investigation
into the concept of concept. The formal deﬁnition of deﬁnable concept is the core
of Tarski’s solution to two problems: the problem of the deﬁnability and mutual
two interpretations of it are isomorphic. Tarski expresses the intuitive signiﬁcance of the notion
of categoricity this way:
“A non-categorical set of sentences (especially if it is used as an axiom system of
a deductive theory) does not give the impression of a closed and organic unity and
does not seem to determine precisely the meaning of the concepts contained in it.”
[Tarski, 1934, p. 311]
Suppose we were to drop this restriction, and say that a set X of sentences is complete with
respect to its terms if and only if it is impossible to construct an essentially richer set Y . Tarski
points out (pp. 308–9) that, given this unrestricted deﬁnition, there will be no complete sets
(apart from some trivial cases). For suppose that X is consistent, and does not contain all extra-
logical constants, or terms. Now add to X an arbitrary logically provable sentence that contains
a term not occurring on the sentences of X. This new set Y is an essentially richer set than X.
For, as Tarski puts it,
“. . . it is obvious that the new extra-logical constant cannot be deﬁned by means
of the terms of X. In fact the only sentence of Y in which this constant occurs is
logically provable, and thus true independently of the meaning of the speciﬁc terms
contained in it.” [Tarski, 1934, p. 309, fn. 1].
40In [Tarski, 1934], Tarski goes on to prove a general theorem concerning completeness with
respect to terms. First we need the notion of a monotransformable set of sentences:
Deﬁnition. A set of sentences is monotransformable if for any two interpretations of this set
there is at most one relation which establishes the isomorphism of the two interpretations.
(Compare and contrast the notion of a categorical set of sentences:
a set of sentences is
categorical if for any two interpretations of it there is at least one relation which establishes the
isomorphism of the two interpretations.)
Tarski’s theorem is as follows:
Theorem.
Every monotransformable set of sentences is complete with respect to its terms.
[Tarski, 1934, p. 314]).

536
Keith Simmons
independence of concepts, and the problem of the completeness of concepts. As
we have seen, this deﬁnition turns on formal relations between expressions, such
as derivability. No semantic word-world relations are involved. The reverse is true
for Tarski’s semantic deﬁnitions of deﬁnability, truth and logical consequence, to
which we now turn.
4
SEMANTICS: DEFINABILITY, TRUTH, CONSEQUENCE, MODEL
THEORY
In three celebrated papers — “On deﬁnable sets of real numbers” [Tarski, 1931a],
“The concept of truth in formalized languages” [Tarski, 1933a], and “On the con-
cept of logical consequence” [Tarski, 1936b] — Tarski constructed precise deﬁni-
tions of deﬁnability, truth, and logical consequence. We turn to these constructions
in Sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 below. As we will see, at the core of each deﬁnition
is the semantic notion of satisfaction of a sentential function.
These semantic
deﬁnitions were important contributions to the development of model theory, and
in 4.4 I make some historical remarks about model theory.
At the outset of [Tarski, 1931a], Tarski notes that mathematicians are extremely
wary of the notion of deﬁnability: “their attitude is one of distrust and reserve”
[Tarski, 1931a, p. 110]. Tarski ﬁnds this perfectly understandable: the semantical
notion of deﬁnability is ambiguous and subject to well-known paradoxes, such as
Richard’s, K¨onig’s, and Berry’s.41 Tarski makes similar remarks about truth:
“For although the meaning of the term ‘true sentence’ in colloquial
language seems to be quite clear and intelligible, all attempts to deﬁne
this meaning more precisely have hitherto been fruitless, and many
investigations in which this term has been used and which started
with apparently evident premisses have often led to paradoxes and
antinomies. . . . The concept of truth shares in this respect the fate of
other analogous concepts in the domain of the semantics of language”.
[Tarski, 1933a, p. 152]42
Small wonder, then, that semantical concepts have an “evil reputation”. [Tarski,
1933a, p. 252]
In his papers on deﬁnability, truth and logical consequence, Tarski’s aim is to
ﬁnd rigorous characterizations of these notions and thereby place them beyond
suspicion and ‘safe’ for theorists to use. Prior to Tarski, it was generally held that
these semantic notions were not the business of the mathematician or logician. Of
the notion of deﬁnability, Tarski writes:
“The distrust of mathematicians towards the notion in question is re-
inforced by the current opinion that this notion is outside the proper
limits of mathematics altogether.” [Tarski, 1931a, p. 110]
41See Richard [1905], K¨onig [1905], and for Berry’s paradox, Russell [1908].
42For related remarks about the concept of logical consequence, see [Tarski, 1936b, p. 409].

Tarski’s Logic
537
Tarski sought to reverse “the current opinion”. He identiﬁed a metamathemat-
ical task here regarding deﬁnability, that of
“making its meaning more precise, of removing the confusions and mis-
understandings connected with it, and of establishing its fundamental
properties. . . .” [Tarski, 1931a, p. 110]
Tarski continues:
“I believe I have found a general method which allows us to construct
a rigorous metamathematical deﬁnition of this notion.” [Tarski, 1931a,
p. 111]
Tarski later applied the same method to construct his deﬁnitions of truth and
logical consequence.
According to Tarski, the method allows the construction of deﬁnitions that
are not only “formally correct” but also “materially adequate”, in the sense that
they “grasp the current meaning of the notion as it is known intuitively” (p. 129
VI). At the core of Tarski’s method is the notion of satisfaction of a sentential
function, which appears in print for the ﬁrst time in [Tarski, 1931a], Tarski’s paper
on deﬁnable sets of real numbers. We will now focus on [Tarski, 1931a] and the
notion of deﬁnability.
4.1
Semantic deﬁnability
In [Tarski, 1931a], Tarski restricts his analysis of the notion of deﬁnability to just
one category of objects: sets of real numbers.
“The problem set in this article belongs in principle to the type of
problems which frequently occur in the course of mathematical inves-
tigations.
Our interest is directed towards a term of which we can
given an account that is more or less precise in its intuitive content,
but the meaning of which has not at present been rigorously estab-
lished, at least in mathematics. We then seek to construct a deﬁnition
of this term which, while satisfying the requirements of methodological
rigour, will also render adequately and precisely the actual meaning of
the term. It was just such problems that the geometers solved when
they established the meaning of the terms ‘movement’, ‘line’, ‘surface’,
or ‘dimension’ for the ﬁrst time. Here I present an analogous problem
concerning the term ‘deﬁnable set of real numbers’. (pp. 111–112)
Tarski works within the framework of the simple theory of types (where the
variables of the ﬁrst order range over individuals, variables of the second order
range over sets of individuals, and so on). The notion of a sentential function
is introduced recursively. There are four primitive sentential functions denoted
by ‘∈’, ‘ν(x)’, ‘μ(x, y)’, ‘σ(x, y, z)’. The last three are special to the theory of

538
Keith Simmons
real numbers, where the ﬁrst-order variables range over reals, and ‘ν(x)’ says that
x = 1, ‘μ(x, y)’ says that ‘x ≤y’, and ‘σ(x, y, z)’ says that x+y = z. So the object
of Tarski’s investigation is the system of reals with the primitive concepts 1, ≤,
and +, or the system ⟨R, 1, ≤, +⟩for short. There are ﬁve fundamental operations
on sentential functions: negation, logical sum ‘+’ (disjunction), logical product ‘.’
(conjunction), universal quantiﬁcation, and existential quantiﬁcation. The set of
all sentential functions is the smallest set which contains the primitive functions
and is closed under the ﬁve operations.
Tarski explicitly distingishes system and metasystem:
“For each deductive system it is possible to construct a particular sci-
ence, namely the ‘metasystem’, in which the given system is subjected
to investigation” (p. 116).
Tarski stresses that the notion of deﬁnability is relative — we can deﬁne, in the
metasystem, the notion of deﬁnability for the given system. Deﬁnability is relative
to a system — and if we ignore this characteristic, we will fall into paradox.43 In
the present case, expressions such as ‘variable of the nth order’ and ‘sentential func-
tion’ are terms of the metasystem, applying as they do to particular expressions of
the system under investigation. We can also introduce into the metasystem arith-
metical notions, like real number, set of real numbers, and so on. The metasystem
now has the resources to deﬁne the following phrase:
A ﬁnite sequence of objects satisﬁes a given sentential function.
In [Tarski, 1931a], Tarski makes no attempt to deﬁne this phrase precisely — a
rigorous treatment is given in [Tarski, 1933a]. Instead, Tarski presents some simple
illustrations. For example, the primitive sentential function ‘σ(x, y, z)’ is satisﬁed
by all sequences of three real numbers x, y, z such that x = y + z; the sentential
function ‘ν(x).ν(y).μ(y, z)’ is satisﬁed by all sequences of three real numbers x, y, z
such that x = 1 = y ≤z; and the sentential function ‘∃z∃u(σ(x, y, z).μ(u, z).ν(u)’
is satisﬁed by sequences of two real numbers x and y where x ≥y+1. Tarski notes
that these examples indicate the possibility of establishing a 1-1 correspondence
between the members of the sequence and the free variables in the sentential
function. In the limit case, a sentential function without free variables — that
43On p. 119, Tarski observes that there are only denumerably many deﬁnable sets (because
there are only denumerably many sentential functions), but non-denumerably many sets of num-
bers. So there exist undeﬁnable sets. Tarski goes on:
“More than that, it is known that, with every denumerable family F of sets of
numbers, a uniquely determined set F ∗can be correlated that does not belong to
F; taking for F the family of all deﬁnable sets, we get F ∗, an example of a set
of numbers deﬁned in terms of the metasystem, but not deﬁnable in the system
itself.” (p. 119)
If we ignore the system/metasystem distinction, we will be landed in contradiction and paradox.
(In a footnote added later, Tarski refers the reader to [Tarski, 1948b, pp. 108f] for a precise
deﬁnition of F ∗.)

Tarski’s Logic
539
is, a sentence — “is satisﬁed either by the empty sequence or by no sequence,
according as the sentence is true or false” (p. 117).
Of special signiﬁcance are sentential functions with one free variable, where
instead of (unit) sequences, we can speak of objects satisfying the given function.
We are led naturally to the notion of a deﬁnable set:
“Consequently, a function which contains a variable of order 1 as its
only free variable determines a certain set of individuals, which, in
particular, may be a certain set of real numbers. The sets thus de-
termined by sentential functions are precisely the sets deﬁnable in the
arithmetical system considered.” (p. 118)
Tarski now states the metamathematical deﬁnition of deﬁnable sets of real numbers
as follows:
(M) A set X is a deﬁnable set if there is a sentential function which contains some
variable of order 1 as its only free variable, and which satisﬁes the condition
that, for every real number x, x ∈X if and only if x satisﬁes this function.
(p. 118)
For example, the following sets are deﬁnable: the set {0}, the set of all positive re-
als, and the set of all reals x such that 0 ≤x ≤1; these sets are determined respec-
tively by the sentential functions ‘σ(x, x, x)’, ‘¬σ(x, x, x).∃y(μ(y, x).σ(y, y, y))’,
and ‘∃y∃z(μ(y, x).σ(y, y, y).μ(x, z).ν(z))’.
So Tarski sketches here, for the ﬁrst time, a rigorous deﬁnition of deﬁnability
in metamathematical terms — in particular, in terms of the metamathematical
notion of satisfaction. But now Tarski takes a further step: he oﬀers a (partial)
reconstruction of the notion of deﬁnability in purely mathematical terms.44 Tarski
writes:
“Under this new deﬁnition the notion of deﬁnability does not diﬀer
from other mathematical notions and need not arouse either fears or
doubts; it can be discussed entirely within the realm of normal math-
ematical reasoning.” (p. 111)
This purely mathematical reconstruction rests on the following observation: each
sentential function determines a certain set of ﬁnite sequences, namely, the set
of all ﬁnite sequences that satisfy it. So we can replace the metamathematical
concept of a sentential function by its mathematical analogue — the notion of a
set of sequences.
In particular, we can introduce the primitive sets of sequences, those which are
determined by the primitive sentential functions. Tarski goes on to deﬁne ﬁve
operations on sets of sequences: complementation, addition, multiplication, and
44No total reconstruction is possible on pain of paradox; Tarski’s partial reconstruction pro-
vides a mathematical deﬁnition of deﬁnable sets of individuals of order n, for a given n. The
construction is carried out in detail for n = 1, and outlined for n = 2; this suﬃces, says Tarski,
to make clear the method for all higher levels.

540
Keith Simmons
summation and multiplication with respect to the kth members of the sequences,
corresponding to the ﬁve operations on sentential functions.45 Then the family (or
set) Df of deﬁnable sets of ﬁnite sequences of real numbers may be deﬁned along
the following lines:
Df is the intersection of all the families of sets K which satisfy the
following conditions: (i) the primitive sets belong to K; (ii) K is closed
under the ﬁve operations.46
The family Df — characterized in purely mathematical terms — is exactly the
family of sets of sequences which are determined by sentential functions.
We
have moved from metamathematical notions (sentential functions, satisfaction) to
mathematical notions (sets of sequences, operations on sets of sequences).
Now we can move on to a mathematical deﬁnition of the notion deﬁnable set
of reals. Among the sets of sequences that belong to Df there are all the sets
U of unit sequences. For any such U, form the set U ∗of the members of U’s
unit sequences.
U ∗is a deﬁnable set of real numbers.
The set D of all these
U ∗s is the family of all deﬁnable sets of real numbers.47 The set D is identical
to the set of deﬁnable sets of real numbers as metamathematically deﬁned by
(M). Here, then, we have reached a purely mathematical characterization of the
notion of a deﬁnable set of real numbers.
The fact that it coincides with the
metamathematical characterization demonstrates its material adequacy.
Tarski goes on to state two very important theorems about Df and D, and
sketches their proofs.
Theorem. A set S of sequences of real numbers is a member of Df iﬀS is a ﬁnite
sum of ﬁnite products of elementary linear sets.48 (Theorem 1 in [Tarski, 1931a,
p. 133].)
45The operations of complementation, addition, multiplication correspond to the sentential
operations of negation, disjunction, and conjunction; they also correspond to the usual Boolean
operations.
The operations of summation and multiplication with respect to the kth terms
correspond to the existential and the universal quantiﬁers respectively.
46See Deﬁnition 9 (p. 128) for a precise formulation.
47See Deﬁnition 10 (p. 128) for a rigorous formulation of the deﬁnition of deﬁnable sets of
individuals.
48For the notion of an elementary linear set, we need the notion of a linear polynomial with
integral coeﬃcients, exempliﬁed by 3x+10y +7z +2. Associated with this polynomial is a linear
equation
(i)
3x + 10y + 7z + 2 = 0 and a linear inequality
(ii)
3x + 10y + 7z + 2 > 0.
Observe that associated with (i) are sequences of reals, each of which is a solution to (i). One
such sequence is ⟨2, −1.5, 1⟩, since x = 2, y = −1.5 and z = 1 provides a solution to (i). We can
make a parallel observation about (ii).
An elementary linear set is a set of all sequences of real numbers which are solutions either of
a linear equation of the type of (i), or a linear inequality of the type of (ii). (For a more rigorous
characterization, see Tarski [Tarski, 1931a, p. 132].)

Tarski’s Logic
541
Theorem. A set X of real numbers belongs to the set D iﬀX is the sum of a ﬁnite
number of intervals with rational end-points.49 (Theorem 2 in [Tarski, 1931a, p.
133].)
Theorem 1 has a special signiﬁcance. Given the correlation between (mathemat-
ical) sets of sequences and (metamathematical) sentential functions, and between
Boolean operations on sets and Boolean operations on sentential functions, there is
a metamathematical analogue of Theorem 1. And this metamathematical theorem
leads to metalogical results of great moment: the theory of the reals ⟨R, 1, ≤, +⟩
is complete and decidable. More on this in Section 5.1 below.50
4.2
Truth
Tarski’s seminal monograph ‘The concept of truth in formalized languages’ [Tarski,
1933a], and his later informal summary ‘The Semantic Conception of Truth’
[Tarski, 1944] are devoted to a single problem — the deﬁnition of truth. Tarski
seeks a deﬁnition of truth that does justice to the classical Aristotelian conception
of truth:
“To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is, is false,
while to say of what is that it is, or of what is not that it is not, is
true.”51
Tarski writes:
“Let us start with a concrete example. Consider the sentence “snow
is white”. We ask the question under what conditions this sentence is
true or false. It seems clear that if we base ourselves on the classical
conception of truth, we shall say that the sentence is true if snow is
white, and that it is false if snow is not white. Thus, if the deﬁnition
of truth is to conform to our conception, it must imply the following
equivalence:
The sentence “snow is white” is true if, and only if, snow is white.”
[1944, p. 667]
The account is readily generalized:
“Let us consider an arbitrary sentence: we shall replace it by the letter
‘p’. We form the name of this sentence and we replace it by another
49An interval with rational end points is a set of one of the following types, where a and b are
arbitrary rational numbers: {x|x = a}, {x|x > a}, {x|x < a}, or {x|a < x < b}.
50Theorems 1 and 2 also have signiﬁcance for analytic geometry. Near the end of [Tarski, 1931a,
pp. 141–2], Tarski reports that Kuratowski drew his attention to a geometric interpretation of the
concepts and operations of [Tarski, 1931a]. (For example, on this interpretation the operation
of summation with respect to the kth members may be taken as projection parallel to the Xk
axis.) Interpreted in this way, Theorems 1 and 2 take the form of certain theorems of analytic
geometry. This geometric interpretation is investigated in [Tarski, 1931b].
51Aristotle, Metaphysics, Γ, 7, 27.

542
Keith Simmons
letter, say ‘X’. We ask now what is the logical relation between the
two sentences “X is true” and ‘p’. It is clear that from the point of
view of our basic conception of truth these sentences are equivalent.
In other words, the following equivalence holds:
(T) X is true if, and only if, p. [Tarski, 1944, p. 668]
Tarski continues:
“Now at last we are able to put into a precise form the conditions under
which we will consider the usage and deﬁnition of the term “true” as
adequate from the material point of view: we wish to use the term
“true” in such a way that all equivalences of the form (T) can be
asserted, and we shall call a deﬁnition of truth “adequate” if all these
equivalences follow from it.” [Tarski, 1944, p. 668]
Here, then, is an informal expression of Tarski’s famous adequacy condition on a
deﬁnition of truth.
However, Tarski stresses that
“the attempt to construct a correct semantical deﬁnition of the expres-
sion ‘true sentence’ meets with very real diﬃculties.” [Tarski, 1933a,
p. 162]
This is primarily because of the well-known Liar paradox. Tarski presents the Liar
along the following lines. Consider the following sentence:
The sentence printed in this chapter on p. 542, line 21, is not true.
Let the letter ‘s’ be an abbreviation of this sentence. Now, we may assert the
following instance of schema (T):
‘s’ is true iﬀthe sentence printed in this chapter on p. 542, line 21, is
not true.
We can establish empirically that
‘s’ is identical to the sentence printed in this chapter on p. 542, line
21, is not true.
By the logic of identity, we obtain
‘s’ is true iﬀ‘s’ is not true.
And we arrive at a contradiction.
Tarski identiﬁes two assumptions that are essential to the construction of the
Liar. The ﬁrst assumption is this:

Tarski’s Logic
543
“(I) We have implicitly assumed that the language in which the anti-
nomy is constructed contains, in addition to its expressions, also the
names of these expressions, as well as semantic terms such as the term
“true” referring to sentences of this language; we have also assumed
that all sentences which determine the adequate usage of this term can
be asserted in the language.” [Tarski, 1944, p. 672]
Tarski calls a language with these properties “semantically universal” [Tarski,
1969, p. 89],52 or “semantically closed” [Tarski, 1944, p. 672]. The second assump-
tion is this:
“(II) We have assumed that in this language the ordinary laws of logic
hold.” [Tarski, 1944, p. 672]
A possible response is to reject II and give up classical logic. For Tarski, this is
not an option:
“It would be superﬂuous to stress here the consequences of rejecting
the assumption II, that is, of changing our logic (supposing this were
possible) even in its more elementary and fundamental parts. We thus
consider only the possibility of rejecting the assumption I.” [Tarski,
1944, p. 673]
And so Tarski concludes that we should seek a deﬁnition of truth for languages
that are not semantically universal.
This leads to a distinction between object language and metalanguage:
“The ﬁrst of these languages is the language which is ‘talked about’
and which is the subject-matter of the whole discussion; the deﬁnition
of truth which we are seeking applies to the sentences of this language.
The second is the language in which we ‘talk about’ the ﬁrst language,
and in terms of which we wish, in particular, to construct the deﬁnition
of truth for the ﬁrst language.” [Tarski, 1944, pp. 673–674]
Tarski points out that the terms ‘object language’ and ‘metalanguage’ apply only
in a relative way:
“If, for instance, we become interested in the notion of truth applying to
sentences, not of our original object language, but of its metalanguage,
the latter becomes automatically the object language of our discussion;
and in order to deﬁne truth for this language, we have to go to a new
metalanguage — so to speak, to a metalanguage of a higher level. In
this way we arrive at a whole hierarchy of languages.” [Tarski, 1944,
p. 674]
52[Tarski, 1969] is a semi-popular account of the notions of truth and proof.

544
Keith Simmons
So in Tarski’s view we can hope to construct a deﬁnition of truth for a language
L only if L is not semantically universal, only if there is a metalanguage for L in
which we can couch the deﬁnition. But now, according to Tarski, colloquial or
natural languages (such as English or Polish) are semantically universal. In fact,
according to Tarski, we can say something stronger: they are universal, in the
sense that they can say everything that can be said. Tarski writes:
“A characteristic feature of colloquial language (in contrast to various
scientiﬁc languages) is its universality. It would not be in harmony with
the spirit of this language if in some other language a word occurred
which could not be translated into it; it could be claimed that ‘if we
can speak meaningfully about anything at all, we can also speak about
it in colloquial language’.” [Tarski, 1933a, p. 164]
In the same vein, Tarski remarks on the “all-comprehensive, universal character”
of natural language and continues
“The common language is universal and is intended to be so. It is
supposed to provide adequate facilities for expressing everything that
can be expressed at all, in any language whatsoever; it is continually
expanding to satisfy this requirement.” [Tarski, 1969, p. 411]
It is the universality of natural languages, says Tarski, “which is the primary
source of all semantical antinomies” [Tarski, 1933a, p. 164]. For if a language can
say everything there is to say, then in particular, it can say everything there is
to say about its own semantics. Such a language is semantically universal. But
a semantically universal language, together with the usual laws of logic, leads to
semantic paradox (see [Tarski, 1933a, pp. 164–5]). Tarski concludes:
“The very possibility of a consistent use of the expression ‘true sen-
tence’ which is in harmony with the laws of logic and the spirit of
everyday language seems to be very questionable, and consequently
the same doubt attaches to the possibility of constructing a correct
deﬁnition of this expression.” ([Tarski, 1933a, p. 165]. See also p. 267)
So Tarski turns away from natural language.53 He writes:
“I now abandon the attempt to solve our problem for the language
of everyday life and restrict myself henceforth entirely to formalized
languages.” [Tarski, 1933a, p. 165]
For the sake of clarity, Tarski constructs a deﬁnition of truth for one particular
formal language — though as he points out, the method applies generally to an
53Despite Tarski’s own misgivings, others have been less pessimistic — for example, Davidson
in [Davidson, 1967], and a number of authors who oﬀer a ‘Tarskian’ approach to the Liar in the
sense that they attribute a hierarchical structure to natural languages (see, for example, Parsons
[1974], Burge [1979], Barwise and Etchemendy [1987], Gaifman [1992], Koons [1992], Glanzberg
[2001]).

Tarski’s Logic
545
extensive group of formalized languages. Tarski chooses as his object language the
calculus of classes. This calculus is one interpretation of Boolean algebra, and a
particularly simple fragment of mathematical logic. There are four constants —
negation (‘N’), disjunction or logical sum (‘A’), the universal quantiﬁer (‘Π’), and
inclusion (‘I’) — and an inﬁnite supply of variables (‘x′’, ‘x′′’, ‘x′′′’) which range
over classes, and which may be arranged in a sequence (so that we may speak
of the kth variable). Composite expressions, such as Ix′′x′′′, are formed in the
obvious way.
The concept of truth for the calculus of classes is to be deﬁned in a metalan-
guage. Accordingly,
“the proper domain of the following considerations is not the language
of the calculus of classes itself but the corresponding metalanguage.
Our investigations belong to the metacalculus of classes developed in
this metalanguage.” [Tarski, 1933a, p. 169]
The metalanguage includes the logical expressions ‘not’, ‘or’, ‘for all’, and ‘is in-
cluded in’, which have the same meanings as the constants of the object language
— so the object language can be translated into the metalanguage. The meta-
language includes further expressions of a general logical character, including set-
theoretical expressions (such as ‘is an element of’, ‘class’ and ‘natural number’)
and expressions from the logic of relations (such as ‘domain’ and ‘ordered n-tuple’).
There is one further important category of expressions in the metalanguage: the
expressions of a structural-descriptive character. These are the names of expres-
sions of the object language. Tarski mentions the following names in particular:
‘the negation sign’ (abbreviated by ‘ng’), ‘the sign of logical sum’ (‘sm’), ‘the sign
of the universal quantiﬁer’ (‘un’), ‘the inclusion sign’ (‘in’), ‘the kth variable’ (‘vk’),
and ‘the expression which consists of two successive expressions x and y’ (‘x⌢y’).
Tarski observes that the metalanguage contains both an individual name and a
translation of every expression (and so every sentence) of the object language; this
is crucial for the construction of the deﬁnition of truth.
Tarski next turns to the metatheory, and presents the axiom system of the
metalanguage.
The axioms divide into two kinds.
First there are the general
logical axioms which provide a suﬃciently comprehensive system of mathematical
logic (we may take, for example, the axioms of Principia Mathematica). Axioms of
the second kind deal with the structural-descriptive concepts. In his introduction
to [83a], Corcoran stresses the signiﬁcance of these axioms.
“In the ‘Wahrheitsbegriﬀ’, Tarski isolates as a primitive notion the
fundamental operation of concatenation of strings and he presents, em-
ploying concatenation, the ﬁrst axiomatic codiﬁcation of string theory,
thereby providing deductive foundations of scientiﬁc syntax.” [Tarski,
1983a, p. xxi]
Tarski writes:

546
Keith Simmons
“What we call metatheory is, fundamentally, the morphology of lan-
guage — a science of the form of expressions — a correlate of such
parts of traditional grammar as morphology, etymology, and syntax.”
[Tarski, 1933a, p. 251]
The axioms are as follows:
Axiom 1.
ng, sm, un, and in are expressions, no two of which are identical.
Axiom 2.
vk is an expression if and only if k is a natural number distinct from
0; vk is distinct from ng, sm, un, in, and also from vl if k ̸= l.
Axiom 3.
x⌢y is an expression if and only if x and y are expressions; x⌢y is
distinct from ng, sm, un, in, and from each of the expressions vk.
Axiom 4.
If x, y, z, and t are expressions, then we have x⌢y = z⌢t if and only if
one of the following conditions is satisﬁed: (a) x = z and y = t; (b)
there is an expression u such that x = z⌢u and t = u⌢y; (c) there is
an expression u such that z = x⌢u and y = u⌢t.
Axiom 5.
(The principle of induction) Let X be a class which satisﬁes the fol-
lowing conditions: (a) ng ∈X, sm ∈X, un ∈X, and in ∈X; (b) if
k is a natural number distinct from 0, then vk ∈X; (c) if x ∈X and
y ∈X, then x⌢y ∈X. Then every expression belongs to the class X.
Axiom 5 tells us in a precise way that every expression consists of a ﬁnite number
of signs.
In a series of deﬁnitions that follow these axioms (pp. 175–6), Tarski introduces
three fundamental operations — negation (‘¯x’ denotes the negation of x), dis-
junction (‘x + y’ denotes the disjunction of x and y), and universal quantiﬁcation
(denoted by ‘∩’). Conjunction is deﬁned in the usual way in terms of negation
and disjunction, and the existential quantiﬁer — denoted by ‘∪’ — is deﬁned in
terms of the universal quantiﬁer and negation.
By means of these operations,
compound expressions are formed from simpler ones. This leads to a deﬁnition of
the notion of a sentential function. The simplest sentential function is an inclu-
sion, an expression of the form (in⌢vk)⌢vl, or ιk,l for short. Compound sentential
functions are formed by applying the three operations to inclusions any number
of times. Sentences are then deﬁned as a special case of sentential functions: they
are sentential functions with no free variable. Corcoran remarks that Tarski here
provides
“the ﬁrst formal presentation of a generative grammar” [Tarski, 1983a,
p. xxi]54
54Corcoran continues:
‘It is to be regretted that many linguists, philosophers, and mathematicians know
so little of the history of the methodology of deductive science that they attribute
the basic ideas of generative grammar to linguists working in the 1950s rather than

Tarski’s Logic
547
Tarski now turns to the axioms for the object language, the calculus of classes.
Among these are axioms that suﬃce for the sentential calculus, in which negation
and disjunction are the only constants. The remaining axioms form a system for
the calculus of classes, a simpliﬁed version of Huntington’s system [Huntington,
1904, p. 297]. Tarski completes the preparations for his deﬁnition of truth by deﬁn-
ing a number of basic metamathematical notions, including consequence, theorem,
deductive system, consistency, and completeness (pp. 180–85).
The deﬁnition of true sentence in the language of the calculus of classes is carried
out in Section 3 of [Tarski, 1933a]. At the outset of this section, Tarski returns to
his adequacy condition and now states it in a more precise way. (In what follows,
S is the class of all meaningful sentences of the language of the calculus of classes.)
“Convention T. A formally correct deﬁnition of the symbol ‘Tr’, for-
mulated in the metalanguage, will be called an adequate deﬁnition of
truth if it has the following consequences:
(α) all sentences which are obtained from the expression
‘x ∈Tr if and only if p’ by substituting for the symbol ‘x’ a structural-
descriptive name of any sentence of the language in question and for the
symbol ‘p’ the expression which forms the translation of this sentence
into the metalanguage;
(β) the sentence ‘for any x, if x ∈Tr then x ∈S’ (in other words ‘Tr
⊆S’).” (pp. 187–8)
Tarski observes that if the object language contained only a ﬁnite number of sen-
tences, it would be straightforward to produce an adequate deﬁnition. In schematic
form, it would look like this:
x ∈Tr iﬀ(x = x1 and p1) or (x = x2 and p2) or . . . or (x = xn and pn)
where ‘x1’, ‘x2’, . . . ‘xn’ are replaced by structural-descriptive names of sentences
of the object language, and ‘p1’, ‘p2’, . . . ‘pn’ by the corresponding translations
of these sentences into the metalanguage.
But if the object language contains
inﬁnitely many sentences, as is the case with the language of the calculus of classes,
then we cannot proceed in this ‘list-like’ way — we cannot formulate inﬁnitely
long deﬁnitions in the metalanguage. Consequently, Tarski turns to the recursive
method. Truth is to be deﬁned in terms of the more basic notion of satisfaction,
and satisfaction is deﬁned recursively.
We saw above that in [Tarski, 1931a] Tarski sketches the notion of satisfac-
tion. But now, for the ﬁrst time in print, Tarski provides a rigorous deﬁnition of
satisfaction (speciﬁc, of course, to the language of the calculus of classes).
to Tarski (and other logician/methodologists) working in the early 1930s.” [Tarski,
1983a, p. xxi]
Corcoran also remarks that although other authors had used ideas about scientiﬁc syntax prior to
[Tarski, 1933a], Tarski was the ﬁrst to present these ideas in a rigorous way — another instance
where Tarski makes formally precise ideas already informally in use (see [Tarski, 1983a, p. xxi,
fn. 13].

548
Keith Simmons
“Deﬁnition 22 The sequence f satisﬁes the sentential function x if and
only if f is an inﬁnite sequence of classes and x is a sentential function
and if f and x are such that either (α) there exist natural numbers k
and l such that x = ιk,l and fk ⊆fl; (β) there is a sentential function
y such that x = ¯y and f does not satisfy the function y; (γ) there are
sentential functions y and z such that x = y +z and f either satisﬁes y
or satisﬁes z; or ﬁnally (δ) there is a natural number k and a sentential
function y such that x = ∩ky and every inﬁnite sequence of classes
which diﬀers from f in at most the kth place satisﬁes the function y.”
(p. 193)
It is remarkable how close this deﬁnition is to contemporary textbook deﬁnitions
— that is a tribute to the precision and clarity of Tarski’s work.
The deﬁnition of truth now follows. Members of sequences correspond to vari-
ables with respect to their indices. Whether or not a sequence satisﬁes a sentential
function depends only on the members of the sequence that correspond to the free
variables of the sentential function. In the limit case, where the sentential function
has no free variables, the members of the sequence do not matter at all. As Tarski
puts it:
“Thus in the extreme case, when the function is a sentence, and so
contains no free variable (which is in no way excluded by Def. 22),
the satisfaction of a function by a sequence does not depend on the
properties of the terms of the sequence at all. Only two possibilities
then remain: either every inﬁnite sequence of classes satisﬁes a given
sentence, or no sequence satisﬁes it. . . . The sentences of the ﬁrst kind
. . . are the true sentences; those of the second kind . . . can correspond-
ingly be called the false sentences.” (p. 194)
So we arrive at Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth:
“Deﬁnition 23 x is a true sentence — in symbols x ∈Tr — if and only
if x ∈S and every inﬁnite sequence of classes satisﬁes x.” (p. 195)
This deﬁnition is clearly formally correct — so the question now is whether it is
materially adequate. The answer is in the aﬃrmative: the deﬁnition is adequate
in the sense of Convention T. Tarski points out that a rigorous proof of this would
require a meta-metatheory, since it is a result about the metatheory. To avoid
any such shift of levels, Tarski adopts an alternative method — the “empirical
method”, according to which we conﬁrm the adequacy of the deﬁnition by way of
concrete examples. The example Tarski considers is the sentence ∩1 ∪2 ι1,2. By
successive applications of the relevant clauses of Deﬁnition 22, it is straightforward
to derive:
∩1 ∪2 ι1,2 ∈Tr iﬀfor every class a there is a class b such that a ⊆b.55
55Following Tarski (p. 196), observe ﬁrst that the sentential function ι1,2 is satisﬁed by exactly

Tarski’s Logic
549
This is a so-called ‘T-sentence’, one of the sentences mentioned in clause (α)
of Convention T. And there is nothing special about this derivation — we can
proceed in an analogous way with any sentence of the object language. Tarski
concludes:
“We have succeeded in doing for the language of the calculus of classes
what we tried in vain to do for colloquial language: namely, to construct
a formally correct and materially adequate semantical deﬁnition of the
expression ‘true sentence’.” (pp. 208–9, Tarski’s emphasis)
Although Tarski has deﬁned truth for a speciﬁc language, the method of con-
struction applies to “many other formalized languages” (p. 209), as Tarski shows
in Section 4. For each particular object language and object theory, we will need
to construct a corresponding metalanguage and metatheory. The construction will
follow the pattern indicated in the case of the calculus of classes. The metalan-
guage will always contain three groups of expressions: expressions of a general
logical kind, expressions with the same meaning as the constants of the object
language, and expressions of the structural-descriptive type. And the axiom sys-
tem of the metatheory will include three groups of axioms: axioms of a general
logical kind, axioms which provide for the translations into the metalanguage of all
theorems of the object theory, and axioms for the structural-descriptive concepts.
We will go on to deﬁne the notions of ‘sentential function’, ‘sentence’ and ‘satis-
faction’, and deﬁne the notion of ‘true sentence’ in terms of satisfaction. Tarski
concludes:
“A. For every formalized language a formally correct and materially
adequate deﬁnition of true sentence can be constructed in the metalan-
guage with the help only of general logical expressions, of expressions
of the language itself, and of terms from the morphology of language -
but under the condition that the metalanguage possesses a higher or-
der than the language which is the object of investigation.” (postscript
to [Tarski, 1933a, p. 273])
those sequences f such that f1 ⊆f2. So the negation ι1,2 is satisﬁed by exactly those sequences
f such that f1 ̸⊆f2. Consequently,
“a sequence f satisﬁes the [sentential] function ∩2ι1,2 if every sequence g which
diﬀers from f in at most the 2nd place satisﬁes the function ι1,2 and thus veriﬁes the
formula g1 ̸⊆g2. Since g1 = f1 and the class g2 may be quite arbitrary, only those
sequences f satisfy the function ∩2ι1,2 which are such that f1 ̸⊆b for any class b. If
we proceed in an analogous way, we reach the result that the sequence f satisﬁes the
function ∪2ι1,2, i.e. the negation of the function ∩2ι1,2, only if there is a class b for
which f1 ⊆b holds. Moreover the sentence ∩1∪2ι1,2 is only satisﬁed (by an arbitrary
sequence f) if there is for an arbitrary class a, a class b for which a ⊆b. Finally by
applying Def. 23 we at once obtain one of the theorems which were described in the
condition (α) of the convention T:
∩1 ∪2 ι1,2 ∈Tr iﬀfor every class a there is a class b such that a ⊆b.
From this we infer without diﬃculty, by using the known theorems of the calculus of
classes, that ∩1 ∪2 ι1,2 is a true sentence.” (p. 196)

550
Keith Simmons
This condition on the metalanguage is crucial. For:
“B. If the order of the metalanguage is at most equal to that of the
language itself, such a deﬁnition cannot be constructed.” (p. 273)56
In particular, if the metalanguage is identical to, or interpretable in the object
language, it is impossible to construct an adequate deﬁnition of truth. In Section
5, Tarski takes as object language the language of the general theory of classes,
and considers a metalanguage which may be interpreted in the object language
— so that every sentence of the metalanguage is correlated with an equivalent
sentence of the object language. Suppose that under these circumstances we can
construct in the metalanguage a correct deﬁnition of truth. Tarski writes:
“It would then be possible to reconstruct the antinomy of the liar in the
metalanguage, by forming in the language itself a sentence x such that
the sentence of the metalanguage which is correlated with x asserts
that x is not a true sentence.”(p. 248)
Let us take a close look at Tarski’s reconstruction of the liar in the metalanguage.
We start with the language of the general theory of classes.
The variables of
this language range over individuals, classes of individuals, classes of classes of
individuals, and so on. Following Tarski, let ‘n’ be a variable ranging over classes
of classes of individuals, and treat numbers in the Russell–Whitehead way. Then
the range of ‘n’ includes the natural numbers.57
Tarski observes that we may
construct a sentential function ιk with sole free variable ‘n’ which says, given a
natural number k, that the class whose name is represented by ‘n’ is identical with
k (see p. 249).
Tarski further observes that it is straightforward to set up a correspondence
between the expressions of the language and the natural numbers. That is, we can
deﬁne in the metalanguage an inﬁnite sequence ∅of expressions in which every
56The order of a language is the smallest ordinal number which is greater than the orders of all
variables occurring in the language (see p. 270). Variables ranging over individuals are assigned
the order 0; variables ranging over classes of individuals and over relations between individuals
are assigned the order 1; variables ranging over classes of classes of individuals and over relations
between classes of individuals are assigned the order 2; and so on. The order of the language of
the calculus of classes is 2, since its variables (ranging over classes of individuals) are of order 1.
The language of the general theory of classes (introduced in Section 5) is a language of inﬁnite
order. Its variables range over classes, classes of classes, classes of classes of classes, and so on
— and so its order is ω. (For the notion of the order of an expression, see the Postscript pp.
269–272, which revises Tarski’s earlier account in section 4, p. 218).
Tarski’s summary conclusion A from the Postscript is a signiﬁcant revision of his summary
in Section 6. In Sections 4 and 5, Tarski works with Husserl’s notion of semantical category,
introduced by Le´sniewski into metamathematical investigations (Tarski cites Le´sniewski [1929],
especially pp. 14 and 68.)
In the Postscript Tarski dispenses with the theory of semantical
categories, and as a consequence ﬁnds that “the range of the results obtained has been essentially
enlarged, and at the same time the conditions for their application have been made more precise”
(p. 273).
57See Tarski p. 233, fn.1. For example, the number 1 is the class of all classes which have
exactly one individual as a member.

Tarski’s Logic
551
expression occurs exactly once; we will let ‘∅n’ denote the nth expression in the
sequence. Consequently, we can correlate with every operation on expressions an
operation on natural numbers, with every class of expressions a class of natural
numbers, and so on. “In this way”, Tarski writes,
“the metalanguage receives an interpretation in the arithmetic of the
natural numbers and indirectly in the language of the general theory
of classes.” (pp. 249–50)58
That is, the metalanguage is interpretable in the object language.
Now suppose that we have deﬁned in the metalanguage the class Tr of true
sentences of the object language.
Let the symbol ‘U ∗y’ denote the existential
quantiﬁcation of the sentential function y with respect to the variable ‘n’. Consider
the expression:
U ∗(ιn.∅n) ̸∈Tr.
The expression ‘ιn.∅n’ denotes the conjunction of the sentential functions denoted
by ιn and ∅n.
And ‘U ∗(ιn.∅n)’ denotes the existential quantiﬁcation of this
conjunction with respect to ‘n’. As a whole, the expression ‘U ∗(ιn.∅n) ̸∈Tr’ says
that this existential quantiﬁcation is not a true sentence of the object language.
The expression ‘U ∗(ιn.∅n) ̸∈Tr’ itself is a sentential function of the meta-
language with ‘n’ as its sole free variable. Given that we can always correlate
sentential functions with arithmetical functions, this sentential function may be
correlated with another function equivalent to it but expressed solely in the terms
of arithmetic. Let us schematically refer to this arithmetical function by ‘ψ(n)’.
We have:
1. for any n, U ∗(ιn.∅n) ̸∈Tr if and only if ψ(n).
Since the general theory of classes provides a foundation for the theory of natural
numbers, it follows that ‘ψ(n)’ is a sentential function of the object language. So
it will appear in the sequence ∅— let it appear at the kth place. Now instantiate
(1) to ‘k’:
2. U ∗(ιk.∅k) ̸∈Tr if and only if ψ(k).
Remember that we have assumed that the deﬁnition of Tr is adequate. Ac-
cordingly, condition (α) of Convention T holds. Now U ∗(ιk.∅k) is a structural-
descriptive name of a sentence of the object language. The sentence that it names
says the following: “there is an n such that n = k and ψ(n)”, or more simply,
“ψ(k)”. So by condition (α) we obtain:
3. U ∗(ιk.∅k) ∈Tr if and only if ψ(k).
58The theory of natural numbers can be developed in the general theory of classes. Tarski
writes that the general theory of classes “suﬃces for the formulation of every idea which can be
expressed in the whole language of mathematical logic” (pp. 241–2).

552
Keith Simmons
And (2) and (3) yield a contradiction.
Notice that ‘ψ(k)’, a sentence of the object language, is correlated with
‘U ∗(ιk.∅k) ̸∈Tr’, a sentence of the metalanguage, and the latter says of the former
that it is not true. Thus, to repeat Tarski’s words, we have formed in the object
language itself “a sentence x such that the sentence of the metalanguage which
is correlated with x asserts that x is not a true sentence.” In reconstructing the
Liar in this way, Tarski has used the so-called diagonal argument; the distinctive
‘diagonal’ step is the inference to (2), where we replace the variable ‘n’ in the
correlates ‘U ∗(ιn.∅n) ̸∈Tr’ and ‘ψ(n)’ by k, the index of ‘ψ(n)’ in ∅.59 One can
also see close analogies with the heterological paradox, generated by the phrase
‘is not true of itself’ or ‘heterological’ for short. Tarski pursues this analogy in
[Tarski, 1944, p. 673, fn. 11].
We now have a sketch of the proof of Tarski’s undeﬁnability theorem for the
speciﬁc case of the general theory of classes. Tarski states the result as follows:
“Theorem 1 (α) In whatever way the symbol ‘Tr’, denoting a class of
expressions, is deﬁned in the metatheory, it will be possible to derive
from it the negation of one of the sentences which were described in
the condition (α) of the convention T;
(β) assuming that the class of all provable sentences of the metalan-
guage is consistent, it is impossible to construct an adequate deﬁnition
of truth in the sense of convention T on the basis of the metatheory.”
[Tarski, 1933a, p. 247]
Clearly, (β) follows immediately from (α). For a general statement of the the-
orem, recall Tarski’s summary conclusion in the Postscript:
“B. If the order of the metalanguage is at most equal to that of the
language itself, such a deﬁnition cannot be constructed.” (p. 273)
A typical contemporary formulation of Tarski’s theorem is likely to dispense with
any mention of a metalanguage; for example,
Given a language L of a theory that includes ﬁrst-order number theory,
no adequate deﬁnition of truth in L can be given in L.
Of his proof of Theorem 1, Tarski writes “We owe the method used here to
G¨odel” (fn. 1, p. 247). Indeed, (α) does not really involve truth at all.60 If we
replace the symbol ‘Tr’ by the more neutral symbol ‘φ’, (α) tells us that there is a
sentence p with a structural-descriptive name x such that the sentence ‘¬(φ(x) ↔
p)’ and hence ‘φ(x) ↔¬p’ is derivable from the metatheory.
If we interpret
φ not as ‘true’ but as ‘provable’, (α) is essentially an instance of G¨odel’s ﬁrst
incompleteness theorem. Originally, Tarski’s paper did not contain Theorem 1,
59For more on the diagonal argument, the Liar, and Tarski’s theorem, see [Simmons, 1993,
Chapter 2].
60This point is stressed by Vaught in [Tarski, 1986a, p. 871].

Tarski’s Logic
553
but instead “certain suppositions in the same direction” (fn. 1, p. 247), based
partly on Tarski’s own work and partly on a short report of G¨odel’s [Tarski, 1930b].
Theorem 1 and the sketch of its proof were added in press, after Tarski became
acquainted with [G¨odel, 1931] and was convinced that G¨odel’s results carried over
to the general theory of classes.61
In notes added to [Tarski, 1933a], Tarski is at pains to set the historical record
straight. There was some need for this. For example, Carnap erroneously wrote
that Tarski’s investigations were carried out “in connection with those of G¨odel”
([Carnap, 1935]). In fact Tarski arrived at the ﬁnal formulation of his deﬁnition
of truth in 1929. But the paper was not published until 1933 (in Polish) — and
only received more general attention when it was published in German in 1935.
Tarski emphasizes that the methods and results of [Tarski, 1933a] were entirely
his own, with two noted exceptions — Section 2 (on the problems of deﬁning truth
in natural language) was directly inﬂuenced by Le´sniewski, and the method of the
proof of Theorem 1 was drawn from G¨odel [1931]. It is noteworthy that Tarski’s
discussion of the arithmetization of the metalanguage and metatheory proceeded
quite independently of G¨odel’s work (though G¨odel developed the method far more
completely).
*******
Tarski’s theory of truth has received far more philosophical attention than any-
thing else in Tarski’s corpus. It is without doubt the work for which Tarski is best
known to philosophers. It is also the subject of Tarski’s most sustained philosoph-
ical discussion, which comprises the second half of [Tarski, 1944] (under the title
of ‘Polemical Remarks’). We turn now to some of the philosophical issues raised
by Tarski’s work on truth.
(i) There is disagreement over the point of Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth. What
is Tarski’s aim?
To this question, I believe there is a clear answer in Tarski’s
writings. On the one hand, truth is a notion that is fundamental to science, logic
and metamathematics; on the other hand, it leads to paradoxes and antinomies,
earning itself an “evil reputation”. We must then ﬁnd a way of deﬁning truth
that will preserve its intuitive content but place it beyond suspicion. Tarski seeks
a deﬁnition of truth in terms that no one could question. And for Tarski, those
terms are the terms of logic, the terms of the object language, and the structural-
descriptive terms:
“. . . the semantical concepts are . . . reduced to purely logical concepts,
the concepts of the language being investigated and the speciﬁc con-
cepts of the morphology of language” [Tarski, 1936a, p. 406]
Moreover, this reduction is strongly suggested by the T-sentences. According
to Tarski, the T-sentence
61These negative results about truth and provability are informally discussed in Tarski [Tarski,
1969].

554
Keith Simmons
‘snow is white’ is true if and only if snow is white
is a partial deﬁnition of truth — and it contains a logical term, a sentence of the
object language, and a structural-descriptive name of that sentence. As we saw
earlier, Tarski suggests that for an object language with ﬁnitely many sentences, we
need only list all the associated T-sentences for a complete deﬁnition of truth. This
will not work, of course, for languages with inﬁnitely many sentences — for those,
Tarski uses the recursive method. But still, says Tarski, his recursive deﬁnition
eﬀects the kind of reduction suggested by the T-sentences (see for example [Tarski,
1933a, pp. 251–3]).
Suppose now that in the metalanguage we introduce semantic concepts (refer-
ring to the object language) by way of Tarski’s deﬁnition. Then:
“the deﬁnition of truth, or of any other semantic concept, will fulﬁl
what we intuitively expect from every deﬁnition; that is, it will explain
the meaning of the term being deﬁned in terms whose meaning appears
to be completely clear and unequivocal. And, moreover, we have then
a kind of guarantee that the use of semantic concepts will not involve
us in any contradictions.” [Tarski, 1944, p. 675]
Here is the point of Tarski’s deﬁnition. In the metalanguage, we may use the notion
of truth (for the object language) without fear of paradox, safe in the knowledge
that ‘true’ can always be eliminated via its deﬁniens in a precise, uncontroversial
way, in favour of terms which are not semantical and thereby immune to paradox.62
Tarski’s deﬁnition, then, legitimates the use of the concept of truth (for a given
object language, in a suitable metalanguage). And Tarski was optimistic that the
concept of truth thus deﬁned would prove fruitful, both for philosophy and the
special sciences. Tarski points out that the problem of deﬁning truth “has often
been emphasized as one of the fundamental problems of the theory of knowledge”
[Tarski, 1936a, p. 407]. He suggests that the notion of truth is essential to the
following constraint on empirical theories:
62These remarks are in broad agreement with Etchemendy’s discussion in section 1 of
[Etchemendy, 1988a].
They are opposed to Field’s claim in [Field, 1972] that Tarski aimed
for a physicalistic reduction of truth.
Field rests his textual case on one brief passage from
[Tarski, 1936a]:
“. . . it would then be diﬃcult to bring this method into harmony with the postulates
of the unity of science and of physicalism (since the concepts of semantics would
be neither logical nor physical concepts).” [Tarski, 1936a, p. 406]
The method in question is the axiomatic method of deﬁning truth, according to which truth is
introduced as a primitive concept whose basic properties are established by axioms. Tarski’s
concern here is that a primitive semantic concept would be in tension with the scientiﬁc, phys-
icalist outlook.
Tarski’s theory produces no such tension: truth is eliminable, not primitive.
Immediately after the passage just quoted, Tarski remarks that his preferred method reduces the
concept of truth to logical concepts, concepts of the object language, and structural-descriptive
concepts. There is no mention of physicalistic concepts or the need for a speciﬁcally physicalistic
reduction. Tarski thought it an advantage of his theory that it harmonized with the scientiﬁc
outlook — but there is no indication that Tarski sought an explicitly physicalist reduction of
truth.

Tarski’s Logic
555
“As soon as we succeed in showing that an empirical theory contains (or
implies) false sentences, it cannot be any longer considered acceptable.”
[Tarski, 1944, p. 691]
And in regard to mathematics and metamathematics, Tarski suggests that we
can already see the valuable results contributed by the theory of truth and the
semantic method:
“These results concern the mutual relations between the notion of truth
and that of provability; establish new properties of the latter notion
(which, as well known, is one of the basic notions of metamathematics);
and throw some light on the fundamental problems of consistency and
completeness. . . .
Furthermore, by applying the method of semantics we can adequately
deﬁne several important metamathematical notions which have been
used so far only in an intuitive way — such as, e.g., the notion of
deﬁnability or that of a model of an axiom system; and thus we can
undertake a systematic study of these notions. In particular, the inves-
tigations on deﬁnability have already brought some interesting results,
and promise even more in the future.” (pp. 692–693)
(ii) What kind of theory is Tarski’s theory of truth? Is it, for example, a correspon-
dence theory of truth? At several places, Tarski says that he wishes to capture
the intuitions behind the classical Aristotelian conception of truth — and Tarski
formulates that conception in terms of correspondence. Consider:
“If we wished to adapt ourselves to modern philosophical teminology,
we could perhaps express this conception by means of the following
formula:
The truth of a sentence consists in its agreement with (or
correspondence to) reality.” ([Tarski, 1944, p. 667]. See also
[Tarski, 1933a, p. 153] and [Tarski, 1936a, p. 401].)
However, we would expect a full-blown correspondence theory to provide an
account of the correspondence relation and its relata — and Tarski’s theory does
not. Such notions as correspondence and state of aﬀairs are not the subject of
Tarski’s theory — for Tarski, these are vague notions that gesture towards a cer-
tain conception of truth. It is noteworthy that Aristotle’s dictum (quoted above)
makes no mention of a correspondence relation, or facts, or states of aﬀairs. And
Tarski ﬁnds Aristotle’s formulation preferable to those that talk vaguely of ‘corre-
spondence’ and ‘reality’ (see [Tarski, 1944, p. 667]). Still, Aristotle’s formulation,
like the others, cannot serve as a deﬁnition of truth, and
“[i]t is up to us to look for a more precise expression of our intuitions.”
[Tarski, 1944, p. 667]

556
Keith Simmons
According to Tarski, those intuitions are adequately accommodated by the T-
sentences. Take the sentence ‘snow is white’. To what fact or state of aﬀairs or
condition does this sentence correspond? To the fact, state of aﬀairs or condition
that snow is white. That is, the sentence is true if snow is white, and false if snow
is not white — or to put it in familiar terms, ‘snow is white’ is true if and only if
snow is white. A deﬁnition of truth conforms to the correspondence conception if
it implies such T-sentences. (See [Tarski, 1944, p. 667]). So we can attribute to
Tarski a correspondence conception of truth — but we should not say that Tarski’s
theory is a correspondence theory in any robust sense.
If Tarski’s theory is not a correspondence theory, is it a kind of deﬂationary
theory?63 Deﬂationists, in particular disquotationalists, have drawn heavily from
Tarski’s account. According to the disquotationalist (for example Quine, in [Quine,
1970, Chapter 1], saying
‘snow is white’ is true
is just an indirect way of saying something about the world, namely, that snow
is white. All there is to say about the truth of ‘snow is white’ is encapsulated
by its associated T-sentence. According to the disquotationalist, truth is not a
substantive property; rather, the term ‘true’ is a “device for disquotation” ([Quine,
1970, p. 12]). A natural disquotational deﬁnition of ‘true’ for a language L with
ﬁnitely many sentences is this:
x is true iﬀ(x = x1 and p1) or (x = x2 and p2) or . . . or (x = xn and
pn)
where ‘x1’, ‘x2’, . . . ‘xn’ are replaced by quote-names of sentences of L, and ‘p1’,
‘p2’, . . . ‘pn’ by the sentences themselves. And this deﬁnition looks very like the
one Tarski suggests for languages with ﬁnitely many sentences (see above). So
there appear to be some close connections between Tarski’s theory and disquota-
tionalism.
Of course, Tarski and disquotationalists are concerned with languages that con-
tain inﬁnitely many sentences. For that reason, as we saw, Tarski employs the
recursive method. The disquotationalist might follow suit: given a language with
a ﬁnite stock of names and predicates, reference may be disquotationally deﬁned
by a ﬁnite list of sentences of the form ‘ “a” refers to a’, and satisfaction by a
ﬁnite list of sentences of the form ‘x satisﬁes “F” if and only if x is F’. But such
a recursive disquotationalism is restricted to sentences that have the appropriate
kind of logical form. And there is an array of truths that are notoriously hard to
ﬁt into the Tarskian mould: belief attributions, counterfactuals, modal assertions,
statements of probability, and so on. Since disquotationalism is an account of the
truth predicate of an entire natural language and not of some restricted portion,
the recursive route seems unattractive.
63For a recent collection of classic and contemporary papers on deﬂationism see [Blackburn
and Simmons, 1999].

Tarski’s Logic
557
The disquotationalist might prefer to extend the above ﬁnitary deﬁnition to an
inﬁnitary one:
x is true iﬀ(x = x1 and p1) or (x = x2 and p2) or . . .
where ‘p1’, ‘p2’ . . . abbreviate the sentences of the language.64 So now ‘true’ is not
just a device of disquotation; it is also a device for expressing inﬁnite disjunctions.
Here the disquotationalist and Tarski part company; Tarski writes:
“Whenever a language contains inﬁnitely many sentences, the deﬁni-
tions constructed automatically according to the above scheme would
have to consist of inﬁnitely many words, and such sentences cannot
be formulated either in the metalanguage or in any other language.”
[Tarski, 1933a, p. 188–9]65
But Tarski’s inﬁnitary qualms aside, might it be claimed that disquotationalism
captures the deﬂationary spirit of Tarski’s theory?
Such a claim might be further encouraged by the observation that Tarski’s
deﬁnition is eliminative. According to the disquotationalist we have just char-
acterized, ‘true’ is always in principle eliminable by disquotation. The deﬁniens
contains, apart from logical terms, only the quote-names of the sentences of the
given language, and their disquotations. And Tarski is quite clear that his deﬁni-
tion of truth is eliminative (see [Tarski, 1944, p. 683]). Tarski points out that the
elimination may not be as straightforward as it is with “ ‘snow is white’ is true” —
consider the sentences “All consequences of true sentences are true” and “The ﬁrst
sentence written by Plato is true”, where the elimination of ‘true’ is not a matter
of simple disquotation (see [Tarski, 1944, p. 683]). Nevertheless, elimination is
always possible in principle:
“Of course, since we have a deﬁnition for truth and since every deﬁni-
tion enables us to replace the deﬁnition by its deﬁniens, an elimination
of the term ‘true’ in its semantic sense is always theoretically possible.”
[Tarski, 1944, p. 683]
However, despite the close connections between Tarski and the disquotationalist,
and the shared eliminative nature of their deﬁnitions, I think Tarski would strongly
resist the label ‘deﬂationist’.
First, unlike the disquotationalist, Tarski is not
oﬀering a general theory of truth in natural languages. His theory is a limited to
certain regimented languages — including fragments of a natural language, but
never the whole language. Second, for Tarski truth is a substantive and fruitful
64Such a deﬁnition is suggested by remarks in [Leeds, 1978], and versions of it are presented
explicitly in [Field, 1986], [Resnik, 1990], [David, 1994].
For an illustration, consider the sentence: ‘What Claire said yesterday was true’. According to
the deﬁnition, the sentence is equivalent to What Claire said=‘aardvarks amble’ and aardvarks
amble or What Claire said = ‘antelopes graze’ and antelopes graze or . . . .
65In later work, Tarski investigated inﬁnitary languages — see [Tarski, 1958a; Tarski, 1958b;
Tarski, 1961b; Tarski, 1961c].

558
Keith Simmons
concept. According to the disquotationalist, there is no substantive concept of
truth — only the term ‘true’ that serves as a logical device. But, according to
Tarski, as we have seen, truth is a concept that has important work to do — in
philosophy and in metamathematics, for example. Third, Tarski thinks it is a
mistake to think that the concept of truth is sterile on the grounds that the word
‘true’ may be eliminated on the basis of its deﬁnition. That would lead, Tarski
says, to the absurd conclusion that all deﬁned notions are sterile. Tarski writes:
“In fact, I am rather inclined to agree with those who maintain that the
moments of greatest creative achievement in science frequently coincide
with the introduction of new notions by means of deﬁnition.” [Tarski,
1944, p. 683]
Tarski reserves the label ‘the semantic conception of truth’ for his account. And
the label is useful, at least for distinguishing Tarski’s theory from correspondence
and deﬂationary theories. Tarski’s theory does not ﬁt comfortably into either of
those categories. Tarski himself emphasizes the neutrality of his theory:
“we may accept the semantic conception of truth without giving up
any epistemological attitude we may have had; we may remain naive
realists, critical realists or idealists, empiricists or metaphysicians —
whatever we were before. The semantic conception is completely neu-
tral toward all these issues” [Tarski, 1944, p. 686]
Epistemological and metaphysical disputes about truth are not Tarski’s concern.
Rather, Tarski is after a deﬁnition of ‘true sentence’ that is precise, fruitful, im-
mune to paradox, and consonant with ordinary usage.
(iii) There are many other philosophical issues raised by Tarski’s work on truth.
Here we indicate just some of them.
(a) Is truth immanent or transcendent? It is striking that Tarski deﬁnes ’true’
only relative to a given language:
“We can only meaningfully say of an expression that it is true or not
if we treat this expression as a part of a concrete language. As soon as
the discussion concerns more than one language the expression ‘true
sentence’ ceases to be unambiguous.” [Tarski, 1933a, p. 263]
The question arises whether truth must always be ‘immanent’ in this way, or
whether there is a more general notion that transcends particular languages.66
(b) Are natural languages universal in the way that Tarski says they are? At issue
here is the expressive capacity of natural languages.67
(c) Are natural languages inconsistent? Tarski is often taken to give an aﬃrmative
66For discussions of this issue, see for example [Resnik, 1990] and [Field, 1994].
67For further discussion see, for example, [Martin, 1976], [Herzberger, 1981] and [Simmons,
1993].

Tarski’s Logic
559
answer to this question, and he certainly comes close. He says that the semantical
antinomies
“seem to provide a proof that every language which is universal in
the above sense, and for which the normal laws of logic hold, must be
inconsistent.” [Tarski, 1933a, pp. 164–5]
But note the “seem to”.
In [Tarski, 1944], Tarski is more explicitly cautious
— since a natural language has no exactly speciﬁed structure, “the problem of
consistency has no exact meaning with respect to this language” [Tarski, 1944,
p. 673]. Tarski also notes in [Tarski, 1933a, p. 267] that bringing exact methods
to bear on natural language would require a reform of the language, including its
division into a sequence of object languages and metalanguages.
“It may, however, be doubted whether the language of everyday life,
after being ‘rationalized’ in this way, would still preserve its naturalness
and whether it would not rather take on the characteristic features of
the formalized languages.” [Tarski, 1933a, p. 267]
There is, then, a delicate question as to how to read Tarski here. My preferred
reading is this: it is inappropriate to bring exact methods to bear on natural
language, and if one insists on doing so, the result will either be confusions and
contradictions or an artiﬁcial regimentation of natural language.68
(d) How is Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth related to the truth-conditions theory of
meaning? According to [Davidson, 1967], the relationship is very close:
“There is no need to suppress, of course, the obvious connection be-
tween a deﬁnition of truth of the kind Tarski has shown how to con-
struct, and the concept of meaning. It is this: the deﬁnition works
by giving necessary and suﬃcient conditions of the truth of every sen-
tence, and to give truth conditions is a way of giving the meaning of a
sentence. To know the semantic concept of truth for a language is to
know what it is for a sentence — any sentence — to be true, and this
amounts, in one good sense we can give to the phrase, to understanding
the language.” (p. 76)
Others would deny the connection that Davidson maintains here.69 It is clear that
Tarski would not regard his deﬁnition of truth as the basis for a theory of meaning
for natural languages. For one thing, Tarski restricts himself to formal languages.
And for another, truth, not meaning, is Tarski’s target.
The meanings of the
sentences of the object language and metalanguage are taken as given from the
outset — indeed, it is a requirement of Tarski’s deﬁnition that the object language
be translatable into the metalanguage.
68For further discussion see, for example, [Soames, 1999, pp. 49–56 and 150–51].
69See for example Etchemendy [1988a, pp. 56–62], and Soames [1999, pp. 102–107]. Davidson’s
own position on this issue evolved over the years — for example, one may compare and contrast
Davidson [1967] and Davidson [1996].

560
Keith Simmons
4.3
Logical consequence
We have just seen how Tarski took up the challenge of providing a precise def-
inition of truth that conforms to ordinary usage. In his paper “On the concept
of logical consequence” [Tarski, 1936b], Tarski takes up the parallel challenge for
the concept of logical consequence. At the outset of the paper, Tarski rejects the
idea that logical consequence can be captured exhaustively via formal rules of in-
ference. The idea had great appeal among logicians: after all, all exact reasonings
in mathematics were formalizable using a small stock of simple rules of inference.
But Tarski showed that there is a clear and unbridgeable gap between the ordinary
notion of logical consequence and the logicians’ formalized notion.
As early as 1927, Tarski showed the existence of so-called ω-incomplete theories
(the terminology, but not the concept, is due to G¨odel [G¨odel, 1931]).70 Such a the-
ory includes the normal rules of inference (such as substitution and detachment),
and among its theorems are the following:
A0.
0 possesses the property P
A1.
1 possesses the property P
and in general every sentence of the form
An.
n possesses the property P.
But the following sentence cannot be proved in the theory:
A.
Every natural number possesses the property P.
Now it is clear that, according to our ordinary notion, A is a logical consequence
of A0, A1, . . . An, . . .. So:
“the formalized concept of consequence, as it is generally used by math-
ematical logicians, by no means coincides with the common concept.”
(p. 411)
Tarski goes on to point out that this gap cannot be closed by the introduction
of new (inﬁnitary) rules of inference. For G¨odel’s results show that
“[i]n every deductive theory (apart from theories of a particularly el-
ementary nature), however much we supplement the ordinary rules of
inference by new purely structural rules, it is possible to construct
sentences which follow, in the usual sense, from the theorems of this
theory, but which nevertheless cannot be proved in this theory on the
basis of the accepted rules of inference.” [Tarski, 1936b, p. 412–413]
70Tarski reports (in [Tarski, 1933b, p. 279, fn. 2] that in 1927 he had delivered a paper entitled
‘Remarks on some notions of the methodology of the deductive sciences’ to the Second Conference
of the Polish Philosophical Society in Warsaw in which he stressed the importance of the concepts
of ω-consistency and ω-completeness, and communicated an example of an ω-incomplete theory.
A slightly altered form of this theory appears in [Tarski, 1933b].

Tarski’s Logic
561
Consequently,
“In order to obtain the proper concept of consequence, which is close
in essentials to the common concept, we must resort to quite diﬀerent
methods and apply quite diﬀerent conceptual apparatus in deﬁning it.”
(p. 413)
The new methods are Tarski’s semantic methods. While Tarski makes “no very
high claim to complete originality” [Tarski, 1935, p. 414], it is clear that he regards
his account as the ﬁrst fully precise semantic treatment of logical consequence.
Tarski’s positive account in [Tarski, 1936b] starts out with two guiding intuitions.
Suppose we have a class K of sentences and a sentence X which follows from K.
The intuitions are these:
(i)
It can never happen that every member of K is true and X is false.
(ii) The subject matter of K and X (the objects to which reference is made)
have no eﬀect on the consequence relation — only the form of the sentences
matters.
(i) and (ii) suggest the following condition on the consequence relation:
(F) Given K and X, if the nonlogical constants are replaced uniformly, yielding
K′ and X′, then X′ must be true if all the sentences of K′ are true.
Now Tarski points out that while (F) can serve as a necessary condition, it is
not suﬃcient. The diﬃculty is this: we may not assume that the language con-
tains designations for all possible objects.71 (Here, Tarski’s remarks are aimed at
Carnap’s deﬁnition of logical consequence.)72 To avoid this diﬃculty, Tarski turns
to the notions of sentential function and satisfaction. Assume a correspondence
between variables and extralogical constants. Given a class L of sentences, replace
each occurrence of an extralogical constant by its corresponding variable. We will
obtain a class of sentential functions — call it L′. Given the concept of the satis-
faction of a sentential function by a sequence of objects, we can deﬁne the notion
of a model of L as follows:
An arbitrary sequence S of objects is a model of the class L of sentences
if and only if S satisﬁes every member of L′.
71Tarski points out that it may, and does, happen that X does not follow in the ordinary sense
from the sentences of K, and yet the condition F is satisﬁed — where F is satisﬁed because
the language with which we are dealing does not have a suﬃcient stock of extra-logical symbols.
Tarski writes that the condition is suﬃcient
“only if the designations of all possible objects occurred in the language in question.
This assumption, however, is ﬁctitious and can never be realized” [Tarski, 1936b,
p. 416]
72In [Carnap, 1934, pp. 137ﬀ], Carnap provided deﬁnitions of logical consequence and fur-
ther derivative concepts. Tarski regarded them as inadequate because the deﬁned concepts are
dependent on the richness of the language under investigation.

562
Keith Simmons
The notion of a model of a sentence is to be understood in the the obvious way.
And now Tarski states the deﬁnition of logical consequence:
“The sentence X follows logically from the sentences of the class K if
and only if every model of the class K is also a model of the sentence
X.” [Tarski, 1936b, p. 417]
This deﬁnition, says Tarski, agrees with common usage, and meets the condi-
tions (i) and (ii) — for it follows from the deﬁnition that every consequence of true
sentences is true, and that the consequence relation is independent of the meanings
of extra-logical constants. Notice that a deﬁnition of logical truth is immediately
forthcoming: a sentence Y is logically true if every sequence of objects is a model
of Y .
There has been far less philosophical discussion of Tarski’s notion of logical
consequence than of his notion of truth. (Perhaps, as G´omez-Torrente suggests
in [G´omez-Torrente, 1996, p. 126], this is a sign of its success — it is generally
regarded as a standard ﬁxture of modern logic.) But there has been some discus-
sion, most notably the critical work of Etchemendy in [Etchemendy, 1983; 1988a;
1988b; 1990]. Etchemendy challenges the model-theoretic treatment of logical con-
sequence, a treatment that is now quite standard.73 Etchemendy also challenges
the widespread attribution of this standard treatment to Tarski (see [Etchemendy,
1988a]). He argues that Tarski’s deﬁnition of logical consequence diverges from
the standard one.
According to Etchemendy, there are two main points of divergence. The ﬁrst
concerns the ω-rule of inference, the inference that allows us to move from A1, A2,
. . . An, . . . to A. Given a ﬁrst-order formalization of arithmetic (where the numerals
are nonlogical constants) the ω-rule is invalid according to the standard model-
theoretic account — for there are interpretations of ‘natural number’ and ‘0’, ‘1’,
‘2’, . . . for which A1, A2, . . . An, . . . are all true and A is false. But Tarski claims
that the inference is intuitively valid, and that his deﬁnition respects this intuition.
If so, then it follows that Tarski’s deﬁnition and the standard model theoretic
deﬁnitions are diﬀerent. And Etchemendy goes on to argue that the price Tarski
pays for the validation of the ω-rule is a trivialization of his analysis.74
The second main point of divergence concerns domain variation: according to
Etchemendy, Tarski’s account of logical consequence, unlike the standard account,
does not require that we vary the domain of quantiﬁcation. But now Tarski’s ac-
count gets into trouble, Etchemendy argues. Suppose the intended interpretation
73For a defence of the model-theoretic account against Etchemendy’s attack, see [Soames, 1999,
pp. 117–136].
74According to Etchemendy, Tarski allows a nonstandard choice of logical constants, which may
include the numerals and the quantiﬁer ‘every natural number’. Then A will be a consequence
of A1, A2, . . . An, . . . , since “any set that contains each natural number contains every natural
number” [Etchemendy, 1988a, p. 73]. Etchemendy argues that this ﬂexibility with regard to the
choice of logical constants leads to a certain trivialization of Tarski’s analysis. However, below we
will consider another reading of Tarski, according to which Tarski’s deﬁnition does not diverge
from the standard model-theoretic one, Tarski does not endorse nonstandard choices of logical
constants, and no such trivialization results.

Tarski’s Logic
563
of a given language has a domain with two or more individuals. Now consider the
sentence ∃x∃y(x ̸= y). If we do not require domain variation, this sentence will be
a logical truth.
If Etchemendy is right, Tarski’s deﬁnition — to its detriment — diverges from
the standard model-theoretic account in two important respects. But it is possible
to resist Etchemendy’s reading of Tarski. According to G´omez-Torrente [G´omez-
Torrente, 1996], the supposed divergences are illusory. First, Tarski did not think
that ﬁrst-order versions of the ω-rule are valid — only certain versions in broader
logical frameworks are valid. (Of course, an argument may be valid under some but
not all of its formalizations). G´omez-Torrente argues that in [Tarski, 1936b] Tarski
has in mind a presentation of arithmetic in a broad logical framework such as the
simple theory of types or the calculus of classes. (We saw above in fn. 71 that Tarski
discusses ω-incompleteness in [Tarski, 1933b], where the logical framework is the
general theory of classes.) In such a broad framework, arithmetical expressions
(like the numerals) are deﬁned expressions, not primitives or nonlogical constants.
Now consider the ω-rule of inference again. If there are any nonlogical constants,
they will appear in P only — nowhere else are there any constants subject to
reinterpretation.
And since the class of logically deﬁned natural numbers will
coincide with the extension of the predicate ‘natural number’, A will follow from
A1, A2, . . . An, . . . (to borrow Etchemendy’s words, quoted in fn. 74, any set that
contains each natural number contains every natural number).
Second, although it is true that [Tarski, 1936b] makes no mention of domain
variation, G´omez-Torrente provides several reasons for thinking that it is implicit
in Tarski’s deﬁnition. Perhaps the most compelling reason is the following. Tarski
often speciﬁes a domain (or universe of discourse) by way of a nonlogical predi-
cate. For example, recall the ‘textbook’ introduction of a model in [Tarski, 1941a,
Chapter VI] — detailed in 2.5 above. We start with a simple deductive theory,
the theory of congruence. The nonlogical predicate ‘S’ denotes the set of all line
segments — the domain or universe of discourse. Now the two axioms are rela-
tivized to S; for example, Axiom 1 says that for all x ∈S, x ∼= x. Now we abstract
away from our particular theory. In particular, we replace ‘S’ by ‘K’, so that now
the axioms are fully abstract, and relativized to ‘K’. Now ‘K’ may be interpreted
as the set of all line segments — but it may also be interpreted as the universal
class, or the set of all numbers, or any set of numbers, and so on. In each case,
the interpretation of ‘K’ will be the domain of the model. Here, and elsewhere
in Tarski’s work,75 domain variation is accommodated by the reinterpretation of
75There are many other places where Tarski speciﬁes a domain via a nonlogical predicate.
For another example, consider Tarski’s presentation of abstract Boolean algebra in [Tarski,
1935+1936] — detailed in 2.4 above.
As we saw, the meaning of the predicate ‘B’ is given
by ‘the universe of discourse’. In the course of [Tarski, 1935+1936], ‘B’ is variously interpreted
as the universe of sets (Boolean set algebra), the set S of all sentences (the calculus of sen-
tences), and the class D of deductive systems (the calculus of systems). Again, domain variation
is accommodated by the reinterpretation of a nonlogical predicate.
As further examples, G´omez-Torrente also cites all the ﬁrst order theories, and the second-order
theory of real arithmetic, presented in [Tarski, 1936c].

564
Keith Simmons
nonlogical predicates. But Tarski’s test for logical consequence just is a matter
of interpretation and reinterpretation — and so Tarski’s deﬁnition as it stands
accommodates domain variation.76
We have good reason, then, to maintain the received view: Tarski provided
us with the ﬁrst precise model-theoretic treatment of logical consequence — and
Tarski’s treatment remains standard to this day.
4.4
Model theory: some historical remarks
Tarski’s seminal work on deﬁnability, truth and logical consequence were of cen-
tral importance to the development of model theory — the study of the relation
between formal languages and their interpretations. Chang and Keisler point out
that model theory is a young subject, “not clearly visible as a separate area of
research until the early 1950s” [Chang and Keisler, 1973, p. 3].
[L¨owenheim,
1915] is generally regarded as the ﬁrst speciﬁc contribution to model theory. In
this paper, L¨owenheim introduces the method of elimination of quantiﬁers (more
on this below). L¨owenheim also proves the theorem that bears his name: If a
ﬁrst-order sentence A is true in every ﬁnite domain but not every domain, then
there is a denumerable domain in which A is not true. L¨owenheim’s result was
improved by Skolem in [Skolem, 1920], yielding the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem:
Any set of ﬁrst-order sentences which has a model has a denumerable model. In
[Skolem, 1922], Skolem went on to improve the result further: Any model of a set
of ﬁrst-order sentences has a denumerable submodel.77
Tarski’s earliest contributions to model theory were presented in the university
lectures and seminars that he gave at Warsaw University in the years 1926–1928
(see [Tarski, 1948a, p. 50, fn. 11]). It is reported that in 1927-8 Tarski produced
further improvements to the L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem as follows:
(i)
Any denumerable set of ﬁrst-order sentences that has an inﬁnite model has
an uncountable model.78
(ii) Any denumerable set of ﬁrst-order sentences that has an inﬁnite model has a
76G´omez-Torrente mentions two other reasons for thinking that domain-variation is implicit in
Tarski’s deﬁnition. First, as both Etchemendy and G´omez-Torrente point out, Tarski had already
deﬁned the notion of ‘true sentence in an individual domain a’ in [Tarski, 1933a], showing an
explicit concern with domain variation prior to [Tarski, 1936b]. Why unnecessarily attribute to
Tarski an abrupt change of mind? Second, [Tarski, 1936b] is a summary of an address given to
a philosophical audience (it was delivered at the International Congress of Scientiﬁc Philosophy,
in Paris, 1935). The paper is indeed informally written and brief — so it would not be surprising
if Tarski suppressed certain more technical matters. (G´omez-Torrente [1996] is a careful and
convincing paper which contains more argumentation and historical information that I am able
to cover here.)
77Given a model M with domain D, a submodel M′ of M has for its domain a subset of D.
M′ assigns to the expressions of the given ﬁrst-order language restrictions of the extensions that
M assigns — restrictions tailored to M′’s smaller domain.
78According to the editors of Fundamenta Mathematicae, Tarski proved this result in 1927–8.
See the editors’ Note after the paper Skolem [1934].

Tarski’s Logic
565
model in each inﬁnite power.79
Vaught reports that Tarski never published a proof of (i) or (ii); Tarski’s proofs
remains a mystery.80 Tarski also explored the method of eliminating quantiﬁers,
a powerful method for establishing metamathematical properties of theories, es-
pecially decidability. We will take a closer look at the method in Section 5 below.
A number of key notions of model theory were introduced in these seminars —
among them, Vaught reports, the notion of elementary equivalence.81
G¨odel’s landmark completeness theorem was published in 1930.
During the
1930s, Tarski produced his greatest contributions to model theory — the work
on deﬁnability, truth and logical consequence. As we have seen, Tarski stresses
semantical methods in Chapter VI of his 1941 textbook [Tarski, 1941a], and the
notion of model takes center-stage.
It was not until the postwar period that model theory became an autonomous
area of study. In 1954–5, Tarski published a series of three articles under the title
“Contributions to the theory of models” [Tarski, 1954a; 1954b; 1955]. In the ﬁrst
of these, Tarski writes:
“Within the last few years a new branch of metamathematics has been
developing. It is called the theory of models and can be regarded as a
part of the semantics of formalized theories.” [Tarski, 1954a, p. 517]
This appears to be the ﬁrst time that the phrase ‘theory of models’ appears in
the literature.82 The subject developed quickly in the 1950s, stimulated by work
of Tarski, Mal’cev, Henkin and Abraham Robinson, among others. Tarski con-
tinued to make important contributions: for example, he introduced the notions
of elementary substructures and elementary chains, and proved some fundamental
results involving these notions, including “Tarski’s union theorem” (see [Tarski,
1957b], with Vaught); with Frayne, Morel and Scott, he showed the importance of
the role of ultraproducts in model theory (see [Tarski, 1958c]); and with Hanf, he
initiated work on measurable cardinals ([Tarski, 1962] and [Hanf, 1963–4] — and
see Section 8 below).83 Tarski also inﬂuenced model theory a great deal through
his students and through his collaborations with other logicians.84
79In [Tarski, 1957b], Tarski and Vaught write:
“A proof, along these lines, of Theorem 2.2 is known, but is by no means simple. It
is essentially the same proof which was originally found by Tarski, in 1928, for the
generalized L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem.” [Tarski, 1957b, p. 666, fn. 8]
80Vaught refers the reader to his speculations in [Vaught, 1965, p. 398], and [Vaught, 1974,
p. 160].
The ﬁrst published proof of (ii) appeared in [Mal’cev, 1936] (which also contains a
generalization of G¨odel’s completeness and compactness theorems to uncountable languages).
81[Vaught, 1986, p. 870]. Two models are elementarily equivalent iﬀevery sentence that is true
in one is true in the other, and vice versa.
82This claim is made by [Chang and Keisler, 1973, p. 3], and by [Vaught, 1986, p. 876].
83For a more detailed survey of Tarski’s postwar contributions to model theory, see [Vaught,
1986] and [Chang and Keisler, 1973, pp. 515–531]. Addison, Henkin and Tarski [1965b] contains
a large bibliography of work on model theory up to that time.
84Consider the roster of logicians that Vaught provides:

566
Keith Simmons
5
DECIDABILITY AND UNDECIDABILITY
Tarski casts the decision problem sometimes in terms of proof, and sometimes in
terms of truth. In [Tarski, 1953], for example, the notion of proof is central:
“By a decision procedure for a given formalized theory T we understand
a method which permits us to decide in each particular case whether
a given sentence formulated in the symbolism of T can be proved by
means of the devices available in T (or, more generally, can be rec-
ognized as valid in T). The decision problem for T is the problem of
determining whether a decision procedure for T exists (and possibly
of exhibiting such a procedure). A theory is called decidable or unde-
cidable according as the solution of the decision problem is positive or
negative.” [Tarski, 1953, p. 3]
In [Tarski, 1948a], the notion of truth takes centre-stage:
“The most important kind of decision problems is that in which K
[a class of sentences] is deﬁned to be the class of true sentences of a
certain theory. When we say that there is a decision method for a
certain theory, we mean that there is a decision method for the class
of true sentences of the theory.” [Tarski, 1948a, p. 1]
Tarski was in no doubt about the signiﬁcance of the decision problem:
“As is well known, the decision problem is one of the central problems
of contemporary metamathematics”. [Tarski, 1953, p. 3]
In the present section, we turn to Tarski’s work on decidability (Sections 5.1 and
5.2) and undecidability (Section 5.3).
5.1
Decidability of the theory of the reals
Tarski famously proved the decidability of the ﬁrst-order theory of the real num-
bers. The proof was ﬁrst published in full detail in A Decision Method for Ele-
mentary Algebra and Geometry [Tarski, 1948a]:
“In this monograph we present a method . . . for deciding on the truth
of sentences of the elementary algebra of real numbers.” (p. 2)
“Tarski inﬂuenced model theory not only with his papers but also through his PhD
students, his correspondence, and his conversations with people, many of whom
came to Berkeley to see him. This was especially so in the two decades after the
war. His PhD students active in model theory included Mostowski, Julia Robinson,
Wanda Szmielew, [Robert Vaught], C. C. Chang, S. Feferman, Montague, H. J.
Keisler, H. Gaifman, W. Hanf, and others. Some people (not PhD students) active
in model theory, who were close to Tarski and received inspiration from him in
their work, were Beth, Fra¨ıss´e, Henkin, Lo´s, Lyndon, and D. Scott. One could add
J. Ax, W. Craig, A. Ehrenfeucht, Y. Ershov, S. Kochen, M. Rabin, A. Robinson,
and many, many others.” [Vaught, 1986, p. 877]

Tarski’s Logic
567
By “the elementary algebra of real numbers” is to be understood
“that part of the general theory of the real numbers in which one uses
exclusively variables representing real numbers, constants denoting el-
ementary operations on and relations between real numbers, like ‘+’,
‘·’, ‘−’, ‘<’, ‘>’, and ‘=’, and expressions of elementary logic such as
‘and’, ‘or’, ‘not’, ‘for some x’, and ‘for all x’.” (p. 2)
The primitive operations are ‘+’ and ‘·’, and so we shall refer to this theory as
⟨R, +, ·⟩.
Here decidability is understood in the semantic sense — the intuitive notion of
truth plays a fundamental role in Tarski’s presentation. (Tarski refers the reader
to the formal deﬁnition in [Tarski, 1933a].) But Tarski points out that truth could
be eliminated from the entire discussion by proceeding axiomatically, and replac-
ing the notion of truth by the notion of provability (see [Tarski, 1948a, fn. 9, pp.
48–50], where Tarski provides a list of axioms). Under this new interpretation,
Tarski’s results lead easily to the conclusion that the axiomatic system of elemen-
tary algebra is decidable, consistent, and complete (see fn. 15, p. 53). Moreover,
since the axioms are satisﬁed not only by the reals but also by the elements of any
real-closed ﬁeld, it follows that the theory of real-closed ﬁelds is also decidable,
consistent, and complete (see fn. 15, p. 54).85 Of these various related results, the
decision method for real-closed ﬁelds is particularly celebrated.
Tarski established the decidability of the ﬁrst-order theory of the reals by “the
method of eliminating quantiﬁers” [Tarski, 1948a, p. 15]. Following [Tarski, 1948a,
p. 50, fn. 11], we can trace the history of this method through [L¨owenheim, 1915,
Section 3], [Skolem, 1919, Section 4], [Langford, 1927; 1928], and [Presburger,
1930]. Tarski mentions that in his university lectures for the years 1926–8 the
method was developed in a general and systematic way (see [Tarski, 1948a, p. 50,
fn. 11]).
In outline, the method is as follows.
Given a theory T, we identify certain
basic formulas, and prove that every formula of T is T-equivalent to a Boolean
combination of basic formulas.
A Boolean combination of basic formulas is a
formula obtained from basic formulas by repeated applications of ¬ and &; and
two formulas φ and ψ are T-equivalent iﬀT ⊨φ ↔ψ (i.e. φ ↔ψ is a semantic
consequence of T). The proof — and in particular the step where we ‘eliminate
quantiﬁers’ — yields a decision procedure for the theory T.
For illustration, consider the theory D of dense simple order without endpoints.
We take D to be given by the set of its axioms,86 and we take the true sen-
85For a full characterization of the theory of real-closed ﬁelds see, for example, [Chang and
Keisler, 1973, p. 41].
86The theory of dense simple order without endpoints has the following axioms:
1. ∀x∀y∀z(x ≤y & y ≤z →x ≤z) (transitivity)
2. ∀x∀y(x ≤y & y ≤x →x = y) (antisymmetry)
3. ∀x(x ≤x) (reﬂexivity)
4. ∀x∀y(x ≤y ∨y ≤x) (comparability)

568
Keith Simmons
tences of D to be its axioms and their semantic consequences. We will apply the
method of quantiﬁer elimination to show that D is decidable (a result published
by Langford in 1927).87 We take as basic formulas the following: ‘vm = vn’ and
‘vm ≤vn’. (Notice that the Boolean combinations of basic formulas are exactly
the open formulas.) Let ‘vm < vn’ abbreviate ‘vm < vn & vm ̸= vn’. We consider
n + 1 variables v0, v1, . . . , vn for n > 0. We associate with these variables certain
conjunctions θ0 & θ1 & . . . θn−1 called arrangements. Each conjunct θi is either
ui < ui+1 or ui = ui+1, where u0, u1, . . . , un is a renumbering of v0, v1, . . . , vn.
The main result to be proved is the following:
Quantiﬁer Elimination Theorem for D.
Every formula is D-equivalent to an open
formula.
We can easily show that to prove this theorem it is suﬃcient to prove:
(1)
If ψ(v0, . . . vn) is an open formula, then ∃vmψ is D-equivalent to an open
formula.88
5. ∀x∀y(x ≤y & x ̸= y) →∃z(x ≤z & z ̸= x & z ≤y & z ̸= y)
6. ∃x∃y(x ̸= y)
7. ∀x∃y(x ≤y & x ̸= y)
8. ∀x∃y(y ≤x & x ̸= y).
(Axioms 1,2,3 give the theory of partial orders; if we add Axiom 4, we obtain the theory of
simple order (or linear order); if we further add Axioms 5 and 6, we obtain the theory of dense
simple order; and with the ﬁnal addition of Axioms 7 and 8, we arrive at the theory of dense
simple order without endpoints.)
87In his papers [1927; 1928], Langford proved that the following theories are decidable by the
method of quantiﬁer elimination: dense linear orders without endpoints, dense linear orders with
a ﬁrst element but no last, dense linear orders with ﬁrst and last elements, and the system of
the natural numbers ordered by ‘<’.
88Here is a sketch of a proof of this result, that to prove the theorem it is suﬃcient to prove (1).
First we establish a general result for any theory T (this is Lemma 1.5.1 in [Chang and Keisler,
1973, p. 50]):
To show that every formula is T-equivalent to a Boolean combination of basic for-
mulas, it is suﬃcient to show:
(i) every atomic formula is T-equivalent to a Boolean combination of basic formulas,
and
(ii) if ψ is a Boolean combination of basic formulas then ∃vmψ is equivalent to a
Boolean combination of basic formulas.
This general result is proved by induction on the complexity of formulas.
If φ is an atomic
formula, then φ is T-equivalent to a Boolean combination of basic formulas by (i). The cases
for negation and conjunction are obvious. If φ is ∃vmψ, where ψ is a Boolean combination θ of
basic formulas, then ∃vmψ is T-equivalent to ∃vmθ, and so, by (ii), T-equivalent to a Boolean
combination of basic formulas. (For more details, see Chang and Keisler, ibid.).
Now apply this general result to theory D. Here, (i) is immediate: the atomic formulas are
vm = vn and vm ≤vn, and these are the basic formulas (and so vacuously equivalent to a
Boolean combination of basic formulas). So it remains only to prove (ii). Since the open (or
quantiﬁer-free) formulas are exactly the Boolean combinations of basic formulas, (ii) is equivalent
to:
If ψ is an open formula, then ∃vmψ is D-equivalent to an open formula.

Tarski’s Logic
569
As we are about to see, the proof of (1) involves the elimination of quantiﬁers,
and yields a decision procedure for the theory D.89
First, some preliminaries.
Note that if m > n, then the quantiﬁer is vacuous, and (1) is immediate. So we
may assume m ≤n. It is convenient to further assume a suitable renaming of the
variables so that m = n. We will also assume the following lemma:
Lemma. Every open formula ψ(v0, . . . , vn) is D-equivalent to v0 < v0, or v0 = v0,
or the disjunction of ﬁnitely many arrangements of the variables v0, . . . , vn.90
So for the purposes of proving (1), we can assume that ψ is
(i)
v0 < v0, or
(ii) v0 = v0, or
(iii) the disjunction of ﬁnitely many arrangements of the variables v0, . . . , vn.
(1) is immediate for the cases (i) and (ii), since in each case ∃vnψ (either ∃v0(v0 <
v0) or ∃v0(v0 = v0)) is D-equivalent to the open formula ψ (either v0 < v0 or
v0 = v0 respectively).
So we turn to case (iii), and let
ψ = θ0 ∨. . . ∨θp
where each θi is an arrangement of v0, . . . , vn. It follows that
D ⊨∃vnψ ↔∃vn(θ0 ∨. . . ∨θp),
and so
D ⊨∃vnψ ↔∃vnθ0 ∨. . . ∨∃vnθp.
We now show that ∃vnψ is D-equivalent to an open formula. First, suppose that
n = 1. Then there are only three possibilities for each disjunct ∃vnθi : ∃v1(v0 < v1)
or ∃v1(v0 = v1) or ∃v1(v1 < v0). Each of these is a consequence of D, and so the
entire disjunction is a consequence of D. That is:
D ⊨∃vnθ0 ∨. . . ∨∃vnθp.
It follows that
D ⊨∃vnψ.
So ∃vnψ is D-equivalent to v0 = v0, an open formula.
Second, suppose that n > 1. We now describe a procedure for ﬁnding an open
formula D-equivalent to ∃vnψ. (We will later see that this procedure is the core of
But this is just (1) — and so it remains only to prove (1). So to prove the quantiﬁer elimination
theorem it is suﬃcient to prove (1) — which is what we wanted to show.
89For the proof that follows, I follow Chang and Keisler [Chang and Keisler, 1973, pp. 52–4].
Full details can be found there.
90This is Lemma 1.5.2, [Chang and Keisler, 1973, p. 51]. For the proof, see pp. 51–2.

570
Keith Simmons
the decision procedure for D.) Consider each arrangement θi of v0, . . . , vn. There
is an associated arrangement θi* of v0, . . . , vn−1 formed from θi by leaving out
vn.91 It is straightforward to check that
D ⊨∃vnθi ↔θ∗
i .92
So it follows that
D ⊨∃vnψ ↔θ∗
0 ∨. . . ∨θ∗
p.
So ∃vnψ is D-equivalent to an open formula. This completes the proof of (1), and
so we have proved the quantiﬁer elimination theorem for D.
We are also in a position to describe a decision procedure for D. Given an
arbitrary sentence φ, we wish to determine whether φ is a true sentence of D.
We proceed as follows. We put φ into prenex normal form Q0v0 . . . Qnvnψ, where
each Qi is a quantiﬁer expression, and ψ is an open formula.
We can assume
without loss of generality that Qn is an existential quantiﬁer, since otherwise we
may start with ¬φ. We now eliminate the existential quantiﬁer Qn. Since ψ is
an open formula, by the above lemma it is D-equivalent to v0 < v0 or v0 = v0
or a disjunction θ0 ∨. . . ∨θp of ﬁnitely many arrangements of v0, . . . , vn. In the
ﬁrst case, we replace Qnvnψ by v0 < v0; in the second case we replace Qnvnψ
by v0 = v0. In the third case, we replace Qnvnψ by v0 = v0 if n = 1, and if
n > 1, we replace Qnvnψ by a D-equivalent open formula θ∗
0 ∨. . . ∨θ∗
p by the
procedure just described in the previous paragraph. We repeat this procedure for
Qn−1, Qn−2, . . . , Q1, until a sentence of the form Q0v0χ(v0) remains. And then it
is obvious whether or not Q0v0χ(v0) is a true sentence of D. (It is easy to see that
Q0v0χ(v0) must take one of four forms: ∃v0(v0 = v0), ∀v0(v0 = v0), ∃v0(v0 < v0)
or ∀v0(v0 < v0), the ﬁrst two of which are clearly true sentences of D, while the
second two clearly are not.) From this we can decide whether or not φ is a true
sentence of D.
For a simple example, consider the sentence
(i)
∃v0∀v1∃v2(v0 < v1 & v1 < v2).
91For example, suppose n = 2 and the arrangement θi of v0, v1 and v2 is:
v0 < v1 & v1 = v2.
Then the associated arrangement θ∗
i of v0 and v1 is:
v0 < v1.
92For an illustration, consider θi and θ∗
i from the previous footnote. Here the biconditional
∃vnθi ↔θ∗
i is
∃v2(v0 < v1 & v1 = v2) ↔v0 < v1.
which is logically equivalent to
v0 < v1 & ∃v2(v1 = v2) ↔v0 < v1.
This is clearly a semantic consequence of D as required (since ∃v2(v1 = v2) is an obvious semantic
consequence of D).

Tarski’s Logic
571
Notice that this sentence is already in prenex normal form, and that the formula
‘v0 < v1 & v1 < v2’ is already an arrangement of the variables v0, v1, v2. Following
our procedure, we replace the formula ‘∃v2(v0 < v1 & v1 < v2)’ by ‘v0 < v1’, and
obtain the sentence:
(ii) ∃v0∀v1(v0 < v1).
Since the innermost quantiﬁer expression of (ii) is a universal quantiﬁer, we work
instead with its negation, which is logically equivalent to
(iii) ∀v0∃v1¬(v0 < v1).
Since here n = 1, our procedure tells us to replace ‘∃v1¬(v0 < v1)’ by ‘v0 = v0’ to
obtain the sentence
(iv) ∀v0(v0 = v0).93
We readily see that (iv) and hence (iii) are true sentences of D. And since (iii) is
logically equivalent to the negation of (ii), we conclude that (ii) and hence (i) are
not true sentences of D.
This completes our illustration of a decision procedure generated by the proof
of a quantiﬁer elimination theorem. Tarski’s decision procedure for the ﬁrst-order
theory ⟨R, +, ·⟩follows the same general pattern. The central result of [Tarski,
1948a] is a quantiﬁer elimination theorem for ⟨R, +, ·⟩(Theorem 31, p. 39).94 The
decision method is a straightforward consequence of the theorem, and follows soon
after (Theorem 37, p. 42).
The proofs and results of [Tarski, 1948a] have a long history. Tarski reports
that he had obtained partial results tending in the same direction — such as the
decidability of elementary algebra with addition as the only operation, and of the
geometry of the straight line — in his university lectures of 1926–8 (see [Tarski,
1948a, fn. 4], where Tarski refers the reader to to Presburger [1930, p. 95, fn. 4],
and Tarski [1921, p. 324, fn. 3].) Tarski remarks that the decision procedure for the
ﬁrst-order theory of the reals was found in 1930 (see the Preface of [Tarski, 1948a]
and also p. 2, especially fn. 4). Tarski’s paper [Tarski, 1931a] on the deﬁnability
of the reals (which we have discussed in Section 4 above) implicitly mentions a
93Notice how this step connects to the case of n = 1 in the proof above. The formula ‘¬(v0 <
v1)’ is D-equivalent to the following disjunction of arrangements of v0, v1:
v0 = v1 ∨v1 < v0.
Now ∃v1(v0 = v1 ∨v1 < v0) is logically equivalent to
∃v1(v0 = v1) ∨∃v1(v1 < v0).
It is clear that each disjunct is a logical consequence of D. And so we may replace ‘∃v1¬(v0 < v1)’
by ‘v0 = v0’.
94Tarski remarks that, from a purely mathematical point of view, the results leading up to
Theorem 31, and Theorem 31 itself, are closely related to Sturm’s theorem.
Indeed, Tarski
writes that “Theorem 31 constitutes an extension of Sturm’s theorem. . . to arbitrary systems of
equations and inequalities with arbitrarily many unknowns.” (p. 52, fn. 12).

572
Keith Simmons
quantiﬁer elimination result for ⟨R, 1, ≤, +⟩, where the basic formulas are ‘x = 1’,
‘x ≤y’, ‘x + y = z’. Recall Theorem 1 from [Tarski, 1931a] (mentioned in Section
4.1 above):
Theorem. A set S of sequences of real numbers is a member of Df if and only if
S is a ﬁnite sum of ﬁnite products of elementary linear sets.
Theorem 1 is a theorem of mathematics, but as we noted in Section 4.1 there is
a correlation between (mathematical) sets of sequences and (metamathematical)
sentential functions, and between their respective Boolean operations — and so
there is a metamathematical analogue of Theorem 1. Tarski writes:
We can easily formulate (and prove) a metamathematical theorem
which is an exact analogue of Th. 1. This metamathematical result
leads us to a conclusion that, in the system of arithmetic described
in Sec 1 [viz. ⟨R, 1, ≤, +⟩], every sentence of order 1 can be proved
or disproved. Moreover, by analysing the proof of this result, we see
that there is a mechanical method which enables us to decide in each
particular case whether a given sentence (of order 1) is provable or
disprovable. [Tarski, 1931a, p. 134]
The metamathematical result that Tarski mentions here is a quantiﬁer elim-
ination theorem for ⟨R, 1, ≤, +⟩expressed in terms of deﬁnability.
Tarski also
mentions that the decidability of ⟨R, 1, ≤, +⟩(as well as its completeness) follows
from the proof of the theorem.
Immediately after the passage just quoted, Tarski points out that the theory of
the real numbers can be based on diﬀerent systems of primitive concepts — for
example, it can be based on the concepts of sum and product. Then a modiﬁed
form of Theorem 1 holds for ⟨R, +, ·⟩. Here we can see an implicit mention of the
quantiﬁer elimination theorem for ⟨R, +, ·⟩, since the modiﬁed version of Theorem
1 will have its metamathematical analogue too.
Tarski ﬁrst explicitly mentions the quantiﬁer elimination theorem for ⟨R, +, ·⟩in
The completeness of elementary algebra and geometry [Tarski, 1967], a monograph
that was scheduled for publication in 1940.95 Tarski also provides an outline of the
proof. In this work the emphasis is on the completeness of ⟨R, +, ·⟩(see [Tarski,
1967, Theorem 2.1, Sec. 2]). Referring to [Tarski, 1967] and [Tarski, 1948a], Tarski
writes:
95The monograph was to appear in 1940 in Actualites Scientiﬁques et Industrielles, Hermann
& Cie, Paris. In the Foreword to [Tarski, 1967], Tarski reports that the process of publication
reached the stage of page proofs, but then, during the war, the whole setting was destroyed. All
that remained were two sets of page proofs in Tarski’s possession. Several years later, J. C. C.
McKinsey re-wrote the monograph, and this version was published as [Tarski, 1948a]. In 1967,
the original page proofs were reprinted, largely due to the eﬀorts of Ren´e de Possel, Director of
the Institut Blaise Pascal in Paris. Sczcerba remarks (in [Szczerba, 1986, p. 908]) that Tarski
ﬁrst saw the reprint of the original proofs in 1967 on his 65th birthday.

Tarski’s Logic
573
“A comparison of the titles of the two monographs reveals that the
center of scientiﬁc interest has been shifted to the decision problem
from that of completeness”. (Foreword to [Tarski, 1967])
Indeed, from [Tarski, 1931a] to [Tarski, 1967] and on to [Tarski, 1948a] we see
a shift in emphasis from deﬁnability to completeness to decidability. In [Tarski,
1948a], mention of deﬁnability and completeness is relegated to footnotes. In fn.
13 of [Tarski, 1948a] Tarski remarks that the quantiﬁer elimination theorem “gives
us a simple characterization of those sets of real numbers, and relations between
real numbers, which are arithmetically deﬁnable”, and refers the reader back to
[Tarski, 1931a]. Completeness is mentioned in fn. 15. The emphasis on decidability
is at least in part explained by the fact that the RAND corporation supported the
publication of [Tarski, 1948a]. Tarski writes:
“Within a few months the monograph was published. As was to be ex-
pected, it reﬂected the speciﬁc interests which the RAND Corporation
found in the results. The decision method for elementary algebra and
geometry — which is one of the main results of the work — was pre-
sented in a systematic and detailed way, thus bringing to the fore the
possibility of constructing an actual decision machine. Other, more
theoretical aspects of the problems discussed were treated less thor-
oughly, and only in notes.” (Preface to [Tarski, 1948a])
5.2
The decidability of elementary geometry
As Tarski mentions here, and as its title suggests, the monograph [Tarski, 1948a]
contains a proof not only of the decidability of the ﬁrst-order theory of the reals
but also of the decidability of elementary (that is, ﬁrst-order) geometry. Tarski
outlines a decision method for the speciﬁc case of 2-dimensional Euclidean geom-
etry, but points out that the method can be adapted to Euclidean geometry of
any number of dimensions, as well as to various systems of non-Euclidean and
projective geometry.96 Tarski observes in fn. 18 (pp. 55–57) that, just as in the
case of elementary algebra, one may proceed axiomatically, in terms of provability
rather than truth. Tarski presents a list of axioms for 2-dimensional Euclidean
geometry, which is easily modiﬁed to form a basis for elementary geometry of any
number of dimensions. One of the fruits of the decision method in this axiomatic
setting is a “constructive consistency proof for the whole of elementary geometry”
(fn. 18, p. 57).97
The decision method for 2-dimensional Euclidean geometry is readily obtained
from the decision method for elementary algebra, since each sentence of elemen-
tary geometry can be suitably correlated with a sentence of elementary algebra.
96In fn. 19, Tarski mentions that ordinary projective geometry may be treated as a branch of
the theory of modular lattices, referring the reader to Birkhoﬀ[Birkhoﬀ, 1948]. Tarski goes on
to say that the decision method also applies to this branch of lattice theory.
97Tarski observes that this improves a result to be found in [Hilbert and Bernays, 1939, vol 2,
pp. 38ﬀ].

574
Keith Simmons
Following Tarski (pp. 43–45), we will ﬁrst describe the system of 2-dimensional
Euclidean geometry and then show how to set up the correlation.
The language of 2-dimensional Euclidean geometry contains inﬁnitely many
variables ranging over points of the Euclidean plane, and three predicate constants:
the identity sign ‘=’, the 3-place predicate ‘B(x, y, z)’ to be read as ‘y is between
x and z’, and the 4-place predicate ‘D(x, y, z, w)’ to be read as ‘the distance
from x to y is equal to the distance from z to w’.
The atomic formulas are
‘x = y’, ‘B(x, y, z)’, and ‘D(x, y, z, w)’; complex formulas are built from the atomic
formulas via the usual sentential connectives and the quantiﬁers. It is noteworthy
that in Tarski’s formalization only points are treated as individuals, and there
are no set-theoretical devices or second-order variables.
This is in contrast to
Hilbert’s inﬂuential Grundlagen der Geometrie, where certain geometrical ﬁgures
are treated as individuals, and the others are treated as second-order point sets.98
We can translate a sentence φ of elementary geometry into a sentence φ∗of
elementary algebra by ﬁxing a coordinate system. We make the following replace-
ments:
(i)
If x is a (geometric) variable in φ, we replace it by two (algebraic) variables x1
and x2. (Intuitively, x represents a point in the Euclidean plane, and x1 and
x2 represent its real coordinates.) Distinct geometric variables are replaced
by distinct algebraic variables.
(ii) The quantiﬁer phrases ∃x and ∀x are replaced by ∃x1∃x2 and ∀x1∀x2 respec-
tively.99
(iii) ‘x = y’ is replaced by ‘x1 = y1 & x2 = y2’.
(iv) ‘B(x, y, z)’ is replaced by
‘(y2 −x2) · (z1 −y1) = (z2 −y2) · (y1 −x1) & 0 ≤(x1 −y1) · (y1 −z1)
& 0 ≤(x2 −y2) · (y2 −z2)’.
98Tarski draws the contrast in [Tarski, 1959]
“Thus, in our formalization of elementary geometry, only points are treated as in-
dividuals and are represented by (ﬁrst-order) variables. Since elementary geometry
has no set-theoretical basis, its formalization does not provide for variables of higher
orders and no symbols are available to represent or denote geometrical ﬁgures (point
sets), classes of geometrical ﬁgures, etc. It should be clear that, nevertheless, we
are able to express in our symbolism all the results which can be found in textbooks
of elementary geometry and which are formulated there in terms referring to vari-
ous special classes of geometrical ﬁgures, such as the straight lines, the circles, the
segments, the triangles, the quadrangles, and, more generally, the polygons with a
ﬁxed number of vertices, as well as to certain relations between geometrical ﬁgures
in these classes, such as congruence and similarity. This is primarily a consequence
of the fact that, in each of the classes just mentioned, every geometrical ﬁgure is
determined by a ﬁxed ﬁnite number of points.” [Tarski, 1959, p. 17, and see also
fn. 3]
99Alternatively, we can work just with ‘∃’, as Tarski does, and take ‘∀’ to abbreviate ‘¬∃¬’.

Tarski’s Logic
575
(v)
‘D(x, y, z, w)’ is replaced by
‘(x1 −y1)2 + (x2 −y2)2 = (z1 −w1)2 + (z2 −w2)2’.
For example, the true sentence
∀x∀y∀z∃wD(x, y, z, w)
of elementary geometry is correlated with the true sentence
∀x1∀x2∀y1∀y2∀z1∀z2∃w1∃w2[(x1 −y1)2 + (x2 −y2)2 = (z1 −w1)2 + (z2 −w2)2]
of elementary algebra. Tarski makes the general observation:
It is now obvious to anyone familiar with the elements of analytic ge-
ometry that whenever φ is true then φ∗is true, and conversely. [Tarski,
1948a, p. 45]
It follows that 2-dimensional elementary geometry is decidable:
And since we can always decide in a mechanical way about the truth
of φ∗, we can also do this for φ. (ibid.)
Tarski proved a number of other decidability results that we have not yet men-
tioned, all by the method of quantiﬁer elimination.
They include decidability
results for the theory of dense linear orderings (proved in Tarski’s lectures of 1926–
8); for the theory of wellorderings (work started with Mostowski in the 1930s, and
culminating in [Tarski, 1978]); and for the theory of Boolean algebras (announced
in [Tarski, 1949f]).100
Although the method of quantiﬁer elimination did not
originate with Tarski, it was in his hands an extremely powerful systematic tool,
producing a number of important results about a wide range of theories. None
were more signiﬁcant than the decision method for real-closed ﬁelds, described by
Doner and Hodges as “an astonishingly fruitful mathematical result” [Doner and
Hodges, 1988, p. 23]; for a detailed account of the impact of this result of Tarski’s,
see van den Dries [van den Dries, 1988, esp. pp. 10–16].
5.3
Undecidability
In his paper “A general method in proofs of undecidability” [Tarski, 1953, pp. 3–
35],101 Tarski distinguishes two diﬀerent methods for solving the decision problem.
100For more details and further references, see Doner and Hodges [Doner and Hodges, 1988, pp.
21–23]. Several of Tarski’s students — Presburger, Szmielew, and Doner — proved decidability
results under Tarski’s supervision (see [Doner and Hodges, 1988, pp. 23–4]).
In particular,
Presburger proved the decidability of the arithmetic of the natural numbers with addition in
[Presburger, 1930] — his master’s thesis, supervised by Tarski.
101This paper is the ﬁrst of three that compose [Tarski, 1953] (written in collaboration with
Mostowski and A. Robinson). Tarski reports that the observations contained in the paper were
made in 1938–9, presented to a meeting of the Association for Symbolic Logic in 1948, and
summarized in [Tarski, 1949b].

576
Keith Simmons
1. The direct method. The ‘direct’ method is based on ideas developed in [G¨odel,
1931], in particular the notions of general recursive functions and sets, and the
following characterisation of a decidable theory:
“A theory T is called decidable if the set of all its valid sentences is
recursive, and otherwise undecidable.” [Tarski, 1953, p. 14]
This is the method used by Church to show the undecidability of Peano’s arith-
metic, and by Rosser to show that every consistent extension of Peano’s arithmetic
is also undecidable.
2. The indirect method. This method
“consists in reducing the decision problem for a theory T1 to the
decision problem for some other theory T2 for which the problem has
previously been solved.” [Tarski, 1953, p. 4]
In the original form of the indirect method, there are two ways to proceed:
(i)
Where T2 is undecidable, we show that T1 can be obtained from T2 by deleting
ﬁnitely many of T2’s axioms.
(ii) Where T2 is essentially undecidable, we show that T2 is interpretable in T1.
Church applied procedure (i) to prove that ﬁrst-order predicate logic is undecid-
able, taking T2 to be a fragment of Peano arithmetic (PA). Tarski observes that
procedure (ii) often proceeds with PA as T2 — in this way, for example, “various
axiomatic systems of set theory have turned out to be undecidable” (p. 4).
However, Tarski also observes that the indirect method is limited:
“The indirect method in its original form was rather restricted in appli-
cations. Only in exceptional cases can a theory for which the decision
problem is discussed be obtained from another theory, which is known
to be undecidable, simply by omitting ﬁnitely many sentences from
the axiom system of the latter. On the other hand, one could hardly
expect to ﬁnd an interpretation of Peano’s arithmetic in various simple
formalized theories, with meager mathematical contents, for which the
decision problem was open. With regard to theories of this kind both
the direct and indirect methods seem to fail.” (p. 4)
Tarski’s novel contribution was to extend and modify the indirect method, sig-
niﬁcantly enlarging the scope of its application. Here the key notion is that of an
essentially undecidable theory: a theory is essentially undecidable if it and every
consistent extension of it is undecidable. The observation at the heart of Tarski’s
method is this:
(I)
“[I]n order to establish the undecidability of a theory T1, it suﬃces to show
that some essentially undecidable theory T2 can be interpreted, not neces-
sarily in T1, but (what is much easier) in some consistent extension of T1 —
provided only that T2 is based upon a ﬁnite axiom system.” (p. 5)

Tarski’s Logic
577
Since T2 must be ﬁnitely axiomatizable, PA can no longer serve as T2. However,
“examples of essentially undecidable theories which are based upon ﬁ-
nite axiom systems and are readily interpretable in other theories have
been found (by the direct method) among fragments of Peano’s arith-
metic.
Using this fact and applying the extended indirect method,
many formalized theories — like the elementary theories of groups,
rings, ﬁelds, and lattices — have recently been shown to be undecid-
able.” (p. 5)
A particularly useful example is the theory Q, a ﬁnitely axiomatizable and essen-
tially undecidable fragment of PA found by Tarski and Mostowski using the direct
method in 1939 (see [Tarski, 1949c]), and considerably simpliﬁed by Robinson (in
[Robinson, 1950]).102 Tarski writes:
“Theory Q turned out to be very suitable for our method; its mathe-
matical content is meager, and it can easily be interpreted or at least
weakly interpreted in many diﬀerent theories. Hence Theory Q has
become a powerful instrument in the study of the decision problem;
with its help it has proved to be possible to obtain a negative solution
of this problem for a large variety of theories for which the problem
had previously been open.” [Tarski, 1953, p. 32]
In [Tarski, 1953], Tarski lays out the theoretical foundations for his indirect
method. In sections I.2 and I.3, Tarski deﬁnes a number of basic concepts and
proves six theorems about undecidable and essentially undecidable theories, with
no mention yet of the notion of interpretability. We ﬁrst review some of Tarski’s
deﬁnitions:
“A theory T1 is called a subtheory of a theory T2 if every sentence
which is valid in T1 is also valid in T2; under the same conditions T2 is
referred to as an extension of T1.” (p. 11)
“An extension T2 of T1 is called inesssential if every constant of T2
which does not occur in T1 is an individual constant and if every valid
sentence of T2 is derivable in T2 from a set of valid sentences of T1.”
(p. 11)
“Two theories T1 and T2 are said to be compatible if they have a com-
mon consistent extension.” (p. 12)
A theory is axiomatizable “if there is a recursive set A of valid sentences
of T such that every valid sentence of T is derivable from the set A;
if the set A is assumed to be ﬁnite, the theory T is called ﬁnitely
axiomatizable.” (p. 14)
102The construction of Q is carried out in “Undecidability and Essential Undecidability in Arith-
metic”, by Mostowski, Robinson and Tarski, the second paper in [Tarski, 1953]. For historical
information about the construction, see [Tarski, 1953, pp. 39–40, fn. 1].

578
Keith Simmons
One useful theorem Tarski proves in section I.3 is the following:
Theorem. Let T1 and T2 be two compatible theories such that every constant of
T2 is also a constant of T1. If T2 is essentially undecidable and ﬁnitely axiomatiz-
able, then T1 is undecidable, and so is every subtheory of T1 which has the same
constants as T1. (This is Theorem 6, p. 18.)
Later in the paper (p. 32), Tarski gives an example of an application of Theorem
6. Consider theory N, the arithmetic of the natural numbers, with non-logical
constants + and ·, and possibly others, such as 0 and 1 and <. By deﬁnition, a
sentence of N is valid if it is true under the standard intepretation. Let us observe
the following:
(i)
N is undecidable, and since it is also complete, it is essentially undecidable
and not axiomatizable.103
(ii) PA is an axiomatic subtheory of N with the same constants, and though
axiomatizable, PA is not ﬁnitely axiomatizable.
(iii) In turn, Q is a subtheory of PA which is ﬁnitely axiomatizable, and essentially
undecidable.
Given (iii), PA has a ﬁnitely axiomatizable, essentially undecidable subtheory. And
so it follows from our observations that N has a ﬁnitely axiomatizable, essentially
undecidable subtheory. Now if we apply Theorem 6
“we arrive at once at the conclusion that every theory which is compat-
ible with Q and has the same constants as Q is undecidable. Hence, in
particular, every subtheory of N in which the set of constants includes
+ and · is undecidable . . . this generalizes the results known from the
literature which concern various special subtheories of N.” (p. 32)
The theorems Tarski proves in section 3 — including Theorem 6 — make no
mention of interpretability. In section 4, Tarski widens the scope of these theorems
by introducing the notion of interpretability. It is here in section 4 that Tarski ex-
plicitly provides the grounds for the method encapsulated in (I) above. The notion
of intepretability rests on the prior notion of deﬁnition, or more speciﬁcally the
notion of a possible deﬁnition of a given constant in a theory T. Tarski introduces
the notion by way of examples, one of which is the 2-place predicate symbol <:
“A possible deﬁnition of < in T is any sentence of the form
(i)
∀x∀y(x < y ↔φ)
103Tarski states the following theorem in [Tarski, 1953, p. 14]:
For a complete theory T the following three conditions are equivalent: (i) T is unde-
cidable, (ii) T is essentially undecidable, and (iii) T is not axiomatizable.
The proof is straightforward: for a complete theory, (i) implies (iii), and the other parts of the
theorem are immediate from the deﬁnitions.

Tarski’s Logic
579
where φ is a formula of T (x and y being any two diﬀerent variables
such that no variable diﬀerent from both of them occurs free in φ).”
(p. 20)
Notice that while (i) is not a sentence of T, it is a sentence in every extension of
T which contains < as a constant. It is straightforward to extend the notion of a
possible deﬁnition to n-place predicate and operation letters.
Now consider two theories T1 and T2, and assume for the moment that T1 and
T2 have no non-logical constants in common. Tarski characterizes the notion of
interpretablity of one theory in another as follows:
“. . . T2 is interpretable in T1 if we can extend T1, by including in the set
of valid sentences some possible deﬁnitions of the nonlogical constants
of T2, in such a way that the resulting extension of T1 turns out to be
an extension of T2 as well.” (p. 21)
The notion of interpretability is easily extended to the general case in which T1
and T2 may have some non-logical constants in common.104 Tarski also introduces
the notion of weak interpretability:
“A theory T2 is said to be weakly interpretable in T1 if T2 is inter-
pretable in some consistent extension of T1 which has the same con-
stants as T1.” (p. 21)
Tarski goes on in section I.4 to prove several theorems that turn on the notions of
interpretability and weak interpretability. One of these theorems is the following:
Theorem. Let T1 and T2 be two theories such that T2 is weakly interpretable in T1
or in some inessential extension of T1. If T2 is essentially undecidable and ﬁnitely
axiomatizable, then:
(i)
T1 is undecidable and every subtheory of T1 which has the same constants as
T1 is undecidable;
(ii) there exists a ﬁnite extension of T1 which has the same constants as T1 and
is essentially undecidable. (Theorem 8, pp. 23–4)
Theorem 8 is a generalization of Theorem 6, for if T1 and T2 are compatible and
every constant of T2 is also a constant of T1, then T2 is weakly interpretable in T1.
Tarski remarks that, from the point of view of providing theoretical foundations
for his general indirect method,
104In the general case
“we ﬁrst replace the non-logical constants in T2 by new constants not occurring in
T1 (diﬀerent symbols by diﬀerent symbols), without changing the structure of T2
in any other respect; if the resulting theory T ′
2 proves to be interpretable in T1, we
say that T2 is also interpretable in T1.” (p. 21)

580
Keith Simmons
“Theorem 8 is especially important . . . ; for, given a ﬁnitely axiom-
atizable and essentially undecidable theory, this theorem enables us
to establish the undecidability of various other theories which may be
very distant in their mathematical content from the original theory.”
(p. 30)
Theorem 8 captures in a precise way the observation in (I) above.
For an example of the application of theorems from section 4 (including Theorem
8), we need one more notion, that of relative interpretability. Given a theory T and
a 1-place predicate P, the theory T (P ) is obtained by relativizing the quantiﬁers
in T to P; that is, each subformula ∀xψ (or ∃xψ) is replaced by ∀x(Px →ψ)
(or ∃x(Px&ψ)).
Now, a theory T2 is relatively interpretable (relatively weakly
interpretable) in a theory T1 if T (P )
2
is interpretable (weakly interpretable) in T1.
Among the theorems concerning relative interpretability is the following:
Theorem. Let T be any theory and P a unary predicate which is not a constant of
T. Then T (P ) is essentially undecidable if and only if T is essentially undecidable.
(Theorem 10, p. 27)
Now consider again the theories N and Q, and note that, by Theorem 10, Q(P )
is essentially undecidable. Tarski writes:
“N is known to be relatively interpretable in the arithmetic of integers
J, a theory constructed analogously to N, but in which the variables
are assumed to range over the set of all integers. Hence, Q is also rela-
tively interpretable in J. By applying Theorems 8–10 we conclude that
every subtheory of J in which +, ·, and possibly some other symbols
occur as nonlogical constants is undecidable. As interesting examples
of such subtheories we may mention the elementary theories of rings,
commutative rings, and ordered rings.” (p. 33)
A parallel result was established by Julia Robinson for the arithmetic A of rational
numbers (see [Robinson, 1949]). Robinson proved that N, and so Q, is relatively
interpretable in A — and that consequently all the subtheories of A (with +
and · as non-logical constants) are undecidable. These subtheories include the
elementary theories of ﬁelds and ordered ﬁelds.
As Tarski mentions (pp. 33–34), many other results were established using the
indirect method, by Tarski and by others.105
Tarski established the undecid-
ability of the elementary theories of groups, lattices, modular lattices, comple-
mented modular lattices, and abstract projective geometries (see [Tarski, 1949d;
Tarski, 1949e]). Tarski also established undecidability results for equational the-
105For a survey of more recent results inspired by Tarski’s method, see [McNulty, 1986, esp. pp.
893–6].

Tarski’s Logic
581
ories of relation algebras,106 and for certain branches of elementary geometry.107
W. Szmielew and Tarski proved that all known axiomatic systems of set theory,
with the 1-place predicate ‘S’ (‘is a set’) and ‘∈’ (‘is a member of’) as nonlog-
ical constants, are undecidable; they proved this general result by showing that
Q is interpretable in a small axiomatic, essentially undecidable fragment of set
theory.108 R. M. Robinson showed that the elementary theories of various spe-
cial rings are undecidable (see [Robinson, 1951]). Grzegorczyk proved the unde-
cidability of distributive lattices, Brouwerian algebras, and related algebraic and
geometric systems (see [Grzegorczyk, 1951]).
In his proofs of decidability results, Tarski took a known method — the elimi-
nation of quantiﬁers — to a new level. But in his proofs of undecidability results,
Tarski established a new method, an indirect method that turned on the semantic
notions of deﬁnition and interpretability. Indeed, Tarski’s method is often referred
to as the “method of interpretation”. So at the heart of Tarski’s original con-
tributions to the decision problem lies his groundbreaking work on fundamental
semantic notions.
6
MORE ON LOGIC AND ALGEBRA
Tarski’s work on algebra and logic ﬂows in two directions, from algebra to logic,
and back again. As we saw in 2.4 above, Tarski increasingly ‘algebraized’ logic,
investigating logical systems as interpretations of algebras. In the other direction,
Tarski brought metalogical questions to bear on algebras; we saw, for example,
that Tarski established the decidability of Boolean algebras (5.1 above) and the
undecidability of equational theories of relation algebras (5.3 above). In this sec-
tion, we say more about Tarski’s work on the connections between algebra and
logic.
6.1
Boolean algebra and the calculus of classes
With the ﬁrst direction in mind, recall that in [Tarski, 1935+1936] Tarski treated
the calculus of sentences and the calculus of deductive systems as two realizations
of Boolean algebra (see 2.4 above). In his 1935 paper “On the Foundations of
Boolean Algebra” [Tarski, 1935], Tarski showed that another logical theory, the
calculus of classes, can be treated in the same way.109 Tarski opens his paper as
106These results can be found in [Tarski, 1987a, section 8.5, pp. 251–258]. The history of these
results is reviewed in section 8.7, pp. 268–271. Relation algebras are characterized on pp. 235–
236. As we will see in Section 6 of this chapter, Tarski initiated the study of relation algebras in
his paper [Tarski, 1941b]. An equational theory is a restricted elementary theory, restricted to
those universal sentences whose quantiﬁer-free subformulas are equations between terms.
107See [Tarski, 1959] and [Tarski, 1979].
108These and related results are stated without proof in [Tarski, 1952b].
109We presented the calculus of classes in 4.2 above (it was the object language for Tarski’s
deﬁnition of truth in [Tarski, 1933a]). Variables range over classes, and there are four constants:
negation, disjunction, the universal quantiﬁer, and inclusion.

582
Keith Simmons
follows:
“Boolean algebra, also called the algebra of logic, is a formal system
with a series of important interpretations in various fundamental de-
partments of logic and mathematics. The most important and best
known interpretation is the calculus of classes.” [Tarski, 1935, p. 320]
Tarski goes on to investigate several systems of Boolean algebra, and shows that
one of them — the ‘atomistic system of Boolean algebra’ — is equivalent with
the calculus of classes. So, along with [Tarski, 1935+1936], [Tarski, 1935] is a
contribution to the algebraization of logic.
Recall Postulates I–VII (presented in 2.4 above, pp. 523–524).
These form
what Tarski calls the ordinary system of Boolean algebra. To these axioms, Tarski
adds three more, each of an inﬁnite character. These axioms contain two new
primitive operations: 
y∈X y (the sum of all elements of the set X) and 
y∈X y
(the product of all elements of the set X). The additional axioms are as follows
(where, recall, B is the universe of discourse):
Postulate VIII
If X ⊆B, then
(a) 
y∈X y ∈B;
(b) x < 
y∈X y for every x ∈X;
(c) if z ∈B and x < z for every x ∈X, then 
y∈X y < z.
Postulate IX
If X ⊆B, then
(a) 
y∈X y ∈B;
(b) 
y∈X y < x for every x ∈X;
(c) if z ∈B and z < x for every x ∈X, then z < 
y∈X y.
Postulate X
If x ∈B and X ⊆B, then
(a) x. 
y∈X y = 
y∈X(x.y);
(b) x + 
y∈X y = 
y∈X(x + y).
Postulates I–X form the extended (or complete) system of Boolean algebra.110
In the second half of [Tarski, 1935], Tarski constructs the atomistic system of
Boolean algebra. The set of atoms, At, is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition. x ∈At if and only if (1) x ∈B and x ̸= 0, and (2) for every element
y ∈B, the formulas y < x and y ̸= 0 imply y = x.
Tarski now adds one further axiom to Postulates I–X:
Postulate D
If x ∈B and x ̸= 0, then there is an element y ∈At such that
y < x.
110In the ﬁrst half of [Tarski, 1935], Tarski shows that this axiomatization can be simpliﬁed —
ﬁrst to a system of four axioms, and then to a system of two (see pp. 323–333). Tarski reports
(in a footnote added later to [Tarski, 1935, on p. 333]) that these simpliﬁcations were inﬂuenced
by work of Le´sniewski, speciﬁcally the deductive theory that Le´sniewski called mereology (see
Le´sniewski [1916] and [1927–31]).

Tarski’s Logic
583
Without Postulate D, the following questions are all open: Do atoms exist? Are
atoms included in every element (other than 0)? Is every element the sum of the
atoms included in it? With Postulate D, all these questions are answered in the
aﬃrmative. The system of postulates I–X+D is the atomistic system of Boolean
algebra. It is this system of algebra that Tarski shows to be equivalent with the
calculus of classes (see Theorem 6, p. 340).111
6.2
The calculus of relations and relation algebras
In a paper published a few years later — “On the Calculus of Relations” [Tarski,
1941b] — Tarski shows that we can take the algebraic view of another logical
theory, the calculus of (binary) relations.
Tarski traces the beginnings of this
theory back to de Morgan, but “[t]he title of creator of the theory of relations was
reserved for C. S. Peirce” [Tarski, 1941b, p. 73]. Peirce’s work “was continued
and extended in a very thorough and systematic way by E. Schr¨oder” (ibid.) in
Algebra und Logik der Relative ([Schr¨oder, 1895]).112 Schr¨oder’s thorough account
of the calculus of relations contains a large number of unsolved problems, and
indicates the direction for further investigations — consequently, Tarski expresses
his amazement that there was no speciﬁc development of this rich logical theory in
the decades that followed. Tarski sought “to awaken interest in a certain neglected
logical theory” [Tarski, 1941b, p. 89].
Tarski contrasts two methods for constructing the calculus of relations. The ﬁrst
constructs the calculus as part of a larger logical theory (the functional calculus
developed by Hilbert and Ackermann).
The second method is speciﬁc to the
calculus of relations, and as a result it is simpler and more elegant. This method
is an algebraic construction which originates with Tarski, and we turn to it now.
The vocabulary of Tarski’s construction comprises relation variables, the usual
sentential connectives, the familiar constants and operations from Boolean algebra
(1, 0,−, +, and ·), and ﬁve further symbols peculiar to the calculus of relations:
1′ (the identity element, or Peircean unit), 0′ (the diversity element, or Peircean
111Tarski remarks that Postulate D “brings with it a whole series of far-reaching consequences”
[Tarski, 1935, p. 335]. Among these are the general distributive laws for addition and multipli-
cation:
(E) Let R be any class of subsets X of the set B (P
X∈R X ⊆B), and let S be the class of
all those sets Y which are included in the sum of all sets of the class R and have at least one
element in common with every set of the class R (Y ⊆P
X∈R X, and if X ∈R, then X.Y ̸= 0).
Then:
(a) Q
X∈R
P
z∈X z = P
Y ∈S
Q
z∈Y z, and
(b) P
X∈R
Q
z∈X z = Q
Y ∈S
P
z∈Y z.
The sentences (a) and (b) are generalizations of Postulates V and X respectively. Tarski and Lin-
denbaum showed that (E) cannot be derived from Postulates I–X alone; indeed, given Postulates
I–X, (E) is equivalent to Postulate D.
Tarski’s work on general distributive laws in Boolean algebras, started here in [Tarski, 1935],
was developed further in [Tarski, 1957a].
112This work of Schr¨oder’s was the third volume of Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik
[Schr¨oder, 1890–1905].

584
Keith Simmons
zero), ⌣(the unary operation of conversion), ; (the binary operation of relative
product), and J- (the binary operation of relative addition).113 To ﬁx ideas, think
for the moment of relations set-theoretically, as sets of ordered pairs. Then the
identity element is the set of identity pairs, the converse of a relation R is given
by:
˘R = {⟨x, y⟩|⟨y, x⟩∈R},
and the relative product of R and S is given by
R; S = {⟨x, z⟩|∃y such that ⟨x, y⟩∈R & ⟨y, z⟩∈S}.
Peircean zero and relative addition are dispensable, since each can be deﬁned in
terms of the other symbols (as we shall see shortly).
The axioms of Tarski’s algebra fall into three groups: the usual axioms for
the sentential connectives, the axioms for Boolean algebra (with class variables
replaced by relation variables), and the axioms governing the further ‘Peircean’
constants and operations. Tarski lists eight axioms in this third group:
(i)
˘˘R = R.
(ii)
⌣
R;S = ˘S; ˘R.
(iii)
R; (S; T) = (R; S); T
(iv)
R; 1′ = R.
(v)
R; 1 = 1 ∨1; ¯R = 1.
(vi)
(R; S). ˘T = 0 →(S; T). ˘R = 0.
(vii) 0′ = ¯1′.
(viii) R J- S = ¯R; ¯S.
Axioms (i)–(iv) involve exclusively 1′,⌣, and ;. Though fully abstract, they are
natural and obvious when we read them in the more concrete setting of set the-
ory. Axioms (v) and (vi) establish connections between Boolean and ‘Peircean’
concepts. Axioms (vii) and (viii) can be understood as deﬁnitions of 0′ and J-. 114
113Perhaps more familiar now than 1′, 0′, ;, and +
⌣are the symbols ˚1, ˚0, ⊙, and ⊕, respectively.
See for example, [Tarski, 1987a, pp. 235–6], where a characterization of a relation algebra may
also be found.
114Tarski points out that these axioms can be represented geometrically.
Suppose that the
relation variables denote relations between real numbers, and consider a rectangular coordinate
system in the plane. Then every relation R may be represented as the set of all points (x, y) such
that x has the relation R to y. The relations 1, 0, 1′, 0′ are respectively: the whole plane, the
empty set of points, the identity relation represented by the straight line with equation x = y,
and the diversity relation by the set of all points not on this straight line. The Boolean operations
are represented in the usual set-theoretic way. To obtain ˘R, take the set of points — or point

Tarski’s Logic
585
Here we have the ﬁrst presentation of the calculus of relations as an axiomatic
algebraic theory. Moreover, Tarski’s paper [Tarski, 1941b] initiated the study of
relation algebras. Tarski’s work on the arithmetic of relation algebras at Berke-
ley during the 1940s culminated with the paper “Distributive and modular laws
in the arithmetic of relation algebras” [Tarski, 1951a], which Tarski wrote with
his student Louise Chin. In [Tarski, 1951b] and [Tarski, 1952a], Parts 1 and 2
of “Boolean algebras with operators”, Tarski and Jonsson investigated algebraic
systems enriched by new operations, and relation algebras ﬁgure prominently in
this work.115
Tarski’s paper [Tarski, 1941b] is another clear example of Tarski’s algebraic
treatment of logical theories.
But it also shows Tarski working in the reverse
direction, raising metalogical questions for his algebraic theory.
For example,
Tarski raises a question as to the equivalence of the two methods of construction.
Declaring this a diﬃcult open question, Tarski continues:
“I can only say that I am practically sure that I can prove with the
help of the second method all of the hundreds of theorems to be found
in Schr¨oder’s Algebra und Logik der Relative.” (p. 88)
For a second example, Tarski turns to the so-called “representation problem”:
“Is every model of the axiom system of the calculus of relations iso-
morphic with a class of binary relations which contains the relations
set — corresponding to R and rotate it (in three dimensions) through an angle of 180o about
the line x = y. It is rather more complicated to explain relative product geometrically. We need
to supplement the coordinate system with a z-axis perpendicular to the xy-plane. Then for the
representation of R; S (in the xy-plane) proceed as follows: rotate the point set corresponding
to R through a right angle about the x-axis, draw through every point of the resulting set a
straight line parallel to the y-axis, and take the union of all these straight lines — this gives us
the ‘cylindrical’ point set R∗. Similarly, rotate the set corresponding to S through a right angle
about the y-axis, draw the lines parallel to the x-axis, and obtain the ‘cylindrical’ point set S∗.
Finally, take the intersection of R∗and S∗and project it orthogonally on the xy-plane. This
projection is the geometrical representation of R; S. The representation of relative sum is readily
obtained from that of the relative product, given axiom (viii).
This geometric representation provides an intuitive reading of the axioms. For example, axiom
(i) corresponds to the obvious geometric fact that if we rotate any point set through 180o about
a given straight line, and then again by 180o about the same straight line, we obtain the original
point set.
Or consider axiom (v):
we can see that this axiom is true under the geometric
representation. Observe ﬁrst that R; 1 holds between x and y if and only if there is a z such
that xRz (the relation is independent of y). So to obtain the geometric representation of R; 1
consider the set corresponding to R, draw through every point of this set a straight line parallel
to the y-axis, and take the union of all these straight lines. Now axiom (v) says that either the
set representing R; 1 is the whole plane or the set representing 1; ¯R is the whole plane. If R; 1
is not the whole plane then there must be a line parallel to the y-axis which does not contain
any point in the set corresponding to R. So this line is composed only of points belonging to
the set corresponding to ¯R. If through every point of this line we draw a straight line parallel to
the x-axis and take the union of all these parallel lines, we obtain the whole plane. That is, the
relation 1; ¯R is represented by the whole plane.
115For more on the work by Tarski and others on relation algebras, see [Monk, 1986, esp. pp.
901–2] and [Jonsson, 1986, esp. p. 884].

586
Keith Simmons
1, 0, 1′, 0′ and is closed under all the operations considered in this cal-
culus?” (p. 88)
M. H. Stone had proved the analogous result for Boolean algebra in the aﬃrmative
(see [Stone, 1936]). In 1941 Tarski’s question was an open one — but Lyndon
proved that the answer is in the negative (see [Lyndon, 1950], with a correction
in [Lyndon, 1956]). Tarski maintained his interest in the metalogic of relation
algebras throughout the rest of his career — Tarski’s undecidability results for a
variety of relation algebras, mentioned above and in 5.2, are contained in his ﬁnal
published monograph [Tarski, 1987a] (with Givant).116
6.3
Predicate logic and cylindric algebras
Thus far we have seen that Tarski provides algebraic treatments of a number of
logical theories: the calculus of sentences, the calculus of deductive systems, the
calculus of classes, and the calculus of (binary) relations. We turn now to Tarski’s
algebraic treatment of the predicate calculus. To this end, Tarski developed the
theory of cylindric algebras:
“This theory . . . was originally designed to provide an apparatus for an
algebraic study of ﬁrst-order predicate logic.” [Tarski, 1971, Foreword,
p. 1]
Tarski collaborated with Henkin and Monk to produce Cylindric Algebras Part 1
[Tarski, 1971] and Part 2 [Tarski, 1985].
In the Foreword to [Tarski, 1971], Tarski, Henkin and Monk introduce cylindric
algebras by way of cylindric set algebra. Just as Boolean algebra is an abstraction
from Boolean set algebra (see Section 2.4 above, p. 522), so cylindric algebra is an
abstraction from cylindric set algebra. So let us begin with cylindric set algebras.
In the broadest terms, a cylindric set algebra of dimension α is a structure
A = ⟨S, ∪, ∩, ∼, 0,α U, Cκ, Dκλ⟩κ,λ<α
where S is the universe of the algebra (the set of all its elements), ∪and ∩are
binary operations, ∼and Cκ(κ < α) are unary operations, and 0,αU, Dκλ(κ, λ < α)
are distinguished elements. We now describe these ingredients in more detail.
It is helpful to describe cylindric set algebras using terminology drawn from
analytic geometry (see [Tarski, 1971, pp. 1–2]). We start with the set αU. The
elements of αU are sequences x = ⟨x0, x1, . . . , xk, . . .⟩of length α (α an ordinal),
where each xk is a member of an arbitrary set U. The set αU is called the α-
dimensional Cartesian space with base U, and each element x is called a point,
116Tarski discusses other metalogical problems in [Tarski, 1941b], speciﬁc to the ﬁrst method of
constructing the calculus of relations. He announces two results: (i) the calculus of relations is
undecidable, and (ii) there are sentences of the elementary theory of relations with only relation
variables free that cannot be transformed into an equivalent sentence of the calculus of relations.
Tarksi leaves unsolved a new decision problem regarding the transformations mentioned in (ii):
is there a procedure for deciding in a particular case whether such a transformation is possible?

Tarski’s Logic
587
with coordinates x0, x1, . . . , xk,. . . . The elements of the universe S are subsets of
αU. (Just as the elements of a Boolean set algebra may be subsets of an arbitrary
set V , so the elements of a cylindric algebra are subsets of a certain Cartesian
power of an arbitrary set U.) The operations ∪, ∩and ∼are the usual Boolean
operations; indeed, the structure
A = ⟨S, ∪, ∩, ∼, 0,αU⟩
is a Boolean set algebra, with S closed under the Boolean operations.
The distinguished element Dκλ and the unary operation Cκ are speciﬁc to cylin-
dric set algebras. Dκλ is a certain subset of αU — its members are the points of αU
whose κth coordinate is identical to its λth coordinate. The point set Dκλ is called
the κ, λ-diagonal set. The aptness of the name is easily seen if we consider the
case α = 2 (the case where the Cartesian space with the base U is 2-dimensional)
— here Dκλ is the main diagonal line of the coordinate system. In general, for
κ ̸= λ, Dκλ is the hyperplane deﬁned by xκ = xλ.
The unary operation Cκ is called the κth cylindriﬁcation. Intuitively, given a
subset X of the space αU, Cκ(X) is the cylinder obtained if each point in X is
‘stretched out’ parallel to the κth coordinate axis. More precisely,
a point y is in Cκ(X) iﬀthere is a point in X which diﬀers from y only
in its κth coordinate.
(It is easy to check that if Cκ is applied to the diagonal set Dκλ, it yields αU.)117
The universe S is closed under cκ.
We now move to the general notion of a cylindric algebra by abstracting from
cylindric set algebras. We consider the algebraic identities that hold in all cylindric
set algebras, and select some of them as axioms for the general, abstract theory
of cylindric algebras. Changing the terminology, we take a cylindric algebra of
dimension α to be a structure
A = ⟨A, +, ·, −, 0, 1, cκ, dκλ⟩κ,λ<α
where A is an arbitrary set, +, ·, −, 0, 1 are the familiar Boolean operations and
distinguished elements, cκ (for κ < α) is a unary operation (still called the κth
cylindriﬁcation), and dκλ (for κ, λ < α) is a distinguished element (called the κλ-
diagonal element). The axioms of a cylindric algebra fall into two groups. The ﬁrst
group of axioms characterize the Boolean algebra ⟨A, +, ., −, 0, 1⟩. (For example,
we could use Postulates I–VII from 2.4 above.) The second group is composed
of equational axioms that are special to cylindric algebras. These axioms are as
follows, where x, y are arbitrary elements of A, and κ, λ, μ are arbitrary ordinals
less than α:
1. cκ(0) = 0
117In general, Cκ(Dκλ) = Cλ(Dκλ) =
αU.
For example, consider the case α = 2.
If the
01 diagonal is stretched out parallel to either the 0 axis or the 1 axis, the result is the entire
2-dimensional Cartesian space with base U.

588
Keith Simmons
2. x · cκ(x) = x
3. cκ(x · cκ(y)) = cκ(x) · cκ(y)
4. cκ(cλ(x)) = cλ(cκ(x))
5. cκ(dκλ) = 1
6. cμ(dκμ · dμλ) = dκλ, provided that μ ̸= κ, λ
7. cκ(dκλ · x) · cκ(dκλ · −x) = 0, provided κ ̸= λ
These axioms are natural enough if we keep in mind cylindric set algebra.118
But in order to grasp the motivation for them, and for cylindric algebras generally,
we must remember their original purpose: to serve “as an instrument for the
algebraization of predicate logic” [Tarski, 1971, p. 4]. Cylindric algebras can be
viewed not only as an abstraction from cylindric set algebra, but also from ﬁrst-
order logic:
“The notion of a cylindric algebra can be considered as a common,
algebraic abstraction from its two sources.” [Tarski, 1985, p. v]
So consider ﬁrst-order predicate logic with identity, together with Tarski’s deﬁ-
nitions of model and (semantic) consequence. Let Φ be the denumerable set of all
formulas of (ﬁrst-order) predicate logic. Let Σ be a set of sentences — or a theory
— from the language of predicate logic. We now deﬁne the notion of equivalence
relative to a theory Σ as follows:
Deﬁnition. φ and ψ are equivalent under set Σ, written φ ≡Σ ψ, iﬀφ ↔ψ is a
consequence of Σ.
It is easy to see that ≡Σ is an equivalence relation on Φ. So for each formula
φ, there is an equivalence class [φ] of all formulas ψ such that φ ≡Σ ψ , and the
union of these mutually exclusive equivalence classes is Φ (that is, ≡Σ partitions
Φ). Let ΦΣ be the set of these equivalence classes.
Now we form a cylindric algebra for a theory Σ:
AΣ = ⟨ΦΣ, +, ·, −, 0, 1, cκ, dκλ⟩κ,λ<ω
where
[φ] + [ψ] = [φ ∨ψ]
[φ] · [ψ] = [φ&ψ]
−[φ] = [¬φ]
cκ[φ] = [∃vκφ]
dκλ = [vκ = vλ]
118For example, consider Axiom 2 in the concrete setting of cylindrical set algebra. It is obvious
that if we consider the set of points x and its cylindriﬁcation cκ(x), then the points they share
in common are just the points of x. And we have already seen the intuitive backing for Axiom 5.

Tarski’s Logic
589
and the distinguished elements 0 and 1 are [vκ ̸= vκ] and [vκ = vκ] respec-
tively.
It is straightforward to check that this algebra satisﬁes all the axioms
of ω-dimensional cylindric algebras, in particular Axioms 1–7.119
The signiﬁcance of cylindrical algebras for the algebraic study of predicate logic
“is rather obvious” [Tarski, 1971, p. 8]. To paraphrase what Henkin, Monk and
Tarski go on to say, theories are basic entities in metalogical discussions just as
algebraic structures are basic entities in algebraic research. By correlating the
algebra AΣ with any theory Σ, we have established a correspondence (which turns
out to be one-one) between ﬁrst-order theories and cylindric algebras of formulas.
The basic metalogical problems for a ﬁxed theory Σ are problems of the type: “Is
a given sentence φ a consequence of the theory Σ?”. Each such problem clearly
reduces to an algebraic problem concerning the associated algebra of formulas:
“Does the equation [φ]=1 hold in the algebra AΣ ?”
For Tarski, then, cylindric algebras (like Boolean and relational algebras) were
a tool for algebraizing logic. But Tarski also brought logic to bear on the algebras
— like Boolean and relational algebras, cylindrical algebras are themselves a ﬁt
subject for metalogical investigation. Chapter 4 of [Tarski, 1985] applies logical
notions to cylindrical algebras: the authors consider the model theory of cylindrical
algebras in the ﬁrst part of the chapter, and various decision problems in the
second. Decidability and undecidability results are obtained for various cylindrical
algebras.
In the Foreword to [Tarski, 1971], Tarski, Henkin and Monk trace the path that
led to their collaboration:
“The theory of cylindric algebras was founded by Tarski, in collabora-
tion with his former students Louise H. Chin (Lim) and Frederick B.
Thompson, during the period 1948-52. Soon thereafter Henkin became
interested in the subject and began to work with Tarski on its further
development. In 1961 they published a fairly extensive outline of their
research, and the plan was ﬁrst formulated to prepare a detailed mono-
graph on the subject. Subsequently Monk’s substantial contributions
to the theory made a joining of eﬀorts desirable, and thus the present
team of authors was ﬁnally formed.” [Tarski, 1971, p. 23]
Part 2 of Cylindric Algebras [Tarski, 1985] was published in 1985; its ﬁrst draft
was two-thirds complete when Tarski died. The monograph Cylindric set algebras
[Tarski, 1981], authored by Tarski, with Andreka, Henkin, Monk and Nemeti,
was another major contribution to the theory. The theory of cylindric algebras
has been an active ﬁeld of research: for a survey of major results and further
references, see [Monk, 1986, esp. 903–5].
119For example, Axiom 1 holds since the existential generalization of any member of [vκ ̸= vκ]
is a member of [vκ ̸= vκ]; Axiom 2 holds since [φ] = [φ&∃xκφ]; Axiom 4 turns on the equivalence
of ∃vκ∃vλφ and ∃vλ∃vκφ; and Axiom 5 holds since cκ(dκλ) = [∃vκ(vκ = vλ)] = [vκ = vκ] = 1.

590
Keith Simmons
7
MORE ON GEOMETRY
7.1
The metamathematics of elementary geometry
We have already seen one of Tarski’s most celebrated metamathematical result
in geometry: the decidability of elementary (or ﬁrst-order) Euclidean geometry,
discovered in 1930 but not published in full until [Tarski, 1948a] (see section 5.2
above). Tarski returned to the metamathematics of geometry in “What is ele-
mentary geometry?” [Tarski, 1959]. Recall that in [Tarski, 1948a, fn. 18] Tarski
brieﬂy considers an axiomatic theory of Euclidean geometry — it is this theory of
elementary geometry that Tarski investigates further in [Tarski, 1959].
In [Tarski, 1959], Tarski is fully explicit about the reference of the term ‘ele-
mentary geometry’. Loosely it refers to the geometry which is based on Euclid’s
Elements and which forms the subject matter of secondary school geometry. But
for metamathematical investigations, we need a more precise description; for one
thing, we must specify the language in which the sentences of elementary geome-
try are formulated. As we saw in Section 5.2 above, the language of elementary
geometry is the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus — the ﬁrst-order variables range over
individuals (points), and there are no second-order or set-theoretical devices. The
language contains two primitive predicates: a three-place predicate Bxyz (‘y is
between x and z’), and the 4-place predicate Dxyzw (‘the distance from x to y is
equal to the distance from z to w’).
Tarski goes on to present a list of 12 axioms and one axiom schema.
(See
[Tarski, 1959, pp. 19–20]. This list supersedes the one in [Tarski, 1948a, fn. 18],
which was found to contain superﬂuous axioms. Such reﬁnements aside, Tarski’s
axiom system essentially dates back to his university lectures in the years 1926–27,
as Tarski reports in [Tarski, 1967, p. 341, fn. 34]. These axioms form the basis
for elementary geometry, or G for short. They are the universal closures of the
following:
A1.
Bxyx →x = y. (Identity Axiom for Betweenness)
A2.
Bxyu & Byzu →Bxyz. (Transitivity Axiom for Betweenness)
A3.
Bxyz & Bxyu & x ̸= y →Bxzu ∨Bxuz.
(Connectivity Axiom for
Betweenness)
A4.
Dxyyx. (Reﬂexivity Axiom for Equidistance)
A5.
Dxyzz →x = y. (Identity Axiom for Equidistance)
A6.
Dxyzu & Dxyvw →Dzuvw. (Transitivity Axiom for Equidistance)
A7.
Bxzw & Byuz →∃v(Bwvy & Bxuv). (Pasch’s Axiom)120
120In [Tarski, 1979], Tarski and Sczcerba provide the following ﬁgure for Pasch’s axiom:

Tarski’s Logic
591
A8.
Bxut & Byuz & x ̸= u →∃v∃w(Bxyv & Bxzw & Bvtw). (Euclid’s Ax-
iom)121
A9.
Dxyx′y′ & Dyzy′z′ & Dxux′u′ & Dyuy′u′ & Bxyz & Bx′y′z′ & x ̸= y →
Dzuz′u′). (Five-Segment Axiom)
A10. ∃z(Bxyz & Dyzuv). (Axiom of Segment Construction)
A11. ∃x∃y∃z(¬Bxyz & ¬Byzx & ¬Bzxy). (Lower Dimension Axiom)
A12. Dxuxv & Dyuyv & Dzuzv & u ̸= v →Bxyz ∨Byzx ∨Bzxy. (Upper
Dimension Axiom)
A13. (Elementary Continuity Axioms)
∃z∀x∀y(φ&ψ →Bzxy) →∃u∀x∀y(φ&ψ →Bxuy)
x
z
w
u
y
v
121We can associate with Euclid’s Axiom the following ﬁgure:
x
y
u
z
t
w
v
A8 says in essence: there is always a straight line through a point t inside an angle (here, angle
yxz) that touches both sides of the angle (see [Tarski, 1983b, p. 13]).
Notice that the line vw meets the lines yv and zw in such a way that the angles yvt and twz
add up to less than two right angles. Compare A8 with Euclid’s original formulation of his Fifth
Postulate:
“That, if a straight line [vw] falling on to straight lines [yv and zw] make the interior
angles on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced
indeﬁnitely, meet [at x] on that side on which are the angles less than two right
angles.”
A8 is provably equivalent to the Parallel Axiom (Axiom IV in [Hilbert, 1922]):
If A is a line and a is a point that does not belong to A, then there is exactly one
line which is parallel to A to which a belongs.
For a proof of the Parallel Axiom (Hilbert’s IV) from A8, see [Tarski, 1983b, p. 123]

592
Keith Simmons
where φ and ψ are formulas, z and y do not occur free in φ, and z and x do
not occur free in ψ.
Axiom 8 is crucial to the formation of Euclidean geometry. If we omit it, we
have the theory of absolute geometry; and if we admit instead its negation, we
have Bolyai–Lobachevsky geometry. The system comprising A1–A12 is worthy of
study in its own right, since much of Euclidean geometry proceeds without A13.122
A13 is a ﬁrst-order analogue of the second-order axiom of continuity. Tarski
notes that standard axiomatizations of G include a continuity axiom that contains
second-order variables X, Y ,. . . ranging over sets of points. A typical formulation
is:
∀X∀Y [∃z∀x∀y(x ∈X & y ∈Y →Bzxy) →∃u∀x∀y(x ∈X & y ∈Y →Bxuy)].
The ﬁrst-order schema contained within A13 is obtained by replacing ‘x ∈X’ by
an arbitrary ﬁrst-order formula in which x occurs free, and ‘y ∈Y ’ by an arbitrary
ﬁrst-order formula in which y occurs free. A13 can be viewed as a restriction of
the second-order axiom to the deﬁnable sets.
Tarski goes on to address four fundamental metamathematical problems. The
ﬁrst is the representation problem. In general, the representation problem for a
theory is the problem of characterizing all of the theory’s models. In the case of
G, the answer is given by the following theorem:
Representation Theorem. M is a model of G if and only if M is isomorphic with
the Cartesian space over some real closed ﬁeld F.123
The second and third problems are the completeness problem and the decidabil-
ity problem. Tarski provides positive answers to both: G is complete and consistent
[Tarski, 1959, p. 22, Theorem 2], and decidable [Tarski, 1959, p. 23, Theorem 3].
The fourth problem is the problem of ﬁnite axiomatizability. Here the question is:
Can the axiom system be replaced by an equivalent ﬁnite system? The answer is
negative: G is not ﬁnitely axiomatizable [Tarski, 1959, p. 24, Theorem 4].124
122For more in this vein, see [Szczerba, 1986, p. 909].
123This is Theorem 1 in [Tarski, 1959, p. 21]. A model of G is a structure ⟨A, B, D⟩, where A
is an arbitrary non-empty set, B is a 3-place relation and D is a 4-place relation, and where all
the axioms of G hold if the variables are taken to range over elements of A, and the constants B
and D are taken to refer to B and D respectively. Let F be a real closed ﬁeld ⟨F, +, ·, =⟩. (For
a deﬁnition of real closed ﬁeld, see for example [Chang and Keisler, 1973, p. 41].) Consider the
set AF = F × F of all ordered pairs x = ⟨x1, x2⟩with x1 and x2 in F. We deﬁne the relations
BF and DF as follows:
BF (x, y, z)
iﬀ
(x1 −y1) · (y2 −z2) = (x2 −y2) · (y1 −z1) & 0 ≤(x1 −y1) · (y1 −z1) &
0 ≤(x2 −y2) · (y2 −z2).
DF (x, y, z, w)
iﬀ
(x1 −y1)2 + (x2 −y2)2 = (z1 −w1)2 + (z2 −w2)2.
(Compare clauses (iv) and (v) in Section 5.2) The structure C2 = ⟨AF , BF , DF ⟩is called the
Cartesian space over F. We now have all the ingredients of Theorem 1. Tarski provides an
outline of a proof in [Tarski, 1959, pp. 21–22].
124Tarski provides an outline of the proof on pp. 23–24.

Tarski’s Logic
593
This negative result might be considered a drawback of Tarski’s treatment of
elementary geometry. Further, there are notions of textbook geometry that cannot
be expressed in G — for example, the notions of the circumference and area of a
circle, and the notion of a polygon with arbitrarily many vertices. In [Tarski, 1959],
Tarski considers two other ways of interpreting the term ‘elementary geometry’ by
way of alternative axiomatizations. The ﬁrst is of greater expressive power than
G, and can accommodate the geometric notions just mentioned; however, Tarski
notes that this theory is undecidable, and that the other three metamathematical
problems remain open. The second alternative is ﬁnitely axiomatizable; however,
it is weaker than G and consequently captures fewer validities, and its decision
problem is open. Tarski concludes:
“The problem of deciding which of the various formal conceptions of
elementary geometry is closer to the historical tradition and the col-
loquial usage of this notion seems to be rather hopeless and deprived
of broader interest. The author feels that, among these various con-
ceptions, the one embodied in [G] distinguishes itself by the simplicity
and clarity of underlying intuitions and by the harmony and power of
its metamathematical implications.” (p. 28)
A recent, detailed study of Tarski’s theory G can be found in [Tarski, 1983b]. This,
and its bibliography give a good sense of Tarski’s extensive inﬂuence on research
in foundational geometry and metamathematics.
Tarski’s interest in the metamathematics of geometry was not restricted to
Euclidean geometry. As we noted in Section 5.2, Tarski proved that certain sys-
tems of non-Euclidean and projective geometry are decidable; and as we noted
in Section 5.3, Tarski showed that abstract projective geometries are undecidable
(see [Tarski, 1949e]).
Tarski also investigated the metalogic of aﬃne geometry
in [Tarski, 1965a] and [Tarski, 1979], in collaboration with L.W. Szczerba. As
Szczerba puts it, aﬃne geometry is roughly the theory of the betweenness relation
on the open and convex subsets of the Euclidean plane.125 A precise axiomatic
characterization of general aﬃne geometry (GA) is presented in [Tarski, 1979].
The system of axioms for GA consists of A1, A2, A3, A7, A11, and A13, together
with three further axioms speciﬁc to aﬃne geometry.126 Tarski and Szczerba solve
the representation problem for GA, and go on to show that GA is incomplete (in
fact GA has 2ℵ0 complete extensions), undecidable (in fact hereditarily undecid-
125See [Szczerba, 1986, p. 910].
126The three further axioms are as follows:
Extension Axiom The universal closure of ∃x(Bxyz & x ̸= y).
Desargues’ Axiom The universal closure of Bwxx′ & Bwyy′ & Bwzz′ & Bxyz′′ & Bx′y′z′′ &
Byzx′′ & By′z′x′′ & Bxzy′′ & Bx′z′y′′ & ¬Bwxy & ¬Bxyw & ¬Bywx & ¬Bwyz & ¬Byzw &
¬Bzwy & ¬Bwzx & ¬Bzxw & ¬Bxwz →Bx′′y′′z′′.

594
Keith Simmons
able),127 and not ﬁnitely axiomatizable. In [Tarski, 1979] Tarski and Szczerba also
investigate the metamathematical properties of various extensions of GA. One of
these — Euclidean aﬃne geometry (EA) — is obtained by adding Euclid’s Axiom
A8 to the axioms for GA. EA is the main subject of [Tarski, 1965a], where it
is shown, like GA, to be incomplete, (hereditarily) undecidable, and not ﬁnitely
axiomatizable.
7.2
Primitive concepts of geometry
Another aspect of Tarski’s metamathematical treatment of geometry is his work
on primitive notions in geometry. We have seen that Tarski’s formalization of Eu-
clidean geometry requires just two primitive concepts — betweenness and equidis-
tance. For Tarski, this economy is desirable and metamathematically signiﬁcant.
(In this respect, Tarski’s formalization is superior to Hilbert’s.)
The question
arises: How economical can we be? Can we ﬁnd a single geometric notion in terms
of which all the concepts of Euclidean geometry can be deﬁned?
More narrowly, we can ask whether there is a relation between points that
w
y
x
z
y
y’
’’
x
z’
’’
z’’
x’
Upper
Dimension
Axiom
The
universal
closure
of
∃v[{Byvz
&
(Bxvw ∨Bvwx ∨
Bwxv)} ∨{Bzvx & (Byvw ∨Bvwy ∨Bwyv)} ∨{Bxvy & (Bzvw ∨Bvwz ∨Bwzv)}].
x
z
w
y
v
127A theory T is hereditarily undecidable if not only T but also every subtheory of T with the
same constants is undecidable.

Tarski’s Logic
595
can serve this purpose. This is the leading question of Tarski’s papers [Tarski,
1956a] (with E.W.Beth) and [Tarski, 1956b].
This search is constrained by a
result established by Tarski and Lindenbaum: No binary relation between points
can serve this purpose.128 Still, Pieri showed that a certain three-place relation I
comes close, where I(x, y, z) holds iﬀthe distance from x to y is the same as the
distance from x to z (see [Pieri, 1908]). (In the 2-dimensional case, I(x, y, z) holds
iﬀx, y and z are the vertices of an isosceles triangle, with the line from y to z as
the base; in the 1-dimensional case, x is the midpoint of the line from y to z.) The
relation I can serve as the only primitive for n-dimensional Euclidean geometry,
provided that n ≥2. The equidistance relation denoted by D also comes close,
since for n ≥2 the betweenness relation B is deﬁnable in terms of D.
Can we do better than I and D?
In [Tarski, 1956a], Tarski considers the
‘equilaterality’ relation E : E(x, y, z) holds if the distances between x, y and z are
equal. (In the 2-dimensional case, E(x, y, z) holds if x, y and z are the vertices of
an equilateral triangle.) Can E serve as the only primitive notion of Euclidean
geometry? Tarski shows that the answer is aﬃrmative for n-dimensional Euclidean
geometry as long as n ≥3; the answer is negative for n = 1 or n = 2. So E joins
the ranks of other ternary relations, like I, which can serve as the sole primitive
concept of n-dimensional Euclidean geometry for certain n, but not all n.
In
[Tarski, 1956b], Tarski considers in full generality the question of which ternary
relations can serve as the sole primitive of Euclidean geometry for all n, and
establishes a property that any such relation must have (and which E and I in
particular fail to have, as Tarski shows).
Tarski’s search for a single primitive relation in [Tarski, 1956a] and [Tarski,
1956b] was limited to relations between points. Much earlier, in the paper ‘Foun-
dations of the geometry of solids’ [Tarski, 1929a], Tarski developed a geometry
of solids, in which the primitive individuals are not points but spheres — or bet-
ter, balls.129 Tarski was responding to a challenge set by Le´sniewski: to estab-
lish the foundations of a geometry of solids. In laying these foundations, Tarski
works within the framework of Le´sniewski’s deductive theory of mereology (see
Le´sniewski, [1916] and [1927–31]). Just one 2-place relation — the relation of part
to whole — is needed for Le´sniewski’s theory. Tarski showed in [Tarski, 1929a]
that we can deﬁne all the concepts of 3-dimensional Euclidean geometry in terms
of just the notions of ball and the part-whole relation.
The key to Tarski’s demonstration is this: we may deﬁne the notion of point and
128See Lindenbaum and Tarski [1936c].
Indeed, Lindenbaum and Tarski announce that in
elementary Euclidean geometry no 2-place relation can be deﬁned “apart from the universal
relation, the empty relation, identity and diversity.” [Tarski, 1936c, p. 389]
129In the original paper [Tarski, 1929a], Tarski used the word for ‘sphere’. But in a footnote
added later (fn. 1, p. 26), Tarski suggests that, since he is developing a geometry of solids and
not a point geometry, it would be advisable to replace the word ‘sphere’ by ‘ball’.
Tarski worked with open balls. S. Ja´skowski — in the paper [Ja´skowski, 1948] cited by Tarski in
[Tarski, 1929a] (see fn. 2, p. 26) and by Szczerba in [Szczerba, 1986, p. 911] — simpliﬁed Tarski’s
geometry by modifying the deﬁnition of the relation ‘A is concentric with B’, and working with
closed instead of open balls.

596
Keith Simmons
the relation I above in terms of balls and the part-whole relation. The deﬁnitions
are as follows:
Deﬁnition. A point is the class of all balls which are concentric with a given ball.
(See Deﬁnition 6, p. 27).130
Deﬁnition. I(x, y, z) iﬀthere exists a ball W which belongs to the point x and
which satisﬁes the following condition: no ball V belonging to the point y or the
point z is a part of W or disjoint from W. (See Deﬁnition 7, p. 27).131
Given Pieri’s result (above), it follows that every concept of 3-dimensional Eu-
clidean geometry can be deﬁned in terms of balls and the part-whole relation
— and the result extends to n-dimensional Euclidean geometry for n ≥2. As
Szczcerba remarks (in [Szczerba, 1986]), the notion of a ball seems much more
intuitive than the notion of a point — accordingly, this system of solid geometry
is known as Tarski’s natural geometry.
7.3
The Banach-Tarski paradox
The famous Banach-Tarski paradox is a startling theorem proved by Tarski and
Stefan Banach in their paper “Sur la d´ecomposition des ensembles de points en
parties respectivement congruentes” [Tarski, 1924d].
This was Tarski’s second
published paper in geometry, and like the ﬁrst — [Tarski, 1924b] — it is con-
cerned with the notion of equivalence by ﬁnite decomposition. According to the
classical deﬁnition of this notion, two geometric ﬁgures are equivalent by ﬁnite
decomposition if one can be decomposed (or “cut up”) into ﬁnitely many ﬁgures
that can be rearranged to form the other one. Tarski worked with a generalized
set-theoretical version of this classical notion, which treats geometric ﬁgures such
as polygons and polyhedra as sets of points. Tarski characterizes equivalence by
ﬁnite decomposition along these lines:
Two sets of points A and B (in particular, two polygons or polyhe-
dra) are said to be equivalent by ﬁnite decomposition iﬀA can be
decomposed into ﬁnitely many disjoint sets of points A1, A2, . . . , An,
B can be decomposed into the same number of disjoint sets of points
B1, B2, . . . , Bn, and Ai and Bi are congruent, for 1 ≤i ≤n.132
In [Tarski, 1924b] Tarski considers two theorems that were known to hold for the
classical notion of equivalence by ﬁnite decomposition:
Theorem 1 Two arbitrary polygons, where one is contained in the other, are never
equivalent by ﬁnite decomposition.
Theorem 2 Two polygons are equivalent by ﬁnite composition if and only if they
130Tarski observes (in [Tarski, 1929a, p. 27, fn. 1]) that balls are (ﬁrst-order) individuals, while
points are second-order objects. In point geometry, the reverse is true.
131Intuitively, the lines xy and xz are radii of the ball W.
132See Tarski [1924b, p. 64].

Tarski’s Logic
597
are equal in area.
Tarski shows in [Tarski, 1924b] that these theorems also hold for the set-theoretical
version of equivalence by ﬁnite decomposition.
These results about polygons appear natural and intuitive, and one might expect
them to hold for polyhedra too. But they do not. At the very end of [Tarski,
1924b], Tarski remarks that, if we take equivalence by ﬁnite decomposition in
the set-theoretical sense, it can be shown that Theorems 1 and 2 do not extend
to polyhedra. Tarski announces the following theorem, proved in the yet-to be-
published paper [Tarski, 1924d]:
Two arbitrary polyhedra (of the same volume or not) are equivalent
by ﬁnite decomposition. (See [Tarski, 1924b, p. 64].)
As Tarski cautiously puts it, the result “seems perhaps paradoxical” (p. 64). This
theorem is the Banach-Tarski paradox.133
The theorem is more precisely stated in [Tarski, 1924d] as follows:
If A and B are any two sets of points in 3-dimensional Euclidean space,
each being bounded and with a non-empty interior, then A and B are
equivalent by ﬁnite decomposition.134
In particular, then, two spheres of diﬀerent radii are equivalent by ﬁnite decom-
position (in sharp contrast to the 2-dimensional case of circles). This encourages
dramatic statements of the paradox:
“It is possible to cut up a pea into ﬁnitely many pieces that can be
rearranged to form a ball the size of the sun!”135
or
“A ball, which has a deﬁnite volume, may be taken apart into ﬁnitely
many pieces that may be rearranged via rotations of R3 to form two,
or even 1,000,000 balls, each identical to the original one.”136
The theorem extends to n-dimensional Euclidean space, for n ≥3.137
133Previous paradoxical decompositions were constructed by Vitali [Vitali, 1905] and Hausdorﬀ
[Hausdorﬀ, 1914]. Hausdorﬀ’s work was a major inﬂuence on Banach and Tarski’s paper. For
more historical background, see [Wagon, 1985, Chapters 1–3].
134See [Tarski, 1924d, p. 140, Theorem 24]. In the statement of the theorem, Tarski uses the
term “ensembles-fronti`eres”. This term is deﬁned in fn. 1, p. 133: it applies to exactly those sets
of points that have no interior point.
135[Wagon, 1985, p. xiii].
136[Wagon, 1985, p. 28].
137See [Tarski, 1924d, p. 121], where the theorem is stated in its fully general form, and also p.
137, where Tarski indicates how to proceed with the proof for n ≥3. Moore writes that Banach
and Tarski independently discovered the Banach–Tarski paradox, and agreed to write a joint
paper. In a personal communication to Moore, Tarski reported that the general result was due
to him (see [Moore, 1982, p. 285, fn. 3]).

598
Keith Simmons
Jan Mycielski calls the Banach-Tarski result “the most surprising result of theo-
retical mathematics”.138 One kind of response to the paradox — the most common
— has been to take the result at face value, and accept it as a demonstration that
mathematics can sometimes fail in the most radical way to match up with physical
reality.139 A diﬀerent kind of response — little seen nowadays — has been to treat
it as the conclusion of a genuine paradox, a conclusion that is so counterintuitive
that we are forced us to review the argument that produced it. For some the
culprit is the Axiom of Choice, which is indispensable to the proof.140
8
SET THEORY
Tarski’s ﬁrst published paper [Tarski, 1921] and his last published monograph
[Tarski, 1987a] were both works in set theory. Tarski’s early interest in set the-
ory was inspired by Sierpi´nski, who, together with Janiszewski and Mazurkiewicz,
started up the Warsaw School of Mathematics in 1919. In the 1920s and 1930s,
Tarski wrote a number of papers on topics in general set theory. The subject of
[Tarski, 1921] was the notion of a well-ordered set; subsequent papers dealt with
such topics as the theory of ﬁnite sets, cardinal arithmetic, and the Axiom of
Choice and its equivalents. As set theory developed and grew more sophisticated
and specialized, so did Tarski’s work. Tarski was a seminal ﬁgure in the devel-
opment of the theory of large cardinals — he produced highly inﬂuential work
on large cardinals from 1930 to the 1960s.
Tarski also investigated set theory
from the algebraic perspective, a perspective which — as we have seen — he so
often brought to logic.
In Cardinal Algebras [Tarski, 1949f] and Ordinal Alge-
bras [Tarski, 1956c] Tarski investigated cardinal and ordinal addition within the
framework of abstract algebraic systems. And in A Formalization of Set Theory
without variables [Tarski, 1987a], Tarski and Steven Givant developed set theory
within the framework of abstract relation algebras (see section 6.2 above for more
on relation algebras).
8.1
General set theory
In his paper [Sierpi´nski, 1918], Sierpi´nski investigated in detail the role that the
Axiom of Choice played in set theory and analysis, and threw out a challenge to
138See Mycielski’s Foreword to [Wagon, 1985].
139The mathematical lesson to learn is that the Banach–Tarski theorem
“precludes the existence of ﬁnitely-additive, congruent-invariant measures over all
bounded subsets in [three-dimensional space] R3.”
(Mycielski, in the Foreword to [Wagon, 1985])
140For a detailed discussion of the role of the Axiom of Choice in the proof of the Banach-Tarski
theorem, see [Wagon, 1985, Chapter 13]. Wagon’s book is a recent mathematical work motivated
by the Banach–Tarski result. It contains a number of open problems, old and new. One of these
Wagon calls “Tarski’s Circle-Squaring Problem” (posed in 1925): Is a circle (with interior points)
equivalent by ﬁnite decomposition to a square of the same area? (See [Wagon, 1985, p. 101ﬀ] for
a discussion of this and related problems.)

Tarski’s Logic
599
mathematicians: determine the deductive relations between the Axiom of Choice
and other propositions.141 Tarski responded to this challenge in [Tarski, 1924a].
At the outset of this paper, Tarski lists seven propositions that are equivalent
to the Axiom of Choice. Each of these propositions is a statement of cardinal
arithmetic, where m, n, p, q are inﬁnite cardinal numbers:
I.
m · n = m + n
II.
m = m2
III.
If m2 = n2 then m = n
IV.
If m < n and p < q then m + p < n + q
V.
If m < n and p < q then m.p < n.q
VI.
If m + p < n + p then m < n
VII. If m · p < n · p then m < n142
In their joint paper [Tarski, 1926a], Tarski and Lindenbaum added to this list seven
more propositions, all of them statements from the theory of cardinal numbers (see
[Tarski, 1926a, pp. 185–6, Theorem 82]).143 Thus, Tarski’s early work in [Tarski,
1924a] and [Tarski, 1926a] was a major contribution to our understanding of the
relation between cardinal arithmetic and the Axiom of Choice, and in particular
to the project of ﬁnding so-called ‘cardinal equivalents’ of Choice.144
Another topic of Tarski’s early work in set theory was the theory of ﬁnite sets.
In [Tarski, 1924c] Tarski systematically constructed a theory of ﬁnite sets on the
basis of Zermelo’s ﬁrst ﬁve axioms (Extensionality, Elementary sets, Separation,
Power set, Union) — Zermelo’s remaining two axioms, the Axiom of Choice and
the Axiom of Inﬁnity, were excluded. Tarski remarks that no previous attempt to
construct such a theory had been completely successful; for example, Dedekind’s
treatment in [Dedekind, 1888] did not have a solid axiomatic foundation, and
Russell and Whitehead’s account (in [Russell and Whitehead, 1910–13]) is speciﬁc
to their theory of types (see [Tarski, 1924c, pp. 67–8].)
Tarski’s own starting point was a new deﬁnition of ﬁnite set:
141See [Moore, 1982, Chapter 4.1] for more on Sierpi´nski’ work and inﬂuence.
142Tarski’s proof of the equivalences is based on Zermelo’s system of axioms (omitting Choice,
of course) together with two additional axioms which introduce the notion of cardinal number:
1. Every set has a cardinal number.
2. Two sets have the same cardinal number if and only if there is a 1-1 correspondence between
them.
143Tarski and Lindenbaum’s [Tarski, 1926a] was an extensive summary of their recent results
in set theory, presented without proofs.
144In [Rubin and Rubin, 1963], Herman and Jean Rubin present over one hundred equivalents of
the Axiom of Choice — and one category of equivalents they call ‘cardinal equivalents’. For more
on Tarski’s work on cardinal equivalents, see [Moore, 1982, pp. 213–219, Section 4.3]. Other work
on cardinal arithmetic published by Tarski in the 1920s includes [Tarski, 1925; Tarski, 1926a;
Tarski, 1929c].
Tarski later obtained further cardinal equivalents of the Axiom of Choice in
[Tarski, 1938a], a paper that investigated inaccessible cardinals (see section 8.2 below).

600
Keith Simmons
A set A is ﬁnite iﬀevery non-empty set K of subsets of A has a ⊆-least
element B (that is, an element B such that no member of K is a proper
subset of B). (See [Tarski, 1924c, p. 71, Deﬁnition 3].)
From this starting point, Tarski went on to prove a large number of theorems which
established all the fundamental properties of ﬁnite sets with which he was familiar.
Tarski’s deﬁnition diﬀers from the standard arithmetic deﬁnition, according to
which a set is ﬁnite iﬀit is either empty or there exists a 1-1 correspondence
between it and the set {1, 2, . . . , n} for some ﬁnite n. In contrast to this usual
deﬁnition, Tarski’s deﬁnition is independent of the concept of ﬁnite number. It
also diﬀers from Dedekind’s, according to which a set is ﬁnite if there is no 1-1
correspondence between it and any of its proper subsets.
The question naturally arises as to the equivalence of these various deﬁnitions,
and this question is also investigated in [Tarski, 1924c]. Tarski shows that his
deﬁnition is equivalent to the usual arithmetical one, thereby showing that the
theory of ﬁnite sets can be constructed from the usual deﬁnition without the
need for the Axiom of Choice. He also shows if a set is ﬁnite in his sense, then
it is ﬁnite in Dedekind’s sense.
For Tarski, the reverse direction was an open
problem: without Choice, it was not known how to establish the equivalence of his
deﬁnition and Dedekind’s (see [Tarski, 1924c, p. 95]). In an appendix to [Tarski,
1924c], Tarski states a number of open problems of this kind, generated by ﬁve
alternative deﬁnitions of ﬁnite set that Tarksi lists (on p. 115).
It turned out
that none of these deﬁnitions — among them Tarski’s and Dedekind’s — were
equivalent in the absence of the Axiom of Choice. So while Tarski’s deﬁnition
permitted the construction of the theory of ﬁnite sets without Choice, a number
of alternative deﬁnitions (including Dedekind’s) did not.145
8.2
Large cardinals
Tarski initiated the systematic study of large cardinals, and he and his school
were largely responsible for its continuing development. An appropriate starting
point is Tarski and Sierpi´nski’s joint paper [Tarski, 1930a] in which they deﬁne
the notion of an inaccessible cardinal. Their deﬁnition runs as follows:
A cardinal number m is inaccessible iﬀit is not the product of a fewer
number of cardinals of lesser power. (See Deﬁnition 1, p. 289).
The intuitive idea is that an inaccessible cardinal cannot be obtained from below.
As Tarski and Sierpi´nski remark, ℵ0 is clearly an inaccessible cardinal: it cannot be
obtained from the product of ﬁnitely many ﬁnite cardinals. In current terminology,
Tarski and Sierpi´nski’s deﬁnition characterizes the class of strongly inaccessible
cardinals.
In [Tarski, 1938a], Tarski provided alternative characterizations of the strongly
inaccessible cardinals. He also characterized the weakly inaccessible cardinals, as
follows:
145For more on Tarski on ﬁnite sets, see [Moore, 1982, pp. 209–213, section 4.2].

Tarski’s Logic
601
m is a weakly inaccessible cardinal iﬀm = ℵα where α is a regular
limit ordinal.146
Tarski shows, with the help of the Axiom of Choice, that if a cardinal is strongly
inaccessible, it is weakly inaccessible. He also proves the reverse direction, but, as
he makes fully explicit, he does so only with the help of the Generalized Continuum
Hypothesis.
Tarski took inaccessible cardinals to be natural objects of set theory:
“. . . the belief in the existence of inaccessible cardinals > ω (and even
of arbitrarily large cardinals of this kind) seems to be a natural con-
sequence of basic intuitions underlying the “na¨ıve” set theory and re-
ferring to what can be called “Cantor’s absolute”.” [Tarski, 1962, p.
124]
And Zermelo’s set theory cannot accommodate these intuitions:
“on the basis of the usual axioms of Zermelo the existence of such
numbers, apart from the two smallest of them, 2 and ℵ0, cannot be
established at all.” [Tarski, 1939, p. 557]
Accordingly, Tarski introduced for the ﬁrst time an axiom that guaranteed the
existence of large cardinals.147 Remarking that the axiomatization of increasingly
large segments of “Cantor’s absolute” is regarded by many as one of main aims of
research in the foundations of set theory, Tarski continues:
“Those who share this attitude are always ready to accept new “con-
struction principles”, new axioms securing the existence of new classes
of “large” cardinals (provided they appear to be consistent with old
axioms).” [Tarski, 1939, p. 557]
Tarski’s Axiom of Inaccessible Cardinals was ﬁrst presented in [Tarski, 1938a, p.
375]. Tarski’s formulation was based on a technical characterization of the strongly
inaccessible cardinals (drawn from [Tarski, 1938a, Theorem 21]). In [Tarski, 1939,
p. 558], Tarski replaced it by a more natural version:
For every set N there exists a set M with the following properties:
146For the notion of a regular ordinal, we need some prior notions. We call two partially ordered
sets X and Y similar (in symbols, X ∼Y ) if there exists an order-preserving 1-1 correspondence
between them. Next we need the notions of an initial ordinal and coﬁnality.
Deﬁnition α is an initial ordinal iﬀOrdα & ∀β < α(¬α ∼β).
Deﬁnitions
α is coﬁnal with β iﬀα ≤β & ∃f(f : α →β & β = ∪range(f)).
The coﬁnality cf(β) of β is ∩{α|α is coﬁnal with β}.
We are now in a position to deﬁne the notion of a regular ordinal:
Deﬁnition For an initial ordinal κ, κ is regular iﬀcf(κ) = κ.
147Compare the introduction of the Axiom of Replacement to guarantee the existence of certain
intuitive sets — for example, the denumerable set {Z0, PZ0, PPZ0, . . . }, where Z0 is the set of
positive integers and P is the power set operation (see [Skolem, 1922], in [van Heijenoort, 1967,
pp. 296–7]).

602
Keith Simmons
(i)
N is equipollent to a subset of M.148
(ii) the set of subsets of M which are not equipollent to M (i.e. the
set {x|x ⊆M & x < M})149 is equipollent to M.
(iii) there is no set P such that P’s power set is equipollent to M.
Either version of the Axiom of Inaccessible Sets says, in eﬀect, that for any set
there is a larger set whose cardinal number is strongly inaccessible. The axiom
“assures the existence of inaccessible numbers as large as we please” [Tarski, 1939,
p. 558]. Moroever, the axiom has “great deductive power”:
“If it is included in Zermelo’s or Zermelo-Fraenkel’s axiom-system this
axiom brings with it a great simpliﬁcation and reduction of the sys-
tem; and, be it noted, the axiom of choice then becomes a provable
theorem.” [Tarski, 1939, p. 557]
In a later series of papers [Tarski 1943; 1957a; 1958a; 1958b; 1961a; 1962; 1964],
Tarski investigated a family of problems concerning inaccessible cardinals. These
problems share the same structure. The form of each problem is this: to determine
the class of all the (inﬁnite) cardinals that have a given property P, where it is
known that ℵ0 does not have P, and that the accessible cardinals do. The problem
reduces to this: which of the inaccessible cardinals, if any, have P?
For example, one problem examined in [Tarski, 1962] is the compactness problem
for predicate logics with inﬁnitely long formulas.150 Let Lω be ordinary predicate
logic. For any regular cardinal α let Lα be the logical system that diﬀers from Lω
in having α diﬀerent variables, inﬁnitary operations analogous to ordinary disjunc-
tion and conjunction, and new versions of universal and existential quantiﬁcation
adjusted to the inﬁnitary setting.151 The compactness problem for logics Lα is
the problem of determining those cardinals α for which the following compactness
theorem holds:
If S is any set of sentences in Lα, and if every subset of S with power
< α has a model, then S also has a model.
That is, a cardinal α has the property P in the present case if the compactness
theorem holds for α. If so, α is a compact cardinal; otherwise it is incompact.
Now ω is compact, while all the accessible cardinals are incompact. What about
the inaccessible cardinals? Here the problem about inaccessible cardinals has a
metamathematical or metalogical setting. Tarski’s student Hanf proved that a very
large class of inaccessible cardinals are incompact.152 Consider an arrangement
of all the inaccessible cardinals in a transﬁnite increasing sequence θ0, θ1, . . . , θi,
148Two sets are equipollent iﬀthere is a 1-1 correspondence between them.
149A < B iﬀthere is a set C such that A is equipollent to C and C ⊂B.
150These logics are brieﬂy discussed in [Tarski, 1958a].
151For a full description see, for example, [Tarski, 1962, pp. 116–7].
152[Hanf, 1963–4].

Tarski’s Logic
603
. . .
for ordinals 0, 1, . . . , i, . . .. Hanf proved that every cardinal α of the form
α = θi with 0 < i < α is incompact.
In [Tarski, 1962] Tarski used this metamathematical result of Hanf’s to estab-
lish certain other properties of this large class of inaccessible cardinals. Tarski
still regarded the metamathematical approach as powerful and intuitive, even for
results in pure set theory.153 Referring back to [Tarski, 1962], Tarski and Keisler
later wrote:
“The results we have mentioned concerning large classes of inaccessible
cardinals were originally obtained with the essential help of metamath-
ematical (model-theoretic) methods. These methods still provide the
intuitively and deductively simplest approach of the topic in its full
generality. In our opinion this circumstance provides new and signif-
icant evidence of the power of metamathematics as a tool in purely
mathematical research, and at the same time does not detract in the
least from the value of the results obtained.” [Tarski, 1964, p. 130]
Nevertheless in [Tarski, 1964] Tarski and Keisler undertake a purely mathematical
(and very extensive) treatment of the topics discussed in [Tarski, 1962], motivated
to some extent “by some (irrational) inclination toward puritanism in methods”
[Tarski, 1964, p. 130].154
At the end of [Tarski, 1962], Tarski observes that the problems he has treated
remain open only for the smallest inaccessible cardinal that is not incompact, and
beyond. If there is no such cardinal, the problems are fully disposed of. And
Tarski reports that
“we do not know any example of a cardinal α > ω which would possess
a “constructive characterization” (in some very general and rather loose
sense of this term) and of which we could not prove that it is incompact
. . . ” [Tarski, 1962, p. 119]
So should we add an axiom to the eﬀect that there are no such cardinals? Only
if we are willing to compromise the study of “Cantor’s absolute”, which Tarski
certainly was not. So we should be prepared to accept large cardinal axioms, but
not prepared to accept
“any axioms precluding the existence of [large] cardinals — unless this
is done on a strictly temporary basis, for the restricted purpose of fa-
cilitating the metamathematical discussion of some axiomatic systems
of set theory.” [Tarski, 1962, p. 124]
153Work of Tarski’s that adopts the metamathematical approach to the present family of prob-
lems are [Tarski, 1958a] (with D. Scott), [Tarski, 1961a; Tarski, 1961b]. See also [Keisler, 1962].
154Tarski [1962] and [Tarski, 1964] inspired a great deal of research on measurable cardinals and
ultraproducts (see for example [Chang and Keisler, 1973, Ch. 4.2]. For some historical notes, see
[Chang and Keisler, 1973, pp. 520–1]).

604
Keith Simmons
8.3
The algebraization of set theory
We turn ﬁrst to Tarski’s book Cardinal Algebras [Tarski, 1949f], published in 1949
but conceived some twenty years earlier.
It deals with cardinal arithmetic, in
particular cardinal addition. Tarski distinguishes two types of results in cardinal
arithmetic, those that rely on the Axiom of Choice, and those, more constructive
in nature, that mostly do not. In [Tarski, 1949f], Tarski investigates results of the
second type that concern cardinal addition. Tarski establishes that all of these
results can be derived within the framework of so-called cardinal algebras, which
satisfy just a small number of laws or postulates. Moreover, these laws apply not
only to cardinal arithmetic, but also to various other mathematical systems. So
cardinal algebras form a simple framework within which many results from many
diﬀerent systems are forthcoming.
A cardinal algebra is an ordered triple A = ⟨A, +, Σ⟩satisfying certain postu-
lates. A is a set of arbitrary elements, + is a 2-place operation, and Σ an operation
on inﬁnite sequences (intuitively, Σ is inﬁnite addition). Postulates I and II are
respectively the closure of A under + and the closure of A under Σ. Postulate
III is the associative postulate: 
i<∞ai = a0 + 
i<∞ai+1. Postulate IV is the
commutative-associative postulate: 
i<∞(ai + bi) = 
i<∞ai + 
i<∞bi. Postu-
late V is the zero postulate: there is an element z in A such that a+z = z +a = a
for every a ∈A. Postulates VI and VII are the ones characteristic of cardinal alge-
bras. Postulate VI is the reﬁnement postulate: if a + b = 
i<∞ci then there are
ai and bi such that a = 
i<∞ai, b = 
i<∞bi, and cn = an + bn. Postulate VII
is the remainder (or inﬁnite chain) postulate: if an = bn + an+1, for n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
then there is an element c ∈A such that an = c + Σi<∞bn+i for n = 0, 1, 2, . . ..
(See [Tarski, 1949f, pp. 3–4].) It is straightforward to check that the cardinal num-
bers with the operations of binary and inﬁnite addition form a cardinal algebra.
The ﬁrst part of [Tarski, 1949f] develops the arithmetic of cardinal algebras. (The
second part extends these results to a wider class of algebraic systems, and exam-
ines general methods of constructing cardinal algebras; the third part investigates
the connections between cardinal algebras and related algebraic systems.) Tarski
remarks:
“The idea of an algebraic treatment of [cardinal arithmetic] and cer-
tain aspects and implications of the algebraic development seem to be
essentially new.” (Preface to [Tarski, 1949f, p. xii])
Tarski’s monograph Ordinal Algebras [Tarski, 1956c] does for ordinal addition
what [Tarski, 1949a] did for cardinal addition. As Tarski puts it:
“The method applied in this monograph in the development and pre-
sentation of the theory of ordinal addition is the abstract algebraic
method which was applied for analogous purposes in an earlier work
of the author, [Tarski, 1949f].” (Introduction to [Tarski, 1956c], p. 2.)
Tarski remarks that the algebras themselves show some analogies — we ﬁnd clo-
sure, associative, and remainder postulates. The main diﬀerence, according to

Tarski’s Logic
605
Tarski, is that in ordinal algebras the operation + is not commutative; also, the
reﬁnement postulate is replaced by a much stronger statement, the directed re-
ﬁnement postulate. (For a full speciﬁcation of ordinal algebras, and more on these
analogies and diﬀerences, see [Tarski, 1956c, Chapter 1]). As in the case of car-
dinal addition, Tarski’s novel algebraic approach to ordinal addition generated,
from a very small base, a large number of results that are not limited to ordinal
arithmetic.155
Tarski’s ﬁnal monograph A Formalization of Set Theory without variables (with
Steven Givant) [Tarski, 1987a] is a wholesale algebraization of set theory. In the
preface, Tarski and Givant announce:
“In this work we shall show that set theory and number theory can be
developed within the framework of a new, diﬀerent, and very simple
formalism, LX.” (p. xi)
The formalism LX contains no variables, quantiﬁers, or sentential connectives. The
vocabulary of LX contains seven symbols: two atomic predicates, ˚1 (denoting the
identity relation between individuals) and E (denoting the membership relation);
four operators, + (Boolean addition), −(Boolean complement), ˘ (conversion —
see 4.2 above), and ⊙(relative product — called ‘;’ in 4.2 above); and a second
identity predicate = (denoting the identity relation between relations). Compound
predicates are formed from the atomic predicates ˚1 and E using the operators. All
mathematical statements in LX are of the form ‘A = B’, where A and B are
arbitrary predicates.
The deductive apparatus of LX is based upon ten logical axiom schemata (see
[Tarski, 1987a, p. 46]):
(I)
A + B = B + A
(II)
A + (B + C) = (A + B) + C
(III)
(A−+ B)−+ (A−+ B−)−= A
(IV)
A ⊙(B ⊙C) = (A ⊙B) ⊙C
(V)
(A + B) ⊙C = A ⊙C + B ⊙C
(VI)
A ⊙˚1 = A
(VII)
A˘˘ = A
(VIII) (A + B)˘= A˘+ B˘
(IX)
(A ⊙B)˘= B˘⊙A˘
155Both [Jonsson, 1986] and [Levy, 1988] note that Tarski’s work on cardinal and ordinal al-
gebras has been somewhat neglected. Jonsson suggests that Tarski’s thoroughness may in part
explain this, “for he presented the mathematical community with two highly polished and elab-
orate creations, but with relatively few open problems” [Jonsson, 1986, p. 885].

606
Keith Simmons
(X)
A˘⊙(A ⊙B)−+ B−= B−.
These axioms are the analogues of the equational postulates for abstract relation
algebras essentially given by Chin and Tarski in [Tarski, 1951a, p. 344]. There is
just one rule of inference, the rule of replacing equals by equals, familiar from high
school algebra. Tarski and Givant write that
“LX proves adequate for the formalization of practically all known
systems of set theory, and hence for the development of all of classical
mathematics.” (Preface to [Tarski, 1987a, p. xii])
Thus set theory can be based entirely on a system which is free of variables and
in which the only formulas are sentences which take the form of equations. (See
[Tarski, 1987a, section 4.6] for the formalizability of systems of set theory in LX.)
The system LX is a direct development of Tarski’s work on the calculus of relations
and relation algebras (see 6.2 above):
“Roughly speaking, the formalism LX that is the central focus of this
work is obtained from Tarski’s equational formalization of the calculus
of relations by introducing the constant E and deleting all variables.”
(Preface to [Tarski, 1987a, p. xvii])
Givant reports that Tarski died shortly after the manuscript for [Tarski, 1987a]
was completed.
9
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Tarski wrote twenty monographs and more than one hundred articles, and yet he
published next to nothing about his philosophical views. Even in his work best-
known to philosophers — his work on the concept of truth — Tarski’s philosophical
views are hard to pin down, as we have seen.
In a rare expression of his philosophical standpoint regarding the foundations
of mathematics, Tarski once wrote:
“. . . I may mention that my personal attitude towards this question
agrees in principle with that which has found emphatic expression in
the writings of S. Le´sniewski and which I would call intuitionistic for-
malism.” [Tarski, 1930d, p. 62]
But in a footnote added later to this paper, Tarski characteristically drew back
from such an unequivocal philosophical statement (“This last statement expresses
the views of the author at the time when this article was originally published and
does not adequately reﬂect his present attitude” (ibid.)).
Mostowski (Tarski’s ﬁrst PhD student) reports that Tarski was inﬂuenced early
on by Kotarbinski’s “reism”, a nominalist doctrine, and would express sympathy
with nominalism in oral discussions. But as Mostowski points out, this seems to

Tarski’s Logic
607
conﬂict with Tarski’s constant use of abstract and general notions (consider, for
example, Tarski’s wholesale acceptance of set theory).156
We can ﬁnd some brief philosophical remarks in two other pieces of Tarski’s,
both published posthumously. In a letter to Morton White, written in September
1944, Tarski followed what he took to be the Millian view, that logical and math-
ematical truths are, like empirical truths, the results of accumulated experience.
Tarski goes on to say:
“I think I am ready to reject certain logical premisses (axioms) of our
science in exactly the same circumstances in which I am ready to reject
empirical premisses (e.g. physical hypotheses). . . ” [Tarski, 1987b, p.
31]
This was a view that was later to ﬁnd expression in [White, 1950] and [Quine,
1951], both of whom acknowledge their debt to Tarski.
The second posthumous piece is the paper “What are logical notions?” [Tarski,
1986a]. Tarski makes it clear that he is not after any ‘platonic’ answer to the
question :
“. . . people speak of catching the proper, true meaning of a notion,
something independent of actual usage, and independent of any nor-
mative proposals, something like the platonic idea behind the notion.
This last approach is so foreign and strange to me that I shall sim-
ply ignore it, for I cannot say anything intelligent on such matters.”
[Tarski, 1986a, p. 145]
Instead, Tarski aims to capture a possible use of the term ‘logical notion’, one
that he thinks is in agreement with at least one actual usage of the term. As with
the notions of deﬁnability, truth, and logical consequence, Tarski seeks to capture
common usage as far as consistency and rigor allow.157
It is clear that Tarski’s most signiﬁcant philosophical contributions ﬂow from
his logical and metamathematical work, and not from any overtly philosophical
writings.
This is no accident: Tarski held ﬁrmly to the view that logical and
mathematical investigations should proceed unhampered by any particular philo-
sophical perspective. For example, as Mostowski emphasizes, Tarski’s unrestricted
use of set theory gave him a mathematical reach that was beyond that available to
the adherents to Hilbert’s formalism or Brouwer’s intuitionism. Tarski thought of
himself ﬁrst and foremost as a mathematician and a logician, and as a philosopher
only in some secondary sense: “perhaps a philosopher of a sort” [Tarski, 1944, p.
693].
Tarski’s philosophical contributions are to be found in his work on metamath-
ematics, semantics and logic. In the course of more than sixty years of active
research, Tarski articulated concepts and established theorems that have become
156[Mostowski, 1967, p. 81].
157Tarski’s suggestion concerning logical notions is couched in geometric terms of invariance
under transformations.

608
Keith Simmons
standard in modern logic; he ushered in new ﬁelds; he helped to construct the very
framework of modern logic. And through generation after generation of his stu-
dents, Tarski’s inﬂuence is still felt. In their review of [Tarski, 1956d], Pogorzelski
and Surma write:
“. . . the thing that we ﬁnd most striking is that there . . . is hardly
another scientist in the history of the exact sciences whose part in the
construction of notions for a large domain of science was as powerful as
the contribution of Tarski to the creation of conceptual apparatus for
logic, metalogic, and even metamathematics. In fact, the conceptual
structure of these disciplines is due to Tarski.”158
Tarski oﬀered an additional way to measure “the value of a man’s work” [Tarski,
1944, p. 693]:
“It seems to me that there is a special domain of very profound and
strong human needs related to scientiﬁc research, which are similar in
many ways to aesthetic and perhaps religious needs. And it also seems
to me that the satisfaction of these needs should be considered an
important task of research. Hence, I believe, the question of the value
of any research cannot be adequately answered without taking into
account the intellectual satisfaction which the results of that research
bring to those who understand it and care for it. It may be unpopular
and out-of-date to say — but I do not think that a scientiﬁc result
which gives us a better understanding of the world and makes it more
harmonious in our eyes should be held in lower esteem than, say, an
invention which reduces the cost of paving roads, or improves household
plumbing.” [Tarski, 1944, p. 694]
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am very grateful to my colleague Michael Resnik for his valuable comments on
an entire draft of this chapter, and to David Ripley for his outstanding editorial
work. I have also beneﬁted from some excellent secondary sources. In particular,
I have been helped by the following: the survey/expository papers on Tarski’s
work published by the Journal of Symbolic Logic, comprising Vaught [1986] (on
model theory), Jonsson [1986] (on general algebra), McNulty [1986] (on undecid-
able theories), Monk [1986] (on algebraic logic), Szczerba [1986] (on geometry),
Levy [1988] (on set theory), Van den Dries [1988] (on Tarski’s elimination the-
ory for real closed ﬁelds), Doner and Hodges [1988] (on decidable theories), Blok
and Pigozzi [1988] (on general metamathematics), Etchemendy [1988a] (on truth
and logical consequence), and Suppes [1988] (on the philosophical implications of
Tarski’s work); Corcoran [1983a]; Moore [1982]; Mostowski [1967].
158This is the conclusion of [Pogorzelski and Surma, 1969].

Tarski’s Logic
609
BIBLIOGRAPHY
WORKS BY TARSKI
[Tarski, 1921] ‘Przyczynek do aksjomatyki zbioru dobrze uporzadkowanego’ (’A contribution to
the axiomatics of well-ordered sets’), Przeglad Filozoﬁczny, vol.24 , pp. 85–94, 1921.
[Tarski, 1923] ‘O wyrazie pierwotnym logistyki’, Doctoral dissertation, published in Przeglad
Filozoﬁczny, vol.26, pp. 68–89, 1923. An English translation appears in [Tarski, 1983a, pp.
1–23], under the title ‘On the primitive term of logistic’.
[Tarski, 1924a] ‘Sur quelques theor`emes qui equivalent a l’axiome du choix’, Fundamenta
Matematyczno-ﬁzyczny, vol.2, pp. 47–60, 1924.
[Tarski, 1924b] ‘O rownowaznosci wielokatow’ (‘On the equivalence of polygons’), Przeglad
Matematyczno-ﬁzyczny, vol. 2, pp. 47–60, 1924. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1986b, vol.
1].)
[Tarski, 1924c] ‘Sur les ensembles ﬁnis’, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 6, pp. 45–95, 1924.
(Page references are to [Tarski, 1986b, vol. 1])
[Tarski, 1924d] with S. Banach. ‘Sur la decomposition des ensembles de points en parties respec-
tivement congruentes’, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 6, pp. 244–277, 1924. (Page references
are to [Tarski, 1986b, vol. 1].)
[Tarski, 1925] ‘Quelques theor`emes sur les alephs’, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 7, pp. 1–14,
1925.
[Tarski, 1926a] with A. Lindenbaum. ‘Communication sur les r´echerches de la th´eorie des en-
sembles’, Comptes Rendus des S´eances de la Soci´et´e des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie,
Classe III, vol. 19, pp. 299–330, 1926. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1986b, vol. 1].)
[Tarski, 1927a] ‘Remarque concernant l’arithmetique des nombres cardinaux’ (abstract), An-
nales de la Soci´et´e Polonaise de Mathematique, vol. 5, p. 101, 1927.
[Tarski, 1927b] with A. Lindenbaum. ‘Sur l’independance des notions primitives dans les sys-
temes math´ematiques’, Abstract, Annales de la Soci´et´e Polonaise de Math´ematique, vol. 5,
pp. 111–113, 1927.
[Tarski, 1929a] ‘Les fondements de la geometrie des corps’, Ksiega Pamiatkowa Pierwszego Pol-
skiego Zjazdu Matematycznego (Supplement to Rocznik Polskiego Towarzystwa Matematy-
cznego), Krakow, pp. 29–33, 1929. A translation, with additions, appears in [Tarski, 1983a,
pp. 24–29] under the title ‘Foundations of the geometry of solids’. (Page references are to
[Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1929b] ‘Remarques
sur
les
notions
fondamentales
de
la
m´ethodologie
des
math´ematiques’, Annales de la Soci´et´e Polonaise de Math´ematique, vol. 7, pp. 270–2,
1929.
[Tarski, 1929c] ‘Geschichtliche Entwicklung und gegenwartiger Zustand der Gleichmachtigkeit-
stheorie und der Kardinalzhlarithmetik’, Ksiega Pamiatkowa Pierwszego Polskiego Zjazdu
Matematycznego (Supplement to Rocznik Polskiego Towarzystwa Matematycznego), Krakow,
pp. 48–54, 1929.
[Tarski, 1930a] with W. Sierpi´nski. ‘Sur une propri´et´e caracteristique des nombres inaccessibles’,
Fundamenta Mathematicae vol. 15, pp. 292–300, 1930. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1986b],
vol. 1.)
[Tarski, 1930b] ‘¨Uber einige fundamentale Begriﬀe der Metamathematik’, Comptes Rendus des
s´eances de la Soci´et´e des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, vol.23, cl.iii, pp. 22–29, 1930.
An English translation appears in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 30–37], under the title ‘On some funda-
mental concepts of metamathematics’. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1930c] with J. Lukasiewicz. ‘Untersuchungen ¨uber den Aussagenkalk¨ul’, Comptes Ren-
dus des s´eances de la Soci´et´e des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, vol.23, c.iii, pp. 30–50,
1930. An English translation appears in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 38–59], under the title ‘Investiga-
tions into the sentential calculus’. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1930d] ‘Fundamentale Begriﬀe der Methodologie der deduktiven Wissenschaften. I’,
Monatshefte fur Mathematik und Physik, vol. 37, pp. 361–404, 1930. An English transla-
tion appears in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 60–109], under the title ‘Fundamental concepts of the
methodology of the deductive sciences’. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)

610
Keith Simmons
[Tarski, 1931a] ‘Sur les ensembles deﬁnissables de nombres r´eels. I.’, Fundamenta Mathematicae,
vol. 17, pp. 210–239, 1931. An English translation appears in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 110–142],
under the title ’On deﬁnable sets of real numbers’. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1931b] with C. Kuratowski. ‘Les operations logiques et les ensembles projectifs’ (with C.
Kuratowski), Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol.17, pp. 240–248, 1931. An English translation
appears in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 143–151], under the title ‘Logical operations and projective
sets’. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1933a] ‘Pojecie prawdy w jezykach nauk dedukcyjnych’ (‘The concept of truth in the
languages of deductive sciences’), Travaux de la Soci´et´e des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie,
Classe III, Sciences Math´ematiques et Physiques, no.34, Warsaw, 1933. A German translation
of this was published under the title ‘Der Wahrheitsbegriﬀin den formalisierten Sprachen’, in
Studia Philosophica, vol. 1, pp. 261–405, 1935. An English translation of the German appears
under the title ‘The concept of truth in formalized languages’ in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 152–278].
(Page references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1933b] ‘Einige Betrachtungen ¨uber die Begriﬀe ω-Widerspruchsfreiheit und der ω-
Vollstandigkeit’, Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, vol. 40, pp. 97–112, 1933. An
English translation appears in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 279–295], under the title ‘Some observa-
tions on the concepts of ω-consistency and ω-completeness’. (Page references are to [Tarski,
1983a].)
[Tarski, 1934] ‘Z badan metodologicznych nad deﬁniowalnosca terminow’ in Przeglad Filo-
zoﬁczny, vol. 37, pp. 438–460, 1934. A German translation appears under the title ‘Einige
methodologische Untersuchungen ¨uber die Deﬁnierbarkeit der Begriﬀe’, in Erkenntnis, vol.
5, pp. 80–100, 1935. An English translation of the German, supplemented by some passages
translated from the Polish original, appears under the title ‘Some methodological investiga-
tions on the deﬁnability of concepts’ in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 296–319]. (Page references are to
[Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1934–35] with A. Lindenbaum. ‘¨Uber die Beschr¨anktheit der Ausdrucksmittel deduk-
tiver Theorien’, in Ergebnisse eines mathematischen Kolloquiums, fascicule 7, pp. 15–22,
1934–35. An English translation of the German appears under the title ‘On the limitations of
the means of expression of deductive theories’, in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 384–392]. (Page references
are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1935] ‘Zur Grundlegung der Booleschen Algebra I’, in Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol.
24, pp. 177–98, 1935. An English translation appears under the title ‘On the foundations of
Boolean algebra’ in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 320–341]. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1935+1936] ‘Grundz¨uge des Systemenkalk¨uls, Erster Teil’, Fundamenta Mathematicae,
vol. 25, pp. 503–526, 1935, and ‘Grundz¨uge des Systemenkalk¨uls, Zweiter Teil’, Fundamenta
Mathematicae, vol. 26, pp. 283–301, 1936. The two parts are translated as one paper in
[Tarski, 1983a, pp. 342–383], under the title ‘Foundations of the Calculus of Systems’. (Page
references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1936a] ‘O ugruntowaniu naukowej semantyki’ (‘The establishment of scientiﬁc seman-
tics’), Przeglad Filozoﬁczny, vol. 39, pp. 50–57, 1936. A German translation was published
under the title ‘Grundlegung der wissenschaftlichen Semantik’, in Actes du Congr`es Inter-
national de Philosophie Scientiﬁque, vol. 3, Actualit´es Scientiﬁques et Industrielle, vol. 390,
pp. 1–8, Hermann & Cie, Paris, 1936. An English translation of the German appears under
the title ‘The establishment of scientiﬁc semantics’ in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 401–408]. (Page
references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1936b] ‘O pojciu wynikania logicznego’, Przeglad Filozoﬁczny, vol. 39, pp. 58–68, 1936.
A German translation of this was published under the title ‘Uber den Begriﬀder logischen
Folgerung’, in Actes du Congr`es International de Philosophie Scientiﬁque, vol. 7, Actualit´es
Scientiﬁques et Industrielle, vol.394, pp. 1–11, Hermann & Cie, Paris, 1936. An English trans-
lation of the German appears under the title ‘On the concept of logical consequence’ in [Tarski,
1983a, pp. 409–420]. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1936c] with A. Lindenbaum. ‘¨Uber die Beschranktheit der Ausdrucksmittel deduktiver
Theorien’ (with A. Lindenbaum), Ergebnisse eines Mathematischen Kolloquiums, vol. 7, pp.
15–22, 1936. An English translation appears under the title ‘On the limitations of the means
of expression of deductive theories’ in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 384–392]. (Page references are to
[Tarski, 1983a].)

Tarski’s Logic
611
[Tarski, 1936d] O logice matematycznej i metodzie dedukcyjnej (On mathematical logic and
the deductive method), Bibljoteczka Matematyczna, vol. 3–5, Ksiaznica-Atlas, Lwow and
Warsaw, 1936.
[Tarski, 1938a] ‘¨Uber unerreichbare Kardinalzahlen’, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 30, pp.
68–89, 1938. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1986b, vol. 2].)
[Tarski, 1938b] ‘Der Aussagenkalkul und die Topologie’, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 31,
pp. 103–34, 1938. An English translation appears in [Tarski, 1983a, pp. 421–454], under the
title ‘Sentential Calculus and Topology’. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1983a].)
[Tarski, 1939] ‘On well-ordered subsets of any set’, Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 32, pp.
176–183, 1939. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1986b, vol. 2].)
[Tarski, 1941a] Introduction to logic and to the methodology of deductive sciences, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford and New York, 1941.
[Tarski, 1941b] ‘On the calculus of relations’, Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 6, pp. 73–89, 1941.
[Tarski, 1943] with P. Erd˝os. ‘On families of mutually exclusive sets’, Annals of Mathematics,
ser. 2, vol. 44, pp. 315–329, 1943.
[Tarski, 1944] ‘The semantic conception of truth and the foundations of semantics’, Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research, vol. 4, pp. 341–375, 1944. (Page references are to [Tarski,
1986b, vol. 2].)
[Tarski, 1948a] A Decision Method for Elementary Algebra and Geometry (prepared for publi-
cation by J. C. C. McKinsey), US Air Force Project RAND, R-109, the RAND Corporation,
Santa Monica, California, 1948. (A second, revised edition was published by the University
of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, California 1951.)
[Tarski, 1948b] ‘A problem concerning the notion of deﬁnability’, Journal of Symbolic Logic,
13, 79–104, 1948.
[Tarski, 1949a] ‘Arithmetical classes and types of Boolean algebras’ (abstract), Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, vol. 55, p. 64, 1949.
[Tarski, 1949b] ‘On essential undecidability’, Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 14, pp. 75–76,
1949.
[Tarski, 1949c] ‘Undecidability in the arithmetic of integers and in the theory of rings’, Journal
of Symbolic Logic, vol. 14, p. 76, 1949.
[Tarski, 1949d] ‘Undecidability of group theory’ (abstract), Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 14,
pp. 76–77, 1949.
[Tarski, 1949e] ‘Undecidability of the theories of lattices and projective geometries’ (abstract),
Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 14, pp. 77–78, 1949.
[Tarski, 1949f] Cardinal Algebras, Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York, 1949.
[Tarski, 1951a] with L. H. Chin. ‘Distributive and modular laws in the arithmetic of relation
algebras’, University of California Publications in Mathematics, new series, vol. 1, no. 9, pp.
341–384, 1951.
[Tarski, 1951b] with B. Jonsson. ‘Boolean algebras with operators. Part I’, American Journal of
Mathematics, vol. 73, pp. 891–939, 1951.
[Tarski, 1952a] with B. Jonsson. ‘Boolean algebras with operators. Part II’, American Journal
of Mathematics, vol. 74, pp. 127–162, 1952.
[Tarski, 1952b] with W. Szmielew. ‘Mutual interpretability of some essentially undecidable the-
ories’, Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Cambridge, Mass, 1950,
vol. 1, American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., p. 734, 1952.
[Tarski, 1953] with A. Mostowski and R. M. Robinson. Undecidable theories, North-Holland
Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1953.
[Tarski, 1954a] ‘Contributions to the theory of models, I’, Indagationes Mathematicae, vol. 16,
pp. 572–581, 1954. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1986b, vol. 3].)
[Tarski, 1954b] ‘Contributions to the theory of models, II’, Indagationes Mathematicae, vol. 16,
pp. 582–588, 1954.
[Tarski, 1955] ‘Contributions to the theory of models, III’, Indagationes Mathematicae, vol. 17,
pp. 56–64, 1955.
[Tarski, 1956a] with E. W. Beth. ‘Equilaterality as the only primitive notion of Euclidean ge-
ometry’, Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Proceedings, Series A, vol.
59 (= Indagationes Mathematicae, vol. 18), pp. 462–467, 1956.
[Tarski, 1956b] ‘A general theorem concerning primitive notions of Euclidean geometry’, Konin-
klijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Proceedings, Series A, vol. 59 (= Indaga-
tiones Mathematicae, vol. 18), pp. 468–474, 1956.

612
Keith Simmons
[Tarski, 1956c] Ordinal Algebras, North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam 1956.
[Tarski, 1956d] Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. Papers from 1923 to 1938, Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1956. (Translated by J. H. Woodger.)
[Tarski, 1957a] with E. C. Smith. ‘Higher degrees of distributivity and completeness in Boolean
algebras’, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 84, pp. 230–257, 1957.
[Tarski, 1957b] with R. L. Vaught. ‘Arithmetical extensions of relational systems’, Compositio
Mathematica, vol. 13, pp. 81–102, 1957. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1986b, vol. 3].)
[Tarski, 1958a] with D. S. Scott. ‘The sentential calculus with inﬁnitely long expressions’, Col-
loquium Mathematicum, vol. 6, pp. 165–170, 1958.
[Tarski, 1958b] ‘Remarks on predicate logic with inﬁnitely long expressions’ Colloquium Math-
ematicum, vol. 6, pp. 171–176, 1958.
[Tarski, 1958c] with T. E. Frane and D. S. Scott. ‘Reduced products’, Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, vol. 5, pp. 673–674, 1958.
[Tarski, 1959] ‘What is elementary geometry?’, The axiomatic method, with special reference
to geometry and physics, L. Henkin et al., editors, pp. 15–29. North-Holland Publishing
Company, Amsterdam, 1959.
[Tarski, 1961a] with P. Erd˝os. ‘On some problems involving inaccessible cardinals’, Essays on the
foundations of mathematics, Y. Bar-Hillel et al., editors, pp. 50–82. Magnus Press, Jerusalem,
1961.
[Tarski, 1961b] ‘Representable Boolean algebras and inﬁnitary logics’ (abstract), Notices of the
American Mathematical Society, vol. 8, pp. 154–155, 1961.
[Tarski, 1961c] ‘A model-theoretic result concerning inﬁnitary logics’ (abstract), Notices of the
American Mathematical Society, vol. 8, p. 260, 1961.
[Tarski, 1962] ‘Some problems and results relevant to the foundations of set theory’, Logic,
methodology, and philosophy of science. Proceedings of the 1960 International Congress, E.
Nagel et al., editors, pp. 125–135. Stanford University Press, Stanford, California, 1962. (Page
references are to [Tarski, 1986b, vol. 4].)
[Tarski, 1964] wtih H. J. Keisler. ‘From accessible to inaccessible cardinals. Results holding
for all accessible cardinal numbers and the problem of their extension to inaccessible ones’,
Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 53, pp. 225–308, 1964. (Page references are to [Tarski, 1986b,
vol. 4].)
[Tarski, 1965a] with L. W. Szczerba. ‘Metamathematical properties of some aﬃne geome-
tries’, Logic, methodology, and philosophy of science. Proceedings of the 1964 International
Congress, Y. Bar-Hillel, editor, pp. 166–178. North-Holland Publishing Company, Amster-
dam, 1965.
[Tarski, 1965b] with J. W. Addison and L. Henkin, eds. The theory of models, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1965.
[Tarski, 1967] The completeness of elementary algebra and geometry, Institut Blaise Pascal,
Paris, 1967.
[Tarski, 1969] ‘Truth and Proof’, Scientiﬁc American, vol. 220, no. 6, pp. 63–77, 1969. (Page
references are to [Tarski, 1986b, vol. 4].)
[Tarski, 1971] with L. Henkin and J. D. Monk. Cylindric Algebras, Part I, North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company, Amsterdam, 1971.
[Tarski, 1978] with J. Doner and A. Mostowski. ‘The elementary theory of well-ordering —
A metamathematical study’, Logic Colloquium ’77, A. Macintyre et al., editors, pp. 1–54.
North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam.
[Tarski, 1979] with L. W. Szczerba. ‘Metamathematical discussion of some aﬃne geometries’,
Fundamenta Mathematicae, vol. 104, pp. 155–92, 1979.
[Tarski, 1981] with H. Andreka, L. Henkin, J. D. Monk and I. Nemeti. Cylindric set algebras,
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 883, Springer-Verlag, Berlin and New York, 1981.
[Tarski, 1983a] Logic, semantics, metamathematics. Papers from 1923 to 1938 (translations by
J. H. Woodger). Second, revised edition of [Tarski, 1956d], with editor’s introduction and
an analytic index (J. Corcoran, editor), Hackett Publishing Company, Indianapolis, Indiana,
1983.
[Tarski, 1983b] with W. Schwabhauser and W. Szmielew. Metamathematische Methoden in der
Geometrie, Hochschultext, Springer-Verlag, Berlin and New York, 1983.
[Tarski, 1985] with L. Henkin and J. D. Monk. Cylindric Algebras, Part II, North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company, Amsterdam 1985.

Tarski’s Logic
613
[Tarski, 1986a] ‘What are logical notions?’ John Corcoran, editor, History and Philosophy of
Logic, 7, pp. 143–154, 1986.
[Tarski, 1986b] Aﬀred Tarski: Collected Papers, vols. 1–4, S. Givant and R. McKenzie, eds.,
Birkh¨auser, Basel, Boston, Stuttgart, 1986.
[Tarski, 1987a] with S. Givant. A formalization of set theory without variables, Colloquium
Publications, vol. 41, American Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode Island, 1987.
[Tarski, 1987b] ‘A philosophical letter of Alfred Tarski’, Journal of Philosophy, pp. 28–32, 1987.
WORKS BY OTHER AUTHORS
[Ajdukiewicz, 1921] K. Ajdukiewicz. Z metodologji nauk dedukcyjnych (From the methodology
of the deductive sciences), Lwow, 1921.
[Aristotle, 1941] Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, pp. 108–186 of [McKeon, 1941].
[Barwise and Etchemendy, 1987] J. Barwise and J. Etchemendy. The Liar, Oxford University
Press, 1987.
[Beth, 1953] E. W. Beth. ‘On Padoa’s method in the theory of deﬁnition’, Indagationes Math-
ematicae, xv, pp. 330–9, 1953.
[Birkhoﬀ, 1948] G. Birkhoﬀ. Lattice Theory, American Mathematical Society Colloquium pub-
lications, vol. 25, revised edition, New York, 1948.
[Blackburn and Simmons, 1999] S. Blackburn and K. Simmons. Truth, in the series Oxford
Readings in Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 1999.
[Blok and Pigozzi, 1988] W. J. Blok and D. Pigozzi. ‘Alfred Tarski’s work on general metamath-
ematics’, Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 36–50, 1988.
[Bolzano, 1837] B. Bolzano. Wissenschaftslehre (Theory of Science), Sulzbach: Seidel, 4 vols.,
1837.
[Burge, 1979] T. Burge. ‘Semantical Paradox’, Journal of Philosophy 76, pp. 169–98, 1979;
reprinted in [Martin, 1984, pp. 83–117]. Page references are to [Martin, 1984].
[Carnap, 1934] R. Carnap. Logische Syntax der Sprache, Wien, 1934.
[Carnap, 1935] R. Carnap. ‘Ein Gultigkeitskriterium f¨ur die Satze der klassischen Mathematik’,
Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, xlii, pp. 163–90, 1935.
[Chang and Keisler, 1973] C. C. Chang and H. J. Keisler. Model Theory, North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company, Amsterdam, 1973.
[David, 1994] M. David. Correspondence and Disquotation, Oxford University Press, 1994.
[Davidson, 1967] D. Davidson. ‘Truth and Meaning’, Synthese 17, pp. 304–23, 1967.
[Davidson, 1996] D. Davidson. ‘On the Folly of Trying to Deﬁne Truth’, Journal of Philosophy
93, pp. 263–278, 1996.
[Dedekind, 1888] R. Dedekind. Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? Braunschweig: Vieweg,
1888.
[Doner and Hodges, 1988] J. Doner and W. Hodges. ‘Alfred Tarski and decidable theories’, Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 20–35, 1988.
[Edwards, 1967] P. Edwards, ed. The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Macmillan Publishing Co.,
New York, 1967.
[Etchemendy, 1983] J. Etchemendy. ‘The doctrine of logic as form’, Linguistics and Philosophy,
vol. 6, pp. 319–334, 1983.
[Etchemendy, 1988a] J. Etchemendy. ‘Tarski on truth and logical consequence’, Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 51–79, 1988.
[Etchemendy, 1988b] J. Etchemendy. ‘Models, semantics and logical truth’, Linguistics and Phi-
losophy, vol. 11, pp. 91–106, 1988.
[Etchemendy, 1990] J. Etchemendy. The Concept of Logical Consequence, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge 1990.
[Field, 1972] H. Field. ‘Tarski’s theory of truth’, Journal of Philosophy, vol. LXIX, no. 13, pp.
347–375, 1972.
[Field, 1986] H. Field. ‘The Deﬂationary Conception of Truth’, in Fact, Science, and Morality:
Essays on A. J. Ayer’s ‘Language, Truth and Logic’, edited by G. MacDonald and C. Wright,
pp. 55–117. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986.
[Field, 1994] H. Field. ‘Deﬂationist views of meaning and content’, Mind 103, pp. 249–84, 1994.

614
Keith Simmons
[Gaifman, 1992] H. Gaifman. ‘Pointers to Truth’, Journal of Philsophy 89, pp. 223–61, 1992.
[Givant, 1986] S. Givant. ‘Bibliography of Alfred Tarski’, Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 51,
no. 4, pp. 913–941, 1986.
[Glanzberg, 2001] M. Glanzberg. ‘The Liar in context’, Philosophical Studies 103, pp. 217–251,
2001.
[G¨odel, 1930a] K. G¨odel. ‘Die Vollstandigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalk¨uls’,
Monatshefte fur Mathematik und Physik, 37, pp. 349–360; translated in [van Heijenoort,
1967, pp. 582–591].
[G¨odel, 1930b] K. G¨odel. ‘Einige metamathematische Resultate ¨uber Entscheidungsdeﬁnitheit
und
Widerspruchsfreiheit’,
Akademie
der
Wissenschaften
in
Wien,
Mathematisch-
naturwissenschaftliche Klasse, Akademischer Anzeiger, lxvii, pp. 214–215, 1930.
[G¨odel, 1931] K. G¨odel. ‘¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I’, Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, xxxviii, pp. 173–98, 1931.
[G´omez-Torrente, 1996] M. G´omez-Torrente. ‘Tarski on logical consequence’, Notre Dame Jour-
nal of Formal Logic, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 125–151, 1996.
[Grzegorczyk, 1951] A. Grzegorczyk. ‘Undecidability of some topological theories’, Fundamenta
Mathematicae, vol. 38, pp. 137–152, 1951.
[Hanf, 1963–4] W. P. Hanf. ‘Incompactness in languages with inﬁnitely long expressions’, Fun-
damenta Mathematicae, vol. 53, pp. 309–324, 1963–4.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1914] F. Hausdorﬀ. ‘Bemerkung ¨uber den Inhalt von Punktmengen’ Mathematische
Annalen 75, pp. 428–433, 1914.
[Herbrand, 1928] J. Herbrand. ‘Sur la th´eorie de la demonstration’, Comptes Rendus Hebdo-
madaires des S´eances de l’Academie des Sciences, vol. 186, pp. 1274–1276, 1928.
[Herzberger, 1981] H. Herzberger. ‘New Paradoxes for Old’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society 81, pp. 109–23, 1981.
[Hilbert, 1922] D. Hilbert. Grundlagen der Geometrie, 3rd ed., Teubner, Leipzig, 1922.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1939] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Arithmetik, vol. 1,
Berlin, 1934; vol.2, Berlin, 1939.
[Hodges, 1986] W. Hodges. ‘Alfred Tarski’, Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 51, no. 4, p. 866,
1986.
[Hook, 1950] S. Hook, ed. John Dewey: Philosopher of Science and Freedom, New York, Dial
Press, 1950.
[Huntington, 1904] E. V. Huntington. ‘Sets of independent postulates for the algebra of logic’,
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, v, pp. 288–309, 1904.
[Ja´skowski, 1948] S. Ja´skowski. ‘Une modiﬁcation des deﬁnitions fondamentales de la geometrie
des corps de M. A.Tarski’, Annales de la Soci´et´e Polonaise de Math´ematique, xxi, pp. 298–301,
1948.
[Jonsson, 1986] B. Jonsson. ‘The contributions of Alfred Tarski to general algebra’, The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 883–889, 1986.
[Keisler, 1962] H. J. Keisler. ‘’Some applications of the theory of models to set theory’, Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science. Proceedings of the 1960 International Congress, pp.
80–86. Stanford, 1962.
[Koons, 1992] R. C. Koons. Paradoxes of Belief and Strategic Rationality, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1992.
[K¨onig, 1905] J. K¨onig. ‘On the foundations of set theory and the continuum problem’, in [van
Heijenoort, 1967, pp. 145–149].
[Langford, 1927] C. H. Langford. ‘Some theorems on deducibility’, Annals of Mathematics, ser.
2, vol. 28, pp. 16–40, 1927.
[Langford, 1928] C. H. Langford. ‘Theorems on deducibility (second paper)’, Annals of Mathe-
matics, ser. 2, vol. 28, 459–471, 1928.
[Leeds, 1978] S. Leeds. ‘Theories of Reference and Truth’, Erkenntnis 13, pp. 111–129, 1978.
[Le´sniewski, 1916] S. Le´sniewski. ‘Podstawy ogolnej teorii mnogosci I’ (Foundations of general
set theory I) Moscow, 1916.
[Le´sniewski, 1929] S. Le´sniewski. ‘Grundzuge eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik’, Secs 1–11, Fundamenta Mathematicae, xiv, pp. 1–81, 1929.
[Le´sniewski, 1927–31] S. Le´sniewski. ‘O podstawach matematyki’ (On the foundations of math-
ematics), Przeglad Filozoﬁczny, xxx, pp. 164–206, 1927; ibid., xxxi, pp. 261–91, 1928; ibid.,
xxxii, pp. 60–105, 1929; ibid., xxxiii, pp. 77–105, 1930; ibid., xxxiv, pp. 142–70, 1931.

Tarski’s Logic
615
[Levy, 1988] A. Levy. ‘Alfred Tarski’s work in set theory’, Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 53,
no. 1, pp. 2–6, 1988.
[L¨owenheim, 1915] L. L¨owenheim. ‘¨Uber Moglichkeiten im Relativkalk¨ul’, Mathematische An-
nalen, vol. 76, pp. 447–470, 1915.
[Lyndon, 1950] R. Lyndon. ‘The representation of relational algebras’, Annals of Mathematics,
ser. 2, vol. 51, pp. 707–729, 1950.
[Lyndon, 1956] R. Lyndon. ‘The representation of relational algebras. II’, Annals of Mathemat-
ics, ser. 2, vol. 63, pp. 294–307, 1956.
[Mal’cev, 1936] A. Mal’cev. ‘Untersuchungen aus dem Gebiete der mathematischen Logik’,
Matematiceskii Sbornik, vol. 1 (43), pp. 323–336, 1936.
[Martin, 1976] R. L. Martin. ‘Are Natural Languages Universal?’, Synthese 32, pp. 271–91, 1976.
[Martin, 1984] R. L. Martin, ed. Recent Essays on Truth and the Liar Paradox, Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1984.
[McKeon, 1941] R. McKeon, ed. The Basic Works of Aristotle, Random House, New York, 1941.
[McNulty, 1986] G. McNulty. ‘Alfred Tarski and undecidable theories’, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 890–898, 1986.
[Moore, 1982] G. Moore, Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice: its origins, development and inﬂuence,
Springer Verlag, New York, 1982.
[Monk, 1986] J. D. Monk. ‘The Contributions of Alfred Tarski to Algebraic Logic’, The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 899–906, 1986.
[Mostowski, 1967] A. Mostowski. ‘Alfred Tarski’, in [Edwards, 1967, vol. 8, pp. 77–81].
[Padoa, 1900] A. Padoa. ‘Logical introduction to any deductive theory’, 1900. Translated in [van
Heijenoort, 1967, pp. 118–123].
[Parsons, 1974] C. Parsons. ‘The Liar Paradox’, Journal of Philosophical Logic 3, pp. 381–412,
1974. Reprinted in [Martin, 1984]. Page references are to Martin 1984.
[Pasch, 1982] M. Pasch. Vorlesungen ¨uber neuere Geometrie, Leipzig: Teubner, 1882.
[Peano, 1895–1908] G. Peano. Formulaire de math´ematiques, 5 vols. Turin: Bocca, pp. 1895-
1908.
[Pieri, 1908] M. Pieri. ‘La geometria elementare istituita sulle nozioni di ‘punto’ e ‘sfera’ ’.
Memorie di Matematica e di Fisica della Societa Italiana delle Scienze, ser. 3, 15, pp. 345–
450, 1908.
[Pogorzelski and Surma, 1969] W. Pogorzelski and S. Surma. Review of [Tarski, 1956], Journal
of Symbolic Logic 34, pp. 99–106, 1969.
[Presburger, 1930] M. Presburger. ‘¨Uber die Vollstandigkeit eines gewissen Systems der Arith-
metik ganzer Zahlen, in welchem die Addition als einzige Operation hervortritt’, Comptes-
rendus du I congr`es des mathematiciens des pays slaves, Warszawa, 1929, Ksiaznica Atlas
T.N.S.W. Warsaw, pp. 92–101, 1930.
[Quine, 1951] W. V. O. Quine. ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’, Philosophical Review, LX, 1, pp.
20–43, 1951.
[Quine, 1970] W. V. O. Quine. Philosophy of Logic, Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1970.
[Resnik, 1990] M. Resnik. ‘Immanent Truth’, Mind, vol. 99, no. 395, pp. 405–424, 1990.
[Richard, 1905] J. Richard. ‘Les principes des math´ematiques et le probl`eme des ensembles’, in
Revue g´en´erale des sciences pures et appliqu´ees 16, p. 541, 1905. Also in Acta Mathematica
30, pp. 295–6, 1906. An English translation appears in [van Heijenoort, 1967, pp. 143–44].
[Robinson, 1949] J. Robinson. ‘Deﬁnability and decision problems in arithmetic’, Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 14, pp. 98–114, 1949.
[Robinson, 1950] R. M. Robinson. ‘An essentially undecidable axiom system’, Proceedings of
the International Congress of Mathematicians, vol. 1, pp. 729–730, 1950.
[Robinson, 1951] R. M. Robinson. ‘Undecidable rings’, Transactions of the American Mathe-
matical Society, vol. 70, pp. 137–159, 1951.
[Rubin and Rubin, 1963] H. Rubin and J. Rubin. Equivalents of the Axiom of Choice, Amster-
dam, North-Holland, 1963.
[Russell, 1908] B. Russell. ‘Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types’, American Jour-
nal of Mathematics 30, pp. 222–262, 1908. Reprinted in [van Heijenoort, 1967, pp. 150–182].
[Russell and Whitehead, 1910–13] B. Russell and A. N. Whitehead. Principia Mathematica,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press: vol.1, 1910; vol. 2, 1912; vol. 3, 1913.
[Schr¨oder, 1890–1905] E. Schr¨oder. Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik (exakte Logik),
Leipzig; i, 1890; ii, part 1, 1891; ii, part 2, 1905; iii, part 1, 1895.

616
Keith Simmons
[Schr¨oder, 1895] E. Schr¨oder. Algebra und Logik der Relative, 1895, vol.iii, part 1 of [Schr¨oder,
1890–1905].
[Sierpi´nski, 1918] W. Sierpi´nski. ‘L’axiome de M. Zermelo et son role dans la th´eorie des ensem-
bles et l’analyse’, Bulletin de l’Academie des Sciences de Cracovie, Classe des Sciences Math.,
Serie A, pp. 97–152, 1918.
[Simmons, 1993] K. Simmons. Universality and the Liar, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge and New York, 1993.
[Skolem, 1919] T. Skolem. ‘Untersuchungen ¨uber die Axiome des Klassenkalk¨uls und ¨uber Pro-
duktations — und Summationsprobleme, welche gewisse Klassen von Aussagen betreﬀen’,
Skrifter utgit av Videnskapsselskapet i Kristiania, I. klasse 1919, no. 3, Oslo, 1919.
[Skolem, 1920] T. Skolem. ‘Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen ¨uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit oder
Beweisbarkeit mathematischer S¨atze nebst einem Theoreme ¨uber dichte Mengen’, Videnskaps-
sel Skrifter I. Matematisk-naturvidenskabelig Klasse, vol. 6, pp. 1–36, 1920. Translated under
the title ‘Logico-combinatorial investigations in the satisﬁability or provability of mathemat-
ical propositions: A simpliﬁed proof of a theorem by L. L¨owenheim and generalization of the
theorem’, in [van Heijenoort, 1967, pp. 254–63].
[Skolem, 1922] T. Skolem. ‘Some remarks on axiomatized set theory’, 1922. Reprinted in [van
Heijenoort, 1967, pp. 290–301].
[Skolem, 1934] T. Skolem. ‘¨Uber die Nicht-charakterisierbarkeit der Zahlenreihe mittels endlich
oder abz¨ahlbar unendlich vieler Aussagen mit ausschliesslich Zahlenvariablen, Fundamenta
Mathematicae, vol.23, pp. 150–161, 1934.
[Soames, 1999] S. Soames. Understanding Truth, Oxford University Press, Oxford and New
York, 1999.
[Stone, 1936] M. H. Stone. ‘The theory of representation for Boolean algebras’, Transactions of
the American Mathematical Society, xi, pp. 37–111, 1936.
[Stone, 1937] M. H. Stone. ‘Applications of the theory of Boolean rings to general topology’,
Fundamenta Mathematicae, xxix, pp. 223–303, 1937.
[Stone, 1937–38] M. H. Stone. ‘Topological representations of distributive lattices and Brouwe-
rian logics’, Casopis pro Pestovani Matematiky a Fysiky, lxvii, pp. 1–25, 1937–8.
[Suppes, 1988] P. Suppes. ‘Philosophical implications of Tarski’s work’, Journal of Symbolic
Logic, vol. 53, no. 1, 80–91, 1988.
[Szczerba, 1986] L. W. Szczerba. ‘Tarski and geometry’, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 51,
no. 4, 907–912, 1986.
[van den Dries, 1988] L. van den Dries. ‘Alfred Tarski’s elimination theory for real closed ﬁelds’,
Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 53, no. 1, 7–19, 1988.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, ed. From Frege to G¨odel: a source book in mathemat-
ical logic, Harvard University Press, 1967.
[Vaught, 1965] R. L. Vaught. ‘A L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem for cardinals far apart’, Proceed-
ings of the 1963 Berkeley symposium on the theory of models, J. Addison et al., editors, pp.
390–401. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
[Vaught, 1974] R. L. Vaught. ‘Model theory before 1945’, Proceedings of the Tarski symposium,
Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, vol. 25, pp. 153–172. American Mathematical
Society, Providence, Rhode Island, 1974.
[Vaught, 1986] R. L. Vaught. ‘Alfred Tarski’s work in model theory’, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, vol. 51, no. 4, 869–882, 1986.
[Veblen and Young, 1910] O. Veblen and J. W. Young. Projective Geometry, Ginn, Boston,
Massachusetts (2 vols., ﬁrst, 1910; second, 1918); reprint, Blaisdell, New York, 1938.
[Vitali, 1905] G. Vitali. Sul problema della mesura dei gruppi di punti di una retta, Bologna,
Tip. Gamberini e Parmeggiani, 1905.
[Wagon, 1985] S. Wagon. The Banach-Tarski Paradox, Cambridge University Press, 1985.
[White, 1950] M. White. ‘The Analytic and the Synthetic: An Untenable Dualism’. In [Hook,
1950, pp. 316–30].

EMIL POST
Alasdair Urquhart
1
BIOGRAPHY
Emil Leon Post was born on February 11 1897 into an Orthodox Jewish family in
August´ow, a town at that time within the Russian empire, but after 1918 in the
province of Bialystok in Eastern Poland. In 1897 his father Arnold emigrated to
join his brother in America. Seven years later, in May 1904, with the success of
the family clothing and fur business in New York, his wife Pearl, together with
Emil and his sisters Anna and Ethel, joined him. The family lived in a comfortable
home in Harlem.
Figure 1. Emil Post, June 1924
As a child, Post was particularly interested in astronomy, but an accident at the
age of twelve foreclosed that choice of career. As he reached for a lost ball under a
parked car, a second car crashed into it, and he lost his left arm below the shoulder.
As a high school senior, Post wrote to several observatories inquiring whether his
handicap would prevent him pursuing a career as an astronomer. The responses
he received, though not uniformly negative, were suﬃcient to discourage him from
following his childhood ambition; instead, he turned towards mathematics.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

618
Alasdair Urquhart
Post attended Townsend Harris High School, a free secondary school for gifted
students on the campus of City College, and received a B.S. in mathematics from
City College in 1917 (where he beneﬁted from a college education free of tuition
fees). While still an undergraduate, he had already done a good deal of the work
for a paper on generalized diﬀerentiation, presented to the October 1923 meeting
of the American Mathematical Society, but only published in full seven years later
[Post, 1930]. Post was a graduate student at Columbia University from 1917 to
1920, and it was at Columbia that his interest in modern mathematical logic was
aroused by a seminar on the recently published Principia Mathematica [Whitehead
and Russell, 1910-13] conducted by Cassius J. Keyser. His doctoral thesis, written
under the supervision of Keyser, is a systematic study of the propositional calculus
of Principia, including a proof of completeness.
Post spent the academic year 1920-21 as a Procter Fellow at Princeton Univer-
sity, and it was during this postdoctoral year that he discovered results anticipating
the later incompleteness theorems of Kurt G¨odel and the undecidability results of
Church and Turing. The excitement caused by these startling discoveries precipi-
tated his ﬁrst attack of manic-depressive illness, a condition that plagued him for
the rest of his life. He recovered suﬃciently from this ﬁrst attack to take up an
instructorship at Cornell University, but a second attack led to a withdrawal from
university teaching, and during the 1920s, he supported himself by teaching at
George Washington High School in New York.
Under the care of a general practitioner, Dr. Levy, Post developed a routine that
was designed to avoid undue excitement leading to manic attacks. His regimen
involved strictly restricting the time spent on his research to three hours a day,
from 4 to 5 p.m. and then from 7 to 9 p.m.
In 1932, Post was appointed to the faculty of City College of New York. He left
after only one month, but returned in 1935 for the rest of his career. In spite of
restrictions on his research time due to his treatment regimen and a teaching load
of sixteen hours a week, Post was able to publish some of his most remarkable
and inﬂuential papers during this period. His marriage to Gertrude Singer in 1929
undoubtedly introduced a measure of stability into his life, and she assisted him
both by typing his papers and letters, and taking care of day to day ﬁnancial
aﬀairs. Their daughter Phyllis Goodman remarks that: “My mother . . . was the
buﬀer in daily life that permitted my father to devote his attention to mathematics
(as well as to his varied interests in contemporary world aﬀairs). Would he have
accomplished so much without her? I, for one, don’t think so” [Davis, 1994, p. xii].
Post was a remarkably successful and popular teacher at City College; his un-
usual pedagogical methods are described below in §8. He continued to struggle
with manic-depressive illness, and in 1954, he succumbed once more. He died of
a heart attack on 21 April 1954 after electro-shock treatment at an upstate New
York mental hospital.

Emil Post
619
2
INFLUENCES ON POST
To a remarkable extent, Post as a logician was a homegrown American original.
Most of the other outstanding logicians of the 1920s and 1930s, such as G¨odel,
Herbrand, Bernays, Turing and Church, were inﬂuenced more or less directly by
Hilbert’s formalist program, and the problems that grew out of it. Post, on the
other hand, after the initial stimulus provided by Principia Mathematica, created
his own research project and problems more or less single handed, at a time when
logic and the foundations of mathematics were not considered respectable topics
for mathematical work in the United States.
An important early inﬂuence on his ideas about logic was the philosopher-
logician C.I. Lewis. Lewis’s monograph A Survey of Symbolic Logic [Lewis, 1918]
is an expository work largely devoted to bridging the gap between the tradition
of algebraic logic of Boole and Schr¨oder and Principia Mathematica, but it has a
remarkable sixth chapter that had a strong eﬀect on Post’s early thinking. Lewis
contrasts the logistic method of Whitehead and Russell with what he calls a “het-
erodox” view of the nature of mathematics and logistic.
Lewis points out that the foundational portion of Principia Mathematica falls
short of being a completely formal system. Rather, the primitive propositions of
that work are presented in terms of the intuitive meanings associated with the
notation. Thus, for example, the formation rules of the language are presented
by phrases such as “If p is an undetermined elementary proposition, “not-p” is an
elementary propositional function,” while the rule of detachment (modus ponens)
is stated as follows: “Anything implied by a true elementary proposition is true”
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910-13, Vol. 1, pp. 92, 94]. Whitehead and Russell fail
to make the basic distinction between axioms and rules of inference, since they are
lumped together under the heading of “Primitive Propositions.”
Lewis presents his heterodox view of the logistic method in the following striking
deﬁnition:
A mathematical system is any set of strings of recognizable marks in
which some of the strings are taken initially and the remainder derived
from these by operations performed according to rules which are inde-
pendent of any meaning assigned to the marks [Lewis, 1918, p. 355].
Lewis illustrates his deﬁnition by presenting the propositional calculus of Principia
Mathematica in a strictly formalist style. He uses the purposely meaningless words
“quid” and “quod” to refer to formulas and propositional connectives. With this
terminology, he restates the formation rule above as follows: “The combination of
any quid preceded immediately by the mark ∼may be treated as a quid.” The
rules of substitution and modus ponens he states in this way:
(7) In any string in the initial set, or in any string added to the list
according to rule, any quid whatever may be substituted for p or q or r,
or for any quid consisting of only one mark. When a quid is substituted

620
Alasdair Urquhart
for any mark in a string, the same quid must also be substituted for
that same mark wherever it appears in the string.
(8) The string resulting from the substitution of a quid consisting of
more than one mark for a quid of one mark, according to (7), may be
added to the list of strings.
(9) In any string added to the list, according to (8), if that portion
of the string which precedes any mark ⊃is identical with some other
string in the set, preceded by (, then the portion of that string which
follows the mark ⊃referred to may be separately repeated, with the
omission of the ﬁnal mark ), and added to the set [Lewis, 1918, p. 357].
Lewis’s strictly formal statement of the rule of detachment makes a striking con-
trast with the informal and inexact version of Whitehead and Russell, which in-
vokes the extraneous notion of truth in setting down the rule.
Post refers several times to the inﬂuence of Lewis’s formalistic view of logistic
systems on his early work [Post, 1921a, p. 165], [Post, 1994, pp. 23,377], and his
research at Princeton during his postdoctoral year can be seen as an attempt to
work out Lewis’s formalistic ideas in the context of the full system of Whitehead
and Russell, and to use them in obtaining general results about formal systems.
Post also acknowledged the inﬂuence of his thesis advisor, Cassius J. Keyser
(1862–1947), on his logical work. This may seem somewhat surprising, in view
of the fact that Keyser, although he took part in a debate with Bertrand Russell
on the axiom of inﬁnity [Keyser, 1904][Russell, 1904], was best known for his
numerous books of popular essays on mathematics and mathematical philosophy.
Nevertheless, Post thanks Keyser warmly in the introduction to [Post, 1921a], and
his monograph [Post, 1941] is dedicated to Keyser, “in one of whose pedagogical
devices the author belatedly recognizes the true source of his truth-table method.”
3
THE DOCTORAL DISSERTATION
Post’s ﬁrst published paper in logic [Post, 1921a] is a shortened version of his
doctoral dissertation; according to a letter from Post to Hermann Weyl of 1941,
the paper was accepted only on condition that its original length be cut by one-
third [Davis, 1994, p. xviii].
This article is outstanding for several reasons. Its main mathematical result
is the ﬁrst published proof of completeness and decidability of the propositional
fragment of Principia Mathematica. (An earlier proof was given by Paul Bernays
in his Habilitationsschrift of 1918 at G¨ottingen, published in abbreviated form
in [Bernays, 1926].) The method of the paper is a conscious departure from the
methods of Whitehead and Russell, and Post gives a clear statement of the modern
metalogical attitude to formal systems. Furthermore, a great deal of Post’s most
signiﬁcant later work in logic is present in embryo in this paper.
In the introduction to his paper, Post points out the restricted viewpoint adopted
by the authors of Principia Mathematica. The aim of Whitehead and Russell is to

Emil Post
621
develop the logical foundations of mathematics in a ﬁxed axiomatic system (a form
of the theory of types). The ideal of the work is to develop mathematics within a
logical formalism that is viewed as a universal language. Hence, Whitehead and
Russell eschew as far as possible any considerations about their system that go
beyond this restricted purpose. Post points out that in this way, they “gave up
the generality of outlook which characterized symbolic logic,” and goes on to say:
It is with the recovery of this generality that the ﬁrst portion of our
paper deals.
We here wish to emphasize that the theorems of this
paper are about the logic of propositions but are not included therein.
More particularly, whereas the propositions of ‘Principia’ are particular
assertions introduced for their interest and usefulness in later portions
of the work, those of the present paper are about the set of all such
assertions [Post, 1921a, pp. 163-4].
Post concludes his introduction with a clear explicit statement of his metalog-
ical viewpoint, saying: “We have consistently regarded the system of ‘Principia’
and the generalizations thereof as purely formal developments, and so have used
whatever instruments of logic or mathematics we found useful for a study of these
developments,” referring in a footnote to the chapter of Lewis’s book discussed
above. Post had thus arrived at a logical method similar to that of the Hilbert
school, though in his case, there is no explicit restriction to ﬁnitary methods (how-
ever, the methods he used were in fact mostly constructive).
The main part of the paper begins with a precise formulation of the propositional
calculus of Principia Mathematica, inspired by the formulation of Lewis described
above. Post then immediately introduces a truth-table development. Denoting
the truth-value of a proposition by + if it is true and by −if it is false, he gives
the now familiar truth-tables for the primitive connectives
p
∼p
+
−
−
+
p, q
p ∨q
+ +
+
+ −
+
−+
+
−−
−
and goes on to provide a clear explanation of the truth-table method. He uses the
adjective “positive” for tautologies, “negative” for contradictions, and “mixed” for
contingent formulas (the terminology of “tautology” and “contradiction” is derived
from the independent development of the truth-table method in [Wittgenstein,
1921],[Wittgenstein, 1922]). In a footnote, he remarks that the truth-tables for
the primitive connectives are described by Whitehead and Russell [Whitehead and
Russell, 1910-13, Vol. 1, pp. 8,115], but not the general notion of truth-table, and
points out that the idea is implicit in the expansion technique used by the algebraic
logicians Boole, Jevons and Venn [Lewis, 1918, p. 74, p. 175f]. As we have seen
above, he later cited his thesis advisor Cassius J. Keyser as a more immediate
source of the method.

622
Alasdair Urquhart
Post now states his “Fundamental Theorem,” the result that a propositional
function is assertible in the system if and only if it is positive.
This provides
both a completeness theorem as well as a decision procedure for the system (Post
emphasizes the decision procedure aspect rather than completeness). The proof
proceeds by showing that any formula in the system is provably equivalent to one
in full disjunctive normal form, that is to say, any function f(p1, . . . , pn) can be
proved equivalent to a disjunction of conjunctions of the form Q1 ∧· · ·∧Qn, where
each Qi is either pi or ∼pi. Post observes that if f(p1, . . . , pn) is a positive function,
then the equivalent full disjunctive normal form is easily seen to be provable (since
it must contain all possible conjunctions of the form described above), and hence
f itself is provable.
Post remarks that while the conversion to full disjunctive normal form and
the corresponding decision procedure were both implicit in the earlier literature of
algebraic logic, the signiﬁcance of his theorem is quite diﬀerent. Although Schr¨oder
had given a version of the truth-table decision procedure in his treatise on the
algebra of logic, formal and informal logic are bound together in his development in
such a way as to prevent the system as a whole from being completely determined.
The paper continues by considering three diﬀerent generalizations of his results,
two of which were the basis of a good deal of his later research.
The ﬁrst generalization consists of generalizing the truth-table method to an
arbitrary ﬁnite set of truth-functions as primitive connectives. The basis of ∼
and ∨chosen by Whitehead and Russell is functionally complete, since all truth-
functions can be expressed in this primitive vocabulary (a fact proved explicitly
by Post). However, not all choices of primitive connectives result in a functionally
complete system; the basis of ∼and ≡is an example. Post announces but does not
prove his complete classiﬁcation of all possible classes of truth-functions generated
by a ﬁnite set of connectives. We discuss this result below in §5.
Post next considers “Generalization by Postulation,” a much farther-reaching
idea. He envisages sets of postulates for generalized propositional logics, with a ﬁ-
nite set of primitive connectives, and a ﬁnite set of axioms and rules, including the
rule of unrestricted substitution, and goes on to consider generalized versions of
completeness and consistency for such systems. The usual deﬁnition of consistency
does not work here, since such systems may not have a recognizable negation con-
nective; similar remarks apply to the notion of completeness. Post replaces these
with the following broader notions. He deﬁnes a postulate system to be consistent
if not all formulas are assertible, and closed if the addition of any unprovable for-
mula as an axiom results in an inconsistent system. These notions are now usually
referred to as “Post-consistency” and “Post-completeness.” Earlier in the paper,
Post had shown the propositional calculus of Principia Mathematica to be con-
sistent and complete in these senses, as corollaries to his Fundamental Theorem.
Using his abstract deﬁnitions of consistency and completeness, he proves a few
general results about closed (Post-complete) systems, remarking of one of them
that it “begins to approximate to the truth-table method.” This remark looks
forward to the work of his postdoctoral year, in which he tried to obtain general

Emil Post
623
decidability results using the postulational generalization.
The last section of the paper is given over to the ﬁnal generalization, many-
valued logic. Post replaces his earlier truth-values + and −by m distinct “truth-
values” t1, t2, . . . , tm, where m is any positive integer.
He generalizes classical
negation by replacing with a cyclic permutation of the m truth-values; the gen-
eralization of classical disjunction has the higher of its two inputs (assuming the
ordering t1 ≥t2 ≥· · · ≥tm). Thus the truth-tables for the generalized connectives
are as follows:
p
∼mp
t1
t2
t2
t3
. . .
. . .
tm
t1
p, q
p ∨m q
t1 t1
t1
. . .
. . .
ti1 tj1
ti1
. . .
. . .
ti2 tj2
tj2
tm tm
tm
where i1 ≤j1 and i2 ≥j2.
Generalizing his earlier results for two-valued logic, Post shows that his m-
valued connectives are functionally complete. He then goes on to consider the
m-valued logical systems that result by deﬁning the asserted functions to be those
that always take values t1, t2, . . . , tμ, where 0 < μ < m.
He provides a brief
sketch of the method used to give a complete set of postulates for the resulting
systems. Jan Lukasiewicz had proposed the idea of a three-valued logic slightly
earlier than Post [Lukasiewicz, 1920].
Lukasiewicz was inspired by the idea of
a non-Aristotelian logic, in which the third truth-value would represent the no-
tion of indeterminacy, associated with propositions about future events.
Post
seems mostly interested in his generalization as pure mathematics, remarking that
“whereas the highest dimensioned intuitional point space is three, the highest
dimensioned intuitional propositional space is two.” He goes on to say, though,
that just as higher dimensional spaces in geometry can be interpreted by using
some other element than point, so the higher dimensioned logical spaces can be
interpreted by using elements other than propositions. This idea is carried out in
the last section of the paper by interpreting the propositions of m-valued logic as
vectors (p1, p2, . . . , pm−1) of two-valued propositions, with the proviso that if one
proposition is true, then all those that follow are true.
Post himself did not continue his work in many-valued logic, but later math-
ematicians such as D.L. Webb, Alan Rose and A.L. Foster continued the devel-
opment of these systems. The algebraic version of Post’s systems, the theory of
“Post algebras,” is investigated in papers such as [Rosenbloom, 1942], [Epstein,
1960], [Traczyk, 1963], [Traczyk, 1964].

624
Alasdair Urquhart
4
THE POSTDOCTORAL YEAR
During the academic year 1920-21, Post held a Procter Fellowship at Princeton
University (Alan Turing also held a Procter Fellowship 1937-38). It was during
this year that he made his most dramatic discoveries in logic, anticipating by a
decade or more the work of G¨odel, Church, Turing and others on incompleteness
and undecidability. Unfortunately, for reasons we discuss below, Post failed to
publish his ideas until after other authors had caught up with his groundbreaking
work.
He started from the postulational generalization of [Post, 1921a], hoping to
obtain general results about the decidability of postulate systems that are abstract
versions of the formalism of classical propositional logic. The simplicity of such
systems encouraged him in the belief that such results were obtainable, and in
addition, he had several positive results to his credit. He had solved the decision
problem in the important special case of two-valued propositional logic, and in
addition had provided a complete classiﬁcation of all possible subsystems of this
logic based on two-valued connectives. Finally, he had proved the decidability of
all abstract propositional logics where all of the connectives were unary (one-place
operators), a result published in the abstract [Post, 1921b].
Post’s hope was that progress on the decision problem for such generalized
propositional calculi (which he called the “general ﬁniteness problem”) was pos-
sible because of their simple and transparent mathematical structure. His ideas
appear nowadays wildly optimistic, but we have the beneﬁt of hindsight; Jacques
Herbrand, in a paper surveying the work of the Hilbert school [Herbrand, 1930],
expressed a similarly optimistic view towards the decision problem for ﬁrst-order
logic (known as the Entscheidungsproblem).
Post published nothing in logic between [Post, 1921b] and [Post, 1936]. Nev-
ertheless, we know of his work of 1920-21 because of the retrospective survey he
wrote in 1941 [Post, 1965], on which this section is based. This article falls into
two parts.
In the ﬁrst part, Post demonstrates a series of reductions through
which the decision problem, or “general ﬁniteness problem” is reduced to a system
of an extremely simple type, which he calls a system in “normal form.” In the
second part, the application of a diagonal argument leads him to the conclusion
that the decision problem for systems in normal form is unsolvable, together with
the incompleteness results following from this conclusion.
Post deﬁnes the notion of reduction as follows: “A system S1 is reduced to a
system S2 if a 1-1 correspondence is (eﬀectively) set up between the enunciations of
S1, and certain of the enunciations of S2, so that an enunciation of S1 is asserted
when and only when its correspondent in S2 is asserted” [Post, 1965, p. 351],
[Post, 1994, p. 382]. (This deﬁnition is in fact Post’s later interpretation of his
tacit assumptions; at the time, he did not have a formal deﬁnition.) Post uses
the word “enunciation” to denote a formula of a system. The most important
property of reduction is that if we can solve the decision problem for a system S2,
and S1 can be reduced to S2, then the decision problem for S1 is also solvable.

Emil Post
625
Post begins from the formulation of a generalized propositional logic described
in the previous section, calling it “Canonical Form A.” He shows that any system
in canonical form A can be reduced to a second form, “Canonical Form B.” In
Canonical Form B, the unrestricted rule of substitution present in Form A is
replaced by a much weaker version. Post shows, however, that the eﬀect of the
substitution rule can be obtained by using the idea of axiom schemes. For example,
in formulating the propositional calculus, we can take as axioms all formulas of the
form (∼A ∨(∼B ∨A)). This method of dispensing with the rule of substitution
is usually attributed to John von Neumann, who employed it in [von Neumann,
1927]. In the conventional formulation, this involves an inﬁnite set of axioms. Post,
on the other hand, requires his rules to be ﬁnite, so he adds an axiomatization of
the notion of formula, or “enunciation,” in his terminology. To achieve this, he
adds a primitive function e(·) to his system, whose intended interpretation is “P
is an enunciation,” together with rules such as: e(P), e(Q) =⇒e((P ∨Q)).
Post’s next reduction shows that the entire ﬁrst-order fragment of Principia
Mathematica can be reduced to canonical form B. Considerable complications are
induced by the fact that diﬀerent types of variable are involved here, while canon-
ical form B only allows one type of variable. A corollary of this work is that if
the decision problem for all systems in canonical form B were solvable, then the
Hilbertian Entscheidungsproblem would be solvable. More important from Post’s
point of view was the fact that it appeared that all of Principia Mathematica could
in a similar fashion be reduced to a system in canonical form B. Hence, in spite of
its apparently modest appearance, canonical form B already encapsulates the full
complexity of the whole system of Whitehead and Russell, at least as far as the
decision problem is concerned.
At this point in the narrative of his postdoctoral research, Post introduces a
digression into the combinatorial problem of ‘tag,’ a seemingly innocuous problem
that arose early in his research. Let us suppose that we are given a ﬁnite set of
primitive symbols, say the set of numerals 0, 1, . . . , μ for simplicity. Then a tag
system is given by a ﬁnite set of rules of the form 0 →σ0, . . . , μ →σμ, where
σ0, . . . , σμ is a sequence of ﬁnite strings of primitive symbols, possibly empty,
together with a positive integer ν. These rules are applied as follows. Given a
non-empty sequence B of symbols, append to the end of B the string associated
with the ﬁrst symbol in B, then delete the ﬁrst ν symbols (all, if there are less
than ν symbols). For example, consider the tag system with the primitive symbols
0, 1, the rules 0 →00, 1 →1101 and ν = 3 (a system that Post himself found
intractable). Then if we start with the sequence 10, the rules successively produce
101, 1101, 11101, 011101, . . . .
The problem of tag is to decide, given an initial
string, whether or not the process terminates in the empty string or not. One can
think of this as a process in which one end of the string, advancing at a constant
rate, is trying to catch up with the other end of the string – hence the colourful
name of ‘tag,’ suggested by Post’s fellow-student and colleague B.P. Gill.
Post came upon the problem in the following way. Early in his work, he had
discovered a method that, given two formulas in a system in canonical form A

626
Alasdair Urquhart
(that is to say, two terms of ﬁrst-order logic), determines whether or not there
is a set of substitutions that makes the two expressions identical. He called this
method the “the L.C.M. process” – this is Post’s name for the uniﬁcation algorithm
that plays a very important part in automated theorem proving in ﬁrst-order
logic, and was described in print in the groundbreaking paper on the resolution
method [Robinson, 1965].
(Post’s “least common multiple” appears to be an
alternative name for Robinson’s “most general uniﬁer.”) In attempting to extend
the algorithm to higher-order logic, Post encountered the problem of tag. An eﬀort
to extend the result of [Post, 1921b] to more general systems led again to the same
problem. Thus this combinatorial problem in symbol manipulation seemed like an
essential stepping stone towards his hoped-for general results on decidability, and
Post made it the major project of his postdoctoral year.
It should come as no surprise that the two problems mentioned above are unsolv-
able. The problem of tag was proved unsolvable in [Minsky, 1961] – an attractive
exposition of this result is in the book [Minsky, 1967]. As for the higher-order uni-
ﬁcation problem, the second-order case was proved unsolvable in [Goldfarb, 1981].
At the initial stage of his research, though, Post did not have an inkling of unsolv-
able problems, but instead hoped that the simple and primitive character of tag
systems would lead to equally simple decision procedures. This hope led rapidly
to disillusionment, as he found that problems of ordinary number theory cropped
up in his attempts at solving the problem of tag, disappointing his hope that “the
known diﬃculties of number theory would, as it were, be dissolved in the partic-
ularities of this more primitive form of mathematics” [Post, 1965, p. 373], [Post,
1994, p. 398]. Although the solution of the general problem of “tag” appeared
hopeless (and hence the entire program of the solution of decision problems), Post
had assumed that it was a very minor, if essential, stepping stone towards his
broader program. However, in the late summer of 1921, Post found a further se-
ries of reductions that led to a ﬁnal canonical form very close to the apparently
special form of “tag.” We now describe this ﬁnal series of reductions.
Canonical form B assumes that there are inﬁnitely many variables, and that the
formation rules for formulas are given in terms of functional operations f(p1, . . . , pn).
Post begins his series of reductions by reducing systems in form B to systems in
canonical form C, in which all formulas are built from a ﬁnite alphabet Σ, and
the formulas consist simply of the set Σ∗of all ﬁnite strings built from symbols in
Σ. A system in canonical form C has a ﬁnite set of strings as primitive assertions,
and a ﬁnite set of rules, or “productions” having the form σ1, . . . , σk =⇒τ, where
σ1, . . . , σk, τ are strings composed of the symbols in Σ, together with added sym-
bols from a set of auxiliary symbols Δ = {P1, P2, . . . , Pm, . . . } disjoint from Σ,
and every auxiliary symbol in τ appears in one of σ1, . . . , σk. In an application of
the rule, the auxiliary symbols in Δ are considered as syntactic variables ranging
over arbitrary strings (possibly empty).
As an example of such a system, consider the alphabet {a, b}, and let the prim-
itive assertions consist of the strings a, b, aa, bb. The two rules of the system are:
P1 =⇒aP1a, P1 =⇒bP1b.

Emil Post
627
It is easy to see that the assertions of this system consist of all palindromes in the
alphabet {a, b}, that is to say, all non-empty strings that read the same forward
as backwards.
As a second example, consider the alphabet {p, ∼, ∨, (, )}, with the single prim-
itive assertion p, and the rules:
P1 =⇒∼P1, P1, P2 =⇒(P1 ∨P2).
Then the assertions of this system are exactly the formulas of the propositional
calculus of Principia Mathematica containing the single variable p.
Post’s next move is to give a series of four successive reductions, in the course
of which the decision problem is reduced to that of systems of the very simple
Post normal form. A system of canonical form C is said to be in normal form if it
has a single primitive assertion, and all productions are of the form σP =⇒Pτ.
Thus the general decision problem, even for a system as apparently complicated
as Principia Mathematica, can be reduced to that for a system of rules that can
only operate on strings by ﬁrst deleting an initial substring, then tacking on a new
string at the end. This amazing result was described by Marvin Minsky as “one
of the most beautiful theorems in mathematics” [Minsky, 1967, p. 240]. Post’s
proof of the theorem is not inherently diﬃcult, but it is rather lengthy and not
very easy to follow; a clear exposition of the theorem, following the lines of Post’s
original construction, with numerous helpful examples, is provided in Chapter 13
of [Minsky, 1967]. An alternative approach to the proof, based on the theory of
Turing machines and semi-Thue systems, is given in Chapter 6 of [Davis, 1958].
The normal form is very close to that of tag systems, since in both cases, the
rules involve removing a string of symbols at the beginning, and tacking on a
string at the end.
The simplicity of the ﬁnal normal form, together with his
earlier success in solving the decision problem for a simple case of canonical form
A, aroused Post’s hopes anew. However, as he said later, “just when hope was
thus renewed for a solution of the general ﬁniteness problem, a fuller realization of
the signiﬁcance of the previous reductions led to a reversal of our entire program”
[Post, 1965, p. 402][Post, 1994, p. 418].
4.1
The Anticipation
The reduction of the whole of ﬁrst-order logic to canonical form B, and the subse-
quent reduction of systems in canonical form B to systems in normal form made
it seem very likely that the whole of Principia Mathematica could be reduced to a
system in normal form (although Post never in fact worked out all the details of
this reduction).
In spite of its apparently great deductive power, a system as complicated as
Principia Mathematica can be presented as a set of elementary rules for rewriting
strings of symbols.
This led Post to a far-reaching generalization [Post, 1994,
p. 405], [Post, 1994, p. 420]:

628
Alasdair Urquhart
In view of the generality of the system of Principia Mathematica, and
its seeming inability to lead to any other generated sets of sequences
on a given set of letters than those given by our normal systems, we
are led to the following generalization.
Every generated set of sequences on a given set of letters a1, a2, . . . , aμ
is a subset of the set of assertions of a system in normal form with
primitive letters a1, a2, . . . , aμ, a′
1, a′
2, . . . , a′
μ, i.e., the subset consist-
ing of those assertions of the normal system involving only the letters
a1, a2, . . . , aμ.
The italicized statement in the quotation equates an intuitive notion, the notion
of sets of sequences that are generated by ﬁnite means, with a precisely deﬁned
mathematical notion. It is analogous to Church’s thesis [Church, 1936] identifying
functions that are computable in the intuitive sense with general recursive (equiv-
alently, Turing-computable) functions. Post’s hypothesis, by analogy, has been
called “Post’s thesis” [Davis, 1982, p. 21]; under some plausible assumptions, it is
in fact equivalent to Church’s thesis.
Post now observed that a simple application of Cantor’s diagonal argument
leads immediately to an apparent counter-example to his thesis. Let us represent
sets of positive integers as sets of strings on a single letter ‘a’, where a string of
length n represents the integer n. It is easy to see that we can eﬀectively enumerate
all possible normal systems generating such sets of strings. But now the diagonal
method apparently leads to a generated set of strings that is not one of those in the
enumeration. That is to say, let the diagonal set D be deﬁned by the prescription:
a string a . . . a of length n is in D if and only if it is not generated by the nth
normal system in the enumeration. This appears to contradict Post’s thesis.
However, a contradiction would only arise if D were in fact a generated set. D
would be generated by a ﬁnite process, if we make the assumption that the decision
problem is solvable for the class of normal systems. What we have shown, in fact,
is that this hypothesis together with Post’s thesis, leads to a contradiction. Post
already had a suspicion that there were inherent diﬃculties in his quest for general
decision methods, based on his diﬃculties with the problem of tag. However, no
diﬃculties appeared to stand in the way of his thesis.
Hence, he held fast to
his thesis, concluding that the decision problem for normal systems was in fact
unsolvable. He recorded the philosophical inﬂuences that led him to the resolution
of the contradiction as follows [Post, 1965, p. 407],[Post, 1994, p. 421]:
In thus resolving this dilemma, the writer was greatly inﬂuenced by
having heard, not long before, of Brouwer’s rejecting the law of the
excluded middle. This revolution in the writer’s thought was largely
energized by the immediately prior reading of Poincar´e’s Foundations
of Science.
The informal sketch of the unsolvability of the decision problem for normal
systems given above depends on the assumption of Post’s thesis, which, since it

Emil Post
629
equates an informal notion with a mathematical notion, cannot be considered a
mathematical hypothesis. However, we can restate the result in such a way as to
make into a purely mathematical theorem.
Post concludes the mathematical part of his 1941 paper with a sketch of this
restatement. He begins by observing that there is a universal normal system in the
following sense. There is a normal system K that has the following property: For
every normal system S and formula P in the vocabulary of S, there is a formula
(S, P) of K so that (S, P) is assertible in K if and only if P is assertible in S.
Post’s system K, which he calls the complete normal system, is thus a complete
inference system for assertions of the form “The string P is assertible in the normal
system S,” and is the analogue in the realm of normal systems of Turing’s universal
computing machine [Turing, 1936].
Although the normal systems are abstract versions of formal axiomatic systems,
Post observed that we can also use them to represent decision procedures. Suppose
that we are given a normal system M, and that in addition, there is a normal
system M ′ that contains all of the primitive symbols of M, and in addition a new
letter b (possibly with some other additional symbols).
Assume that if P is a
formula of M, that P is an assertion of M ′ if and only if it is an assertion of M,
and that bP is an assertion of M ′ if and only if it is not an assertion of M. Then
there is a decision procedure for M, since to decide whether or not a formula P is
an assertion of M or not, we can systematically enumerate all of the assertions of
M ′, and observe whether P or bP is an assertion of M ′. (This idea is the source of
Post’s later theorem [Post, 1944, p. 290] that a set of positive integers is recursive
if and only if both it and its complement are recursively enumerable.) If such
a system M ′ exists, then Post says that there exists a ﬁnite-normal-test for the
system M [Post, 1965, pp. 412-413], [Post, 1994, p. 425].
In the informal sketch given above of the result that there is no general deci-
sion procedure for normal systems, we can replace the appeal to Post’s thesis by
restricting our attention to normal systems from the outset, and by replacing the
informal notion of decision procedure by the concept of ﬁnite-normal test. We can
thus prove the fundamental result: There is no ﬁnite-normal-test for the complete
system K.
A rigorous proof of this result depends on a formal version of the
diagonal method sketched above.
Throughout his research of 1920-21, Post concentrated on the problem of deci-
sion procedures. However, his idea of representing decision procedures as complete
formal theories, as in his notion of “ﬁnite-normal-test,” leads immediately to in-
completeness results for formal systems.
The complete system K is able to give correct positive answers to all questions
of the form: “Is the formula P an assertion of normal system S?” Could there
be a system that in addition gives correct negative answers to all such questions?
The fundamental theorem above indicates that such a system cannot exist. Let L
be a normal system that includes all the primitive letters of the complete normal
system K among its primitive letters, together with another primitive letter b.
Furthermore, let us assume that for any normal system S and formula P of S,

630
Alasdair Urquhart
(S, P) is an assertion of L if and only P is an assertion of S, while if b(S, P)
is an assertion of L, then P is not an assertion of S.
Any such L, Post calls
a normal deductive-system adjoined to K. In other words, a normal deductive-
system adjoined to K gives a correct and complete set of positive answers to
questions of the above type, while all of the negative answers it gives to such
questions are correct.
The same argument used to prove the fundamental theorem then demonstrates
a basic incompleteness theorem: No normal deductive-system is complete, so that
if L is any such system, there is always a normal system S and formula P of S
so that P is not an assertion of S, but b(S, P) is not an assertion of L. This is
an abstract form of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem, though stated with respect
to normal systems rather than arithmetical propositions. Post concludes with the
striking words, A complete symbolic logic is impossible, and remarks [Post, 1965,
pp. 416-417],[Post, 1994, pp. 428-429] :
This is an iconoclastic result from the formal logician’s point of view
since it means that logic must not only in some parts of its description
(as in the operations), but in its very operation be informal. Better
still, we may write
The Logical Process is Essentially Creative.
4.2
Post’s failure to publish
In view of the truly remarkable nature of the results that Post achieved in the
early 1920s during his postdoctoral year, one may well wonder why he did not
publish any of this material until ﬁfteen years had passed. There were certainly
a number of external reasons for this. The ﬁrst outbreak of his manic-depressive
illness followed immediately on his great discoveries, and the loss of his academic
position at Cornell University, together with his being forced to make a living
as a high school teacher, were hardly conducive to research and publication. In
the summer of 1924, during a year in which he had some association with Cornell
University, Post made some progress on his project, but he was never able to bring
it to completion.
Another reason given by Post in later years was the general lack of interest
in the United States in logical matters.
In the covering letter that he sent in
1941 with [Post, 1965] to Hermann Weyl, the editor of the American Journal of
Mathematics, he points out that, for example, the original paper giving the results
of [Post, 1941] was returned to him by the editors of the Annals of Mathematics at
the height of his postdoctoral work “without any editorial commitment, and with
a very mixed report from the referee.” He continues:
It therefore seemed to me to be hopeless to seek publication of Part
One of the present paper. And without it, the then revolutionary Part

Emil Post
631
Two would have seemed but idle chatter. An attempt to obtain a full
proof development was interrupted by ill health and led to a constantly
receding date of ultimate publication [Davis, 1994, p. xviii].
This last quotation hints at an internal reason for Post’s failure to stake his
claim to the incompleteness and undecidability results in time. Kurt G¨odel, in the
famous incompleteness paper [G¨odel, 1931] that led to most of the later research
on the limitations of formal systems, set himself a precise but restricted goal. He
showed that a powerful, but quite speciﬁc, axiomatic system for mathematics, the
simple theory of types with the natural numbers as a ground type and the Peano
axioms for number theory, was incomplete, and furthermore, that any of a very
broad class of ω-consistent extensions of this system shared this incompleteness.
At the same time, G¨odel left somewhat indeﬁnite the class of systems to which
his incompleteness results applied, and it was only later, with the publication of
[Church, 1936] and [Turing, 1936] that it became clear that the incompleteness re-
sults were completely general, applying to any formal system including a minimum
of elementary number theory.
Post, on the other hand, set himself the goal of proving his thesis, that the
mathematical concept of normal system exactly characterizes the informal notion
of a generated set of strings.
In the introduction to a strange but fascinating
Appendix to [Post, 1965], he explains his plan:
While the formal reductions of Part I should make it a relatively sim-
ple matter to supply the details of the development outlined in §9 and
the beginning of §10, that development owes its signiﬁcance entirely to
the universal character of our characterization of an arbitrary gener-
ated set of sequences as given in §7. Establishing this universality is
not a matter for mathematical proof, but of psychological analysis of
the mental processes involved in combinatory mathematical processes.
Because these seemed to be suﬃciently simple to be exhaustively de-
scribed, the writer gave up a direct use of Principia Mathematica as a
partial veriﬁcation of the characterization in question, planning rather
that the incompleteness of the logic of Principia Mathematica would be
a corollary of the more general result [Post, 1965, p. 418],[Post, 1994,
p. 429].
The remainder of the Appendix consists of quotations from a diary that Post kept
under the title “Time Accounts” from the spring of 1916 to the spring of 1922 (this
diary is not among the Post papers in Philadelphia, and may have been destroyed
or lost).
It is of course possible to provide quite convincing plausibility arguments for
Church’s thesis, as also for Post’s thesis, and [Church, 1936] and [Turing, 1936]
both contain such heuristic considerations. Turing’s arguments are more convinc-
ing than those of Church; the article [Sieg, 1997] contains an illuminating detailed
analysis of Church’s arguments and a comparison with those of Turing. Neverthe-
less, it seems hopeless to produce an argument that would establish the result with

632
Alasdair Urquhart
complete certainty, and Post’s search for such an analysis was a quixotic venture
doomed to failure. The result was that his results of 1920-21 were superseded by
the work of others, a development that undoubtedly caused Post a great deal of
anguish.
Post’s unpublished paper of 1941 was an attempt to recoup some of his losses.
However, the paper was rejected by Hermann Weyl, who explained his decision by
saying:
I have little doubt that twenty years ago your work, partly because of its
then revolutionary character, did not ﬁnd its due recognition. However,
we cannot turn the clock back; in the meantime G¨odel, Church and
others have done what they have done, and the American Journal is
no place for historical accounts . . . [Davis, 1994, p. xix]
The paper [Post, 1943] is a greatly shortened version of [Post, 1965], containing
only the reduction from canonical form C to normal form, although a concluding
lengthy footnote summarizes the content of the rejected paper.
On October 29 1938, Post made the acquaintance of Kurt G¨odel at a regional
meeting of the American Mathematical Society in New York, and spoke with him
about his work on absolutely unsolvable problems. On the same day, he wrote
G¨odel a touching letter in which he said:
I am afraid that I took advantage of you on this, I hope but our ﬁrst
meeting.
But for ﬁfteen years I had carried around the thought of
astounding the mathematical world with my unorthodox ideas, and
meeting the man chieﬂy responsible for the vanishing of that dream
rather carried me away [G¨odel, 2003, p. 169].
On the following day, Post, still excited by his meeting with G¨odel, wrote a
second letter in which he summarized his work of the 1920s, following the outline
of [Post, 1965] while emphasizing the incompleteness of any formal system with
respect to the ﬁxed subject matter of provability in normal systems. Explaining
his failure to prove G¨odel’s results at the time, he said:
May I ﬁnally say that nothing that I had done could have replaced the
splendid actuality of your proof. For while corollary your theorem may
be of the existence of an absolutely unsolvable problem, the absolute
unsolvability of that problem has but a basis in the nature of phys-
ical induction at least in my work and I still think in any work. Of
course with suﬃcient labor that induction could have gone far enough
to include your particular system theorematically. That that could be
done for Principia Mathematica I saw then. My only excuse for not
doing so – well there are many and having written so much I might
add them. Chieﬂy I thought I saw a way of so analyzing “all ﬁnite
processes of the human mind” [something of the sort of thing Turing
does in his computable number paper] that I could establish the above

Emil Post
633
conclusions in general and not just for Principia Mathematica. Sec-
ondly that the absolute unsolvability of my problem would not achieve
much recognition for others merely on the basis of an incompleteness
proof for Principia Mathematica. And lastly while the above general
analysis enticed me it seemed foolish to do all the labor involved in the
more special Principia Theorem.
Post concluded his letter by apologizing to G¨odel for his excitement when they
met:
It was a real pleasure to meet you and I hope my egotistical outbursts
have spent themselves with that ﬁrst meeting and this letter. Needless
to say I have the greatest admiration for your work, and after all it is
not ideas but the execution of ideas that constitute a mark of greatness
[G¨odel, 2003, pp. 171-72].
In a brief reply, G¨odel reassured Post that he had noticed “nothing of what you
call egotistical outbursts in your letters or in the talk I had with you in New York;
on the contrary it was a pleasure to speak with you” [G¨odel, 2003, p. 173].
In spite of his disappointment in being overtaken by other logicians, Post contin-
ued to work in the area of recursion theory, and made some of his most important
and inﬂuential contributions in the period from 1936 to 1954. Before we take up
this thread again, however, it is necessary to make a digression in order to describe
Post’s work on Boolean clones. Although his fundamental results in this area were
already announced in [Post, 1921a], they were ﬁnally published twenty years later
after major changes in exposition.
5
CLASSIFYING SETS OF BOOLEAN FUNCTIONS
In this section, we discuss Post’s basic results on classes of Boolean functions
closed under composition. Although his work in this area belongs with the most
fundamental results of modern mathematical logic, it has remained somewhat
diﬃcult of access.
When Post rewrote his research for publication, following an unfortunate sug-
gestion of a referee [Post, 1941, p. 4], [Post, 1994, p. 256] he adopted the notation
of Jevons for logical formulas (his earlier version was in terms of the more familiar
truth-tables). Jevons uses capital letters A, B, C, . . . as Boolean variables (inter-
preted as classes), while the corresponding lower case letters a, b, c, . . . represent
the complements of these variables [Jevons, 1864]. The addition symbol + repre-
sents Boolean union (inclusive disjunction), while the universal and empty classes
are symbolized by 1 and 0. As an example of Jevons’s notation, the disjunctive
normal form expression usually symbolized as (A ∧B) ∨(∼A ∧B ∧∼C) is written
in Jevons’s notation as AB + aBc. Post proceeds in his classiﬁcation by means
of what he calls an “expansion” of a logical function, a pair α : β of expressions

634
Alasdair Urquhart
in disjunctive normal form, expressed in Jevons’s notation, the ﬁrst being a dis-
junctive normal form of the function itself, the second a disjunctive normal form
of its negation. The expansion is not unique; for example, one expansion of the
implication function A ⊃B is a + B : Ab, while another is AB + aB + ab : Ab.
Although Jevons’s notation is concise, and not diﬃcult to learn, Post’s use of it
leads to quite unnecessary obscurities. For example, the familiar class of monotone
functions in Post’s terminology becomes the class of functions “satisfying the [A :
a] condition” [Post, 1941, p. 35], [Post, 1994, p. 287]. This idiosyncratic phrase
derives from a characterization of monotone functions in terms of their expansions.
A Boolean function f is monotone if and only if it satisﬁes the [A : a] condition:
for any two terms in an expansion of f, there is a letter which is capital in the
term that is in the ﬁrst expression and small in the term that is in the second
expression.
The result, unfortunately, is a monograph that modern logicians seem to ﬁnd
impossible to read. Post provides a complete and painstaking proof of his ma-
jor results; reviewing the work in the Journal of Symbolic Logic, H.E. Vaughan
[Vaughan, 1941] remarked that the book is “self-contained and very clearly writ-
ten,” and noted only four serious misprints. Nevertheless, the contemporary logi-
cian Roman Murawski wrote [Murawski, 1998] of Post’s characterization of func-
tionally complete sets of connectives (proved in §26 of his monograph):
Did Post prove this theorem? In [Post, 1941] one ﬁnds no proof sat-
isfying the standards accepted today. The reason for that was Post’s
baroque notation (it was in fact an unprecise adaptation of the impre-
cise notation of Jevons from his Pure Logic, cf. [Jevons, 1864]), other
reason was the fact that Post seemed to be simultaneously pursuing
several diﬀerent topics.
Although these accusations of imprecision and lack of rigour are quite unjustiﬁed,
Murawski’s remarks (which echo similar but somewhat more guarded observa-
tions in [Pelletier and Martin, 1990, p. 463]) form an eloquent testimony to the
unreadability of Post’s ill-fated monograph.
In view of the problematic nature of Post’s exposition, in most of this section
we shall expound his results in unabashedly modern terminology. The exposition
below in fact has some substantive diﬀerences from Post’s original statement of his
results; towards the end of this section, we shall return to Post’s original version
to explain where these diﬀerences lie.
5.1
A tour of Post’s lattice
Our object of study in this section is the family of all ﬁnitary functions on the
two-element set S = {0, 1}; we can identify the elements with truth-values, with 1
as “true,” and 0 as “false.” An n-place operation on S, for n > 0, maps n-tuples
of Boolean values into Boolean values. There are 22n such functions for each n;
familiar logical operations such as ∧and ∨are among the sixteen 2-place Boolean

Emil Post
635
functions. (We might also consider the constants 0 and 1 as zero-place functions,
but here we prefer to think of them as 1-place constant functions.)
The most basic n-place functions (apart from the constant functions) are the
projections πn
i , deﬁned by the equation: πn
i (x1, . . . , xn) = xi.
If we think of
functions as given by expressions involving variables x1, . . . , xi, . . . , xn, . . . , then
the projections correspond to the variables themselves.
We can construct new
functions from old by the operation of composition. If f is a k-place operation,
and g1, . . . , gk a list of n-place functions, then we deﬁne an n-place function h by
composition:
h(x1, . . . , xn) = f(g1(x1, . . . , xn), . . . , gk(x1, . . . , xn)).
We deﬁne a family of Boolean functions to be a clone if it contains all the projection
functions and is closed under composition (Post uses a more general notion of
“iteratively closed class,” described below in §5.2).
Figure 2 shows the inclusion diagram of all Boolean clones. Post’s results are
perhaps most easily understood in terms of a commentary on this diagram. The
ﬁrst and most obvious feature of the diagram is its left-right symmetry.
This
symmetry arises from the phenomenon of duality. If f(x1, . . . , xn) is a Boolean
function, then the function g deﬁned by the equation
g(x1, . . . , xn) = ∼f(∼x1, . . . , ∼xn)
is the dual of f; the dual of the dual of f is just f itself. Equivalently, the truth-
table of the dual of f is obtained from the truth-table of f by replacing 0 by 1
and 1 by 0.
For example, ∧is the dual of ∨, and vice versa; the dual of the
implication operator (x ⊃y) is the subtraction operator y ∖x, or equivalently,
(y ∧∼x). A function is self-dual if it is equal to its dual. If C is a clone, then the
class of functions dual to those in C is also a clone, so that to every clone in our
diagram there is a corresponding dual clone, explaining the left-right symmetry.
The fourteen systems in the centre of the diagram are self-dual classes (that is to
say, they are their own duals).
There are only countably many Boolean clones, and Post’s classiﬁcation gives
a complete, explicit description of all of them. Figure 2 shows a central section,
consisting of 30 “sporadic” clones, together with eight inﬁnite descending chains,
four on the left and four on the right. The supplementary Figure 3 shows some
of the rather intricate pattern of containments in the central part of the lattice.
Every one of the clones is ﬁnitely generated, that is to say, there is an explicitly
describable ﬁnite set G of functions so that every function in the clone can be
deﬁned from functions in G. In the remaining part of this section, we shall take a
tour of Post’s lattice, giving a description of all of the clones and their generators.
At the bottom of the lattice, we ﬁnd six classes generated by negation and
constants: R1 = {∅} (the set of all projections), R4 = {∼}, R6 = {1}, R8 = {0},
R11 = {1, 0}, R13 = {∼, 1}. Here, the notation {∼, 1} (for example) denotes the
smallest clone containing the functions ∼and 1.

636
Alasdair Urquhart
R1
R4
R6
R8
R11
R13
S2
S4
S5
S6
P2
P4
P5
P6
F ∞
1
F 3
1
F 2
1
F ∞
2
F 3
2
F 2
2
F ∞
3
F 3
3
F 2
3
F ∞
4
F 3
4
F 2
4
F ∞
5
F 3
5
F 2
5
F ∞
6
F 3
6
F 2
6
F ∞
7
F 3
7
F 2
7
F ∞
8
F 3
8
F 2
8
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
D1
D2
D3
A1
A2
A3
A4
C1
C2
C3
C4
Figure 2. Post’s lattice
Proceeding up the lattice, we encounter two groups of four on left and right,
and one group of ﬁve in the middle. On the left, we have four classes generated
by disjunction and the constants: S2 = {∨}, S4 = {∨, 1}, S5 = {∨, 0} and S6 =
{∨, 0, 1}. On the right, the dual classes are: P2 = {∧}, P4 = {∧, 0}, P5 = {∧, 1},
P6 = {∧, 0, 1}. In the middle, there are ﬁve classes describable in terms of the
biconditional ≡and its dual ⊕(that is to say, addition modulo 2). If we write
⊕3 for the three place operation x ⊕y ⊕z, then we have: L1 = {≡, ∼}, L2 =
{≡}, L3 = {⊕}, L4 = {⊕3}, L5 = {⊕3, ∼}. The class L1 can also be described
abstractly as the set of all linear Boolean functions, that is to say, those expressible
in the form x1 ⊕· · · ⊕xn ⊕c, where c is a constant (0 or 1).
At this point, it is convenient to make a digression to introduce some deﬁni-
tions. We deﬁne two inﬁnite sequences, c2, c3, . . . , cn, . . . and d2, d3, . . . , dn, . . . of

Emil Post
637
R1
R4
R6
R8
R11
R13
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
D1
D2
D3
A1
A2
A3
A4
C1
C2
C3
C4
Figure 3. Post’s lattice: the central part
functions, where cn and dn each have n + 1 input variables. For n ≥2, we deﬁne:
cn(x1, x2, . . . , xn+1) =

1≤i≤n+1
(x1 ∨· · · ∨xi ∨· · · ∨xn+1),
dn(x1, x2, . . . , xn+1) =

1≤i≤n+1
(x1 ∧· · · ∧xi ∧· · · ∧xn+1),
where the notation “ xi” means that the variable xi is omitted from the term in
question. For example, function d2 is given by the deﬁnition
d2(x1, x2, x3) = (x2 ∧x3) ∨(x1 ∧x3) ∨(x1 ∧x2).
The function dn belongs to the family of threshold functions, a family that
plays an important role in theoretical computer science [Vollmer, 1999].
The

638
Alasdair Urquhart
threshold function T n
m, for m ≤n, is the n-place function deﬁned by the condition:
T n
m(x1, . . . , xn) = 1 if and only if x1 + · · · + xn ≥m (that is to say, at least m of
the inputs x1, . . . , xn are equal to 1). For example, (x∨y) = T 2
1 , and (x∧y) = T 2
2 .
With this deﬁnition, we have dn = T n+1
n
.
The function cn satisﬁes the dual
condition: cn(x1, . . . , xn) = 1 if and only if x1 +· · ·+xn > 1. It is easy to see that
c2 = d2. The functions cn and dn are duals of each other, so that the function c2
is self-dual.
In the centre of the diagram is a group of three classes, D2 = {d2}, D1 =
{d2, ⊕3} and D3 = {d2, ⊕3, ∼}. D3 is the class of all self-dual functions; hence
there are exactly seven classes consisting entirely of self-dual functions.
Immediately above D3 lies a group of four classes, A1, A2, A3 and A4. The
top element in this group, A1, is the important class of all monotone functions.
If we order the truth-values by setting 0 < 1, then n-tuples of truth-values can
be ordered by deﬁning ⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩≤⟨y1, . . . , yn⟩if and only if xi ≤yi, for all i,
1 ≤i ≤n. An n-place function f is monotone if for all x1, . . . , xn, y1, . . . , yn,
⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩≤⟨y1, . . . , yn⟩⇒f(x1, . . . , xn) ≤f(y1, . . . , yn).
The generators of these classes are given by A1 = {∧, ∨, 0, 1}, A2 = {∧, ∨, 1},
A3 = {∧, ∨, 0} and A4 = {∧, ∨}.
Proceeding to the top of the lattice, we ﬁnd C1, the class of all Boolean functions,
C2, the class of all functions that preserves 1, in the sense that if f is an n-place
function in C2, then f(1, 1, . . . , 1) = 1, C3, the class of all functions preserving 0,
and C4, the class of all functions preserving both 1 and 0. For generators, we have
C1 = {∨, ∼}, C2 = {∧, ⊃}, C3 = {∨, ∖}, C4 = {x ∧(y ∨∼z), ∨}.
Finally, we have to describe the eight inﬁnite descending chains arranged sym-
metrically on each side of the lattice. Starting with the four chains on the left, we
can describe them using the following sets of generators, where 2 ≤m < ∞:
F m
1 = {x ∨(y ∖z), cm}, F ∞
1
= {x ∨(y ∖z)};
F m
2 = {x ∨(y ∧z), cm}, F ∞
2
= {x ∨(y ∧z)};
F m
3 = {cm, 1}, F ∞
3
= {x ∨(y ∧z), 1};
F m
4 = {⊃, cm}, F ∞
4
= {⊃}.
The four chains on the righthand side of the lattice are the duals of those on the
left. Thus, a set of generators for each class is given by the duals of the generators
of the corresponding dual class:
F m
5 = {x ∧(y ∨∼z), dm}, F ∞
5
= {x ∧(y ∨∼z)};
F m
6 = {x ∧(y ∨z), dm}, F ∞
6
= {x ∧(y ∨z)};
F m
7 = {dm, 0}, F ∞
7
= {x ∧(y ∨z), 0};
F m
8 = {∖, dm}, F ∞
8
= {∖}.

Emil Post
639
It is possible to give a more structural description of the eight inﬁnite chains
by giving properties that characterize the functions in each clone. We general-
ize the property of being 0-preserving that picks out the functions in the class
C3. Deﬁne a function f to be doubly 0-preserving if, given two n-tuples of truth-
values, x1, . . . , xn and y1, . . . , yn such that f(x1, . . . , xn) = f(y1, . . . , yn), there
is a j, where 1 ≤j ≤n, so that xj = yj = 1. More generally, deﬁne f to be
m-tuply 0-preserving if whenever x1
1, . . . , x1
n, x2
1, . . . , x2
n, . . . , xm
1 , . . . , xm
n is a se-
quence of length m, consisting of n-tuples of truth-values such that f(x1
1, . . . , x1
n) =
f(x2
1, . . . , x2
n) = · · · = f(xm
1 , . . . , xm
n ) = 1, there is a j, where 1 ≤j ≤n, so that
x1
j = x2
j = · · · = xm
j
= 1. A function is inﬁnitely 0-preserving if it is m-tuply
0-preserving for all m.
This terminology, taken from [Pippenger, 1997, p. 22],
is justiﬁed by the fact that a function is 0-preserving just in case it is singly
0-preserving.
The class F m
8
consists of all m-tuply 0-preserving functions, F m
7
results by
restricting such functions to be monotone. F m
5 consists of all m-tuply 0-preserving
functions that are also 1-preserving, while F m
6
is the subclass of all monotone
functions in F m
5 .
Finally, the classes F ∞
5 , F ∞
6 , F ∞
7 , F ∞
8
are characterized in
exactly the same way, except that the crucial property is that of being inﬁnitely
0-preserving.
The classes F m
1 , F m
2 , F m
3 , F m
4
and F ∞
1 , F ∞
2 , F ∞
3 , F ∞
4
are characterized in
the same way as their dual counterparts, except that the dual property, of being
m-tuply 1-preserving is employed.
The descriptions of the classes in terms of their generators is adapted from
the paper [Lyndon, 1951] (see also [B¨ohler et al., 2003]). In that paper, Lyndon
provides a complete axiomatization for the equational logics corresponding to each
of Post’s classes.
5.2
Post’s iterative classes
In the exposition of Post’s results, following the contemporary trend, we have
included all projection functions in our functionally closed classes. This is a natural
approach, since (for example) we can consider the formula ∼x as expressing a
function on any number of variables, simply by regarding the variables other than
x as irrelevant. In other words, when we include an n-place function in a class,
then we also include all those functions that arise from it by adding irrelevant
variables.
Post, however, did not make this assumption, and as a result, his classiﬁcation
includes twenty iteratively closed classes that are not clones. We ﬁrst need to
deﬁne Post’s own notion of iteratively closed class. Let π be a map from {1, . . . , n}
onto {1, . . . , k}, where k ≤n. Deﬁne {0, 1}n/π to be the class of all x ∈{0, 1}n
satisfying the condition that for i, j ≤n, if π(i) = π(j) then xi = xj. If x ∈{0, 1}k,
then there is a unique vector y = π−1(x) in x ∈{0, 1}n/π so that for all i,
1 ≤i ≤n, yi = xπ(i). If f is a Boolean function deﬁned on {0, 1}n, then we deﬁne
the function f π on {0, 1}k by setting f π(x) = f(π−1(x)). We now deﬁne a family

640
Alasdair Urquhart
F of Boolean function to be iteratively closed if it satisﬁes the conditions:
1. If f is an n-place function in F and π a map from {1, . . . , n} onto {1, . . . , k},
where k ≤n, then f π is in F;
2. If f(x1, . . . , xi, . . . , xk) is a k-place function in F, and g(x1, . . . , xn) an n-
place function in F, then the k + n −1-place function h deﬁned by
h(x1, . . . , xk+n−1) = f(x1, . . . , g(xi, . . . , xi+k−1), xi+k, . . . , xk+n−1)
is also in F.
That is to say, Post deﬁnes a non-empty class to be iteratively closed if it is closed
under permutation and identiﬁcation of variables, and also under composition. We
now give a short description of the twenty iteratively closed classes that are not
clones.
There are nine classes consisting entirely of 1-place functions. These are O1 =
{π1
1}, O2 = {1}, O3 = {0}, O4 = {π1
1, ∼}, O5 = {π1
1, 1}, O6 = {π1
1, 0}, O7 = {1, 0},
O8 = {π1
1, 1, 0} and O9 = {π1
1, 1, 0, ∼}. Since Post does not consider the empty
class to be iteratively closed, his containment diagram has no least element, and
hence is not a lattice, since O1, O2 and O3 are incomparable minimal elements.
Seven classes consist of sets of functions reducible to 1-place functions, that is
to say, all functions in these classes are obtained by adding irrelevant variables to
1-place functions. Let 1∗be the class of all n-place constant functions taking the
value 1, and 0∗the class of all n-place constant functions taking the value 0. Then
we have the additional iterative classes R2 = {1∗}, R3 = {0∗}, R5 = {π1
1, 1∗},
R7 = {π1
1, 0∗}, R9 = {1∗, 0∗}, R10 = {π1
1, 1∗, 0∗} and R12 = {π1
1, 1∗, 0∗, ∼}.
Finally, there are four classes deﬁned in terms of conjunction and disjunction.
S1 = {π1
1, ∨}, S3 = {π1
1, 1∗, ∨}, P1 = {π1
1, ∧} and P3 = {π1
1, 0∗, ∧}.
5.3
Applications of Post’s classiﬁcation
Post’s classiﬁcation, together with the accompanying containment diagram, en-
codes an enormous quantity of information. Many results, some of them far from
obvious, can be read oﬀimmediately from the diagram.
As an example of such a result, consider the following assertion: If S is an inﬁnite
set of Boolean functions, then there is a ﬁnite set S0 contained in S so that every
function in S can be deﬁned from functions in S0, together with the projection
functions. This does not seem at all obvious. However, it follows immediately
by inspecting Post’s lattice. The lattice, although it contains inﬁnite descending
chains, contains no inﬁnite ascending chains, and the result follows easily from
this fact.
Post’s lattice also makes it easy to see which class is generated by a given ﬁnite
set of Boolean functions. In particular, we can readily give a criterion for a set of
functions F to be functionally complete, so that all functions are deﬁnable from
F. To see how this works, let us examine the top element C1 of Post’s lattice. The

Emil Post
641
class C1 covers exactly ﬁve other classes; that is to say, exactly ﬁve classes, namely
C2, C3, L1, A1, D3, lie immediately below C1 in the diagram. It follows from this
that if F is a set of Boolean functions, then it is functionally complete if and only
if for every one of these ﬁve classes, there is a function in F that is not in the class.
The last sentence of the previous paragraph can be rephrased to give Post’s
criterion for functional completeness. A set of functions is functionally complete if
and only if it contains (a) a function that does not preserve 0, (b) a function that
does not preserve 1, (c) a non-monotone function, (d) a non-linear function, (e) a
function that is not self-dual. Since each one of these conditions is easy to check,
given the truth-table for a function, the criterion leads to a simple algorithm to
determine whether or not a given ﬁnite set of functions is functionally complete. A
self-contained proof of Post’s theorem on functional completeness can be found in
[Pelletier and Martin, 1990]. Similar criteria can be given for all the other classes
in Post’s diagram.
For several decades after the publication of [Post, 1941], Post’s classiﬁcation was
consigned to a backwater of logic, and was almost forgotten. However, with the
increasing interest in Boolean functions and propositional logic, this situation has
changed, and his fundamental results are now frequently employed by theoretical
computer scientists. A survey of some of these applications of Post’s classiﬁcation
can be found in the excellent expository article [B¨ohler et al., 2003].
6
RECURSION THEORY AND DECISION PROBLEMS
Although he had been overtaken by the work of other logicians, Post was well
placed to contribute to the newly developing ﬁelds stemming from the discovery
of the incompleteness of formal systems by G¨odel, and of an exact mathematical
deﬁnition of computable functions by Church and Turing. His point of view was
substantially diﬀerent from the approach followed by other logicians, so that his
papers of the 1930s and 1940s are highly original, breaking new ground in several
directions.
Most of the work in recursion theory in the mid-1930s emphasized computable
functions on the natural numbers. Post’s earlier work diﬀered in its overall thrust,
since he was mainly concerned with formal axiomatic systems, expressed as rules
for manipulating strings of symbols. Consequently, Post was able to develop the
theory in new directions, emphasizing both generated sets of numbers and prob-
lems involving rules for symbolic manipulation.
6.1
Post machines
Post’s ﬁrst publication in logic after a ﬁfteen year gap was [Post, 1936], a short
paper in which he describes a computational model very similar to that of the
Turing machine. Turing’s article was received for publication on May 28 1936,
while Post’s was received October 7 1936; a footnote to Post’s article by the editor,
Alonzo Church, informs the reader that “the present article, however, although

642
Alasdair Urquhart
bearing a later date, was written entirely independently of Turing’s.” Post, on
the other hand, unlike Turing, had the advantage of having read [Church, 1936],
while Turing’s logical inﬂuences seem to have been conﬁned to the incompleteness
results [G¨odel, 1931], the Cambridge lectures of Max Newman and the textbook
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928].
Unlike Turing, Post does not use the word “machine,” but instead speaks of a
“problem solver or worker” (however, the term “Post machine” [Uspensky, 1983]
is now standard terminology for the model). The analogue of a Turing machine’s
“tape” is provided by a “symbol space” consisting of a two way inﬁnite sequence
of spaces or boxes, each of which is either empty or unmarked. The worker is
assumed to be performing the following primitive acts:
(a) Marking the box he is in (assumed empty),
(b) Erasing the mark in the box he is in (assumed marked),
(c) Moving to the box on his right,
(d) Moving to the box on his left,
(e) Determining whether the box he is in, is or is not marked.
The set of directions for the worker consists of a sequence of numbered instruc-
tions, each instruction having one of the following forms:
(A) Perform operation (a), (b), (c) or (d) and then follow direction j,
(B) Perform operation (e) and according as the answer is yes or no correspond-
ingly follow direction number i or direction number j,
(C) Stop.
One box is to be singled out and called the starting point. A problem is given in
symbolic form by a ﬁnite number of boxes being marked with a stroke, and the
output is given in the same form. With these conventions, a set of instructions
serves to deﬁne a computable function, where the positive integer n is symbolized
by a sequence of n consecutive marked boxes.
Post conjectures (correctly) but does not prove that his formulation is equiva-
lent to Church’s deﬁnition of computable functions. His formulation is strikingly
similar to Turing’s earlier deﬁnition, though Turing’s notion of machine conﬁgu-
rations or “m-conﬁgurations” does not appear in Post’s development. This role
is played by the numbers assigned to the instructions in Post’s sets of directions.
Although Turing’s notion of computing machine, rather than Post’s, has become
the standard model in theoretical computer science, Post’s formulation is a little
more like standard machine code (since programs typically do consist of numbered
instructions). To put the matter in computer science terms: Post shows that a
computer that can only perform the primitive acts of reading, writing, moving and

Emil Post
643
following jump instructions conditional on a zero test is a universal computational
model.
Post evidently had plans to continue in a series of articles on the topic (as
appears in the title of his paper) showing how “Formulation 1” could be extended
to broader computational models. He must have been discouraged from this by
the appearance of the more elaborate development in [Turing, 1936], and one can
sense his disappointment in a remark recorded in a notebook in February 1938:
Turing: In large measure removed what was left in my point of view.
His Finite number of mental states hypothesis I did not have, and
if veriﬁed should be a cornerstone in the ﬁnite process development
[Grattan-Guinness, 1990, p. 82].
Post’s notebooks in Philadelphia (see §8) contain some of his work on “Formula-
tion 2.” In it, he considered rules operating in a two-dimensional symbol space,
somewhat reminiscent of later work on cellular automata, such as Conway’s Game
of Life [Berlekamp et al., 1982, Chapter 25] [Wolfram, 2002].
Post ends his paper with some remarks on the signiﬁcance of Church’s thesis.
He says of his conjecture that his formulation 1 is equivalent to the G¨odel-Church
development: “We oﬀer this conclusion at the present moment as a working hy-
pothesis. And to our mind such is Church’s identiﬁcation of eﬀective calculability
with recursiveness.” To this last sentence he adds a footnote, in which he says:
“Actually the work done by Church and others carries this identiﬁcation consider-
ably beyond the working hypothesis stage. But to mask this identiﬁcation under
a deﬁnition hides the fact that a fundamental discovery in the limitations of the
mathematicizing power of Homo Sapiens has been made and blinds us to the need
of its continual veriﬁcation” [Post, 1936, p. 105].
6.2
Recursively Enumerable Sets
In February 1944, Post gave an invited address to the New York meeting of the
American Mathematical Society, and the published version of his talk [Post, 1944]
is his most inﬂuential paper. In it, he sets forth a program to determine the relative
complexity of undecidable problems, based on abstract notions of reducibility. As
part of this program, he poses a problem, later known as “Post’s problem” that
was one of the driving forces behind the rapid development of recursion theory in
the decades following Post’s address.
Since he was addressing a general mathematical audience, Post adopted an
informal mode of presentation that contrasts with the rather formal exposition
that was standard in the ﬁeld of recursive functions at that time. He remarks:
We must emphasize that, with a few exceptions explicitly so noted, we
have obtained formal proofs of all the consequently mathematical the-
orems here developed informally. Yet the real mathematics involved
must lie in the informal development. For in every instance the infor-
mal “proof” was ﬁrst obtained; and once gotten, transforming it into

644
Alasdair Urquhart
the formal proof turned out to be a routine chore [Post, 1944, p. 284]
[Davis, 1965, p. 305][Post, 1994, p. 462].
Although Post seems to have felt that publication of ﬁnal results required a more
formal mode, in fact his informal expository style has now become the norm in
presentations of research in recursion theory.
Post begins his article with a beautifully written survey of the area, stating
Church’s thesis as the identiﬁcation of the intuitive concept of eﬀectively calculable
function with the technical concept of recursive function. He goes on to explain
the intuitive concept of a generated set of positive integers, and asserts his own
thesis as the identity of this concept with that of recursively enumerable set. The
technical deﬁnition of recursively enumerable set is given in terms of his own
concept of normal system, a set of positive integers being recursively enumerable
if it is generated by a normal system with the alphabet {1, b}, the positive integer
n being represented by a string of n 1’s; if a set of integers is generated by a set
of rules B, then we say that B is a basis for the set generated by these rules.
He goes on to point out the generality of this concept, since the assertions of an
arbitrary formal system of formal logic can (by numerical encoding) be regarded
as a recursively enumerable set.
With this identiﬁcation, the decision problem for a formal system can be seen
as the decision problem for a recursively enumerable set. A corollary of Church’s
thesis is that the intuitive concept of a set with a solvable decision problem is
coextensive with the notion of recursive set. Hence, questions of algorithmic de-
cidability can be placed in the abstract framework of recursively enumerable sets of
positive integers and their decision problems. The basic result on the existence of
unsolvable problems (for which Post references [Church, 1936], [Rosser, 1936] and
[Kleene, 1936]) is stated as: There exists a recursively enumerable set of positive
integers which is not recursive.
Post continues with a version of G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem, a reworked
version of his earlier incompleteness results from [Post, 1965]. The set of all bases
B1, B2, . . . can be eﬀectively enumerated, and hence so can the set T of all pairs
(B, n), where n is in the set generated by the basis B. This set T is thus the same
set as is generated by the complete normal system described in §4.1. If we deﬁne
T as the set of all pairs (B, n) not in T, then T is not recursively enumerable,
by a diagonal argument. Thus there is no formal logical system that proves a
proposition of the form “The integer n is not in the set generated by the basis
B” if and only if it is true. Post concludes with words echoing his earlier remarks
from his unpublished manuscript of 1941 [Post, 1944, p. 295] [Davis, 1965, p. 316]:
The conclusion is unescapable that even for such a ﬁxed, well deﬁned
body of mathematical propositions, mathematical thinking is, and must
remain, essentially creative. To the writer’s mind, this conclusion must
inevitably result in at least a partial reversal of the entire axiomatic
trend of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, with a return
to meaning and truth as being of the essence of mathematics.

Emil Post
645
With these words, Post sums up his earlier work on undecidability and incom-
pleteness. The remainder of his paper sets out a program of research that was
to determine a great deal of the direction of the new ﬁeld of recursion theory.
The emphasis is now on the classiﬁcation of recursively enumerable sets, with the
measure of complexity provided by notions of reducibility.
In his postdoctoral work at Princeton, Post had used an informal notion of
reducibility in relating systems in his various canonical forms. If we translate Post’s
earlier notion of reducibility, cited above in §4, into the language of set theory, then
it amounts to that of one-one reducibility. If S and T are sets of positive integers,
then S is many-one reducible to T if there is a computable function f deﬁned on
the positive integers so that n is in S if and only if f(n) is in T. S is one-one
reducible to T if the function f is injective (one-one).
The intuitive idea of reducibility is that it measures the degree of diﬃculty of a
problem. If a problem P is reducible to a problem Q, then a solution to Q would
also lead to a solution of P. Diﬀerent notions of reducibility arise, depending on the
complexity of the reduction process. The reducibility relation is always assumed
to be transitive and reﬂexive, so that we can classify sets in a partial ordering of
degrees of unsolvability, where two sets are equivalent under the ordering if and
only they are reducible to each other (in this case, they are said to be of the same
degree). The most restrictive notion of reducibility deﬁned by Post is that of one-
one reducibility; later he introduces more and more general notions of reducibility,
the most general notion being that of Turing reducibility.
Because the complete set K encodes positive answers to all questions of the
form “Is the integer n in the set generated by the basis B?”, it is not hard to
see that every recursively enumerable set is one-one reducible to K. Conversely,
it is easy to prove that if a set is many-one reducible to K, then it is recursively
enumerable. Hence, the complete set K is of the highest degree of unsolvability
relative to one-one reducibility (1-complete), and consequently also relative to
many-one reducibility (m-complete).
Are there degrees of unsolvability of recursively enumerable sets strictly between
the degree of recursive sets and that of K? This is the general problem addressed
by Post in the later parts of his paper; he answers the question for some of the
stronger (that is, more restrictive) concepts of reducibility, but not for the most
general notion, Turing reducibility. As an initial step in his quest for intermediate
degrees, Post begins by singling out a key property of the complete set K.
Fix a numerical encoding of all of the pairs (B, n). Then the image K of the
set T under this encoding is a recursively enumerable set that is not recursive.
The diagonal method that proves K not to be recursive is constructive. In Post’s
terminology, the set K is a creative set, that is to say, a recursively enumerable
set C for which there exists a recursive function f giving a unique positive integer
n = f(i) for each basis Bi for a recursively enumerable set Wi of positive integers
such that whenever Wi is a subset of C (the complement of C), then n is also in C,
but not in Wi. This key property of the complete set K is an abstract version of
the G¨odel incompleteness theorem, in the sense that G¨odel’s construction provides

646
Alasdair Urquhart
a constructive method that given a formal system for arithmetic in which only true
statements are provable, produces another statement (the G¨odel sentence for the
system) that is also true, but unprovable in the system.
If S is a creative set, then its complement S contains an inﬁnite recursively
enumerable subset. This follows from the fact that starting from the empty set, we
can construct successively larger subsets of S using the function f(i) to obtain an
inﬁnite recursively enumerable subset of S. If A and B are recursively enumerable,
A is creative, and A is many-one reducible to B, then B is also creative. It follows
that if B is an m-complete recursively enumerable set, that B contains an inﬁnite
recursively enumerable subset.
This last result motivates Post’s next deﬁnition: a recursively enumerable set
S of positive integers is simple if S is inﬁnite, but does not contain any inﬁnite
recursively enumerable subset. A simple set cannot be recursive, for if it were, S
would be an inﬁnite recursively enumerable subset of itself. Post’s next result is a
clever diagonalization that proves that a simple set exists. For every basis Bi, his
construction guarantees that a member of Wi (the set generated by Bi) is placed
in S, provided Wi is inﬁnite, so that this member is a witness to the fact that Wi
is not a subset of S. At the same time, Post constrains the number of witnesses
that can be added so that S is inﬁnite.
The existence of a simple set shows that there is a recursively enumerable set
of intermediate degree in the ordering according to many-one reducibility. In fact,
this result can be strengthened by deﬁning a more general notion of reducibility.
If a set A is reducible to a set B, then we can think of the reduction as being given
in terms of membership queries. So, for example, if A is many-one reducible to B,
we put an integer n in A if the answer to the query “Is f(n) in B?” is positive,
otherwise we leave it out. However, we could just as well leave n out if the answer
is positive, and otherwise put it in. In other words, it is quite reasonable to say
that the complement S of a set is reducible to the set S itself. This idea leads
immediately to the more general notion of truth-table reducibility.
Deﬁne a Boolean query to a set B to be a propositional formula built out of
the Boolean connectives ∧, ∨, ∼, in which the atomic formulas are all of the form
(m ∈B), where m is a positive integer; for example, the formula
[(5 ∈B) ∧∼(67 ∈B)] ∨[∼(42 ∈B) ∧(87 ∈B)].
We deﬁne a set A to be truth-table reducible to a set B if there is a recursive
function f so that for all n, f(n) is a Boolean query to B, and n is in A if and
only if B satisﬁes the query f(n). If, in addition, there is a ﬁxed upper bound on
the number of atomic formulas in the Boolean queries f(n), then we say that A is
bounded truth-table reducible to B.
Post is able to show that if S is a simple set, then a creative set cannot be
reduced to S by bounded truth-table reductions. However, this result does not
generalize to unbounded truth-table reductions, since he proves that if C is any
creative set, then there is a simple set S so that C is reducible to S by unbounded
truth-table reductions.

Emil Post
647
This last result leads Post to generalize the notion of simplicity to that of a
hyper-simple set. A hyper-simple set H is deﬁned to be a recursively enumerable
set of positive integers so that H is inﬁnite, but there is no inﬁnite recursively
enumerable set of mutually exclusive ﬁnite sequence of positive integers so that
each sequence has at least one member in H (“mutually exclusive” means that
the sequences have no elements in common). The notion of hyper-simplicity is
powerful enough to show that there are intermediate degrees of unsolvability in
the truth-table ordering, since Post proves, ﬁrst that a hyper-simple set exists, and
second that no creative set can be reduced to a hyper-simple set by a truth-table
reduction.
Although the notion of truth-table reducibility is fairly broad, it is far from the
most general notion of reducibility that can be deﬁned. Let us imagine that we are
trying to decide whether or not an integer belongs to a set A, while having access
to information about the answers to all possible queries of the form: “Is integer
n in set B?” Alan Turing, in his doctoral thesis [Turing, 1939, §4], [Davis, 1965,
p. 166] suggested the picturesque metaphor of having access to an “oracle” for the
set B, a terminology that is now standard. Then we say that A is Turing-reducible
to B if we can decide whether or not an integer is in A, using a computer that has
access to an oracle for B.
The deﬁnition given in the previous paragraph is not mathematically precise,
but it can be made so in a variety of ways. The method usually adopted is to
deﬁne a Turing machine with an auxiliary tape on which numbers can be written
as queries to the oracle. When the machine enters a query of the form “Is the
integer n in the set B?”, the computation continues in one of two diﬀerent ways,
depending on the answer from the oracle (the oracle’s answers are considered to
be instantaneous, so that a query counts as a single computational step). Post
himself described an alternative approach [Post, 1948] based on a generalization
of his canonical sets to S-canonical sets, in which primitive assertions representing
propositions of the form “Integer n is in S” and “Integer n is not in S” are added
to a canonical system.
Post was unable to solve the problem of whether there exist intermediate degrees
of unsolvability for the most general notion of reducibility, Turing-reducibility.
This became known as “Post’s problem,” and work towards its solution drove a
great deal of the research stimulated by his paper. He expressed some doubts
as to whether hyper-simple sets would provide examples of intermediate degrees,
but was not able to decide the question. The matter was not fully clariﬁed until
after Post’s problem itself had been solved. The paper [Jockusch and Soare, 1973]
shows that if H is Post’s original example of a hyper-simple set, then it may
or may not be Turing-complete, depending on the precise enumeration of bases
B1, B2, . . . , Bn, . . . adopted.
Post’s program of research aimed at solving the problem of the existence of
intermediate degrees was to deﬁne recursively enumerable sets with “sparse” com-
plements, an idea implemented in the deﬁnition of simple and hypersimple sets.
However, although this approach succeeded in the case of the strong reducibilities,

648
Alasdair Urquhart
he was not able to make it work for Turing reducibility. The solution to the prob-
lem was ﬁnally achieved by a diﬀerent approach, the priority method of Friedberg
and Muchnik, discussed below in §6.5.
6.3
The Post Correspondence Problem
In his brief note [Post, 1946], Post provided an addendum to [Post, 1943], in
which he presents an unsolvable problem of striking simplicity.
He considers
strings composed of the two symbol alphabet {a, b}. An instance of the corre-
spondence problem is given by a ﬁnite list (g1, h1), (g2, h2), . . . , (gm, hm) of pairs of
non-empty strings, for example, the list (bb, b), (ab, ba), (b, bb). A solution to such
a problem consists of a ﬁnite sequence σ = σ1, . . . , σk, where 1 ≤σi ≤k, so that
gσ1gσ2 . . . gσk = hσ1hσ2 . . . hσk; a solution to the example just given is provided by
the sequence 1223, since in this case g1g2g2g3 = bbababb = h1h2h2h3.
The preceding example has a very simple solution. Much more diﬃcult instances
of the correspondence problem can be constructed. As a challenge to the reader,
here are two instances that are known to be solvable, but whose solutions are very
diﬃcult:
Instance 1: [Lorentz, 2001] (abb, a), (b, abb), (a, b);
Instance 2: [Zhao, 2002] (aaba, a), (baab, aa), (a, aab).
Post proves unsolvability of his correspondence problem by reducing the decision
problem for normal systems to it. He does not give any applications of the problem.
However, because of its simplicity, it later turned out to be an ideal problem
for proving undecidability results in formal language theory.
Bar-Hillel, Perles
and Shamir [Bar-Hillel et al., 1961] applied the correspondence problem to show
that several problems in the theory of formal languages are undecidable. Among
the problems they prove undecidable is that of deciding whether two context-
free languages have a non-empty intersection (that is, given two phrase structure
grammars, determining whether or not the languages generated by the grammars
have a word in common). The Post correspondence problem is now a standard tool
of formal language theory – see for example the textbook [Hopcroft and Ullman,
1979].
6.4
The Word Problem for Semigroups
By the 1940s, the broad signiﬁcance of the concept of recursive, or computable
functions was already clear. The universality and robustness of the concept of
computability, and its applicability to the classical decision problems in logic was
well known to the logical community. Nevertheless, the applications had remained
within the realm of logic, and the fruitfulness of the idea outside this area remained
to be shown. Post provided a major step in this direction by demonstrating that
a decision problem that had arisen outside the area of logic and foundations was
unsolvable.

Emil Post
649
The Norwegian mathematician Axel Thue in his paper [Thue, 1914] had posed
the word problem for ﬁnitely presented semigroups. The word problem for such a
semigroup is given as follows. There is a ﬁnite set of primitive letters, representing
the generators of the semigroup, from which words can be formed using a binary
associative operation. For example, if the generators of the semigroup are a, b, c,
then the words ((ab)c)a and a(b(ca)) are considered to be the same, so that the
words are treated as strings of letters. Then a presentation of a semigroup with
these generators is given by a ﬁnite set of equations, for example, the equations
ab = ba and abc = bcaa.
The word problem is, given such a presentation, to
determine whether or not a given equation is derivable using the standard rules
for reasoning with equations, where the generators are treated as constants.
Alonzo Church suggested to Post that Thue’s problem, might be proved unsolv-
able as an application of [Post, 1946]. In fact, however, Post solved the problem
not by using his correspondence problem, but by translating the formalism of
Turing machines into the notation of his canonical systems. A presentation of a
semigroup can be rewritten as a set of production rules of the form PσQ =⇒PτQ,
where σ and τ are strings over a ﬁnite alphabet. A set of production rules of this
form Post deﬁnes as a semi-Thue system. A Thue system, which corresponds to
a semigroup presentation, has the added property that whenever the production
PσQ =⇒PτQ is in the set, so is its inverse PτQ =⇒PσQ. For example, the
presentation given above can be rewritten as the set of productions
PabQ =⇒PbaQ, PbaQ =⇒PabQ, PabcQ =⇒PbcaaQ, PbcaaQ =⇒PabcQ.
The decision problem for a semi-Thue system is the problem of determining
whether or not a word τ can be derived from a given word σ using the production
rules of the system.
The word problem of Thue is equivalent to the decision
problem for Thue systems. Post’s strategy to prove unsolvability of this problem
is to reduce the decision problem for a special class of semi-Thue systems to the
decision problem for Thue systems.
This proof strategy is most easily carried out for rules that are deterministic,
in the sense that at most one rule is applicable to any string derivable from an
initial assertion. This is why canonical systems derived from Turing machines are
ideal for this problem. A conﬁguration of a Turing machine can be described as
a string consisting of an endmarker h, followed by a sequence of tape symbols,
followed by a symbol for an internal state of the machine, then another string, and
ﬁnally another endmarker symbol h. For example, the string h110q301h represents
a conﬁguration of a machine in which the internal state of the machine is q3, and
the machine is scanning the fourth symbol of the string 11001 on an otherwise
blank tape. The rules of the Turing machine are then easily rewritten as Post
production rules, for example, the rule Pq31Q =⇒P1q3Q represents the Turing
machine instruction “In state q3, if you are scanning a 1, then move right.”
Post starts from an unsolvable problem in the theory of Turing machines. It
is an unsolvable problem to determine whether or not a Turing machine, with
internal states q1, . . . , qr, started in its initial state q1, reading the ﬁrst symbol in

650
Alasdair Urquhart
a binary string σ on its input tape, halts in its highest-numbered state qr on a
blank tape. Rewriting the machine instructions as a semi-Thue system T ′, this
decision problem becomes: Is there a derivation in the system T ′ of the string
hqrh from the initial string hq1σh? Let T ′′ be the system consisting of all the
inverses of the productions in T ′. Then hqrh is derivable in T ′ from hq1σh if and
only if hq1σh is derivable from hqrh in T ′. Now let T be the system that has
all the rules of T ′, together with all the rules of T ′′ (that is, all the rules of T ′
and their inverses). Then because of the deterministic character of Turing machine
rules, exactly the same strings are derivable from the initial string hqrh in T as are
derivable in T ′′. This reduces the Turing machine problem to the decision problem
for a Thue system, and so shows Thue’s problem of 1914 to be unsolvable.
Very simple unsolvable cases of Thue’s problem are known. Building on Novikov’s
proof of the unsolvability of the word problem for groups (see below), [Tseitin,
1958]shows that the word problem for the semigroup with ﬁve generators {a,b,c,d,e}
and deﬁning relations ac = ca, ad = da, bc = cb, bd = db, eca = ce, edb = de, cca =
ccae is unsolvable.
The formulation of Turing machines used by Post is not the original formulation
of Turing, but a simpliﬁed and clariﬁed version due to Post himself.
It is in
fact Post’s version of the Turing machine that is the standard “Turing machine”
presented in introductory texts on logic and computer science. Post includes an
appendix to his paper providing a detailed critique of Turing’s original paper.
The Russian logician Markov proved the same result independently and almost
at the same time as Post [Markov, 1947].
These results of Post and Markov
were just the beginning of a host of mathematical problems proved undecidable
by the technique of reducing known unsolvable problems to them.
A notable
result achieved somewhat later is the unsolvability of the word problem for ﬁnitely
presented groups, proved by the Russian logician P.S. Novikov in [Novikov, 1955],
and independently though somewhat later by the American logician William Boone
[Boone, 1957a][Boone, 1957b].
A few years later, Post showed that another concrete decision problem (though
of a logical nature) was undecidable, in joint work with Samuel Linial (who later
changed his name to Samuel Gulden). Linial and Post showed that there is an
undecidable subsystem of classical propositional logic by showing how to encode
a system of normal productions in a propositional calculus with detachment as a
primitive rule. This research was published only as an abstract [Linial and Post,
1949]; an exposition of their results is to be found in [Davis, 1958, pp. 137-142].
6.5
Degrees of unsolvability
The joint paper [Kleene and Post, 1954] is an important landmark in the develop-
ment of recursion theory. It had its origins in an encounter between Kleene and
Post at the meeting of the American Mathematical Society at which Post presented
[Post, 1944] on February 26 1944. In an interview of 1984, Kleene recalled:
I was in the Navy when he presented his paper “Recursively Enumer-

Emil Post
651
able Sets . . . ” at a meeting of the American Mathematical Society. I
was teaching midshipmen in the U.S.S. John Jay. That’s not a ship,
it’s a Columbia dormitory. But when midshipmen entered, they said
“Request your permission to come aboard, sir.” I only had to walk 200
yards to go to the lecture. After the lecture I had Post over to my
apartment. I had an apartment just oﬀthe Columbia campus. There I
presented to him – I think it was already in press, if it wasn’t, it was in
manuscript – my paper, “Recursive Predicates and Quantiﬁers,” which
had a very close relation to what he was doing. That’s the ﬁrst he knew
of that [Aspray, 1984].
This paper [Kleene, 1943] is a fundamental contribution in which the arithmeti-
cal hierarchy is introduced. The bottom level of Kleene’s hierarchy is the family
of recursive sets of natural numbers, denoted by Σ0 = Π0. For n > 0, a set B of
natural numbers is in Σn if there is a recursive relation R(x, y1, . . . , yn) so that for
any natural number x,
x ∈B ⇐⇒∃y1∀y2∃y3 . . . QynR(x, y1, . . . , yn),
where Q is ∃if n is odd, and ∀if n is even. Similarly, a set B of natural numbers
is in Πn if there is a recursive relation R(x, y1, . . . , yn) so that for any natural
number x,
x ∈B ⇐⇒∀y1∃y2∀y3 . . . QynR(x, y1, . . . , yn),
where Q is ∃or ∀according as n is even or odd. This hierarchy of sets generalizes
the classiﬁcation of sets as recursive and recursively enumerable, since the family of
recursively enumerable sets is identical with Σ1, while the complements of such sets
(co-r.e. sets) constitute Π1. By generalizing the diagonal argument that shows the
existence of recursively enumerable but non-recursive sets, Kleene proves that this
hierarchy is proper. That is to say, the obvious inclusions Σn ⊆Σn+1, Πn ⊆Πn+1,
Σn ⊆Πn+1 and Πn ⊆Σn+1 are all proper.
Post was stimulated by Kleene’s work to generalize his work on reducibilities
between recursively enumerable sets to a much broader theory of degrees of un-
solvability in work reported in the abstract [Post, 1948]. Recall from §4.1 Post’s
notion of “ﬁnite-normal-test” – a set M of integers is decidable just in case there
is a ﬁnite-normal-test for it, that is, a normal system that has assertions exactly
representing which integers are and are not elements of M. Post generalizes his
earlier notion of canonical sets to S-canonical sets by adding to his canonical
systems primitive assertions representing membership and non-membership of in-
tegers in S, where S is an arbitrary set of integers. Using this broader concept,
he generalizes his earlier characterization of decidable sets by showing that a set
S1 is Turing-reducible to a set S if and only if both S1 and its complements are
S-canonical sets.
Furthermore, the existence of the complete set K generalizes to the relativized
world of oracle computations. If A is an arbitrary set of integers, then there is a set
A′ = KA that has the property: KA can be enumerated by a machine employing

652
Alasdair Urquhart
an oracle for A, and furthermore, any set of integers that can be enumerated by a
machine employing an oracle for A (an A-canonical set) is reducible to KA. If a is
the Turing degree of the set A, deﬁne a′ (the jump of a) to be the degree of the set
A′ = KA. As a generalization of the theorem proving the existence of recursively
enumerable sets that are not recursive, we can show that a is reducible to a′, but
a′ is not reducible to a.
This deﬁnition results in a hierarchy of degrees of unsolvability, with respect
to Turing reducibility. If 0 is the degree of ∅(the degree of the recursive sets),
then 0′ is the degree of the complete set K, and this is the beginning of a strictly
ascending chain of degrees 0, 0′, 0′′, . . . that can be extended to transﬁnite levels.
The results of Post just quoted imply a relationship between the arithmetical
hierarchy of Kleene and Post’s hierarchy of degrees, a result usually called Post’s
Theorem. Post’s theorem says that Σn+1 ∩Πn+1 is exactly the sets of integers
reducible to 0(n), where 0(0) = 0, and 0(n+1) = (0(n))′. Hence, Post’s degree
hierarchy is interleaved between the levels of Kleene’s hierarchy.
Post’s theorem is the main completed result reported in the abstract [Post,
1948].
However, he hints at further results.
“Work is in progress on further
equivalence proofs, further applications of the Kn-scale, incomparable degrees of
unsolvability related to the Kn-scale, extension of the main theorem to Mostowski,
Fund. Math. vol. 34, and extension of the Kn-scale into the constructive transﬁ-
nite.” These later results, though, did not appear in print, and Kleene had occasion
to remonstrate with Post on this score.
Kleene tells the story in a conversa-
tion (also involving Andrzej Mostowski, Gerald Sacks, Michael Morley and Anil
Nerode) recorded in [Crossley, 1975, pp. 18-20].
Mostowski: I must raise a protest against this habit of not publishing.
That is all right here, because you meet every second month to collab-
orate at a conference here or there, but people like me are completely
cut oﬀ.
Kleene: Yes.
Sacks: I agree completely.
Morley: It should lapse.
Sacks: And anyone who does not publish his work should be penalized.
Kleene: This is just what I wrote to Emil Post, on construction of
incomparable degrees and things like that, and he made some remarks
and hinted at having some results and I said (in substance): “Well,
when you leave it this way, you say you have these results, you don’t
publish them. The fact that you have them prevents anyone else who
has heard of them from doing anything on it.” So he said (in substance):
“You have sort of pricked my conscience and I shall write something
out,” and he wrote some things out, in a very disorganized form, and
he suggested that I give them to a graduate student to turn into a
paper. As I recall, I think I did try them on a graduate student, and

Emil Post
653
the graduate student did not succeed in turning them into a paper,
and then I got interested in them myself, and the result was eventually
the Post-Kleene paper [Kleene and Post, 1954].
Morley: You mean one of your graduate students could have had the
Post-X paper?
Nerode: You mean one that wanted to work hard.
Kleene: I suppose, maybe it was not good for a graduate student,
because a graduate student needs a thesis he can publish under his
own name, and this would have had to be joint, or maybe . . .
Morley: Oh, I don’t know. I think he could have borne having a
Post-X paper.
Kleene: As a matter of fact, it could have – if a graduate student had
picked it up. There were things that Post did not know, like that there
was no least upper bound.
1 You see, Post did not know whether it
was an upper semi-lattice or a lattice. I was the one who settled that
thing.
Sacks: What are you talking about? The degrees of the arithmetic
sets?
Kleene: No. The upper semi-lattice of degrees of unsolvability.
The paper [Kleene and Post, 1954] was written by Kleene, and its precise but
very formal style forms a stark contrast with Post’s own rather discursive math-
ematical prose. In it, the degree hierarchy is deﬁned in terms of Kleene’s own
formalism of general recursive functions [Kleene, 1936], [Kleene, 1952a, Chapter
XI]. The notion of reducibility is that of a function being general recursive in cer-
tain other functions, to which various earlier notions of reducibility were known to
be equivalent. Post had proved in unpublished work [Post, 1948] that his own no-
tion of canonical reducibility was equivalent to Turing reducibility [Turing, 1939],
Martin Davis had proved in his Princeton doctoral thesis [Davis, 1950] that canon-
ical reducibility is equivalent to general recursive reducibility, while Kleene had
given a direct proof of the equivalence of Turing reducibility and general recursive
reducibility [Kleene, 1952a, §68, §69].
The relation “A is recursive in B” is reﬂexive and transitive, so the relation
“A is recursive in B and B is recursive in A” is an equivalence relation. Hence,
this equivalence relation partitions the family of all sets of natural numbers into
equivalence classes, or degrees of unsolvability. There are ℵ0 sets in each equiv-
alence class and hence 2ℵ0 degrees, since there are 2ℵ0 sets of natural numbers.
The family of degrees forms an upper semi-lattice, that is, given degrees a and b,
there is a least upper bound a ∪b in the degree ordering. This is because, given
any two sets A and B of degrees a and b, we can deﬁne a set C (for example,
1There seems to be an error in the transcript here. Presumably “greatest lower bound” is
meant.

654
Alasdair Urquhart
{2a : a ∈A} ∪{2b + 1 : b ∈B}) so that A and B are both recursive in C, while C
is recursive in A, B.
The main result for which [Kleene and Post, 1954] is remembered is the proof
of the existence of incomparable degrees between a degree a and its jump a′. The
technique employed by Kleene and Post involves a countable set of conditions,
or “requirements,” as they are usually called today. Given a set B, there are a
countable number of Turing machines M0, M1, . . . , Mk, . . . that use an oracle for
B. Hence, we can give an eﬀective list of requirements of the form: “The set C
is not identical with the set computed by Turing machine Mk with an oracle for
B,” and a similar list with C and B interchanged. Any such condition can be
fulﬁlled by ensuring the presence or absence of a particular integer in B or C,
so Kleene and Post’s construction consists in constructing B and C step by step,
while ensuring that all such conditions are eventually fulﬁlled. Their construction
of A and B, however, requires an oracle for the set KA (where A has the degree
a) and so it does not provide an answer to Post’s problem.
The paper contains a rich collection of additional results. The construction of
intermediate degrees sketched in the preceding paragraph is generalized to show
that between the degrees a and a′, there is an inﬁnite linearly ordered sequence
of degrees that is dense, that is to say, if c, d are degrees in the sequence, where
c < d, there is a degree e so that c < e < d.
The paper also shows that the
degree ordering is not a lattice, by showing that there are degrees a and b with
no greatest lower bound in the degree ordering (this is the result to which Kleene
alludes in the transcript above). Although the paper made considerable inroads
into determining the ﬁne structure of degrees, it also left many open problems,
and provided a powerful stimulus for further work by later logicians.
It also provided an essential stepping stone in the solution of Post’s problem
by two young mathematicians, the ﬁrst an American [Friedberg, 1957] and the
second a Russian [Muchnik, 1956]. Both Friedberg and Muchnik followed Kleene
and Post in constructing a pair of incomparable degrees by the technique of listing
an inﬁnite set of requirements that are all fulﬁlled at the end of the construction.
To avoid the use of an oracle, however, requires a more subtle technique. In the
original Kleene-Post method, a requirement, once fulﬁlled, remains fulﬁlled per-
manently and requires no further attention. In the constructions of Friedberg and
Muchnik, however, a requirement can be violated, or “injured,” at an intermediate
stage. To ensure that a requirement is eventually fulﬁlled in spite of these injuries,
Friedberg and Muchnik impose a priority ordering on their requirements, ensur-
ing that only ﬁnitely many injuries can happen to a given requirement, so that
it is eventually satisﬁed. Consequently, this new technique, which is one of the
fundamental methods in recursion theory, is now known as the “priority method.”
Since the original solution of Post’s problem, recursion theory has become a
discipline of extraordinary depth and richness, and the priority method has been
used in more and more complex settings. Excellent expositions of the resulting
theory are available in the books [Rogers, 1967], [Shoenﬁeld, 1971], [Soare, 1987],
[Odifreddi, 1989] and [Odifreddi, 1999].

Emil Post
655
7
PROVABILITY AND DEFINABILITY
The last major project of Post’s career grew out of his early interest in the question
of absolutely undecidable propositions. Logical developments in the early twenti-
eth century had apparently shown that notions of provability and deﬁnability are
not absolute. In the case of provability, the incompleteness theorems demonstrate
that any consistent formal axiomatic theory for elementary number theory can be
consistently extended by the addition of an unprovable sentence, so that it seems
that we can not identify any ﬁxed or absolute notion of provability. Similarly, it
would appear that the diagonal method, applied to any constructively deﬁned col-
lection of deﬁnable notions, allows us to ﬁnd a new deﬁnable concept not included
in the original list.
Post was very impressed by the absolute character of the concept of computable
function, since the extent of the computable functions does not depend on the for-
malism chosen, a point that he emphasized repeatedly. This led him to hope that
a similar absolute notion of provability might be attainable, leading to absolutely
undecidable propositions.
Already in the early 1920s, Post was interested in the question of the existence
of propositions that are absolutely undecidable in some sense. He describes “A
Probably Fallacious Suggestion for a Non-Provable Theorem” in the Appendix to
his unpublished manuscript of 1941 [Post, 1965, pp. 421-422] [Post, 1994, p. 432].
He considers the enunciation: “For each deductive system of the normal form
and enunciation in it there exists a ﬁnite method of proving or disproving the
derivability of the enunciation in the system,” and attempts to argue that if it
were provable or disprovable, this would contradict the unsolvability of the decision
problem for normal systems.
The preceding attempt proved abortive; Tarski pointed out to Post that his at-
tempted argument was invalid because the supposed proof might be non-constructive.
However, he continued his attempts along these lines, and in a footnote to the 1941
manuscript [Post, 1965, pp. 341-342][Post, 1994, p. 376] says that “since February
1938 we have given an occasional week to a continuation of this work, and largely
in the spirit of the Appendix. Our goal, however, is now an analysis of proof,
perhaps leading to an absolutely undecidable proposition, rather than an analysis
of ﬁnite process.”
The question of the existence of absolutely undecidable propositions was one
of the topics that he discussed with G¨odel at their meeting in October 1938, as
appears from an entry of 4 November 1940 in one of Post’s notebooks:
In ﬁrst meeting with G¨odel (about a year ago or more [probably spring
1939]) 2 suggested to him abs. undec. prob. He said perhaps Cont.
Hyp.
I said this more like parallel axiom, i.e. would merely mean
diﬀerent theories of classes. Wanted rather abs. undec. arith. prop.
where analyse all possible methods of proof & perhaps ﬁnd a property
2In fact the meeting was on October 29 1938, as described above.

656
Alasdair Urquhart
of all such which would lead to abs. und. arith. prob.
G¨odel poo-
poohed idea. Said (roughly) it was absurd [Grattan-Guinness, 1990,
pp. 82-83].
It appears that Post continued this discussion with G¨odel at a second meeting, for
his diary entry continues:
In second meeting, Oct. 1940, I asked him what he was working on
now . . . Said to prove negative of con. hyp. consistent with rest of set
theory. Said he hadn’t succeeded yet, but if so would be abs. undec.
prob. Raised ∥axiom analogy again. But he said no, that axioms of
set theory categorical for all models [Grattan-Guinness, 1990, p. 83].
G¨odel expressed an opinion in print around this time related to those reported by
Post (though considerably more cautious). In his ﬁrst announcement of his consis-
tency proof [G¨odel, 1938], he wrote about the axiom of constructibility (“proposi-
tion A”), from which the generalized continuum hypothesis can be deduced within
the system T of set theory without the axiom of choice:
The proposition A added as a new axiom seems to give a natural com-
pletion of the axioms of set theory, in so far as it determines the vague
notion of an arbitrary inﬁnite set in a deﬁnite way. In this connection
it is important that the consistency proof for A does not break down if
stronger axioms of inﬁnity (e.g., the existence of inaccessible numbers)
are adjoined to T. Hence the consistency of A seems to be absolute in
some sense, although it is not possible in the present state of aﬀairs to
give a precise meaning to this phrase.
Later, of course, he changed his mind on this point, and in [G¨odel, 1947] espoused
the view that new axioms of set theory would be found that would decide the
continuum hypothesis (most likely in a negative sense).
Post, however, was not looking for absolutely undecidable propositions in the
realm of set theory, where he appears to have thought that alternative set theories
were possible, in analogy with alternative theories of geometry. His own goal was
to ﬁnd such problems in the realm of arithmetic. In his paper of 1943, he refers
again to the problem in a footnote to a passage in which he states that the decision
problem for normal systems is unsolvable:
Absolutely unsolvable, that is, to use a phrase due to Church.
By
contrast, the undecidable propositions of G¨odel’s epoch making paper
of 1931 . . . are but relatively undecidable, the very proof of their un-
decidability in the given logic leading to an extension of that logic in
which they are, indeed, proved to be true. A fundamental problem is
the question of the existence of absolutely undecidable propositions,
that is, propositions which in some a priori fashion can be said to have
a determined truth-value, and yet cannot be proved or disproved by
any valid logic [Post, 1943, p. 200], [Post, 1994, p. 445].

Emil Post
657
Even though Post reported that G¨odel had “poo-poohed” his idea of absolutely
undecidable propositions in 1938, it is signiﬁcant that in his Gibbs lecture of 1951,
G¨odel asserted the possibility of absolutely undecidable arithmetical propositions,
though only as one half of a disjunction. The lecture is devoted to the philosophical
consequences of the incompleteness theorems. G¨odel considers arguments some-
what resembling those given in [Lucas, 1961] and [Penrose, 1989], but (unlike these
later writers) drawing not an absolute but a disjunctive conclusion:
Either mathematics is incompletable in this sense, that its evident
axioms can never be comprised in a ﬁnite rule, that is to say, the
human mind (even within the realm of pure mathematics) inﬁnitely
surpasses the powers of any ﬁnite machine, or else there exist absolutely
unsolvable diophantine problems of the type speciﬁed [G¨odel, 1995,
p. 310].
Post continued to work along the lines suggested by the footnote to his 1943
paper, searching for a concept of provability in arithmetic that could play a similar
role in the theory of numbers as recursivity in the theory of algorithms. The only
remaining published record of his thought on this subject in the late 1940s is in
the brief abstract [Post, 1953b], in which he says:
In 1947, in a lost letter to Tarski via Church, the author proposed
a formulation of “Primitive Inductive-Reﬂective Proof” involving, be-
sides the elementary, only mathematical induction and “G¨odelization.”
But representation theory for G¨odel’s system P (1931) failed to ma-
terialize due to P’s Axiom of Reducibility. Indeed, Kleene’s Example
(Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, 1950,
vol. II, p. 683) oﬀers hope of an impossibility proof.
In his Princeton doctoral thesis [Turing, 1939] [Feferman, 1995] Turing studied the
possibility of overcoming arithmetical incompleteness by the successive adjunction
of unprovable sentences, given by G¨odel’s construction – this is presumably the
process that Post describes as “G¨odelization.” Post seems to have hoped to show
that the adjunction of axioms involving higher types was in some sense conserva-
tive with respect to ﬁrst-order arithmetical sentences, but encountered insuperable
diﬃculties in connection with the type-theoretical comprehension axiom, or “Ax-
iom of Reducibility,” as he calls it. The result of Kleene to which Post alludes is
a theorem in [Kleene, 1952b] showing that Brouwer’s fan theorem [Brouwer, 1924]
fails if “choice sequence” is interpreted to mean “recursive function.” In classical
terms, he shows that there is an inﬁnite recursive binary tree with no inﬁnite
recursive branch [Odifreddi, 1989, p. 506].
The conclusion that Post drew from his abortive attempts towards constructing
an absolute notion of provability is that he was attacking the problem in the wrong
order. The right order, he now thought, was: solvability, deﬁnability, provability.
The immediately succeeding abstract [Post, 1953a] reports his success in ﬁnding
a candidate for the role of an absolute notion of deﬁnability.

658
Alasdair Urquhart
An obvious diﬃculty that arises in attempting to give an absolute notion of
deﬁnability is this: if not all ordinals are deﬁnable, then there must be a least
indeﬁnable ordinal (this will certainly be true if we have only countably many
deﬁnitions). But if our notion of deﬁnability is itself deﬁnable, then a contradiction
(Richard’s paradox) results immediately, since the least indeﬁnable ordinal would
then be deﬁnable.
A possible way out of this impasse is to take the notion of deﬁnability to be
highly non-constructive, so that the deﬁnable sets form a proper class, and all
ordinal numbers are deﬁnable. Post carries out this idea by extending the simple
theory of types of order ω, as formulated in [G¨odel, 1931], to transﬁnite levels, with
a type level for all ordinals α. Thus G¨odel’s system P is extended to a system P (α),
with variables x(α)
0 , x(α)
1 , . . . ranging over sets of type α in the type hierarchy, and
the usual apparatus of connectives and quantiﬁers. Post remarks: “The present
thesis is that every deﬁnable set is given by some α-formula” (his intention was to
give a necessary condition for deﬁnability, rather than a full-ﬂedged explication,
as in the case of computability).
Post was unaware that a closely related absolute concept of deﬁnability had been
proposed earlier by G¨odel, in his remarks at the Princeton Bicentennial Conference
on Problems in Mathematics held in 1946. G¨odel’s paper was not published at
the time, and the full text of his address ﬁrst appeared in print in the collection
edited by Martin Davis [G¨odel, 1965, pp. 84-88].
G¨odel’s remarks strikingly parallel Post’s own thinking on these topics. Com-
menting on an earlier lecture by Tarski, he remarks that the great importance
of the concept of general recursiveness is largely due to the fact that “with this
concept one has for the ﬁrst time succeeded in giving an absolute deﬁnition of
an interesting epistemological notion, i.e., one not depending on the formalism
chosen.” Contrasting the situation with that for provability and deﬁnability, he
says:
By a kind of miracle it is not necessary to distinguish orders, and the
diagonal procedure does not lead outside the deﬁned notion. This, I
think, should encourage one to expect the same thing to be possible
also in other cases (such as demonstrability or deﬁnability) [G¨odel,
1965, p. 84].
G¨odel goes on to make a very tentative suggestion about an absolute concept
of provability, conjecturing that any set-theoretical assertion can be decided by a
suﬃciently powerful axiom of inﬁnity, so that “every proposition expressible in set
theory is decidable from the present axioms plus some true assertion about the
largeness of the universe of all sets.”
He continues with “somewhat more deﬁnite suggestions,” proposing deﬁnability
in terms of ordinals as an absolute notion of deﬁnability in set theory. His pro-
posal is to extend the usual language of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory by including
primitive names for all ordinal numbers (so that the formulas of the extended lan-
guage form a proper class); ordinal deﬁnable sets are those speciﬁed by a formula

Emil Post
659
from this extended language. This concept of deﬁnable set is broader than his ear-
lier notion of constructible set, used in proving the consistency of the generalized
continuum hypothesis with the axioms of set theory, since the quantiﬁers in the
extended language range over all sets, whereas constructible sets are deﬁned by
quantiﬁers restricted to the constructible universe.
Post’s own notion is slightly more restrictive than that of G¨odel, and is now
known as that of “hereditary ordinal deﬁnability”; a set is hereditarily ordinal
deﬁnable if it is not only ordinal deﬁnable, but its members, members of members
. . . etc. are also ordinal deﬁnable. The notion of ordinal deﬁnability was redis-
covered again independently during the 1960s [Takeuti, 1961], [Myhill and Scott,
1971].
Because of Post’s untimely death, there is no other published record of his last
logical project. However, two notebooks on “Deﬁnability” written in 1952-1954
remain in the archives of the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia, and
may still repay investigation.
8
POST’S LEGACY
The remarkable fertility of Post’s ideas, particularly in the areas of recursion the-
ory and computer science, is attested by the number of concepts and results named
after him: “Post-completeness,” “Post’s problem,” “Post productions,” “Post cor-
respondence problem,” “Post’s classiﬁcation theorem” are some of the more promi-
nent examples. His inﬂuence on computer science is most remarkable, considering
that he seemingly never had any contact with computing machinery or computer
programming.
Post’s ideas also bore fruit in the area of formal linguistics. The early work
of Noam Chomsky on phrase structure grammars was inﬂuenced by the ideas of
Post; Chomsky formulates basic notions such as that of a context-free language
in terms of rules closely akin to Post productions [Chomsky, 1956].
He seems
to have known of these ideas indirectly through the unusual textbook of Paul
Rosenbloom [Rosenbloom, 1950], in which Post’s production systems are given a
starring role, particularly in the last chapter. Seymour Ginsburg, an important
early contributor to formal language theory, and author of a well known monograph
giving a comprehensive overview of early work on context-free languages [Ginsburg,
1966], was a student with Martin Davis in an honors mathematics class taught by
Post [Gleiser, 1980]. All ﬁve of the students in this course, described by Davis as
a “pressure cooker experience,” became mathematicians.
Post also exerted inﬂuence through the students who were inspired by him and
his remarkable classes. Martin Davis has described Post’s teaching methods:
Post’s classes were tautly organized tense aﬀairs. Each period would
begin with student recitations covering problems and proofs of theo-
rems from the day’s assignment. These were handed out apparently
at random and had to be put on the blackboard without the aid of

660
Alasdair Urquhart
textbook or notes. Woe betide the hapless student who was unpre-
pared. He (or rarely she) would have to face Post’s “more in sorrow
than anger” look. In turn, the students would recite on their work.
Afterwards, Post would get out his 3 by 5 cards and explain various
ﬁne points. The class would be a success if he completed his last card
just as the bell rang. Questions from the class were discouraged: there
was no time. Surprisingly, these inelastic pedagogic methods were ex-
tremely successful, and Post was a very popular teacher [Davis, 1994,
p. xxv].
David Hilbert, in his address before the International Congress of Mathemati-
cians in Paris in 1900, had posed a series of problems to challenge mathematicians
in the new century. Hilbert’s tenth problem reads as follows:
Given a diophantine equation with any number of unknown quantities
and with rational integral numerical coeﬃcients: To devise a process
according to which it can be determined by a ﬁnite number of operations
whether the equation is solvable in rational integers [Hilbert, 1902].
A diophantine equation is any algebraic polynomial equation with whole number
coeﬃcients, for example: 31x2 + 41y3 −17x = 0.
Hilbert’s problem asks for
an algorithm to determine whether or not an arbitrary diophantine equation is
solvable (in line with his rationalistic and optimistic outlook, he seems to have
expected a positive solution). In his address of 1944, Post remarked that Hilbert’s
problem “begs for an unsolvability proof” [Post, 1944, p. 289]. The challenge was
taken up by Post’s student Martin Davis, who was one of the key contributors to
the proof of unsolvability, together with Hilary Putnam and Julia Robinson. The
ﬁnal step completing the proof was provided by the young Russian mathematician
Yuri Matiyasevich [Matiyasevich, 1970]. The reader will ﬁnd excellent and very
readable accounts of the history of this problem in [Reid, 1996] and [Yandell, 2002].
A fully detailed account of the proof, together with much else, is in the beautifully
written book [Matiyasevich, 1993].
8.1
Post’s Papers
Post’s papers are housed at the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia.
They include correspondence, unpublished manuscripts, research notes, and pho-
tographs documenting Post’s career. The notebooks were donated by Martin Davis
in 1986; the remaining papers were donated by Phyllis Post Goodman in 1992. The
correspondence includes letters from Paul Bernays, Alonzo Church, Martin Davis,
Frederic Fitch, Abraham Fraenkel, Kurt G¨odel, Stephen Kleene, W.V. Quine
and Alfred Tarski. Ivor Grattan-Guinness has given a description of the papers
[Grattan-Guinness, 1990], and has transcribed an unpublished manuscript from
1935 [Post, 1990]. This manuscript is a somewhat sketchy essay on Russell’s para-
dox, in which Post works out the idea that the class of existing classes may not be

Emil Post
661
ﬁxed, but rather can expand through the process of thinking about existing ob-
jects. This vision of mathematical objects as processes that evolve through time is
of course one of the fundamental ideas that runs through all of Post’s work, start-
ing from his dissertation, where he introduces the class of elementary propositions
by describing “the vision of the totality of these functions streaming out from the
unmodiﬁed variable p through forms of ever growing complexity . . . ” [Post, 1921a,
p. 165].
This obsession with time also manifests itself throughout the surviving note-
books. There are four major numbered series, ﬁve volumes on “Closed Truth Sys-
tems: Towards a new presentation,” written in 1929-1931 when Post was working
out the new version of his results on closed system of truth functions published as
[Post, 1941], a series of eighteen volumes on “Creative Logic” written 1938-1952,
a series of seventeen volumes on “Theory of Finite Processes” (Volume IV is miss-
ing), written 1944-1951, and two volumes on “Deﬁnability,” written 1952-1954. In
addition, there are notebooks on “Calculus of Finite Processes” 1944, “Complete
Equivalence of Normal Set and Recursive Function Development” 1942-1945 and
“The Logic of Mathematics.”
In his notebooks, Post frequently makes a meticulous record of clock times and of
time spent working. An example quoted by Grattan-Guinness is of a manuscript on
the Laplace transform. Post noted that he was writing the paper on 19 September
1923, starting at 10:08 AM, and ending at 12:28 PM, with three running times
noted within the text [Grattan-Guinness, 1990, p. 79]. Post’s original attack of
mania occurred when he was enormously excited about his new ideas in logic in
1921, and subsequently he attempted to avoid periods of great mental excitement
both by severely restricting the time he spent on research, and by alternating
between one research project and another. Martin Davis has described the onset
of one of his manic episodes in 1947:
With another student, I had begun an “honors” reading course on
mathematical logic under Post’s tutelage. We had just reached the
“deduction theorem” in propositional calculus, when Post met us full of
excitement about his new work. We did not meet again with Post that
semester; we had witnessed the beginning of one of his manic episodes.
Apparently it was precisely excitement that had the potential to push
him over the edge [Davis, 1994, p. xxiv].
It is impossible not to feel deep admiration for Post’s remarkable achievements in
mathematical logic, accomplished while labouring under such a severe handicap.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
My greatest debt is to Martin Davis, whose editorial work and writings on Post
were indispensable in preparing this chapter.
The biographical essay [Gleiser,
1980] is a very informative source on Post’s life. The description of Post’s papers
was obtained from the web site of the American Philosophical Society, which is

662
Alasdair Urquhart
also a reliable source of biographical information. The online MacTutor History of
Mathematics archive at the University of St Andrews, Scotland was also helpful.
The Aspray interview with Kleene was obtained through the online version of the
transcripts of the Princeton mathematical oral history project, obtainable at the
web site of the Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library.
I thank Martin Davis and Solomon Feferman for helpful comments on a draft
of this article, and would also like to thank Earle Spamer of the American Philo-
sophical Society for informative correspondence.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Aspray, 1984] William Aspray. Interview with Stephen C. Kleene and J. Barkley Rosser. Tran-
script of recorded interview 26 April 1984 included in the oral history project The Princeton
Mathematics Community in the 1930s, Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton Uni-
versity (available online at the URL http://www.princeton.edu/mudd/math), 1984.
[Bar-Hillel et al., 1961] Y. Bar-Hillel, M. Perles, and E. Shamir. On formal properties of simple
phrase structure grammars. Zeitschrift f¨ur Phonetik, Sprachwissenschaft, und Kommunika-
tionsforschung, 14:143–172, 1961. Reprinted in [Luce et al., 1965, pp. 75–104].
[Berlekamp et al., 1982] Elwyn R. Berlekamp, John H. Conway, and Richard K. Guy. Winning
Ways for your mathematical plays. Volume 2: Games in Particular. Academic Press, London,
New York, Paris, San Diego, San Francisco, S˜ao Paulo, Sydney, Tokyo, Toronto, 1982.
[Bernays, 1926] Paul Bernays. Axiomatische Untersuchung des Aussagen-Kalkuls der “Principia
Mathematica”. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 25:305–320, 1926.
[B¨ohler et al., 2003] Elmar B¨ohler, Nadia Creignou, Steﬀen Reith, and Heribert Vollmer. Play-
ing with Boolean Blocks, Part I: Post’s lattice with applications to complexity theory. ACM
SIGACT News, 34:38–52, 2003.
[Boone, 1957a] William Boone. Certain simple unsolvable problems of group theory V. Inda-
gationes Mathematicae, 19:22–27, 1957.
[Boone, 1957b] William Boone. Certain simple unsolvable problems of group theory VI. Inda-
gationes Mathematicae, 19:227–232, 1957.
[Brouwer, 1924] L.E.J. Brouwer. Beweis, dass jede volle Funktion gleichm¨assig stetig ist. Konin-
klijke Akademie van wetenschappen te Amsterdam, Proceedings of the section of sciences,
27:189–193, 1924.
[Chomsky, 1956] Noam Chomsky. Three models for the description of language. IRE Transac-
tions on Information Theory, IT-2:113–124, 1956. Reprinted in [Luce et al., 1965, pp. 105–
124].
[Church, 1936] Alonzo Church.
An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory.
The
American Journal of Mathematics, 58:345–363, 1936.
[Crossley, 1975] J.N. Crossley.
Reminiscences of logicians.
In J.N. Crossley, editor, Algebra
and Logic: Papers from the 1974 Summer Research Institute of the Australian Mathemati-
cal Society, Monash University, Australia, pages 1–62, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1975.
Springer-Verlag. Lecture Notes in Mathematics 450.
[Davis, 1950] Martin Davis. On the theory of recursive unsolvability. PhD thesis, Princeton
University, 1950.
[Davis, 1958] Martin Davis.
Computability and Unsolvability.
McGraw-Hill Book Company,
New York, Toronto, London, 1958.
[Davis, 1965] Martin Davis, editor. The Undecidable: Basic Papers on Undecidable Proposi-
tions, Unsolvable Problems and Computable Functions. Raven Press, Hewlett, New York,
1965.
[Davis, 1982] Martin Davis. Why G¨odel didn’t have Church’s thesis. Information and Control,
54:3–24, 1982.
[Davis, 1994] Martin Davis. Emil L. Post: His life and work. In Solvability, Provability, De-
ﬁnability: The Collected Works of Emil L. Post, pages xi–xxviii. Birkh¨auser, Boston, Basel,
Berlin, 1994.

Emil Post
663
[Epstein, 1960] George Epstein. The lattice theory of Post algebras. Transactions of the Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, 95:300–317, 1960.
[Feferman, 1995] Solomon Feferman. Turing in the land of O(z). In Rolf Herken, editor, The
Universal Turing Machine: A Half-Century Survey, pages 103–134. Springer-Verlag, Wien,
New York, 1995. Second edition.
[Friedberg, 1957] R.M. Friedberg. Two recursively enumerable sets of incomparable degrees of
unsolvability. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 43:236–238,
1957.
[Ginsburg, 1966] Seymour Ginsburg.
The Mathematical Theory of Context-free Languages.
McGraw-Hill, New York, San Francisco, St. Louis, Toronto, London, Sydney, 1966.
[Gleiser, 1980] Molly Gleiser. The emotional logician. Datamation, 26, Number 3:221–223, 1980.
[G¨odel, 1931] Kurt G¨odel. ¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I. Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 38:173–198, 1931.
[G¨odel, 1938] Kurt G¨odel. The consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized con-
tinuum hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 24:556–557,
1938. In [G¨odel, 1990, pp. 26–27].
[G¨odel, 1947] Kurt G¨odel.
What is Cantor’s continuum problem?
American Mathematical
Monthly, 54:515–525, 1947. In [G¨odel, 1990, pp. 176–18727].
[G¨odel, 1965] Kurt G¨odel. Remarks before the Princeton bicentennial conference on problems
in mathematics. In Martin Davis, editor, The Undecidable: Basic Papers on Undecidable
Propositions, Unsolvable Problems and Computable Functions, pages 84–88. Raven Press,
Hewlett, New York, 1965. In [G¨odel, 1990, pp. 150–153].
[G¨odel, 1990] Kurt G¨odel. Collected Works, Volume II: Publications 1938-1974. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, New York, Oxford, 1990. Edited by Solomon Feferman, John W. Dawson Jr.,
Stephen C. Kleene, Gregory H. Moore, Robert M. Solovay and Jean van Heijenoort.
[G¨odel, 1995] Kurt G¨odel. Collected Works, Volume III: Unpublished Essays and Lectures. Ox-
ford University Press, New York, Oxford, 1995. Edited by Solomon Feferman, John W. Daw-
son Jr., Warren Goldfarb, Charles Parsons and Robert M. Solovay.
[G¨odel, 2003] Kurt G¨odel. Collected Works, Volume V: Correspondence H-Z. Oxford University
Press, New York, Oxford, 2003. Edited by Solomon Feferman, John W. Dawson Jr., Warren
Goldfarb, Charles Parsons and Wilfried Sieg.
[Goldfarb, 1981] Warren D. Goldfarb. The undecidability of the second-order uniﬁcation prob-
lem. Theoretical Computer Science, 13:225–230, 1981.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1990] Ivor Grattan-Guinness. The manuscripts of Emil L. Post. History
and Philosophy of Logic, 11:77–83, 1990.
[Herbrand, 1930] Jacques Herbrand.
Les bases de la logique Hilbertienne.
Revue de
M´etaphysique et de Morale, 37:243–255, 1930. Reprinted in [Herbrand, 1968, pp. 155–166].
[Herbrand, 1968] Jacques Herbrand. ´Ecrits Logiques. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris,
1968. Biblioth`eque de Philosophie Contemporaine.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] David Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der theo-
retischen Logik. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1928.
[Hilbert, 1902] David Hilbert. Mathematical problems. Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society, 8:437–479, 1902. Reprinted [Yandell, 2002, pp. 389-424].
[Hopcroft and Ullman, 1979] John. E. Hopcroft and Jeﬀrey D. Ullman.
Introduction to Au-
tomata Theory, Languages, and Computation.
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachussetts,
1979.
[Jevons, 1864] W. Stanley Jevons. Pure Logic, or the logic of quality apart from quantity: with
remarks on Boole’s system and on the relation of logic and mathematics. E. Stanford, London,
1864. Reprinted in [Jevons, 1890, pp. 3–77].
[Jevons, 1890] W. Stanley Jevons.
Pure Logic and other minor works.
MacMillan and Co.,
London and New York, 1890. Edited by Robert Adamson and Harriet A. Jevons. Reprinted
by Thoemmes Press, Bristol 1991.
[Jockusch and Soare, 1973] Carl Jockusch and Robert Soare. Post’s problem and his hypersim-
ple set. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 38:446–452, 1973.
[Keyser, 1904] Cassius J. Keyser.
The axiom of inﬁnity: A new presupposition of thought.
Hibbert Journal, 2:532–552, 1904.
[Kleene and Post, 1954] S.C. Kleene and Emil L. Post. The upper semi-lattice of degrees of
unsolvability. Annals of Mathematics, 59:379–407, 1954.

664
Alasdair Urquhart
[Kleene, 1936] S.C. Kleene.
General recursive functions of natural numbers.
Mathematische
Annalen, 112:727–742, 1936.
[Kleene, 1943] S.C. Kleene. Recursive predicates and quantiﬁers. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 53:41–73, 1943.
[Kleene, 1952a] S.C. Kleene.
Introduction to Metamathematics.
Van Nostrand, Princeton,
Toronto, London, 1952.
[Kleene, 1952b] S.C. Kleene. Recursive functions and intuitionistic mathematics. In Proceedings
of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 1950,
volume 2, pages 679–685, 1952.
[Lewis, 1918] C.I. Lewis. A survey of symbolic logic. University of California Press, Berkeley,
1918. Semicentennial Publications of the University of California.
[Linial and Post, 1949] Samuel Linial and Emil L. Post. Recursive unsolvability of the deducibil-
ity, Tarski’s completeness, and independence of axioms problems of propositional calculus.
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 55:50, 1949. (Abstract), [Post, 1994, p. 550].
[Lorentz, 2001] R.J. Lorentz. Creating diﬃcult instances of the Post correspondence problem.
In Tony Marsland and Ian Frank, editors, Second International Conference on Computers
and Games (CG 2001), Hamamatsu, Japan, pages 214–228. Springer Verlag, 2001. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 2063.
[Lucas, 1961] J.R. Lucas. Minds, machines and G¨odel. Philosophy, 36:112–127, 1961.
[Luce et al., 1965] R. Duncan Luce, Robert R. Bush, and Eugene Galanter, editors. Readings
in Mathematical Psychology Volume II. John Wiley and Sons, New York, London, Sydney,
1965.
[Lukasiewicz, 1920] J. Lukasiewicz.
O logice tr´ojwarto´sciowej (on three-valued logic).
Ruch
ﬁlozoﬁczny, 5:169–171, 1920. English translation in [Lukasiewicz, 1970].
[Lukasiewicz, 1970] J. Lukasiewicz. Selected Works. North-Holland, Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
London, 1970. Edited by L. Borkowski; translated from the Polish by O. Wojtasiewicz.
[Lyndon, 1951] R.C. Lyndon. Identities in two-valued calculi. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 71:457–465, 1951.
[Markov, 1947] A.A. Markov. Impossibility of certain algorithms in the theory of associative
systems (Russian). Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR (Reports of the Academy of Sciences of
the USSR), 55:587–590, 1947.
[Matiyasevich, 1970] Yuri Matiyasevich. Enumerable sets are diophantine. Soviet Mathematics
Doklady, 11:354–358, 1970.
[Matiyasevich, 1993] Yuri Matiyasevich. Hilbert’s Tenth Problem. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts and London, 1993.
[Minsky, 1961] Marvin Minsky. Recursive unsolvability of Post’s problem of “tag” and other
topics in theory of Turing machines. Annals of Mathematics, 74:437–455, 1961.
[Minsky, 1967] Marvin L. Minsky. Computation, ﬁnite and inﬁnite machines. Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J., 1967.
[Muchnik, 1956] A.A. Muchnik. On the unsolvability of the problem of reducibility in the theory
of algorithms (Russian). Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR (Reports of the Academy of Sciences
of the USSR), 108:194–197, 1956.
[Murawski, 1998] Roman Murawski. E.L. Post and the development of mathematical logic and
recursion theory. Studies in Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric, 2:17–30, 1998.
[Myhill and Scott, 1971] John Myhill and Dana Scott.
Ordinal deﬁnability.
Proceedings of
Symposia in Pure Mathematics, 13, Part 1:271–278, 1971.
[Novikov, 1955] P.S. Novikov. On the algorithmic unsolvability of the word problem in group
theory (Russian). Trudy Ordena Lenina Matematicheskogo Instituta imeni V.A. Steklova.
Akademiya Nauk SSSR (Proceedings of the Mathematical Steklov Institute of the Academy
of Sciences SSSR), 44:1–143, 1955.
[Odifreddi, 1989] Piergiorgio Odifreddi. Classical Recursion Theory: The Theory of Functions
and Sets of Natural Numbers. North-Holland, Amsterdam, New York, Oxford, Tokyo, 1989.
Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Volume 125.
[Odifreddi, 1999] Piergiorgio Odifreddi. Classical Recursion Theory Volume II. Elsevier North
Holland, Amsterdam, Lausanne, New York, Oxford, Shannon, Singapore, Tokyo, 1999. Stud-
ies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Volume 143.
[Pelletier and Martin, 1990] Francis Jeﬀry Pelletier and Norman M. Martin. Post’s functional
completeness theorem. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 31:462–475, 1990.

Emil Post
665
[Penrose, 1989] Roger Penrose. The Emperor’s New Mind. Oxford University Press, New York,
Oxford, 1989.
[Pippenger, 1997] Nicholas Pippenger. Theories of Computability. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, New York, 1997.
[Post, 1921a] Emil L. Post. Introduction to a general theory of elementary propositions. Amer-
ican Journal of Mathematics, 43:163–185, 1921. [Post, 1994, pp. 21-43].
[Post, 1921b] Emil L. Post. On a simple class of deductive systems. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 27:396–397, 1921. (Abstract), [Post, 1994, p. 545].
[Post, 1930] Emil L. Post. Generalized diﬀerentiation. Transactions of the American Mathe-
matical Society, 32:723–781, 1930. [Post, 1994, pp. 44-102].
[Post, 1936] Emil L. Post. Finite combinatory processes – Formulation I. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 1:103–105, 1936. [Davis, 1965, pp. 289-291] [Post, 1994, pp. 103-105].
[Post, 1941] Emil L. Post. The Two-Valued Iterative Systems of Mathematical Logic. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1941. Annals of Mathematics Studies, No. 5 [Post,
1994, pp. 249-374].
[Post, 1943] Emil L. Post. Formal reductions of the general combinatorial decision problem.
American Journal of Mathematics, 65:197–215, 1943. [Post, 1994, pp. 442-460].
[Post, 1944] Emil L. Post. Recursively enumerable sets of positive integers and their decision
problems. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 50:284–316, 1944. [Davis, 1965,
pp. 305-337] [Post, 1994, pp. 461-494].
[Post, 1946] Emil L. Post. A variant of a recursively unsolvable problem. Bulletin of the Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, 52:264–268, 1946. [Post, 1994, pp. 495-500].
[Post, 1948] Emil L. Post. Degrees of recursive unsolvability. Preliminary report. Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society, 54:641–642, 1948. (Abstract), [Post, 1994, pp. 549-550].
[Post, 1953a] Emil L. Post. A necessary condition for deﬁnability for transﬁnite von Neumann-
G¨odel set theory sets, with an application to the problem of the existence of a deﬁnable
well-ordering of the continuum. Preliminary report. Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society, 59:246, 1953. (Abstract), [Post, 1994, pp. 551-552].
[Post, 1953b] Emil L. Post. Solvability, deﬁnability, provability: history of an error. Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society, 59:245–246, 1953. (Abstract), [Post, 1994, p. 551].
[Post, 1965] Emil L. Post. Absolutely unsolvable problems and relatively undecidable proposi-
tions – account of an anticipation. In Martin Davis, editor, The Undecidable: Basic Papers on
Undecidable Propositions, Unsolvable Problems and Computable Functions, pages 340–433.
Raven Press, Hewlett, New York, 1965. [Post, 1994, pp. 375-441].
[Post, 1990] Emil L. Post. The modern paradoxes. History and Philosophy of Logic, 11:85–91,
1990. Edited by I. Grattan-Guinness.
[Post, 1994] Emil L. Post. Solvability, Provability, Deﬁnability: The Collected Works of Emil
L. Post. Birkh¨auser, Boston, Basel, Berlin, 1994. Edited by Martin Davis.
[Reid, 1996] Constance Reid. Julia, a Life in Mathematics. Mathematical Association of Amer-
ica, Washington, DC, 1996. MAA Spectrum Series.
[Robinson, 1965] J.A. Robinson. A machine-oriented logic based on the resolution principle.
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, 12:23–41, 1965.
[Rogers, 1967] Hartley Rogers.
Theory of Recursive Functions and Eﬀective Computability.
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, St. Louis, San Francisco, Toronto, London, Sydney,
1967. MIT Press Paperback Edition, 1987.
[Rosenbloom, 1942] Paul C. Rosenbloom. Post algebras. I. Postulates and general theory. Amer-
ican Journal of Mathematics, 64:167–188, 1942.
[Rosenbloom, 1950] Paul C. Rosenbloom. The Elements of Mathematical Logic. Dover Publi-
cations, Inc., New York, 1950.
[Rosser, 1936] J.B. Rosser.
Extensions of some theorems of G¨odel and Church.
Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 1:87–91, 1936.
[Russell, 1904] Bertrand Russell. The axiom of inﬁnity. The Hibbert Journal, 2:809–812, 1904.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1971] Joseph R. Shoenﬁeld. Degrees of Unsolvability. North-Holland Publishing
Company: American Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, London, New York, 1971.
[Sieg, 1997] Wilfried Sieg. Step by recursive step: Church’s analysis of eﬀective calculability.
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 3:154–180, 1997.
[Soare, 1987] Robert I. Soare.
Recursively Enumerable Sets and Degrees: A Study of Com-
putable Functions and Computably Generated Sets. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New
York, 1987.

666
Alasdair Urquhart
[Takeuti, 1961] Gaisi Takeuti.
Remarks on Cantor’s absolute.
Journal of the Mathematical
Society of Japan, 13:197–206, 1961.
[Thue, 1914] Axel Thue.
Problem ¨uber Ver¨anderungen von Zeichenreihen nach gegebenen
Regeln. Skrifter utgit av Videnskapsselskapet i Kristiania, I. Matematisk-naturvidenskabelig
klasse, No. 10, 1914.
[Traczyk, 1963] T. Traczyk. Axioms and some properties of Post algebras. Colloquium Mathe-
maticae, 10:193–209, 1963.
[Traczyk, 1964] T. Traczyk. An equational deﬁnition of a class of Post algebras. Bulletin de
l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences. S´eries des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et
Physiques, 12:147–150, 1964.
[Tseitin, 1958] G.S. Tseitin.
An associative calculus with an unsolvable problem of equiva-
lence (Russian).
Trudy Ordena Lenina Matematicheskogo Instituta imeni V.A. Steklova.
Akademiya Nauk SSSR (Proceedings of the Mathematical Steklov Institute of the Academy
of Sciences SSSR), 52:173–189, 1958. English translation American Mathematical Society
Translation Series 2, Volume 94 (1970), pp. 73-92.
[Turing, 1936] Alan Turing.
On computable numbers, with an application to the Entschei-
dungsproblem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Series 2, 42:230–265, 1936.
[Turing, 1939] Alan Turing.
Systems of logic based on ordinals.
Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society, Series 2, 45:161–228, 1939. [Davis, 1965, pp. 155-222].
[Uspensky, 1983] V.A. Uspensky. Post’s Machine. MIR Publishers, Moscow, 1983. Translated
from the 1979 Russian edition by R. Alavina.
[Vaughan, 1941] H.E. Vaughan. Review of [Post, 1941]. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 6:114–115,
1941.
[Vollmer, 1999] Heribert Vollmer. Introduction to Circuit Complexity: A Uniform Approach.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1999. Texts in Theoretical Computer Science:
An EATCS Series.
[von Neumann, 1927] John von Neumann.
Zur Hilbertschen Beweistheorie.
Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 26:1–46, 1927.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910-13] Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell.
Principia
Mathematica. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1910-13. Volume 1 1910, Volume 2
1913, Volume 3 1913.
[Wittgenstein, 1921] Ludwig Wittgenstein. Logisch-philosophische Abhandlung. Annalen der
Naturphilosophie, 14:185–262, 1921. With an introduction (in German) by Bertrand Russell.
[Wittgenstein, 1922] Ludwig Wittgenstein.
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.
Routledge and
Kegan Paul, London and New York, 1922. English translation of [Wittgenstein, 1921], with
an introduction by Bertrand Russell.
[Wolfram, 2002] Stephen Wolfram. A New Kind of Science. Wolfram Media Inc., Champaign,
IL, 2002.
[Yandell, 2002] Benjamin H. Yandell. The Honors Class: Hilbert’s Problems and Their Solvers.
A K Peters, Natick, Massachusetts, 2002.
[Zhao, 2002] Ling Zhao. Solving and creating diﬃcult instances of Post’s correspondence prob-
lem. Master’s thesis, University of Alberta, 2002.

GENTZEN’S LOGIC
Jan von Plato
1
GENTZEN’S LIFE AND WORK IN BRIEF
Gerhard Gentzen was born on 24 November 1909 in Greifswald, a northern Ger-
man city by the Baltic Sea. He began his studies in mathematics and physics there
in 1928, then moved to G¨ottingen in 1929. His doctoral thesis Untersuchungen
¨uber das logische Schliessen (Investigations into logical deduction), under the su-
pervision of Paul Bernays, was accepted in June 1933 and published in two parts
in 1934–35. It contained Gentzen’s main contribution to the study of pure logic,
the systems of intuitionistic natural deduction and classical sequent calculus, and
marked the birth of structural proof theory. National socialist racial laws forced
Bernays to leave his professorship at G¨ottingen in the spring of 1933, even before
the examination of the doctoral thesis, but the two were able to keep up correspon-
dence until the beginning of the Second World War. During this period, Gentzen
worked in G¨ottingen and behaved overtly like any person in accord with the Nazi
regime – not that he would have convinced anyone involved with the latter. The
continued private correspondence with an expelled Jewish professor was certainly
enough to reveal the nature of his attitude.
The proof-theoretical study of pure logic was a preliminary to Gentzen’s greater
aims, namely consistency proofs for arithmetic and analysis. The G¨odel-Gentzen
translations of classical Peano arithmetic into intuitionistic Heyting arithmetic had
shown that, G¨odel’s second incompleteness theorem notwithstanding, the consis-
tency of arithmetic is within the reach of constructive reasoning. Following this
conviction, Gentzen found a proof of consistency late in 1934, for a system that
used natural deduction. The published version of 1936 had a diﬀerent proof based
on the famous principle of transﬁnite induction up to the ordinal ϵ0 by which con-
sistency followed. A third proof of 1938 used transﬁnite induction but the logical
system was a sequent calculus.
Gentzen’s last work, about the “provable initial segments of transﬁnite in-
duction,” was ﬁnished in 1939.
It gave a direct proof of the unprovability of
ϵ0-induction in an extension of Peano arithmetic with transﬁnite ordinals. The
induction principle is expressible in arithmetic, and therefore G¨odel’s ﬁrst incom-
pleteness theorem follows directly, without the metamathematical coding of the
provability predicate as in G¨odel’s original work. Secondly, yet another, fourth
proof of consistency followed as an immediate consequence of the unprovability
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

668
Jan von Plato
of transﬁnite induction. These two results clariﬁed rather fully the situation cre-
ated by the incompleteness of arithmetic. At the same time, Gentzen’s last paper
marked the beginning of ordinal proof theory. Gentzen’s eﬀorts at proving the
consistency of the theory of real numbers came to an end through his untimely
and tragic death in 1945, at the age of thirty-ﬁve. Freed from military service
early in 1942 because of nervous exhaustion, he had become a teacher at the Ger-
man university of Prague in 1943. At the end of the war, the newly organized,
Soviet-backed local police of the city arrested the German professors. Gentzen was
unable to do the required physical work because of a hand injury, was therefore
deprived of food, and died of hunger in prison on 4 August 1945.
The sources of the following presentation, besides Gentzen’s published papers
and manuscripts, are almost all documented in Eckart Menzler-Trott’s pioneering
biography of Gentzen, Gentzens Problem (2001), to appear in English translation
as Logic’s Lost Genius (2007). The notation is uniform and what one would write
today in a logic text in English, but it is so close to the original that a collateral
reading of passages from Gentzen’s papers can be done without diﬃculty. We refer
to passages in Gentzen’s papers by the detailed numbering system he used, rather
than page numbering.
The references section lists all of the eleven articles Gentzen is known to have
written for publication. He wrote also a number of short reviews and abstracts
that can be found described in Menzler-Trott’s biography.
It was believed until the mid-1980s that all of Gentzen’s unpublished papers had
disappeared, but then it was instead found out that his sister was in the possession
of manuscripts. These are written in shorthand and record work done between
1931 and 1944. The Gentzen papers are being laboriously transcribed for eventual
publication by Christian Thiel of Erlangen University. He has generously let us
study both the transcribed and the manuscript parts as well as other documents
relating to Gentzen for work on this Handbook chapter; a brief description of the
contents of the manuscripts is given in the last Section. Thiel has also a summary
Gentzen prepared of his work on the consistency of analysis, dated February 1945.
Lastly, we located in February 2005 an early handwritten manuscript version of
Gentzen’s doctoral thesis. It had been, so to speak, in front of everyone’s eyes
since 1969, because its second page is reproduced photographically on page xiii
of Gentzen’s Collected Papers. Remarkably, this manuscript contains a detailed
proof of normalization for intuitionistic natural deduction, absent from the printed
version.
Most of the presentation that follows is concentrated on historical aspects of
Gentzen’s achievement, including the later development of lines of research that
he initiated. In keeping with the character (and title) of this Handbook, we enter at
places into systematic foundational discussions, especially when we have some new
points of view to present, such as on the correspondence between natural deduction
and sequent calculus, or on the application of sequent calculus in mathematics.
My knowledge of Gentzen’s life and work, beyond his published papers, is mostly
based on the eﬀorts of Eckart Menzler-Trott. He collected for over two decades,

Gentzen’s Logic
669
with unfading enthusiasm, facts and documents about Gentzen, and posed ques-
tions in correspondence to persons many of whom are deceased long since.
I
dedicate this article to Eckart, with the wish that my fellow academic historians
of logic take his work for what it is: that of an amateur par excellence.
2
GENTZEN’S FIRST PAPER
Paul Hertz, otherwise known for his contribution to the foundations of statistical
mechanics, put up in the 1920s a general theory of “systems of sentences” (Hertz
1929). A sentence is an expression of the form a1, . . . , an →b. It has several
interpretations: the circumstances given by a1, . . . , an bring about b, objects with
the properties a1, . . . , an have also the property b, etc. The logical interpretation
is that from the propositions a1, . . . , an, proposition b follows. The arrow thus
represents the notion of logical consequence.
Hertz systems have two forms of rules of inference, the ﬁrst with zero premisses:
a1, . . . , an →ai
for 1 ⩽i ⩽n,
a11, . . . , a1n →b1 . . . am1, . . . , amk →bm
b1, . . . , bm, c1, . . . , cl →c
a11, . . . , a1n, . . . , am1, . . . , amk, c1, . . . , cl →c
Table 1. The rules of Hertz systems.
Hertz called the former kind of rules “immediate inferences” and the latter “syllo-
gisms.” If a collection of sentences S is closed with respect to these rules, it forms
a sentence system. A collection of sentences T is an axiom system for a sentence
system S if each sentence in S is derivable from the ones in T.
One of the principal questions for Hertz was the existence of independent axiom
systems, with independence deﬁned in the obvious way, as underivability by the
rules. Bernays had followed and clearly also sustained the work of Hertz, and
he suggested that Gentzen work with the problem.
The result was Gentzen’s
ﬁrst paper, titled, in English translation, “On the existence of independent axiom
systems for inﬁnitary sentence systems.” He showed by a counterexample that
there is an inﬁnite sentence system that permits no axiom system with independent
axioms.
Gentzen noticed in the course of his work, conducted in the summer of 1931,
that the second form of Hertz’ rules can be replaced by one in which there is just
one term b as a middle term of syllogism:
a1, . . . , am, →b
b, c1, . . . , cn →c
a1, . . . , am, c1, . . . , cn →c
Table 2. Gentzen’s cut rule in Hertz systems.
He called this form of rule cut (Schnitt), and the ﬁrst form of Hertz’ rules thinning
(Verd¨unnung). The “sentences” of the calculus of Hertz became the “sequents” of
Gentzen’s later work.

670
Jan von Plato
The calculus of Hertz was one of the two main sources of Gentzen’s sequent cal-
culus. The other source was his development of the calculus of natural deduction.
The rules of the latter, when adapted to the notation of sequents, led to sequent
calculus proper as we shall see in Section 8. The background of sequent calculus
in the work of Hertz and in Gentzen’s ﬁrst paper is discussed at length in Bernays
(1965).
Gentzen’s work on Hertz systems can be seen as an early contribution to logic
programming. The sentences are the same as program clauses, and derivations
consist of cuts with the terms in the clauses. Gentzen’s work is described from this
point of view in Peter Schroeder-Heister’s paper (2002). The main results contain
a normal form for derivations that amounts, in modern terms, “to the completeness
of propositional SLD-resolution in logic programming” (ibid., p. 246).
Gentzen soon abandoned the topic of his ﬁrst paper. He writes on 13 December
1932 to his old professor in Greifswald, Hellmuth Kneser (from Mentzler-Trott
2001, p. 35):
I have set as my speciﬁc task to ﬁnd a proof of the consistency of logical
deduction in arithmetic... The task becomes a purely mathematical
problem through the formalization of logical deduction.
The proof
of consistency has been so far carried out only for special cases, for
example, the arithmetic of the integers without the rule of complete
induction. I would like to proceed further at this point and to clear at
least arithmetic with complete induction. I am working on this since
almost a year and hope to ﬁnish soon, and would then present this
work as my dissertation (with Prof. Bernays).
3
INTERPRETATION OF PEANO ARITHMETIC IN HEYTING
ARITHMETIC
When intuitionistic logic was in its infancy in the late 1920s, a lively debate arose
on its proper formalization.
It was conducted on the pages of the Bulletin of
the Royal Belgian Academy.
Valeri Glivenko contributed to this discussion in
1929 by a result by which classically provable negative formulas of propositional
logic are already intuitionistically provable. The origins of the idea go back to
Andrei Kolmogorov’s paper of 1925; In it, Kolmogorov gave a double-negation
interpretation of classical logic in intuitionistic logic. For each formula A, let A∗
stand for the formula obtained by preﬁxing each subformula of A with a double
negation. If A is provable classically, then A∗is provable intuitionistically.
Kolmogorov’s paper was written in Russian and remained unknown to logicians
outside Moscow, except for its indirect inﬂuence through Glivenko (1929). In 1932,
G¨odel and Gentzen worked out independently of each other an interpretation of
classical Peano arithmetic in the intuitionistic arithmetic of Heyting. Gentzen’s
translation was as follows:
1.
a = b∗
;
a = b,

Gentzen’s Logic
671
2.
(¬A)∗
;
¬A∗,
3.
(A&B)∗
;
A∗&B∗,
4.
(A ⊃B)∗
;
A∗⊃B∗,
5.
(∀xA)∗
;
∀xA∗,
6.
(A ∨B)∗
;
¬(¬A∗&¬B∗),
7.
(∃xA)∗
;
¬∀x¬A∗.
Table 3. The G¨odel-Gentzen translation.
Gentzen tells to add double-negations to equations if these contain variables.
G¨odel’s translation removes also implications A ⊃B, by translating them into
¬(A∗&¬B∗). The crucial points of the translation are disjunction and existence.
The former is translated into the intuitionistically weaker ¬(¬A∗& ¬B∗), and the
latter into ¬∀x¬A∗. Even though there is a diﬀerence in the translations G¨odel
and Gentzen deﬁned, the translation theorem that they established was the same:
A formula A is a theorem of classical Peano arithmetic if and only if A∗is a
theorem of intuitionistic Heyting arithmetic.
Indirect inferences with the quantiﬁers were thought to be the “dubious” trans-
ﬁnite element in mathematics, to be saved by a ﬁnitary proof of consistency as
required by Hilbert’s program.
By the translation, the consistency of classical
arithmetic reduces to that of intuitionistic arithmetic, so that indirect inferences
in arithmetic are legitimate. Put in another way: The abandonment of indirect
proofs has no real eﬀect, because formulas that are provable only indirectly can
be substituted by classically equivalent intuitionistically provable ones.
As a special case of the G¨odel-Gentzen translation, with all atomic formulas
double-negated, a translation of classical predicate logic into intuitionistic predi-
cate logic is obtained.
Heyting corresponded with Gentzen in the winter and spring of 1933. Only the
letters of the latter have been preserved. It appears from these letters that Gentzen
had sent his paper ¨Uber das Verh¨altnis zwischen intuitionistischer und klassischer
Arithmetik (On the relation between intuitionistic and classical arithmetic) to
Heyting, and also explained some results that appeared later in the doctoral thesis.
Heyting then wrote to G¨odel about Gentzen’s interpretation of classical arithmetic
in intuitionistic arithmetic, with G¨odel answering on 16 May that he had found
the translation and that “it should have been known in G¨ottingen since at least
June 1932.” As a reason for the latter, G¨odel wrote that at that time he had
“reported on it in the Menger colloquium, to wit, in the presence of O. Veblen who
shortly afterwards went to G¨ottingen.” (See the G¨odel-Heyting correspondence in
volume IV of G¨odel’s Collected Works.) We know from Menger’s later recollections,
based on minutes of the meetings, that Veblen got very enthusiastic about the
lecture, and invited G¨odel to visit the newly established Institute for Advanced
Study in Princeton. However, there is no reason to think that Gentzen would
have known of G¨odel’s discovery. It seems that at least three persons had the

672
Jan von Plato
idea, the ﬁrst and most original one being Kolmogorov in 1925. Gentzen may
have taken his inspiration from Glivenko’s theorem and therefore, indirectly, from
Kolmogorov, as G¨odel did (see Troelstra’s introduction to G¨odel’s paper in vol. I of
G¨odel’s Collected Works, p. 282). Upon the publication of G¨odel’s paper, Gentzen
withdrew his own paper, already at proof stage, from publication. Luckily these
proofs were preserved by Bernays, and they appeared in an English translation
in 1969, in Manfred Szabo’s edition of Gentzen’s Collected Papers, then in the
original German in 1974.
We shall see in Section 5 that Gentzen’s paper was
taken out directly from the early version of his doctoral thesis.
The importance of the G¨odel-Gentzen translation was that it clearly showed
the consistency of arithmetic to be within the reach of intuitionistic arguments. A
letter Gentzen wrote to Heyting on 25 February 1933 summarizes the situation as
follows:
A consistency proof by ﬁnite means has . . . not succeeded so far, so
that this original aim of Hilbert has not been achieved.
If, on the
other hand, one admits the intuitionistic position as a secure basis in
itself, i.e., as a consistent one, the consistency of classical arithmetic is
secured by my result. If one wished to satisfy Hilbert’s requirements,
the task would still remain of showing intuitionistic arithmetic con-
sistent. This, however, is not possible by even the formal apparatus
of classical arithmetic, on the basis of G¨odel’s result in combination
with my proof. Even so, I am inclined to believe that a consistency
proof for intuitionistic arithmetic, from an even more evident position,
is possible and also desirable.
The last-mentioned was the goal Gentzen had set to himself early in 1932.
4
NATURAL DEDUCTION
The ﬁrst task in Gentzen’s consistency program was to study pure logic proof-
theoretically. Gentzen’s previous experience in logic included the use of systems
of axiomatic logic in the tradition of Frege and Russell. Hilbert and Ackermann’s
little book Grundz¨uge der theoretischen Logik of 1928 presented classical propo-
sitional and predicate logic axiomatically. Heyting’s pioneering work of 1930 did
the same for intuitionistic logic.
Of his motivations for abandoning the axiomatic tradition in logic, Gentzen
says little.
He just went on, as he writes in his doctoral thesis, to construct
a system of logic that is “as close to actual reasoning as possible.” The main
feature of such reasoning is its hypothetical character: A mathematical argument
starts with some given assumptions that are analyzed into parts. At some stage,
a conclusion is synthesized from suitable parts. Whenever the assumptions are
veriﬁed, also the conclusion is. The result of Gentzen’s exercise was his calculus
of natural deduction. We shall follow ﬁrst the presentation of the published thesis,
then report on the newly discovered manuscript version.

Gentzen’s Logic
673
The preliminaries to Gentzen (1934–35) contain a general deﬁnition of deriva-
tions: An inference ﬁgure can be written in the form
A1 . . . An
B
where n ⩾1. A derivation “consists of formulas (at least one) that form among
themselves inference ﬁgures as follows: Each formula is the conclusion of at most
one ﬁgure, and each formula except for the endformula is the premiss of at least
one ﬁgure, and the system of ﬁgures is acyclic.” (1934–35, I.3.2). Acyclicity re-
quires that there be no repetition of a formula in any premiss-conclusion sequence.
Further explanations specify that the clauses concern formula occurrences in a
derivation.
If the same premiss formula occurs in several inference ﬁgures, the combination
of these two-dimensional ﬁgures need not have any simple representation in two
dimensions. It should be clear that no two-dimensional graphical representation of
derivations is intended by the deﬁnition, but an abstract combinatorial structure.
The condition of acyclicity is a further indication of a combinatorial rather than
geometric concept of derivations. In the former, but not in the latter, it is needed
in order to rule out inﬁnite premiss-conclusion sequences in derivations.
Gentzen’s carefully laid deﬁnition contains as a special case formulas that are
not conclusions of any ﬁgure, by the “at most” clause on conclusions. These are the
topformulas of a derivation. A derivation is next deﬁned to be of tree form if each
formula is the premiss of at most one ﬁgure. Without this condition, derivations
have the structure of directed acyclic graphs, in today’s terminology.
Gentzen’s analysis of the practice of mathematical proofs led him to classify
steps of proof into two types: ones that give prescriptions of the suﬃcient grounds
for concluding a proposition of a given form, the introduction rules of natural de-
duction, and secondly steps of proof that give necessary consequences of a propo-
sition of a given form, the elimination rules. The former are as follows:
A
B
A&B
&I
A
A ∨B
∨I1
B
A ∨B
∨I2
[A]....
B
A ⊃B
⊃I
A(y/x)
∀xA
∀I
A(t/x)
∃xA
∃I
Table 4. The introduction rules of natural deduction.
In rule ⊃I, any number of copies of formula A, the case of none at all included,
can be discharged. Gentzen indicates these formulas in the schematic rule by the
notation [A]. In actual derivations, a numerical label is put next to the rule and
on top of those assumptions discharged by the rule.
Rule ∀I has the variable
restriction: The eigenvariable y must not occur free in any assumptions the result
of substitution A(y/x) depends on. In rule ∃I, t is an arbitrary term. Gentzen
writes formulas with possible free occurrences of a variable x, and the result of a

674
Jan von Plato
substitution of x by a term t, as Ax and At, respectively. The notation for the
universal quantiﬁer ∀, now always used, is introduced in Gentzen’s thesis.
Elimination rules are reverses of sorts of the introduction rules:
A&B
A
&E1
A&B
B
&E2
A ∨B
[A]....
C
[B]
....
C
C
∨E
A ⊃B
A
B
⊃E
∀xA
A(t/x)
∀E
∃xA
[A(y/x)]
....
C
C
∃E
Table 5. Gentzen’s elimination rules for natural deduction.
The same variable restriction holds for rule ∃E as for rule ∀I, i.e., the eigenvariable
y of ∃E must be arbitrary. Derivations can be started with any formulas
A
that act as open assumptions. A careful reading of Gentzen’s thesis shows that
ﬁnished derivations have no open assumptions, i.e., these are all discharged in the
end by rule ⊃I.
Various ways of treating negation are mentioned in Gentzen’s thesis. It can be
a primitive connective, or it can be deﬁned through implication and a constant
formula ⊥denoting falsity, as in ¬A ≡A ⊃⊥. There is no introduction rule for
⊥, but there is instead an elimination rule
⊥
C
⊥E
Table 6. The rule of falsity elimination.
The system of rules of introduction and elimination deﬁnes intuitionistic natural
deduction, or system NJ in Gentzen’s nomenclature.
Of the relation between introduction and elimination rules, Gentzen writes that
the introduction rules of natural deduction can act as operational deﬁnitions of
the connectives. Elimination rules are, then, as Gentzen says, just consequences
of these deﬁnitions: “In the elimination of a sign one can use the formula, the
outermost sign of which is in question, only ‘in its meaning as based on the intro-
duction of this sign’.” (1934–35, II.5.13). Gentzen’s example of this situation is as
follows: If A ⊃B is introduced, followed by an implication elimination concluding
B from A ⊃B and A, it can be obtained by “concluding B immediately from A
that has been proved, for A ⊃B documents the existence of a derivation of B
from A” (1934–35, II.5.13). We note that the argument assumes that derivations
of A ⊃B can be normalized. The same explanation of A ⊃B is given in (1936,
11.1).

Gentzen’s Logic
675
Gentzen’s observation is that steps of introduction followed by the corresponding
eliminations are useless detours (Umwege) in derivations. His example is written
formally as:
[A]....
B
A ⊃B
⊃I
....
A
B
⊃E
....
;
....
A....
B....
Table 7. A detour convertibility on implication.
In modern terms, an I-rule followed by the corresponding E-rule forms a detour
convertibility. A derivation without such convertibilities is in normal form.
Gentzen writes that he was able to establish the existence of a normal form, for
any given derivation of a conclusion C from open assumptions A1, . . . , An, only
for the system of intuitionistic natural deduction, but not for the classical one.
He therefore invented another logical calculus, that of sequents, and proved the
analogue of the convertibility to normal form for the latter. The example of detour
conversion on implication seems to be the only trace that is left in his paper of a
proof of convertibility into normal form. Detour conversions for ∃and for ∨can
be found in (1936, end of 10.3). Detour convertibilities are further described as
“peaks of complexity” in (1938, 3.1).
The main property of derivations in normal form is the subformula property: All
formulas in a normal derivation are subformulas of the open assumptions or of the
conclusion. If the former are discharged by ⊃I, all formulas are subformulas of the
conclusion. For the reason mentioned, Gentzen goes on in (1934–35) to work out
the central results of the analysis of logical proofs in terms of sequent calculi, for
both intuitionistic and classical logic. An application of the intuitionistic sequent
calculus was the decidability of intuitionistic propositional logic. The proof gives
a bound to the size of possible derivation trees by showing that, in any derivation,
the number of times a formula needs to occur on either side of a sequent is at
most three. Another application was to the disjunction property of intuitionistic
logic: If A ∨B is derivable, a derivation of A or B can be found. In particular,
there cannot be any proof of the law of excluded middle A ∨¬A. A corresponding
proof of the disjunction property directly in Gentzen’s system of natural deduction
would not be as straightforward as the proof in sequent calculus.
5
A NEWLY DISCOVERED PROOF OF NORMALIZATION BY GENTZEN
The Paul Bernays collection at ETH Zurich contains as one item a handwritten
version of the Untersuchungen ¨uber das logische Schliessen, numbering 41 pages
and with the, rather misleading, catalogue indication that the 12 ﬁrst pages have
been published as Gentzen’s thesis in the Mathematische Zeitschrift. We shall refer

676
Jan von Plato
to this texs as Ms.ULS. It consists of various strata, also diﬀerentiated by the hand
applied. The text begins with a one-page “setting out of the ﬁeld of investigation.”
Next section I introduces the calculus N1J with the 1 dropped out in a later section
and the printed version. In this part the handwriting is in the “deutsche Schrift,”
quite hard for a modern reader as one may see from the reproduced text in Szabo’s
edition. Now follows a part, beginning with page 13, in which the handwriting is
more relaxed, but still in a style Gentzen would use when writing for others to
read. The part is indicated as “Dissertation, III. Abschnitt. G. Gentzen.” Next
to these indications there is written, in a rather clumsy hand Gentzen would use
when making notes to himself, “IV. Blatt.” Gentzen used folded “Kanzleiformat”
paper, high as a legal size and each sheet giving four pages. Gentzen gives a very
detailed proof of normalization, written out as carefully as the materials in his
published thesis. The proof is typical Gentzen: elaborate verbal arguments and a
necessary minimum of formal notation. There then follows a brief section in which
we see, so to say, sequent calculus being born in front of our eyes. Another short
section introduces the multisuccedent sequent calculus. Between these pages there
is a page of corrections numbered 33, but these corrections are exactly the ones
found in Gentzen’s paper (1933) discussed in Section 3 above. As a last item in
the text comes a proof of the equivalence of Gentzen’s calculus and an axiomatic
calculus. This part is indicated as section II in the end of section I and is written
in the same meticulous “deutsche” hand, numbered separately from page 1 on,
with a casual added numbering from page 37 on.
Section I of Ms.ULS ends with a summary of results obtained so far, seemingly
meant also to list the planned contents of the thesis: First, the equivalence of
section II, with an auxiliary calculus bearing the nomenclature N2, and secondly
the interpretation of classical arithmetic in intuitionistic arithmetic as section III.
At some stage in 1932, Gentzen noticed that most of his rules of natural deduction
have the property that the conclusion is a subformula of a premiss, or the other
way around. There is thus another planned section IV with the following
Conjecture of a theorem: If a logical proposition is provable in the
calculus N1J, there is a proof for it in which only subformulas of it
occur, possibly with diﬀerent variables.
The text states further that the proof of this theorem is not ﬁnished, except
for a calculus with rules for conjunction and the universal quantiﬁer and a rule
corresponding to negation introduction. Some time later Gentzen cancelled out
the “conjecture” into “theorem” and declared the proof as ﬁnished. A last planned
section V of Ms.ULS announces a proof of the consistency of arithmetic, one that
“uses the concept of an inﬁnite sequence of natural numbers and further, at one
point, the law of excluded middle.”
The Ms.ULS must have contained an original text of a section III on the inter-
pretation of classical arithmetic in intuitionistic arithmetic. It was taken out to
become, it seems verbatim, the paper Gentzen (1933), with just page 33 with cor-
rections to this part left in between the preserved manuscript. Marginal remarks

Gentzen’s Logic
677
indicate that the normalization proof was intended to replace the old section III
of the thesis.
From the manuscript Ms.ULS and related materials, three successive plans for
a doctoral thesis can thus be distinguished:
1. The original plan, which has a certain continuity of design to it, namely to:
I introduce the system of intuitionistic natural deduction, II show that it is
equivalent to an axiomatic intuitionistic calculus, III show that axiomatic cal-
culi for classical logic and arithmetic can be interpreted in axiomatic calculi
for intuitionistic logic and arithmetic, IV show that derivations in intuition-
istic natural deduction are normalizing and have the subformula property, V
prove that intuitionistic arithmetic is consistent.
2. In a second phase, around January 1933, the text of III became a separate
paper and V was dropped out, with the likely motive that the planned ap-
proach through an extension of the method of section IV, i.e., normalization
and the subformula property, from pure logic to derivations in arithmetic,
did not work. Gentzen had sent the separate paper to Heyting who answered
on 18 February 1933. Gentzen, in turn, wrote back on 25 February that he
“hopes to be able to make investigations on the consistency of intuitionistic
arithmetic next year.” Thus, the hopes of the previous December, of “ﬁn-
ishing soon” a consistency proof, as in the letter to Kneser, had faded in a
little over a month.
3. In a last phase, the faint beginnings of intuitionistic and classical sequent
calculi, added who knows when to the Ms.ULS, became the real topic of
the doctoral thesis.
The originally planned section IV on normalization,
renumbered III in the second phase, was dropped out (and remained lost
until the writing of this chapter in 2005), and section II on the equivalence
with axiomatic calculi was placed last as in the printed thesis.
We shall now present the main novelties of Ms.ULS, if they can be so described,
as compared to the printed thesis. An example of a formula, seen in the pho-
tographic reproduction of the top part of page 2 of section I in Szabo’s edition,
and diﬀerent from the one in the published thesis, serves to introduce the idea
of natural deduction. The remarkable feature of the treatment of the example
is the adherence to the “linear” succession of steps of proof. The formula to be
derived is (A ∨B)&(A ∨C) →A ∨(B&C). (Gentzen uses X, Y , and Z as well as
dots for avoiding parentheses, as well as →for implication.) First one assumes
(A ∨B)&(A ∨C), then A ∨B is concluded. Next Gentzen considers simultane-
ously, on one line, A and B separately as a “division into cases.” Both cases lead
to the desired conclusion A ∨(B&C). The derivation does not quite succeed in
displaying a linear arrangement of formulas in a derivation. The next example,
the same as in the published version, concludes in a linear fashion from an exis-
tential formula an instance with an arbitrary term, instead of using the standard
existence elimination pattern. This pattern is instead given on page 5 of Ms.ULS

678
Jan von Plato
that gives the rules in the form that has become standard. All three of Gentzen’s
examples are given formal derivations that follow strictly the rule system. In the
presentation of this system, the following rules have been crossed out and replaced
by the rule of falsity elimination: A “tautology” rule that concludes A from the
premiss A, a rule R that concludes ¬A if the assumption A led to contradictory
conclusions, and a rule that concludes an arbitrary formula C from the premisses
A and ¬A. The corrected system is exactly the one that is now called intuitionistic
natural deduction. The notation (x) is used for the universal quantiﬁer, similarly
to the article Gentzen (1933) that was submitted in mid-March 1933, whereas the
published thesis used ∀. A possible motive for the tautology rule, described as
“trivial” by Gentzen, could be that the derivation of the formula A →A is imme-
diate with it. Otherwise one would usually say that the derivation of the premiss
of rule →I has a limiting case in which the derivation is simply an assumption.
Page 9 of section I of Ms.ULS gives the standard detour convertibilities of
natural deduction. For example, the implication conversion scheme is written as
follows:
α
A
[A]
γ
B
A →B
→I
Bε
→E
becomes
α
A

γ
Bε
Table 8. A detour conversion scheme in Gentzen’s manuscript.
The square bracket notation for any number of discharged assumptions A in rule
→I is applied in the converted derivation also to indicate as many copies of the
derivation of the minor premiss.
Gentzen’s proof of normalization for intuitionistic natural deduction has been
worked out directly for the whole calculus N1J. This involves a remarkable dif-
ﬁculty, as compared to a proof of normalization for a calculus without rules for
disjunction and existence. Namely, an introduction-elimination pair can be sep-
arated by a succession of rules ∨E, ∃E. If, say, C&D is a minor premiss of ∨E
introduced in a last step, the conclusion of ∨E is C&D and it can be the premiss
of rule &E. Rule ∨E between &I and &E prevents conversion, as in
A ∨B
[A]....
C&D
[B]
....
C
[B]
....
D
C&D
&I
C&D
∨E
C
&E
What is called a permutation conversion in Prawitz (1965) brings out such hidden
detour convertibilities.
The margin to the beginning of the section with the normalization proof con-
tains a list of changes: The calculus is to be called NJ instead of N1J, and the

Gentzen’s Logic
679
terminology is to be derivations and formulas or expressions instead of proofs and
propositions. Furthermore, the horseshoe is now used for implication, which deﬁ-
nitely shows that the section is a later addition with respect to the other preserved
parts of the Ms.ULS. With this change, the notation follows that of Heyting (1930).
Gentzen begins his proof by deﬁning the notions of a principal formula of a
rule, the one with the corresponding connective or quantiﬁer. The subformulas
of the principal formula that appear in a rule scheme are its neighbors. In rules
∨E, ∃E, the conclusion C forms a bond with its premisses, with two bonds for the
former rule. (This notion corresponds to Prawitz’ “segment.”) A single formula
is a limiting case of a bond. Two bonds are neighbors if they have formulas that
are neighbors. A hillock (H¨ugel) is a bond such that its neighboring bonds consist
of its subformulas. (These must be proper subformulas or else two bonds become
one.) Thus, a hillock is a formula or a sequence of identical formulas of a locally
maximal length.
A careful reading of Gentzen’s thesis shows that completed derivations in natu-
ral deduction do not have open assumptions. Thus, the endformula of a derivation
is bound to be the longest formula in a normal derivation. An “inner” hillock is
one that is a hillock but not the endformula. Gentzen’s proof of normalization con-
siders inner hillocks of maximal formula length, but before the proof can be given,
yet another concept has to be introduced. A formula stands higher in a derivation
than another formula if it stands above the latter. In addition, formulas in the
derivations of the minor premisses of rules ∨E, ⊃E, and ∃E stand higher than the
main premiss and formulas that stand above the major premiss. A main hillock
in a derivation is an inner hillock of maximal length such that no other hillock of
the same length stands higher than it. Gentzen comes now to the formulation of
his “H¨ugelsatz” or “hillock theorem”: A derivation with inner hillocks can be so
transformed that one main hillock is removed and the number of main hillocks of
maximal length reduced, with no new hillocks of greater length created.
The proof of the hillock theorem has four stages. The ﬁrst concern is to have
distinct eigenvariables, and to ensure that derivations remain correct under sub-
stitution of variables. These steps are undertaken with great care. In the second
stage, permutative conversions are made to reduce the number of formulas in a
bond. The derivations are (Ms.ULS, p. 17):
Γ
|C
Δ
|C
I ∃E
Θ
D
Λ
II
Γ
|C
Δ
Π
|C
|C
I ∨E
Θ
D
Λ
II
Table 9. Permutation convertibilities in Gentzen’s normalization
proof.
The order of the premisses diﬀers from the one given earlier in the manuscript.
Formulas that form bonds are indicated by |C.
The upper case Greek letters

680
Jan von Plato
denote other parts of the derivations. The transformed derivations are
Γ
|C
Θ
D
II
Δ
D
Λ
I ∃E
Γ
|C
Θ
D
II
Δ
Π
|C
Θ
D
II
D
Λ
I ∨E
Table 10. The results of permutation conversions.
It is seen that the sequences of bonded formulas are shortened by one in these
transformations.
Permutative conversions are repeated until a main hillock consists of just one
formula instead of a bonded sequence. Now begins the actual reduction of the
derivation. This is divided into two cases according to whether falsity elimination
was applied in the main hillock. If not, there are ﬁve, by today standard, detour
conversion schemes (called reductions by Gentzen). It is remarkable that Gentzen
uses the square bracket notation in these, as in Table 8. In a schematic deriva-
tion, [A] indicates any number n ⩾0 of discharged formulas. In the converted
derivations, a similar notation indicates the same number of repeated parts of
derivations.
The ﬁnal part of the proof considers the case that rule ⊥E has been applied to
conclude a formula C. A local maximum is produced if C is the major premiss of
an elimination. Gentzen shows that rule ⊥E can be applied to infer the conclusion
of the elimination directly. The subformula property of normal derivations is an
immediate corollary to the hillock theorem.
Gentzen’s preserved manuscripts contain further details about the history of
natural deduction that we shall discuss in the last Section.
6
LATER DEVELOPMENTS IN NATURAL DEDUCTION
Gentzen used natural deduction in his early proofs of the consistency of arithmetic:
in the original proof of 1935 that remained unpublished, and in a somewhat dif-
ferent form in the published version of 1936. He changed the notation into one
that displays the open assumptions A1, . . . , An of each formula B in a derivation
on the same line with that formula, as a sequent:
A1, . . . , An →B
Here the assumptions form a list with n ⩾0. The arrow is not any surrogate
implication, but a formal representation of the derivability relation of natural
deduction. Now, in contrast to the thesis, assumptions could be left open.
As a particular case of a sequent, we have A →A which corresponds to mak-
ing the assumption A in the standard notation for natural deduction derivations.

Gentzen’s Logic
681
Sequents of this form are initial sequents and begin derivations. The introduction
rules are straightforward, as in the following:
Γ →A
Δ →B
Γ, Δ →A&B
&I
Γ →A
Γ →A ∨B
∨I1
Γ →B
Γ →A ∨B
∨I2
A, Γ →B
Γ →A ⊃B
⊃I
Γ →A(y/x)
Γ →∀xA
∀I
Γ →A(t/x)
Γ →∃A
∃I
Table 11. Introduction rules for natural deduction in sequent calculus
style.
Note that the lists of assumptions Γ and Δ are independent in rule &I and are
added up in the conclusion. Rule ∀I has the standard variable restriction. The
elimination rules that corresponds to the I-rules are:
Γ →A&B
Γ →A
&E1
Γ →A&B
Γ →B
&E2
Γ →A ∨B
A, Δ →C
B, Θ →C
Γ, Δ, Θ →C
∨E
Γ →A ⊃B
Δ →A
Γ, Δ →B
⊃E
Γ →∀xA
Γ →A(t/x)
∀E
Γ →∃xA
A(y/x), Δ →C
Γ, Δ →C
∃E
Table 12. Elimination rules for natural deduction in sequent calculus
style.
In rule ∃E, y is an eigenvariable.
For a good formalization, rules for handling the lists of assumptions have to be
made explicit. In Gentzen (1936, 5.2.4), the following “structural modiﬁcations”
are permitted: to exchange the order of two consecutive assumptions, to add an
extra assumption, to contract two identical assumptions into one, and to change
a bound variable.
Some confusion has been created by the notation for natural deduction in se-
quent calculus style. For example, Bernays (1970) calls it a sequent calculus. A
look at the rules of the calculus shows that I-rules introduce a connective or quan-
tiﬁer at the right of the sequent arrow, in the succedent part. E-rules, in turn,
make a connective or quantiﬁer disappear from that same part. As we shall see,
the latter makes for a fundamental diﬀerence with sequent calculus proper.
At the time when Gentzen worked out his system of natural deduction, Stanislaw
Jaskowski was also developing a logical system for reasoning with assumptions.
Formulas in derivations are arranged in a linear succession, but Jaskowski’s paper
(1934) remained fragmentary and without substantial results such as a subformula
property. The linear variant of natural deduction is followed in many pedagogical
expositions of elementary logic. Gentzen found Jaskowski’s work by June 1936,
when both were in M¨unster, and considered its linear arrangement of formulas an
improvement, a “liberation from the straitjacket of the tree form,” into one that

682
Jan von Plato
reﬂects “the linearity of thinking” (the former from unpublished notes, the latter
from Gentzen (1934–35, II.2.2.2).
Gentzen’s teacher Paul Bernays visited the Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton in 1935–36. He gave a series of lectures that have been preserved in a
mimeographed form, with the title Logical Calculus. The larger part of the lectures
is devoted to an exposition of Gentzen’s system of natural deduction, with the
rule of double negation included. The presentation, however, is a great step back
from what Bernays could have learned from Gentzen’s dissertation and its early
manuscript version had he studied them well. No mention is made of intuitionistic
logic, and the method of truth tables, in the form of valuations, is oﬀered as a
means for deciding deducibility, with the eﬀect that “the performing of deductions
becomes quite superﬂuous” (p. 34). The derivations in natural deduction remain
on the informal level of Gentzen’s ﬁrst example, with no clear deﬁnition of how
derivation trees are to be constructed. Thus, formulas appear under the inference
line even if they are assumptions, and there is no way of keeping record of which
assumptions are open and which discharged at diﬀerent points of a derivation.
The only use of the calculus is in a proof of equivalence with an axiomatic calculus
that is inspired by the rules of natural deduction, say, in the style of the axioms
A&B ⊃A and A&B ⊃B in place of the two rules &E. Normalization and the
subformula property as well as their applications are not mentioned even if these
were the very motives for studying natural deduction in the ﬁrst place.
On a completely diﬀerent level is the paper by Ingebrigt Johansson, submitted in
1935. It appears that he had worked extensively on his system of minimal logic, a
weakening of intuitionistic logic in which ⊥⊃C should not be a provable formula.
The basis was an axiomatic formulation, but treatments of minimal logic both as
a system of natural deduction and as a sequent calculus are also given, in what
is the second published work on these calculi altogether. Johansson uses sequent
calculus to conclude that the inference to B from (A&¬A) ∨B is an admissible
rule in minimal logic, even if the formula (A&¬A) ∨B ⊃B remains underivable.
The notion of admissibility, even if no German equivalent to such a word is used,
is quite clear: A step of inference is admissible in a system if its conclusion is
derivable in the system whenever the premisses are.
The system of natural deduction lay mostly dormant for some thirty years, until
the thesis of Dag Prawitz of 1965, Natural Deduction: A Proof-Theoretical Study.
It gives the details of normalization of derivations in natural deduction, also given
in a somewhat diﬀerent and less detailed form in Raggio (1965).
The order in which Prawitz (1965) presented the normalization theorem was
diﬀerent from Gentzen’s in Ms.ULS, naturally unknown to the former. Prawitz
gives ﬁrst a normalization theorem and subformula property for a system of natural
deduction for classical logic. This system contains no disjunction or existence.
Therefore, leaving for a while aside the rule that makes the system classical, detour
convertibilities could be made directly, without the diﬃculty provoked by the
elimination rules for disjunction and existence.
Such direct convertibility was
preserved under the addition of a rule of indirect proof for atomic formulas P, a

Gentzen’s Logic
683
rule that made the system classical:
[¬P]
....
⊥
P
Raa
Table 13. Prawitz’ rule of indirect proof.
Prawitz showed that in the ∨, ∃-free fragment of predicate logic, this rule is admis-
sible for arbitrary formulas A, meaning here that whenever there is a derivation of
⊥from the assumption ¬A, a derivation of the conclusion A can be constructed. In
Gentzen’s thesis, various classical rules were suggested, such as the rule of double
negation that concludes A from ¬¬A, with A an arbitrary formula and no sub-
formula property. The system was designated NK, but Gentzen failed to obtain a
normalization theorem for even a fragment of classical logic.
In a second stage, Prawitz considered intuitionistic natural deduction for the full
language of predicate logic and reduced its normalization to the deletion of detour
convertibilities, through permutation convertibilities that reduced the lengths of
the gentzenian “bonds,” or “segments” in Prawitz’ terminology, until there was
just one formula in a segment. The overall structure of the two results, when
intuitionistic logic is considered, is the same as that in Gentzen’s proof. A direct
proof of normalization that combines Prawitz’ two results, without the rule of
indirect proof of course, is found in the textbook Basic Proof Theory by Troelstra
and Schwichtenberg. It is, in all essential respects, the same proof as Gentzen’s
original one.
In the late 1960s, strong normalization became an issue: Prawitz (1971), using
previous work of William Tait (1967) and Jean-Yves Girard (1971), proved that
non-normalities in a derivation can be converted in any order, with a terminating
normalization process and a unique normal derivation as a result. Gentzen seems
not to have noticed the latter. He states in fact the contrary, no doubt motivated
by the failure of this property for the elimination of cuts in a sequent calculus
derivation.
At about the same time as strong normalization was studied, the Curry-Howard
correspondence emerged. Curry had observed in the book on combinatory logic,
Curry and Feys (1958), the analogy between implication elimination in natural de-
duction and functional application. The idea was as old as intuitionistic logic: By
the “BHK-explanation” (for Brouwer-Heyting-Kolmogorov), the forms of propo-
sitions in intuitionistic logic express prescriptions on how to prove those proposi-
tions: A conjunction A&B is proved by proving A and B separately, a disjunction
A ∨B by proving one of A and B, and an implication A ⊃B by showing how to
convert any proof of A into some proof of B, and so on. These explanations come
very close to the introduction rules of natural deduction, but it remains unknown
what their eﬀect on Gentzen’s thought was. An early, even if rather vague, pre-
sentation of intuitionistic logic in these terms is Heyting (1931). In Kolmogorov’s

684
Jan von Plato
paper (1932), propositions are interpreted as problems, and the BHK-explanations
show how solutions to composite problems reduce to their parts.
The Curry-Howard correspondence, from the paper by Howard of 1969, but
published only in 1980, is based on the “formulas-as-types” principle, or in another
jargon, on the “propositions-as-sets” principle. A proposition is thought of as its
set of proofs. Truth of a proposition corresponds to the non-emptiness of the set.
An implication A ⊃B is identiﬁed with the set of functions from A to B. Thus, if
f : A ⊃B and a : A, then functional application gives f(a) : B. The reverse, what
corresponds to the introduction of an implication, is captured by the principle of
functional abstraction of Alonzo Church’s λ-calculus (1932, 1941).
The intuitionistic explanation of implication was criticized as being circular in
the 1930s, the most prominent critic being G¨odel, as in his Zilsel lecture (1938),
and in the Yale lecture (1941): The proof of an implication A ⊃B is reduced
back to a method that converts an arbitrary proof of A into some proof of B.
This explanation assumes the notion of an arbitrary proof and cannot therefore
function as an explanation of the proof of an implication. G¨odel’s own response
was what came to be known as the Dialectica-interpretation, seen in emergence
in the Zilsel lecture and developed fully in the Yale lecture. The interpretation
became generally known only with its publication in the journal Dialectica in 1958.
Today it is seen that the circularity is avoided through a normal form theorem:
The explanation refers in the ﬁrst place to direct proofs of a proposition that have
a speciﬁc form, and the arbitrary proofs in Heyting’s explanation are reduced back
to the direct ones that appear through a normalization process. This conceptual
justiﬁcation of intuitionistic logic was worked out by Michael Dummett (1975) and
Per Martin-L¨of (1975).
The connections between natural deduction, typed λ-calculus, and constructive
type theory have led to a proof-theoretical notion of computation.
Functional
application corresponds to implication elimination: It gives an expression in a
non-evaluated form, and the computation of the value of the function is eﬀected
by what corresponds exactly to a normalization.
7
SEQUENT CALCULUS
Gentzen’s system NJ gives intuitionistic logic. As mentioned, Gentzen obtained
a system of classical logic NK by adding a rule of double negation.
Another
possibility that he mentions was to let instances of the law of excluded middle
appear among the topformulas of derivations. Now not all formulas in a (normal)
derivation need be subformulas of the open assumptions or the conclusion. To
obtain a proof system for classical logic with the subformula property, Gentzen
devised a calculus in which the single conclusion of each rule of natural deduction
is replaced by a ﬁnite number of possible cases. Such cases, say Θ, under the open
assumptions, say Γ, are expressed formally by a sequent written as Γ →Θ. In
Gentzen, Γ and Θ are lists of formulas, so that we can render sequent calculus as
“a calculus with lists of assumptions and cases.” The German word Sequenz means

Gentzen’s Logic
685
sequence. The use of the English “sequent” as a noun stems from Kleene’s book
Introduction to Metamathematics (p. 441), the motivation being that “sequence”
had another formal use in that book. This neologism has been taken over to several
other languages, with such contrived nouns as the Italian “sequente.”
We shall ﬁrst present sequent calculus as it appears from Gentzen’s published
papers, and then go on in the next Section to discuss its birth as seen from the
manuscript version of Ms.ULS.
Gentzen’s original explanation (1934–35, I.2.4) of the meaning of a sequent
A1, . . . , Am →B1, . . . , Bn was that its content is the same as that of the formula
A1& . . . &Am ⊃B1 ∨. . . ∨Bn.
A review of that work by Gentzen’s contem-
porary Arnold Schmidt in G¨ottingen instead contains the following: A sequent
A1, . . . , Am →B1, . . . , Bn means that “B1 or . . . Bn depends on the assumptions
A1 and . . . Am” (Schmidt 1935, p. 145). It is clear by circumstantial evidence that
this suggestion comes from Gentzen.
In reference to his ﬁrst paper (1936) on the consistency of arithmetic, Gentzen
writes in his second paper on the same topic (1938, 1.2):
In the previous work I had introduced the concept of a sequent, with
just one succedent formula, in its immediate connection to the natural
representation of mathematical proofs (5). It is possible to arrive at
the new, symmetric concept of a sequent also from that same point
of view, namely, by striving at a particularly natural representation of
the division into cases (see 4 of the previous work, and in particular
5.26). Namely, a ∨-elimination can now be represented simply as: From
→A ∨B one concludes →A, B, to be read as: ‘Both possibilities A
and B obtain’.
A formal calculus of sequents requires, besides logical rules, also rules for the
handling of lists of formulas in the antecedent (left) and succedent (right) parts of
sequents. Gentzen gives these ﬁrst, named the structural rules of sequent calculus:
Γ →Θ
D, Γ →Θ
LW
Γ →Θ
Γ →Θ, D
RW
D, D, Γ →Θ
D, Γ →Θ
LC
Γ →Θ, D, D
Γ →Θ, D
RC
Δ, D, E, Γ →Θ
Δ, E, D, Γ →Θ
LE
Γ →Θ, E, D, Λ
Γ →Θ, D, E, Λ
RE
Γ →Θ, D
D, Δ →Λ
Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
Cut
Table 14. The structural rules of sequent calculus LK.
Here L and R stand for left and right (A and S in Gentzen), W for weakening
(Verd¨unnung, abbr. Vd), C for contraction (Zusammenziehung, Zz), and E for
exchange (Vertauschung, Vt). Note the mirror-image arrangement of the rules,

686
Jan von Plato
conﬁrmed by the deviation from alphabetical order in the premiss of rule RE. Rule
Cut (Schnitt) is self-symmetric. It permits the composition of two derivations, one
with the case D, the other with the assumption D.
In the following logical rules of sequent calculus, the formulas displayed in the
premisses are the active formulas of a rule (Nebenformeln), and the one with
the connective or quantiﬁer the principal formula (Hauptformel). The upper case
Greek letters indicate what are today called the contexts of the rules; these can be
empty. In general, the antecedent or the succedent of a sequent can be empty. If
both are empty, we have the empty sequent →. The assumption of a formula A in
natural deduction corresponds to the initial sequent A →A by which derivations
start.
The logical rules of Gentzen’s classical sequent calculus are:
Γ →Θ, A
Γ →Θ, B
Γ →Θ, A&B
R&
A, Γ →Θ
B, Γ →Θ
A ∨B, Γ →Θ
L∨
A, Γ →Θ
A&B, Γ →Θ
L&1
B, Γ →Θ
A&B, Γ →Θ
L&2
Γ →Θ, A
Γ →Θ, A ∨B
R∨1
Γ →Θ, B
Γ →Θ, A ∨B
R∨2
Γ →Θ, A(y/x)
Γ →Θ, ∀xA
R∀
A(y/x), Γ →Θ
∃xA, Γ →Θ
L∃
A(t/x), Γ →Θ
∀xA, Γ →Θ
L∀
Γ →Θ, A(t/x)
Γ →Θ, ∃xA
R∃
A, Γ →Θ
Γ →Θ, ¬A
R¬
Γ →Θ, A
¬A, Γ →Θ
L¬
A, Γ →Θ, B
Γ →Θ, A ⊃B
R⊃
Γ →Θ, A
B, Δ →Λ
A ⊃B, Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
L⊃
Table 15. The logical rules of sequent calculus LK.
Rules R∀and L∃have the variable restriction that the eigenvariable y must not
occur free in the conclusion. The rules are displayed in a mirror-image symmetry
down to the last two that have no symmetry. These are separated in the German
original by a horizontal line, the ones above by a vertical line. The point is to
display the duality of & and ∨resp. ∀and ∃, and the self-duality of ¬ (1934–35,
III.2.2.4). Note that the symmetric arrangement is not reproduced in the layout
of the 1969 English translation of Gentzen’s papers.
Gentzen’s system of intuitionistic sequent calculus LJ is obtained from the clas-
sical calculus LK as a special case, by the requirement that the succedent consist
of at most one formula. This feature is one of Gentzen’s essential design principles
in his putting up the calculus LK, and it explains some of the main aspects of
the logical rules. First of all, rule L⊃has single-succedent instances only if the
contexts in the two premisses are independent of each other. Note that the other
two-premiss rules have instead “shared,” identical contexts. The explanation of

Gentzen’s Logic
687
this feature is that the proof of the main result for sequent calculus, Gentzen’s
famous Hauptsatz, is simpliﬁed a bit.
To display a further special feature of the calculus LK, consider the steps of
derivation
A, B, Γ →Θ
A&B, B, Γ →Θ
L&1
B, A&B, Γ →Θ
LE
A&B, A&B, Γ →Θ
L&2
A&B, Γ →Θ
LC
The result would be obtained in one step from the topsequent if instead of Gentzen’s
two rules one used a single left conjunction rule that concludes A&B, Γ →Θ from
A, B, Γ →Θ. The above steps of derivation show that this rule is a derivable rule
in LK. In the other direction, if say A, Γ →Θ is given, a weakening with B fol-
lowed by an exchange and the modiﬁed rule of left conjunction gives A&B, Γ →Θ,
and similarly if B, Γ →Θ is given. Thus, Gentzen’s rules are derivable by the
modiﬁed rule.
The presence of two left conjunction rules is explained by Gentzen’s wish to
display the duality of & and ∨: A dual single right disjunction rule would conclude
Γ →Θ, A ∨B from Γ →Θ, A, B, but this rule has no single-succedent instances.
The intuitionistic calculus would not come out as a special case, so Gentzen’s
solution was to have two left conjunction rules.
Gentzen’s remark in the end of the passage from 1938 quoted above amounts to
the invertibility of a single right disjunction rule, one that concludes Γ →Θ, A∨B
from Γ →Θ, A, B.
Invertibility of logical rules as a general phenomenon was
discovered by Ketonen (1944) and we shall discuss it shortly. An anticipation in
Ms.ULS is discussed in Section 8.
It should be clear that one can arrive at such choices as Gentzen’s regarding the
details of a logical calculus only by trying out various formulations. What they
were and how Gentzen reasoned about them is diﬃcult to say, for whatever papers
and notes Gentzen had left behind in G¨ottingen, they were destroyed in 1964 after
the death of Arnold Schmidt together with Schmidt’s papers. Essential new light
on the discovery of sequent calculus is now shed by the manuscript version of
Gentzen’s thesis.
Some variants of sequent calculi can be found in Gentzen’s papers. He mentions
in (1934–35, III.2.2) the possibility to let, among others, sequents of the form
A, A ⊃B →B be among the topsequents of derivations, and uses this in (1936)
and (1943) (the former natural deduction in sequent calculus style). Given the
premisses of L⊃, so Γ →Θ, A and B, Δ →Λ, the conclusion is obtained as
follows:
Γ →Θ, A
A, A ⊃B →B
Γ, A ⊃B →Θ, B
Cut
B, Δ →Λ
Γ, A ⊃B, Δ →Θ, Λ
Cut
A ⊃B, Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
LE*

688
Jan von Plato
The asterisk indicates as many left exchanges as are needed to bring A ⊃B in the
head of the antecedent. The two cuts are innocuous, because both cut formulas
are subformulas of A ⊃B that appears in the conclusion.
In Gentzen (1938), implication is considered a deﬁned notion. This possibility
is mentioned also in (1934–35, III.2.4.1), with the remark that the deﬁnition can
be given only in the classical calculus NK. In the sequent calculi of (1934–35), all
the standard connectives and quantiﬁers were present. A suﬃcient reason for this
is the requirement that the intuitionistic calculus be a special case of the classical
one. Possibly Gentzen had also some other ideas in the matter, because he states
that “not all of the rules are mutually independent, i.e., one could substitute some
by others. However, if we left some out, the ‘Hauptsatz’ would not hold anymore.”
(1934–35, III.2.1). If we take just some fragment of the language of predicate logic,
the rules for the connectives and quantiﬁers are complete for that fragment. It
seems that Gentzen’s thought was the following: If one deﬁnes logical operations
by others through equivalences, as in A ∨B ⊃⊂¬(¬A&¬B), these equivalences
can be put into use only by using them as cut formulas.
We now come to Gentzen’s Hauptsatz: The rule of cut can be eliminated from
derivations by permuting it up until it reaches initial sequents and gets removed
as superﬂuous. A mere look at the rest of the rules shows that derivations free of
the cut rule have the subformula property.
The proof of cut elimination proceeds by considering an uppermost cut, as in a
typical case of
Γ →Θ, A
Γ →Θ, B
Γ →Θ, A&B
R&
A, Δ →Λ
A&B, Δ →Λ
L&1
Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
Cut
Cut is permuted up as follows:
Γ →Θ, A
A, Δ →Λ
Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
Cut
Cut on A&B is replaced by a cut, or two cuts if R⊃and L⊃were applied, on
strictly shorter formulas. We note in passing that the “shared” contexts of rule R&
do a work here, as mentioned by Gentzen: Had they been independent, there would
have to be steps of weakening that restore the original contexts of the conclusion
of cut.
Another type of cut is met when the cut formula is not principal in the left
premiss, as in
C, Γ →Θ, A&B
C&D, Γ →Θ, A&B
L&1
A, Δ →Λ
A&B, Δ →Λ
L&1
C&D, Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
Cut

Gentzen’s Logic
689
Cut is permuted up as follows:
C, Γ →Θ, A&B
A, Δ →Λ
A&B, Δ →Λ
L&1
C, Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
Cut
C&D, Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
L&1
Here the rank of the cut is diminished by one: Trace up the cut formula from both
premisses of cut until its uppermost appearance. Rank is deﬁned as the sum of the
number of steps of derivation from these ﬁrst appearances to the cut. In Gentzen’s
proof of cut elimination, an uppermost cut in a derivation tree is eliminated, so
the proof is an induction on the number of cuts along branches of a derivation.
Secondly one considers the length of the cut formula, and thirdly the rank of the
cut.
When a cut is permuted up, it eventually reaches an initial sequent. When
one premiss of a cut is an initial sequent, the conclusion is identical to the other
premiss and the cut is deleted.
Gentzen met with one problematic case of cut elimination, one in which the cut
formula in the right premiss is principal in a contraction:
Γ →Θ, D
D, D, Δ →Λ
D, Δ →Λ
LC
Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
Cut
Two cuts on D are needed, with the result
Γ →Θ, D
Γ →Θ, D
D, D, Δ →Λ
Γ, D, Δ →Θ, Λ
Cut
D, Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
LE*
Γ, Γ, Δ →Θ, Θ, Λ
Cut
Γ, Δ →Θ, Λ
LC*,RC*
Here LE∗indicates as many left exchanges as are needed to bring D in front of
Γ and LC∗, RC∗left and right contractions that eliminate the duplications of Γ
and Θ. The cut formula remains the same, but the rank of the lower cut is not
reduced, even if the left exchanges LE∗were absent. Gentzen’s solution was to
introduce a stronger form of cut, in which any number of cut formulas can be
eliminated from the premisses of cut. He called it Mischung, rendered as mix in
some older English literature, and today often called multicut:
Γ →Θ
Δ →Λ
Γ, Δ∗→Θ∗, Λ
Cut*
Table 16. Gentzen’s mix rule.
In the rule, Θ and Δ are lists of formulas in which a “mix formula” D appears at
least once in both, and Θ∗and Δ∗are lists obtained from Θ and Δ through the

690
Jan von Plato
deletion of all occurrences of D. Gentzen writes that the new rule is introduced “to
make the proof easier” (1934–35, III.3.3.1). Intrigued by this remark, the present
author produced a proof of Gentzen’s Hauptsatz without multicut, by an analysis
of how the contraction formula ﬁrst appeared in the derivation of the right premiss
of cut (von Plato 2001).
Cut is a special case of multicut, so that the elimination theorem for the latter
gives also an elimination theorem for the former.
The mix rule treats the antecedents and succedents of sequents without regard
to the order of formulas. This feature can be carried through systematically for all
the rules of sequent calculus by using multisets of formulas instead of lists. Then
the exchange rules can be dropped out. If one treated the standard rule of cut in
this multiset way, the left exchanges LE∗in the problematic case of permutation of
cut given above would disappear, but still the lower cut would not have a reduced
rank.
The idea has been often tried of treating the antecedents and succedents as sets
instead of lists or multisets, which would lead to the exchange and contraction rules
being dropped out. Gentzen does not mention this possibility, and the conclusion
cannot be other than that he thought it not worth mentioning. The problem is
the purely extensional notion of a set: Two sets are equal if they have the same
members, and equals should be substitutable by equals. Logical rules, instead, are
intensional, they work on the forms of expressions. As an example, consider rule
R&, and let the premisses be A, B →C, D and A, B →C, E. (It is understood
that A, B →C, D stands for {A, B} →{C, D}, and so on.)
Now R& gives
A, B →C, D&E as a conclusion. If, however, C and D happen to be identical,
which is not in any way excluded by the schematic rule, then the premisses, with
sets rather than lists or multisets, are A, B →C (by the identity {C, D} = {C})
and A, B →C, E, and rule R& does not match the form of these two sequents.
Attempts at circumventing this kind of a problem lead invariably to rules that do
not operate on sets, but on expressions for sets, with some rule of substitution that
tells when one expression for a set can be replaced by another expression for the
same set. In the end, nothing at all is gained by the exercise: A rule that permits
to substitute an expression {C, C, D, . . .} for a set by the expression {C, D, . . .}
for an equal set is a rule of contraction.
The ﬁrst applications of the cut elimination theorem, to intuitionistic propo-
sitional logic, were listed above. Another application in Gentzen (1934–35) was
to the consistency problem of arithmetic. If the induction scheme is left out, cut
elimination goes through and the underivability of the empty sequent
→, ex-
pressing inconsistency, follows. This consistency result was known from the work
of Johann von Neumann and Jacques Herbrand, the names that Gentzen men-
tions. For him, this application showed the way to a future consistency proof of
the whole of Peano arithmetic within the new proof-theoretical system of sequent
calculus.

Gentzen’s Logic
691
8
THE ORIGINS OF SEQUENT CALCULUS
The manuscript version of Gentzen’s thesis contains the ﬁrst steps in sequent cal-
culus. The pertinent pages of Ms.ULS are numbered 29–32, but these numbers are
later additions to a text written in the “deutsche Schrift” of section I of Ms.ULS,
discussed in Section 5. A calculus NL3 is introduced, described as a “natural-
logistic parallel calculus.” The basic expressions of the calculus are taken over
from Hertz and are called “sentences” (Satz). They are written
A1, . . . , Aν ⊃B
and the reading is: “Proof of a proposition B from the assumptions A1, . . . , Aν.”
The notion of a proof is deﬁned inductively, with the “natural” calculus at left,
the “parallel” calculus at right:
I. A is a proof of A from A.
A
A ⊃A
Next a ﬁrst group of single proof steps is translated into sentences:
1.) The proof of Ph from (x)Px becomes
(x)Px
Ph
(x)Px ⊃Ph
Similarly, the rest of the rules become:
Ph
(Ex)Px
Ph ⊃(Ex)Px
A&B
A
A&B
B
A&B ⊃A
A&B ⊃B
A
A ∨B
B
A ∨B
A ⊃A ∨B
B ⊃A ∨B
A
A →B
B
A, A →B ⊃B
2.) A second group of proof steps come from the schematic rules of natural de-
duction that are translated into proper rules of NL3. The ﬁrst rule is ∀I. Gentzen
writes that “from a proof of P from A1 . . . Aν emerges (through the addition of
(x)Px, below) a proof for (x)Px from A1 . . . Aν.” The rules, in “parallel” writing
are, with Γ abbreviating A1 . . . Aν:
A1 . . . Aν
A1 . . . Aν
....
Pa
(x)Px
Γ ⊃Pa
Γ ⊃(x)Px

692
Jan von Plato
It is not explained why the Ai are repeated under the inference line. The part
from A1 . . . Aν to Pa at the left side, with a the eigenvariable, is circled around
and becomes the premiss of the rule at right.
The ﬁrst left rule comes from ∃E, and Gentzen writes that “from a proof of B
from Γ, [Pa] emerges a proof of B from Γ, (Ex)Px.” Brackets denote any number
⩾0 of occurrences of Pa, with a the eigenvariable. The parallel writing continues:
Γ (Ex)Px
Γ [Pa]
....
B
B
Γ [Pa] ⊃B
Γ (Ex)Px ⊃B
The part from Γ [Pa] to B at left is again circled.
Rule &I is the ﬁrst one with two premisses:
Γ
Γ....
A
Δ
Δ....
B
A&B
Γ ⊃A
Δ ⊃B
Γ Δ ⊃A&B
Note that the contexts are independent, as in natural deduction. Rules ∨E and
⊃I are:
Γ
A ∨B
Δ
[A]Γ
[B]Δ
....
C
C
C
[A]Γ ⊃C
[B]Δ ⊃C
(A ∨B)Γ Δ ⊃C
Γ
[A]Γ
....
B
A →B
[A]Γ ⊃C
Γ ⊃A →B
Finally, the rule of induction is translated into one concluding Γ P1 ⊃Ph from
Γ [Pa] ⊃Pa′.
Next comes stage II of the inductive deﬁnition of derivations:
II. Addition of a condition
(Thinning)
Γ....
B
becomes
Γ A
....
B
Γ ⊃B
Γ A ⊃B

Gentzen’s Logic
693
Combination
(Cut)
Γ....
A
and
Δ A
....
B
become
Δ
Γ....
A
....
B
Γ ⊃A
Δ A ⊃B
Γ Δ ⊃B
Gentzen describes his “natural-logistic parallel calculus” NL3 as follows (Ms.ULS,
p. 31):
The logistic form of proof arises from the natural one as follows: The
parts of proofs that arise in succession (nacheinander) in the construc-
tion of a natural proof are written symbolically one below the other
(untereinander).
The structure of proofs is described to have a tree form, with “axioms” as leaves.
These are of the forms
A ⊃A,
(x)Px ⊃Ph,
Ph ⊃(Ex)Px,
A&B ⊃A,
A&B ⊃B,
A ⊃A ∨B,
B ⊃A ∨B,
A, A →B ⊃B.
Table 17. Axioms of Gentzen’s “parallel calculus” NL3.
(The last axiom has a comma in the original, whereas Gentzen otherwise just
added some extra space.) Axioms are followed by applications of the rules, cut
included.
Gentzen notes that each logical operation has an axiom (or a pair of axioms) and
a rule, and that rules such as &I could be replaced by corresponding axioms, in
this case the axiom A, B ⊃A&B. This would, however, brake down a symmetric
arrangement.
In the other direction, all axioms for the “logical signs” can be
replaced by the following rules (Ms.ULS, p. 32):
Γ ⊃(x)Px
Γ ⊃Ph
Γ (Ex)Px ⊃C
Γ Ph ⊃C
Γ ⊃A&B
Γ ⊃A
Γ ⊃A&B
Γ ⊃B
A ∨B Γ ⊃C
A Γ ⊃C
A ∨B Γ ⊃C
B Γ ⊃C
Γ ⊃A →B
A Γ ⊃B
Table 18. Rules that replace axioms in NL3.

694
Jan von Plato
As an example, Gentzen gives the rule for the universal quantiﬁer. The axiom
(x)Px ⊃Ph gives the corresponding rule by
Γ ⊃(x)Px
(x)Px ⊃Ph
Γ ⊃Ph
The right premiss is indicated as an “axiom” and the step of inference as “cut.”
In the other direction, the rule gives
(x)Px ⊃(x)Px
(x)Px ⊃Ph
The premiss here is indicated as a “structural axiom.” The above rules are, writes
Gentzen, “largely analogous (inversions) to those in 2.”
The square brackets in the premisses of the logical rules of Gentzen’s ﬁrst se-
quent calculus NL3 indicate any number ⩾0 of copies of active formulas of sequent
calculus rules. Correspondingly, there is no rule of contraction. (By the same,
with zero occurences one could do away with weakening, though only for com-
pound formulas.) The possibility of permitting any number of active formulas and
no explicit rule of contraction (nor weakening) was (re)discovered by Sara Negri
in her studies of sequent calculi for linear logic. It was worked out systematically
for intuitionistic and classical sequent calculi in the paper Negri and von Plato
(2001a), titled Sequent calculus in natural deduction style.
Little did we know
that we had (re)developed the very ﬁrst form of sequent calculus ever!
The Ms.ULS contains also a brief consideration of a classical “logistic-dualistic”
sequent calculus LDK. The sentences have the form, now with commas,
A1, . . . , Aμ ⊃B1, . . . , Bν
The meaning of these sentences is explained as in the thesis: If each of the A
holds, then at least one of the B holds. It is further stated that “the order and
multiplicity of the A, resp. B, makes no diﬀerence.”
System LDK consists of the “structural axiom” A ⊃A and the related structural
rules of weakening and cut, written as:
Γ ⊃Δ
ΘΓ ⊃ΔΛ
Γ ⊃ΔA
AΘ ⊃Λ
ΓΘ ⊃ΔΛ
Table 19. Weakening and cut in the “dualistic” calculus LDK.
The axioms for the logical signs are given next, with implication a deﬁned notion.
The arrangement displays the dualities, just as in the structural and logical rules
of the published thesis.
Axioms
&
∨
A&B ⊃A
A ⊃A ∨B

Gentzen’s Logic
695
A&B ⊃B
B ⊃A ∨B
A, B ⊃A&B
A ∨B ⊃A, B
¬
A, ¬A ⊃
⊃A, ¬A
( )
(E)
(x)Px ⊃Ph
Ph ⊃(Ex)Px
Rules
Γ ⊃Pa
Γ ⊃(x)Px
Pa ⊃Γ
(Ex)Px ⊃Γ
Table 20. Logical axioms and rules of the calculus LDK.
Here the text abruptly ends.
9
RELATIONS BETWEEN NATURAL DEDUCTION AND SEQUENT
CALCULUS
The last chapter of Gentzen’s thesis contains proofs of the equivalence of axiomatic,
natural deduction, and sequent calculus formulations of logic through a cycle of
translations of derivations. The equivalence of natural deduction and axiomatic
presentations of logic was treated already in the Ms.ULS, section II. The corre-
spondence between natural deduction and sequent calculus is also present in the
manuscript, as we saw in the previous Section.
We shall consider here Gentzen’s translation from natural deduction to the
intuitionistic sequent calculus LJ. It consists of two phases, in the ﬁrst of which
each formula C in a derivation is replaced by a sequent Γ →C in which Γ lists the
open assumptions C depends on. If there was an I-rule in the natural deduction
derivation, we have, say,
Γ....
A
Δ....
B
A&B
&I
;
Γ →A
Δ →B
Γ, Δ →A&B
The translation gives the step R&, modulo a second phase of weakenings in the
premisses to get a rule with the shared context Γ, Δ in the premisses. The other
I-rules translate similarly, and there is a direct correspondence between introduc-
tions in natural deduction and right rules in sequent calculus.
With elimination rules, the translation is diﬀerent. For example, ⊃E is trans-
lated in the ﬁrst phase as
Γ....
A ⊃B
Δ....
A
B
⊃E
;
Γ →A ⊃B
Δ →A
Γ, Δ →B

696
Jan von Plato
In the next phase a cut is inserted as follows:
Γ →A ⊃B
Δ →A
B →B
A ⊃B, Δ →B
L⊃
Γ, Δ →B
Cut
The derivation in natural deduction could very well have been normal in Gentzen’s
sense, i.e., without consecutive I-E-pairs of rules, yet the result of translation is a
sequent calculus derivation with a cut. Gentzen does not comment on this issue.
However, another translation relates to the role of the structural rules of sequent
calculus: If in rule ⊃I several, say two, or no copies of formula A were discharged,
the translation gives, respectively,
A, A, Γ →B
A, Γ →B
LC
Γ →A ⊃B
R⊃
Γ →B
A, Γ →B
LW
Γ →A ⊃B
R⊃
Thus, the contraction stems from a multiple discharge of an assumption in natural
deduction, and the weakening from a vacuous discharge. The same holds for the
translation of rules ∨E and ∃E.
The correspondence that Gentzen’s work gives between weakening and vacuous
discharge and contraction and multiple discharge goes only in one direction, from
natural deduction to sequent calculus. It is possible to make the correspondence
exact in both directions by changing the rest of the elimination rules so that they
have an arbitrary consequence like ∨E and ∃E (as is done in von Plato 2001a).
By this change, the cuts produced by Gentzen’s translation of rules &E, ⊃E, and
∀E ﬁnd an explanation (see von Plato 2003). Furthermore, cuts in which the cut
formula is principal in a logical rule in the right premiss of cut, so in a left logical
rule, can be interpreted as non-normal instances of the corresponding elimination
rule of natural deduction.
A whole branch of logical studies has been inspired by the special role of
the structural rules of Gentzen’s sequent calculi, so-called “substructural logics.”
Gentzen himself did not think there could be any meaning in the structural rules
in isolation of a logical calculus. In his (1936, 5.244), he called these rules “struc-
tural modiﬁcations” and stated that “all these possibilities of modiﬁcation are of
a purely formal nature. It is only because of special features of the formalism that
these rules must be expressly given.”
In his thesis, Gentzen stated about the elimination rules that “it should be
possible to determine the elimination rules as unique functions of the corresponding
introduction rules, on the basis of certain conditions” (1934–35, III.5.12), but did
not pursue the matter further. A minimum condition is given by what is called
the Gentzen-Prawitz inversion principle: The elimination rule of a connective or
quantiﬁer should bring back that which is included in the suﬃcient conditions for
introducing that connective or quantiﬁer. The detour conversion schemes have
been seen as a formal manifestation of this idea: They justify the elimination rules

Gentzen’s Logic
697
in terms of the introduction rules, by showing how the grounds for introducing a
formula are recovered in the conversions.
The Gentzen-Prawitz inversion principle does not meet Gentzen’s requirement
of actually determining the elimination rules from the introduction rules, instead
of only justifying them. The principle can be generalized, as in Negri and von
Plato (2001, p. 6), into one in which one looks at the arbitrary consequences of
the suﬃcient grounds for introducing a formula, instead of those grounds. For
conjunction the grounds are A and B separately, and their arbitrary consequences
give the following general elimination rule, ﬁrst found by Schroeder-Heister (1984):
A&B
[A, B]
....
C
C
&E
Table 21. Schroeder-Heister’s conjunction elimination rule.
For implication, the suﬃcient ground for introducing A ⊃B is, in Gentzen’s
words, “the existence of a derivation of B from A” (1934–35, II.5.13).
First-
order logic is not able to represent formally within its language the existence of
a derivation. Therefore Schroeder-Heister (1984) considered a system of higher-
order rules.
At about the same time, Martin-L¨of (1984) formulated a general
scheme for elimination rules in his constructive type theory in which the existence
of a derivation can be expressed.
What has been said of implication goes also for universal quantiﬁcation: The
suﬃcient ground for concluding ∀xA is the existence of a derivation of A(y/x)
for an arbitrary y. Type theory can hypothesize the existence of a function that
produces, for any value of y, a proof of A(y/x), and express that a formula C
follows from the existence of such a function.
Looking ﬁnally at the rules of natural deduction in sequent calculus style, tables
11 and 12 above, we note that a normal instance of ∨E is
A ∨B →A ∨B
A, Δ →C
B, Θ →C
A ∨B, Δ, Θ →C
∨E
If the major premiss A ∨B →A ∨B is left unwritten, a left disjunction rule of
sequent calculus, with independent contexts, is obtained. The same observation
can be made about all the elimination rules when given in their general form (as in
von Plato 2001a). Thus, with this change of E-rules, normal derivations in natural
deduction in sequent calculus style and cut-free derivations in sequent calculus
itself become notational variants of each other. The real diﬀerence between the
two types of calculi becomes evident: The class of derivations with the logical
rules of natural deduction is closed with respect to composition of derivations,
whereas the class of derivations with the logical rules of sequent calculus is not:
A non-normal instance of a logical rule in the former is represented as a left rule
and a cut in the latter.

698
Jan von Plato
10
LATER DEVELOPMENTS AND APPLICATIONS OF SEQUENT
CALCULUS
Gentzen’s doctoral thesis marked the birth of structural proof theory, as contrasted
to the old axiomatic proof theory of Hilbert. As mentioned, the ﬁrst one to have
used Gentzen’s methods in print was Ingebrigt Johansson (1936).
In 1938, Katudi Ono published a paper that used sequent calculus for the study
of consistency problems of axiomatic systems. Gentzen himself wrote a review of
this paper, reprinted in Menzler-Trott (2001, pp. 91–92).
A remarkable step ahead in the development of systems of sequent calculus
was taken by Oiva Ketonen in his doctoral thesis of 1944. Ketonen, a student of
mathematics and philosophy in Helsinki, went to G¨ottingen in 1938 to study proof
theory with Gentzen, the closest to a student that the latter may have had. The
connection seems to have been established by his philosophy professor Eino Kaila
who had met Gentzen in 1936 in M¨unster. Ketonen recollected later to the present
author that Gentzen was a person who “did not say much anything.” In a letter
of December 1938 to his mother he mentions, in a rather frustrated tone, that
ﬁnally Gentzen has given him a problem to work on, but unfortunately the letter
does not tell what problem it was. If we had to guess, it would be the problem of
minimizing the number of eigenvariables in sequent calculus derivations, a problem
that was solved by Ketonen’s improvement on Gentzen’s midsequent theorem.
Ketonen’s best-known discovery is a sequent calculus for classical propositional
logic the logical rules of which are all invertible. The rules that are modiﬁed, in
comparison to Gentzen’s calculus LK, are as follows:
A, B, Γ →Θ
A&B, Γ →Θ
L&
Γ →Θ, A, B
Γ →Θ, A ∨B
R∨
Γ →Θ, A
B, Γ →Θ
A ⊃B, Γ →Θ
L⊃
Table 22. Classical sequent calculus with invertible rules.
Each connective has just one left and right rule. Further, all two-premiss rules
have shared contexts, and Ketonen obtains a fully invertible classical propositional
sequent calculus. Invertibility is proved after a proof of cut elimination, in the
manner of the following example of the invertibility of rule R∨: Assume the sequent
Γ →Θ, A ∨B to be derivable. Then also Γ →Θ, A, B is derivable:
Γ →Θ, A ∨B
A →A
A →A, B
RW
B →B
B →B, A
RW
B →A, B
RE
A ∨B →A, B
L∨
Γ →Θ, A, B
Cut
Derivations in the invertible calculus are found by decomposing the endsequent
in any order whatsoever: Given a sequent Γ →Θ to be derived, choose from Γ
or Θ any formula with a connective. The corresponding rule determines uniquely
the premisses. Repeating this root-ﬁrst proof search, as it is often called, formulas

Gentzen’s Logic
699
are decomposed into parts until there is nothing to decompose. At this stage, it
can be determined if the original sequent Γ →Θ is derivable, by controlling if all
topsequents are initial sequents. The process terminates in the case of classical
propositional logic in a bounded number of steps as determined by the number of
connectives in the given sequent.
Ketonen’s proof of invertibility of the logical rules of his sequent calculus used
the structural rule of cut. Later Kurt Sch¨utte (1950) and Haskell Curry (1963)
gave direct proofs of invertibility, the latter with the explicit result that the in-
versions are height preserving: If a given sequent is derivable in at most n steps,
the premisses in a rule that can conclude that sequent also have a derivation in at
most n steps.
The second part of Ketonen’s thesis contained an improvement on Gentzen’s
midsequent theorem. This result, from Gentzen (1934–35, IV.2), states that if a
sequent Γ →Θ is derivable in LK and all quantiﬁed formulas are in prenex nor-
mal form, there is a “midsequent” Γ′ →Θ′ in the derivation such that all logical
steps above the midsequent are propositional, and those below it quantiﬁcational.
Ketonen shows through suitable permutabilities of rules that the number of quan-
tiﬁcational inferences with an eigenvariable, i.e., of instances of R∀and L∃, can be
minimized, with the result that there is a weakest possible midsequent, one with
the property that if any midsequent is derivable, a weakest one is. He was fur-
ther able to deﬁne a recursively enumerable sequence of all possible midsequents
M1, M2, . . . for a sequent Γ →Θ, by which the undecidability of predicate logic
could be seen in a proper light: The derivability of any given midsequent Mi of
the sequence M1, M2, . . . is decidable, but at no ﬁnite stage can it be known if a
midsequent Γ′ →Θ′ for the sequent Γ →Θ to be derived shows up.
Gentzen (1934–35, IV.2.2) notes that Herbrand’s theorem is (for formulas in
prenex form) a special case of his midsequent theorem. He used the midsequent
theorem for a proof of the consistency of arithmetic without the induction principle
(1934–35, IV.3).
Ketonen’s main aim in deﬁning his weakest possible midsequents was to use
them in proofs of underivability. He writes in the introduction to his ﬁnal, third
chapter that “in proof theory, the most common task – the exclusive one in the ap-
plications we discuss – is to show the underivability of a given sequent. Our method
is especially directed towards this task.” By the deﬁning property of a weakest
possible midsequent, if it is not derivable, no midsequent is derivable, and neither
is the given sequent Γ →Θ. The application that Ketonen made of his method of
proofs of underivability was to plane projective and aﬃne geometry. The former
had been studied in Skolem (1920), a paper universally known for the L¨owenheim-
Skolem theorem contained in its ﬁrst part. The second part, mostly forgotten
until the 1990s, contains a polynomial-time algorithm for deciding derivability of
an atomic formula from a ﬁnite number of atomic formulas by the axioms of lattice
theory. The third part contains a similar result for plane projective geometry, with
the derivability relation between atomic formulas generalized into a ﬁnite number
of possible atomic cases, a generalization analogous to that in Gentzen’s sequent

700
Jan von Plato
calculus. Skolem needed it because one of his axioms of projective geometry con-
tains a disjunction in a positive part. To be able to analyze derivations of atomic
cases from atomic assumptions purely combinatorially, without the interference of
logical operations, he needed the generalization. Skolem’s method was to convert
the axioms into rules for the construction of formal derivations. The latter do not
appear anywhere in print in Skolem’s paper, but his verbal explanations amount
to as much (p. 116): “The axioms are in fact principles of demonstration.” The
chapter on Skolem’s logic of this Handbook contains more details about Skolem’s
paper.
Ketonen took up in the third part of his thesis Skolem’s geometrical work. He
used his classical sequent calculus, with the geometrical axioms appearing through
their instances in the antecedent parts of sequents. The cut elimination theorem
applies in this situation, and Ketonen ﬁrst repeated Skolem’s syntactic proof of the
independence of what is known as Desargues’ theorem in projective geometry. He
then went on to study aﬃne geometry, and gave a similar proof of independence
of Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate. Skolem’s and Ketonen’s axiomatizations corresponded
both to a purely universal axiom system, which leads to one essential miss in
geometry: the axiom of noncollinearity that states the existence of at least three
noncollinear points.
How much of Ketonen’s work stems from suggestions on the part of Gentzen
remains unknown, because no correspondence has been found. Ketonen writes in
the preface of his thesis that “Dr. G. Gentzen of G¨ottingen directed me towards the
problem area of this dissertation during my period of study there in 1938–1939.”
The thesis was Ketonen’s only original work in logic, saved from oblivion by a long
review that Bernays wrote of it for The Journal of Symbolic Logic in 1945. Two
somewhat earlier papers in Finnish mention results contained in the thesis, one
of them about the completeness of the predicate calculus, the other about proof
search with the invertible propositional rules (see Negri and von Plato 2001, pp.
60 and 86 for these, and also von Plato 2004a for more details on Ketonen).
In this account of early uses of Gentzen’s sequent calculus, we note Karl Popper’s
paper (1947). Its review in Mathematical Reviews by Evert Beth in 1947 attributes
aspects of Popper’s calculus to Gentzen, Jaskowski, and Ketonen, even if Popper
does not refer to them explicitly. The review shows that Beth knew the calculi of
Gentzen as well as the modiﬁcations made by Ketonen. When Beth later, in his
(1955), presented the tableau calculus, he did not refer to Ketonen but to Kleene
(1952).
The early work of Hertz, Gentzen, and Popper is discussed at length
in Bernays (1965). Invertibility of logical rules is ascribed to Popper, instead of
Ketonen, even if Bernays had made the issue completely clear twenty years earlier,
in his review (1945) of Ketonen’s thesis.
Ketonen’s invertible rules were taken to use by Kleene (1952a) in which it is
stated that the author knows Ketonen’s work only through the Bernays review.
Kleene further used them in his inﬂuential book of 1952 that also treated intuition-
istic sequent calculus in which not all rules can have invertibility. We may consider
that with Kleene’s book, Gentzen’s sequent calculi became generally known and

Gentzen’s Logic
701
accessible.
Kleene’s work of the early 1950s also pioneered a remarkable development in
sequent calculus, namely the “contraction-free” classical and intuitionistic calculi
today denoted by G3c and G3i. These calculi have the property that no structural
rules are needed. Weakening is made an admissible rule by letting initial sequents
have the form A, Γ →Δ, A, instead of Gentzen’s A →A. Contraction is likewise
made admissible by a suitable formulation of the rules. If we look at the invertible
rules of classical propositional logic, such as in table 22 above, we see how the
conclusion uniquely determines the premisses, once the rule applied is speciﬁed.
Thus, because of the invertibility of the logical rules, “the making of derivations
consists of purely mechanical decomposition.” These are the words of Ketonen
from a paper (1943) in Finnish that ﬁrst presented the calculus. He must have
taken it for granted that the rules of weakening and contraction are not needed
in his method of proof search for propositional logic. A calculus for intuitionistic
propositional logic with the same kind of termination of root-ﬁrst proof search
was found as late as 1992 by Roy Dyckhoﬀ, and at the same time also by J¨org
Hudelmaier.
The classical calculus has the property, mentioned above, of height-preserving
invertibility of its logical rules.
Albert Dragalin (1988, Russian original 1979)
reﬁned the calculus into one in which the structural rules are moreover “height-
preserving admissible,” meaning that whenever the premiss of such a rule is deriv-
able, the conclusion is derivable without the rule and with at most the same size
of derivation. This property has profound eﬀects on cut elimination: In permut-
ing cut up, Gentzen had to restore the original contexts through weakenings and
contractions. With the height-preserving admissibility of these rules, the size of a
derivation does not increase when the rules are applied. Dragalin (1988) gave also
an intuitionistic multisuccedent calculus with the same type of admissibility of
the structural rules. Troelsta, ﬁnally, gave in Troelsta and Schwichtenberg (2000,
ﬁrst ed. 1996) a single-succedent intuitionistic calculus with height-preserving ad-
missibility of weakening and contraction. The contraction-free sequent calculi are
powerful tools for the analysis of formal derivations. Many diﬃcult research results
in logic, such as Harrop’s theorem, become exercises through the control over the
structure of proofs that the G3-calculi permit.
The earliest application of sequent calculus in mathematics was in the proof
theory of arithmetic, in Gentzen’s thesis and in a decisive way in the 1938 proof
of the consistency of arithmetic, the latter to be discussed in Section 13. Troelstra
mentions Ketonen’s work as “an early analysis of cutfree proofs in Gentzen calculi
with axioms; but he considers the form of cutfree derivations in the pure calculus
where axioms are present in the antecedent of the sequents derived” (Troelstra
and Schwichtenberg 2000, p. 142). Another way to apply sequent calculus is to
let topsequents in derivations have the form
→A, in which A is an axiom,
or an instance of a universal axiom. Now, by Gentzen’s “extended Hauptsatz,”
cuts in derivations can be permuted up until one of their premisses is an axiom,
but these cuts on axioms remain.
Thus, it was believed that “cut elimination

702
Jan von Plato
fails in the presence of axioms,” as Girard (1987, p. 125) put it. Nevertheless, a
method was found by which axioms are converted into rules of sequent calculus of a
suitable form. These extend the logical rules of sequent calculus while maintaining
the eliminability of cuts. The method was discovered ﬁrst in the study of some
intuitionistic axiom systems for apartness and order, in Negri (1999). It was then
shown that the method applies to any universal axiom systems (Negri and von
Plato 1998). Finally, Negri (2003) showed that it extends to axiom systems the
axioms of which are “geometric implications,” a terminology drawn from category
theory. This vast class of axioms comprises the usual forms of existential axioms
in mathematics.
Extension of sequent calculus by the said method maintains cut elimination,
but atomic formulas typically get removed in the application of the rules so that
the subformula property of cut-free derivations is lost.
Instead, an inessential
modiﬁcation of the subformula property often applies, in which the number of
atomic formulas that can get removed is bounded. If we use a classical sequent
calculus, such as G3c, logical rules can be permuted below the mathematical ones,
so that the latter can be considered in isolation. All active formulas are atomic in
the rules, and the derivability problem of a mathematical theory concerns in the
ﬁrst place sequents Γ →Δ in which all formulas are atomic.
Consider a free-variable axiom A, given in conjunctive normal form.
Each
conjunct can be given as an implication
P1& . . . &Pm ⊃Q1 ∨. . . ∨Qn
with Q1 ∨. . . ∨Qn and ¬(P1& . . . &Pm) as limiting cases when m = 0 and n = 0,
respectively. These are turned into sequent calculus rules, with two possibilities:
Γ →Δ, P1
. . .
Γ →Δ, Pm
Γ →Δ, Q1, . . . , Qn
R-rule
Q1, Γ →Δ
. . .
Qn, Γ →Δ
P1, . . . , Pm, Γ →Δ
L-rule
Table 23. Axioms converted into sequent calculus rules.
The ﬁrst type of rule says that if each of the Pi follows as a case from some
assumptions Γ, then the Qj follow as cases, and the second is a dual to this. The
latter type of rules, the ones that act on the left part of sequents, are best seen in a
root-ﬁrst order. Assume given a system of such left rules and assume that Γ →Δ
contains only atomic formulas. Now try matching Γ →Δ as a conclusion to the
rules. Whenever there is a match, we have premisses that each get one new atomic
formula in the antecedent. Thus, in the end, we obtain the deductive closure of Γ
relative to the rules, with branchings into several possible closures each time there
is more than one premiss. The succedent Δ remains untouched by the rules. The
importance of height-preserving admissibility of contraction is that each rule has
to give a new atomic formula in a premiss. In the contrary case, the conclusion
would follow by the structural rules from a premiss that has a duplicated formula.
Many theories permit to restrict proof search for a sequent Γ →Δ with just
atomic formulas so that all terms in the derivation are terms known from Γ, Δ.

Gentzen’s Logic
703
Derivations with this property are said to have the subterm property, in analogy to
Gentzen’s subformula property of cut-free derivations. There is a bounded number
of distinct atomic formulas with known terms, and instances of rules that produce
duplications can be excluded by the height-preserving admissibility of contraction.
Therefore the search space for a derivation is bounded and the derivability problem
decidable. Theories with the subterm property include lattice theory, both in a
relational formulation as in Skolem’s early work (1920), as well as in a formulation
with the lattice operations (Negri and von Plato 2004). In a relational formulation,
there are axioms that postulate the existence of the lattice meet (resp. join) of any
two elements a, b of a lattice. The subterm property corresponds to the conser-
vativity of these existential axioms over the other lattice axioms, for derivations
with the mathematical rules. This conservativity was Skolem’s main lemma in his
early proof of the decidability of derivability with the axioms of lattice theory. In
a formulation with operations, we have for any two elements a, b a meet a∧b and a
join a∨b. The subterm property means that no new objects have to be constructed,
by which decidability of derivability with the lattice rules follows. We note that
ﬁrst-order lattice theory is not decidable.
Skolem (1920) established a result for plane projective geometry analogous to
that for lattices. As mentioned, this result was redone within sequent calculus by
Ketonen (1944) who also extended it to aﬃne geometry, but neither was able to
include the axiom of noncollinearity in their systems. The subterm property for
plane projective and aﬃne geometry with noncollinearity included, treated by the
method of extending sequent calculus with mathematical rules, was established
in von Plato (2004). The subterm property for these geometries has the eﬀect
that the existence of at least three non-collinear points is conservative over the
rest of the geometrical rules: A proper use of an existential axiom requires an
existential theorem, one could say. Decidability of derivability by the geometrical
rules follows, but as with lattice theory, the ﬁrst-order theory remains undecidable.
11
GENTZEN’S FIRST PROOF OF THE CONSISTENCY OF
ARITHMETIC
Gentzen’s thesis presented his analysis of the structure of derivations in pure logic.
The work was ﬁnished by the spring of 1933, and his next task, or actually the
task he had set aside to write up his doctoral thesis, was to ﬁnd a proof of the
consistency of elementary arithmetic through an analysis of arithmetic derivations.
This he succeeded in doing by the end of 1934, and the result was submitted for
publication in the following summer in a long paper with the title Die Wider-
spruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie (The consistency of pure number theory).
Criticisms by Bernays and G¨odel made Gentzen change his original proof into
one that uses the now famous method of transﬁnite induction up to the ordinal ϵ0.
As is indicated in the published paper of 1936, the most crucial part of the proof
was changed early in 1936. The original proof of consistency of arithmetic that
was submitted to Mathematische Annalen, the leading journal of mathematics at

704
Jan von Plato
that time, was preserved in the form of galley proofs.
An English translation
of the parts diﬀering from the 1936 version was published in Szabo’s edition of
Gentzen’s papers in 1969. The German original was published in 1974 with the
title Der erste Widerpruchsfreiheitsbeweis f¨ur die klassische Zahlentheorie (The
ﬁrst proof of consistency for classical number theory) and with a short introduction
by Bernays.
As explained in Bernays’ paper On the original Gentzen consistency proof for
number theory, of 1970, the criticism was that the proof “implicitly included an
application of the fan theorem.” In 1970, he held his own earlier criticisms doubt-
ful. Kreisel (1987, p. 174), in fact, reports a result by which the addition of the fan
theorem to Peano arithmetic would not make its consistency provable. The proof
is based, instead, on an induction over well-founded inﬁnitely branching trees, or
the “bar theorem” in other words.
Gentzen’s original proof of 1935 is the easiest one to understand of his altogether
four diﬀerent proofs of the consistency of arithmetic. It uses a system of natural
deduction for classical logic, and the basic idea can be described as follows: Assume
that a false formula C is derivable from some assumptions Γ. Think of an attempt
at falsifying C through a “worst possible” situation. Say, if C is ∀xA, a falsifying
instance A(n/x) is chosen. The task is to show that in this situation, also some
formula in Γ can be falsiﬁed. Then, if C is derivable from Γ and no formula in Γ
can be falsiﬁed, also C is unfalsiﬁable.
Gentzen’s 1935 system has just the rules for the connectives ¬ and & and the
universal quantiﬁer, written in sequent calculus style. The rules for & and ∀are
as in tables 11 and 12. The rules for negation are:
Γ →¬¬A
Γ →A
DN
A, Γ →B
A, Δ →¬B
Γ, Δ →¬A
Wid
Table 24. Gentzen’s 1935 negation rules.
Wid stands for the German “Widerlegung,” or refutation of the assumption A
that leads to contradictory conlusions. The rule is substantially the same as a rule
of negation introduction. Gentzen notes (12.4) that the rule of double negation
could be left out, because it has the same eﬀect as the rule of indirect proof that
is admissible.
The induction rule is
A(y/x), Γ →A(sy/x)
A(0/x), Γ →A(t/x)
Ind
Table 25. Gentzen’s induction rule in sequent calculus style.
Here y is an eigenvariable, not free in the conclusion of the rule, and t is any term.
The rest of the arithmetical axioms are treated as in Section 13 below, and here
we consider only the logical rules and the induction rule. Gentzen does not deal
with the question of the closure with respect to composition of derivations in his
system of rules.

Gentzen’s Logic
705
The attempt at falsiﬁcation can be described, let us hope not too anachronisti-
cally because the idea is so immediate, as a game against an omniscient “falsiﬁer,”
and the consistency of arithmetic follows from the availability of a “winning strat-
egy” in such a game. Given a sequent Γ →C, a reduction procedure, in Gentzen’s
words, is deﬁned for it. Reduction is eﬀected by suitable moves: First certain
“S-moves” that operate on the succedent part are taken by the falsiﬁer. One tries
to respond to these by certain “A-moves” on the antecedent part of the given
sequent. The former moves are determined by the form of the given sequent, as
follows:
SVar. Γ →C has free variables. These are instantiated at will.
S&. Γ →A&B. One of Γ →A or Γ →B is chosen.
S¬. Γ →¬A. The reduced sequent is A, Γ →0 = 1.
S∀. Γ →∀xA. Some instance Γ →A(k/x) is chosen.
Table 26. Gentzen’s reduction rules in the succedent part.
The order of precedence among the S-moves is that move SVar comes before the
other S-moves. The falsiﬁer knows how to end up with the worst possible case,
here, a false equation as a conclusion. Each step the falsiﬁer takes simpliﬁes the
succedent of the sequent to be reduced until an equation m = n remains. If the
equation is true, the falsiﬁer lost. Otherwise, when no S-move is applicable and
m = n is false, one tries to show that some of the assumptions must contain a
falsity, too. To do this, the following moves are available:
A&. The sequent is A&B, Γ →m = n with m = n false. For the reduced
sequent, one of A, Γ →m = n and B, Γ →m = n is chosen.
A¬. The sequent is ¬A, Γ →m = n with m = n false. The reducent sequent
is ¬A, Γ →A.
A∀. The sequent is ∀xA, Γ →m = n with m = n false. For the reduced sequent
A(k/x), ∀xA, Γ →m = n with some k is chosen.
Table 27. Gentzen’s reduction rules in the antecedent part.
The order of precedence is that S-moves come always before A-moves. The aim
is to produce a false formula in the antecedent part of a sequent, whenever the
falsiﬁer has produced one in the succedent.
Note that if a negation at left is
reduced, the falsiﬁer is in turn, unless it was a negation of an equality. Given a
sequent Γ →C, the result of the falsiﬁcation moves is a sequent to which no such
move applies. Thus, the aim is to construct a winning strategy in the falsiﬁcation
game, to meet whatever choices the falsiﬁer may make.
A sequent is deﬁned as irreducible if no reduction move applies to it. A sequent
Γ →m = n is in endform if either m = n is true or there is some false equality
in Γ. Finally, a sequent Γ →C is unfalsiﬁable if for any choices of S-moves, there
are A-moves such that Γ →C reduces to endform.

706
Jan von Plato
Gentzen’s consistency proof shows that all derivable sequents are unfalsiﬁable.
It follows that the sequent
→0 = 1 is not derivable, because it is irreducible but
not in endform: No equation in the antecedent is false, because there are none.
The proof proceeds by ﬁrst showing, by induction on formula length, that ini-
tial sequents reduce to endform. Next a crucial lemma shows that if two sequents
Γ →A and A, Δ →C are reducible to endform and possible eigenvariables dis-
tinct, their composition into Γ, Δ →C is reducible to endform. The proof is by
induction on the length of the composition formula A. Next it is shown by induc-
tion on the height of a derivation that if the premisses of the logical rules and the
induction rule reduce to endform, also their conclusions reduce to endform. It then
follows that if the sequent Γ →C is derivable, it is unfalsiﬁable. Consistency is
an immediate corollary: The sequent
→0 = 1 is irreducible but not in endform,
and therefore it is not derivable.
Our description of Gentzen’s proof is straightforward enough. However, Gentzen
does not always state in any clear terms how his proofs are structured, or even
what precisely is being proved. Such things have to be worked out by the reader.
There are other kinds of loose ends, as well: As mentioned, closure with respect
to composition of derivations in Gentzen’s rule system is not treated. Secondly,
Gentzen does not use any normal form in his proofs, which makes them compli-
cated. Lack of such a form is reﬂected in the use of the crucial lemma, closure
of reduction to endform under composition, in the proof of the main result about
the reducibility to endform of derivable sequents. Composition has to be used not
only with the rule of induction, contrary to what one would expect, but also with
the logical rules DN and Wid, which can be avoided through the use of a normal
form for derivations. (For a detailed proof along the lines sketched here, see von
Plato 2005.)
The reduction procedure gives an inﬁnity of choices when S∀is applied, thus a
winning strategy has to be deﬁned inductively in an inﬁnitely branching tree.
12
CRITICISMS OF GENTZEN’S CONSISTENCY PROOF
Gentzen’s original consistency proof was the most important result in logic and
foundations after G¨odel’s incompleteness theorems. It aroused immediate inter-
est, especially through Bernays who stayed at the Institute for Advanced Study
in Princeton in 1935–36. He had sailed in September 1935 over the Atlantic, in
the company of G¨odel and with Gentzen’s manuscript in his briefcase. Correspon-
dence between Bernays and Gentzen documents to some extent the objections to
Gentzen’s ﬁrst proof. Only Gentzen’s letters have been preserved. G¨odel made
a suggestion to change the proof, of which we only know, in Gentzen’s words,
that “the modiﬁcation suggested by G¨odel was known to me, but it is in reality
not usable from the ﬁnitary point of view, due to its impredicative character.”
(Menzler-Trott 2001, p. 58, and also Kreisel 1987, pp. 173–174). At that time,
Gentzen took his proof to be ﬁnitary, even if not representable in arithmetic. He
writes in the original version that the methods used in the proof are undoubtable

Gentzen’s Logic
707
(“unbedenklich”) or “at least essentially more secure than the doubtable forms of
inference of pure number theory.” The reason is that his methods are “ﬁnitary in
a speciﬁc sense,” as deﬁned in his paper. “That this is the case shall be considered
more closely in Section V.” (p. 98 of the German version). In the printed paper,
the last passage was changed into: “To what extent this is the case...”
After the criticism of Bernays, G¨odel, and possibly also von Neumann, Gentzen
changed his original proof. The reason was not that there was objectively some-
thing to criticize: As mentioned, it can be shown that the “fan theorem” Bernays
thought to be an illicit moment behind Gentzen’s proof, would not make the
consistency of Peano arithmetic provable. Before any criticisms and before the
ﬁrst proof, Gentzen had conceived a diﬀerent argument for the termination of the
reduction procedure, one that uses transﬁnite induction. A speciﬁc notation is
created to this purpose in the published version of 1936; However, in his two later
proofs, of 1938 and 1943, Gentzen used the standard notation for ordinal numbers.
Gentzen’s ordinal ϵ0 can be deﬁned as follows in such a notation: Let ω stand for
the ordinal of the natural numbers, and let ω0 ≡0 and ωn+1 ≡ωωn. The ordinal
ϵ0 is the limit of ωn when n grows to inﬁnity.
The 1936 paper suﬀered modiﬁcations in two long sections, which created incon-
gruities with earlier parts that remained unchanged. At the same time, Gentzen
took the occasion to simplify the proof through a modiﬁcation of the system of
natural deduction, by replacing most of the logical rules with “axioms” as in the
Ms.ULS (see Section 8 above). Last, the general procedure for the reduction of
sequents was not used at all, but a new one for the reduction of derivations.
In the modiﬁed second proof of the consistency of arithmetic, the number of
logical rules of natural deduction is cut down by admitting the following sequents
among the initial sequents:
A&B →A
A&B →B
A, B →A&B
∀xA →A(t/x)
A, ¬A →0 = 1
¬¬A →A
Table 28. The initial sequents of Gentzen’s 1936 calculus.
Of the logical rules only ∀I and ¬I (Gentzen’s Wid) remain. All the other ones
follow from the added initial sequents through Gentzen’s “chain rule”:
Γ1 →A1
. . .
Γn →An
A1, . . . An, Δ →C
Γ1, . . . Γn, Δ →C
Chn
Table 29. Gentzen’s chain rule.
In terms of standard natural deduction, the eﬀect of the chain rule is that the open
assumptions A1, . . . An of a derivation are substituted through their derivations in
a simultaneous substitution.
In Bernays (1970), a proof of consistency is sketched that uses the idea of
Gentzen’s unpublished proof, but the logical calculus is not the one of the orig-
inal proof. It is, instead, the above modiﬁcation taken from the printed proof

708
Jan von Plato
of 1936. The reader has some diﬃculty in gathering these details from Bernays’
presentation.
Bernays wrote a review (1936a) of the published proof that explains in a factual
way the central method of the proof. He then states that by G¨odel’s incomplete-
ness theorem, the transﬁnite induction principle cannot be provable in arithmetic,
whereas inductions to strictly below ϵ0 would. How the latter follows is not indi-
cated.
G¨odel’s struggles with Gentzen’s proof became public only in 1958, with the ap-
pearance of his paper ¨Uber eine bisher noch nicht ben¨utzte Erweiterung des ﬁniten
Standpunktes (On a so far unused extension of the ﬁnitary position) in the jour-
nal Dialectica. The third volume of G¨odel’s Collected Works, with the previously
unpublished lectures and papers, shed a lot more light on his involvement with
the consistency of arithmetic. Gentzen’s proof must have come as a surprise to
him. Nothing in his own work indicates that he would have been preoccupied
with a constructive proof of consistency.
By the end of 1938, instead, he had
distinguished three ways to treat the consistency problem. These are found in the
“Zilsel” lecture in the third volume: the use of higher-order primitive recursive
functionals, the use of provability logic, and the use of transﬁnite induction. The
“Yale” lecture of 1941, in the same volume, is a ﬁnished presentation of G¨odel’s
position and his consistency proof for arithmetic. As its title In what sense is intu-
itionistic logic constructive? indicates, G¨odel had doubts about the intuitionistic
explanation of logic. Especially, the explanation of a proof of an implication was
considered circular, as discussed towards the end of Section 6 above. Thus, G¨odel
formulated a “logic-free” hierarcy of primitive recursive arithmetic functionals that
can interpret the intuitionistic logic used in Heyting arithmetic. Consistency of
arithmetic reduces to the computability of terms in G¨odel’s functional calculus.
One may ask why G¨odel did not publish his own alternative proof of the consis-
tency of arithmetic at the time, in the early forties. G¨odel’s relative silence is in
contrast with the picture one gets from his Arbeitshefte: As seen from Dawson and
Dawson (2005), these are full of notes on work concerned with Gentzen’s proof,
treated from diﬀerent points of view. One of G¨odel’s reasons for not publishing
may have been the “shifting interests towards philosophy” that he later recollected
in connection with the work on the independence of the axiom of choice from the
same time. However, the interesting question from a systematic point of view is
what real novelty there is in G¨odel’s proof. Isn’t it clear that if the computability
of terms in a hierarchy of primitive recursive functionals secures the consistency
of arithmetic, then there should be somewhere hidden a principle equivalent to,
or even stronger than, Gentzen’s transﬁnite induction to the ordinal ϵ0? That
the two methods are equivalent from this point of view follows from Tait’s (1967)
interpretation of G¨odel’s theory of primitive recursive functionals in Heyting arith-
metic. Tait (2001,2005) oﬀers profound discussions and comparisons of Gentzen’s
proof and G¨odel’s 1938 view of it.
The deepest foundational issue in the 1930s was the incompleteness of mathe-
matics and its aftermath, in which latter G¨odel and Gentzen were the dramatis

Gentzen’s Logic
709
personae.
Gentzen never learned about G¨odel’s way out, unless the latter de-
scribed it when they came to know each other in December 1939. Still, Gentzen
had the last word anyway, by his last paper of 1943. The closest G¨odel came to an
appreciation of Gentzen’s determination of the proof-theoretical strength of Peano
arithmetic, doubtless the most important step ahead after his own paper of 1931,
seems to be a passage in a letter of March 1966 to Constance Reid who at the
time was preparing her Hilbert-biography. He ﬁrst states (Collected Works, vol.
V) that Hilbert had tried to prove the consistency of classical mathematics “on
the basis of concrete evidence” and continues that “viewing the situation from
a purely mathematical point of view, consistency proofs on the basis of suitably
chosen stronger metamathematical presuppositions (as they have been given by
Gentzen and others) are just as interesting, and they lead to highly important
insights into the proof theoretic structure of mathematics.”
13
THE NEW PROOF OF CONSISTENCY OF 1938
The main novelty of Gentzen’s second proof of the consistency of arithmetic was
the assignment of ordinal numbers to sequents in derivations and the proof that
each reduction step on derivations diminishes the ordinal of the endsequent. How-
ever, Gentzen was not satisﬁed with the way the proof came to be presented. His
style, as such, creates diﬃculties with its long, verbose arguments the details of
which have to be laboriously worked out by the reader. Added to this come the
incongruities created by substantial changes that were not worked through for the
whole paper. Thus, in 1938, Gentzen returned to the topic and published a third
proof of the consistency of arithmetic. Its aim was, in his own words, “to detail
out the basic ideas and to make each single step of the proof as understandable as
possible.” In a letter to Bernays of 12 May 1938, Gentzen writes about his paper
that “it should be fairly clearly visible from the new presentation how I arrived
at the consistency proof, through the method of proof of my dissertation.” (from
Menzler-Trott 2001, p. 79).
The logical calculus is the classical sequent calculus LK of Gentzen’s thesis, with
implication left out. The rule of induction is as in table 25 above, but with an
arbitrary context Θ added in the succedent. The rest of the arithmetical axioms
are converted into “mathematical basic sequents.” Each of these axioms is of the
form P1& . . . &Pn ⊃Q in which the Pi and Q are equations, with possibly n = 0.
These implications are turned into sequents of the form P1, . . . , Pn →Q. The
“extended Hauptsatz” of Gentzen’s thesis states that if among the topsequents
of derivations mathematical basic sequents are permitted, the rule of cut can be
permuted up so that it is applied only to formulas in such sequents. Then the
question of the consistency of arithmetic concerns just the logical rules (together
with the structural rules) and the rule of induction. The rule of cut is indispensable
among the structural rules.
Gentzen’s “new proof” of 1938 shows directly that there cannot be any deriva-
tion of the empty sequent
→. The idea of the proof is to show that if there is

710
Jan von Plato
such a derivation, it can be simpliﬁed. First a procedure is given for the conver-
sion of any derivation of the empty sequent into a simpler form. Next it is shown
that the conversion steps terminate with something that cannot be a derivation of
the empty sequent. The termination proof is based on the assignment of ordinals
to sequents occurring in a derivation, and to a proof that each conversion step
decreases the ordinal of an empty endsequent. In the end, a derivation of
→
exists only if
→
is a conclusion of a logical rule, which it is not.
The proof analyzes the endpiece (Endst¨uck) of a derivation, deﬁned as the sub-
derivation obtained by starting from the endsequent and including each sequent
until an initial sequent or a conclusion of a logical rule is reached. The proof begins
with the following: If there is an instance of rule Ind in the endpiece and if the
term t in its conclusion is a variable, it can be substituted by 0. Otherwise it is
some number i and we have:
A(y/x), Γ →Θ, A(sy/x)
A(0/x), Γ →Θ, A(i/x)
Ind
The sequent A(y/x), Γ →Θ, A(sy/x) is derivable for any numerical value of y.
The induction up to i is replaced by i −1 cuts on such instances, as in
A(0/x), Γ →Θ, A(1/x)
A(1/x), Γ →Θ, A(2/x)
A(0/x), Γ2 →Θ2, A(2/x)
Cut
....
A(0/x), Γi−1 →Θi−1, A(i −1/x)
A(i −1/x), Γ →Θ, A(i/x)
A(0/x), Γi →Θi, A(i/x)
Cut
Here the exponents denote equally many copies of the contexts. The copies are
eliminated by contractions until the conclusion of the original Ind is recovered.
After inductions up to numbers have been replaced by cuts, the endpiece contains
only structural rules.
A crucial lemma (in paragraph 3.4.3 of Gentzen’s paper) shows that there are at
least two sequents beginning the endpiece such that a cut formula of the endpiece
is principal in a left and a right rule, respectively. The purported proof of this
lemma is a long, verbose argument from which it is very diﬃcult to see how it
actually establishes what the lemma claims. An alternative proof is contained in
Takeuti’s book Proof Theory of 1975.
The diﬃculty in Gentzen’s lemma stems from the presence of other structural
rules than cut in the endpiece. If the endpiece has only cuts, with n distinct cut
formulas, there are n + 1 leaves in the endpiece so that either one cut formula
appears at least twice on the same side of at least one sequent, and could be
contracted and the number of cuts reduced, or at least one cut formula is principal
on a left and right side, respectively, of a leaf in the endpiece.
By the lemma, at least one cut in the endpiece can be simpliﬁed by replacing it
with cuts on shorter formulas, just as in our ﬁrst example of permutation of cut
in Section 7. Here we see at work the “method of proof of my dissertation,” as

Gentzen’s Logic
711
Gentzen wrote in the letter of May 1938 to Bernays quoted above. However, the
matter is not as simple in 1938 as it was in the doctoral thesis: After the cut has
been permuted up into cuts with shorter formulas, cuts with these formulas have
to be repeated lower down in the derivation. It is crucial that in these cuts, the
cut formula be principal only in the right premiss. Now the concepts of H¨ohe and
H¨ohenlinie are introduced: The height of a sequent in a derivation is the maximal
length of a cut or induction formula below the given sequent in the derivation.
The empty endsequent has height 0, and height-lines indicate places at which the
height gets diminished. The eﬀect of Gentzen’s overall transformation (1938, 3.5)
is that the height-line gets, so to say, pulled up in the derivation. We shall not
go into the complicated details of this proof, save to say that still today, no proof
without the H¨ohenlinie and with the same ordinal ϵ0 as in Gentzen’s proof seems
to have emerged. (We owe this information to Wilfried Buchholz.)
The formal proof of termination of the reduction process for derivations of the
empty sequent uses an assignment of ordinals to sequents in derivations, and the
veriﬁcation that each reduction step decreases the ordinal of the empty endsequent.
Gentzen’s third proof of the consistency of arithmetic gave a concise and con-
vincing presentation of the result. Others oﬀered soon alternatives to Gentzen’s
treatment of the matter in terms of sequent calculus: Laszlo Kalmar gave in 1938 a
proof of consistency within the axiomatic tradition of logic, explained in the second
edition of the second volume of Hilbert and Bernays’ Grundlagen der Mathematik
(1970). The original paper can be found in the Bernays archives at ETH-Zurich.
In 1940, Wilhelm Ackermann published a proof based on some ideas of Hilbert’s,
ideas that Ackermann himself had applied in his proof of consistency of arithmetic
without the principle of induction in the mid-1920s. In the late 1930s, after so-
licitations on the part of Bernays, Ackermann recast Gentzen’s proof in terms of
Hilbert’s so-called ϵ-calculus (the name is a coincidence and has nothing to do
with the ϵ of Gentzen’s induction principle).
14
GENTZEN’S LAST PAPER
Gentzen ﬁnished in 1939 what is known as a Habilitationsschrift, a kind of second
thesis by which one establishes oneself as part of a university department in Ger-
many. The script became Gentzen’s last paper published during his lifetimes: the
Beweisbarkeit und Unbeweisbarkeit von Anfangsf¨allen der transﬁniten Induktion
in der reinen Zahlentheorie. (Provability and unprovability of initial segments of
transﬁnite induction in pure number theory). It came out in the Mathematische
Annalen in 1943, in a last issue to appear for years. Quite amazingly, a review of
the paper appeared in the United States during the war, in 1944. The reviewer
was Bernays who had moved to Switzerland after 1933. He worked as a bridge
between European and American logicians through the late thirties and the war:
The present author has seen a letter from Bernays to Georg Henrik von Wright
who wrote reviews for The Journal of Symbolic Logic in Helsinki during the war.
Bernays asks for second copies of the reviews, because the air mail letters with the

712
Jan von Plato
original reviews “were destroyed in an air attack.”
Despite Bernays’ eﬀorts, the methods of Gentzen’s 1943 paper, or the earlier
1938 paper, did not become widely used: Both works remained by and large
unread in the 1940s and early 1950s, except for a chosen few such as Sch¨utte,
Kreisel, and Takeuti. Kleene’s Introduction to Metamathematics had covered the
logical aspects of sequent calculi, but no accessible introduction to the proof theory
of arithmetic was available before Takeuti’s Proof Theory of 1975. Even today, one
can ﬁnd whole books devoted to G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem, both popular and
scientiﬁc, that do not as much as mention Gentzen, the person who has contributed
most to solving the problems of consistency and incompleteness of arithmetic.
Gentzen’s idea in his last paper was to extend the domain of natural numbers
by constructive ordinals and to formulate transﬁnite induction as a separate rule of
proof within the extended system. The basis was, as in 1938, his classical sequent
calculus LK of the doctoral thesis of 1933.
He then proceeded to prove that
transﬁnite induction up to ordinals below ϵ0 is an admissible rule of the sequent
calculus for arithmetic with ordinary induction. This observation, apparently due
in some form to Bernays, was made already in 1936.
As a second and main result, Gentzen showed that transﬁnite induction up to ϵ0
is not provable by ordinary arithmetic, even if it is expressible in arithmetic. By the
unprovability of transﬁnite induction, arithmetic is consistent, because anything
would be provable in an inconsistent system. Secondly, arithmetic is incomplete:
Transﬁnite induction expressed as an arithmetic formula is a true but unprovable
sentence. As Gentzen points out, transﬁnite induction is a mathematical principle,
whereas G¨odel’s original proof of incompleteness had produced a “metamathemat-
ical” principle that was coded into arithmetic through G¨odel numbering. Thus, it
was often held to be an artiﬁcial construction that has no serious bearing on “real
mathematics.”
The type O of ordinal numbers below ϵ0 is deﬁned by the following inductive
clauses. 1. 0 : O. 2. If α : O and β : O, then α + β : O. 3. If α : O, then ωα : O.
The basic relations among ordinals are α = β, α ≺β , and α ⪯β. The following
notation is used: ω0 ≡0, ω1 ≡1 ≡ω0, ω2 ≡ω, . . . , ωα+1 ≡ωωα if α ≺ω, and
ωα ≡0 if α ¡ ω.
The place of natural numbers is taken by the ﬁnite ordinals: those α for which
α ≺ω. The successor function for natural numbers is represented as sn ≡n+ω0 ≡
n + 1. Ordinals for which α ≺ω is not the case are transﬁnite ordinals. The rule
of induction is as follows:
y ≺ω, A(y/x), Γ →Θ, A(sy/x)
t ≺ω, A(0/x), Γ →Θ, A(t/x)
Ind
Table 30. Gentzen’s 1943 rule of induction.
As in the rule of table 25, y is the eigenvariable. The only diﬀerence with the
earlier rule is that the ﬁniteness conditions y ≺ω and t ≺ω have been added in
the assumption parts.

Gentzen’s Logic
713
The rule of transﬁnite induction is
y ≻0, ∀z(z ≺y ⊃A(z/x)), Γ →Θ, A(y/x)
A(0/x), Γ →Θ, A(t/x)
TI
Table 31. Gentzen’s rule of transﬁnite induction.
Also here, y is the eigenvariable of the rule. If t is a numerical term (an ordinal
less than ϵ0), application of TI gives a “derivation of transﬁnite induction up to
the ordinal t.”
Gentzen shows ﬁrst that rule TI is not needed below ϵ0.
To this purpose,
he introduces a one-place “property parameter” P. When P(0) →P(t) is the
endsequent of a derivation, we have “derivability of transﬁnite induction up to t.”
Gentzen proves that if t is a numerical term, then P(0) →P(t) is derivable from
the premiss t ≻0, ∀y(y ≺t ⊃P(y)) →P(t) of rule TI in the calculus LK+Ind.
The main result is that transﬁnite induction up to ϵ0 is not derivable in the
calculus LK+TI, unlike inductions to lesser ordinals. The proof is based on the
reduction procedure of the third, 1938 proof of consistency of arithmetic. First the
notion of an endpiece is extended to LK+TI. In 1938, the endpiece ended with an
empty sequent; now instead, the endsequent has the form P(0) →P(t1), . . . , P(tn).
The next step is to assign ordinals to derivations of such endsequents. A crucial
lemma states that in a derivation of an endsequent, the least of the ordinals ti
cannot be greater than the ordinal of the derivation, or else the derivation can be
reduced. The ordinals of derivations are less than ϵ0, so it follows that transﬁnite
induction up to ϵ0 is not derivable.
A more precise result can be given: In a
derivation of P(0) →P(t), the maximum length n of induction formulas in the
derivation has the following connection to t: t ≺ωn+3.
Gentzen’s last paper marked the beginning of the second main direction of proof
theory in addition to structural proof theory, namely ordinal proof theory. The
proof-theoretical ordinal of a theory is deﬁned as the least ordinal that is needed
for proving its consistency, just as with ϵ0 for Peano arithmetic. The central aim
in ordinal proof theory has been to determine the proof-theoretical ordinals of
ever stronger subsystems of second-order arithmetic. Among the highlights of this
development is the determination of the “ordinal of predicativity” around 1964,
independently of each other, by Sch¨utte and Solomon Feferman. The present state
is marked by ordinal analysis of the principle of Π1
2-comprehension in the work of
Toshiyasu Arai and Michael Rathjen. These developments are reviewed in Rathjen
(1995) and (1999).
15
MISCELLANEA
We recall here brieﬂy the contents of those papers of Gentzen that have not been
discussed above.
Gentzen published in 1936 a proof of the consistency of Russell’s simple theory
of types. The same result was proved by Alfred Tarski (1933), as Gentzen was

714
Jan von Plato
eager to point in a few lines he wanted added to Schmidt’s (1936) review of his
paper. The introduction to Gentzen’s paper describes the consistency problem as a
part of Hilbert’s program:“Simple type theory comprises essentially the system of
Principia Mathematica together with the axiom of choice but without the axiom of
inﬁnity. It is only through the inclusion of this axiom ... that essential diﬃculties
arise, diﬃculties the solution of which is the main task of Hilbert’s proof theory.”
Gentzen gives an axiomatic treatment of simple type theory and constructs a model
for it starting with just one ground element. Each level in the type structure then
has a bounded number of elements and the truth values of derivable formulas can
be calculated. The motive for studying type theory should have been that it is
one possible framework for the formalization of mathematics beyond arithmetic.
Gentzen did not, however, pursue this line further.
The last paper that Gentzen wrote, dated 19 December 1944, is a short piece
dedicated to Heinrich Scholz’ 60th birthday. It was published posthumously as
Gentzen (1954). The paper shows that arithmetic derivations with several appli-
cations of the principle of induction can be converted into derivations with just one
such application. Gentzen gained from the result the insight that in the analysis of
derivations in arithmetic, the number of inductions is not essential, but the length
of the longest induction formula, an insight that was important for Gentzen’s 1943
paper on transﬁnite induction.
Gentzen published in 1938 a philosophical paper on “the present state in the
research on foundations of mathematics.” Two earlier papers contain similar ma-
terials, namely Gentzen (1936–37), and the lecture at the philosophy congress in
Paris, Gentzen (1937). The leading idea in these presentations is that ﬁnitary
methods are not suﬃcient for the purposes of consistency proofs in mathemat-
ics, and have to be replaced by stronger, still constructive principles, as found
in intuitionistic mathematics. Gentzen thought that a proof of the consistency
of analysis, i.e., of the theory of real numbers, could be obtained, but was more
sceptical about the possibilities for such a proof for set theory.
Gentzen published a number of reviews that can be found listed, and most of
them reproduced, in Mentzler-Trott (2001, p. 311). A review of Emil Post’s 1936
formulation of the notion of a recursive function, in the paper Finite combinatory
processes, mentions other deﬁnitions of recursiveness by Church, G¨odel and Her-
brand, and Kleene. Gentzen then notes that a process is ﬁnite if it ends in a ﬁnite
number of steps. In this connection, he points at the problematic aspect of the
notion of recursiveness by putting in italics his ﬁnal comment:“Of what kind the
proof of ﬁniteness of the process should be is, as also in Church, not speciﬁed.”
The review of Barkley Rosser’s 1937 paper on G¨odel’s theorem discusses brieﬂy
attempts at formulating inﬁnitary rules of inference, and mentions earlier uses of
inﬁnitary rules in the work of Hilbert and Rudolf Carnap.

Gentzen’s Logic
715
16
THE GENTZEN PAPERS
After the war, there were attempts at locating Gentzen’s papers, especially a
presumed proof or near-proof of the consistency of analysis.
The accounts of
Gentzen’s last days tell that he was thinking constantly of the consistency problem
and had made some essential breakthroughs (See Menzler-Trott 2001, p. 281).
Only a short stenographic memorandum written by Gentzen in February 1945
was found, transcribed in 1948. Bernays read it at the time but was not able to
make any opinion in the matter. The manuscript referred to another thing called
“WA,” for “Widerspruchsfreiheit der Analysis” (consistency of analysis) of which
it was a summary, as it says, “through page 339.” One can double or triple that
to get an idea of how many printed pages such a set of stenographic notes would
correspond to.
A letter of Arnold Schmidt to Gentzen’s mother, from 1948, states that there
are manuscripts in G¨ottingen that are preliminary work for Gentzen’s published
papers. It is suggested that these would not contain anything of new scientiﬁc
value, and that the papers be placed in an archive together with Hilbert’s papers.
No such papers have been, alas, found in G¨ottingen. It is assumed that the papers
were destroyed together with Schmidt’s papers, the latter at his will after his death
in 1964.
It turned out twenty years after the last-mentioned incident that Gentzen’s sister
Waltraut Student was in the possession of two folders of Gentzen’s shorthand notes.
These were given to Christian Thiel who, on the basis of the opinion expressed
by the editor of Gentzen’s Collected Papers, thought that the papers would not
contain anything that would not have been known already, and would thus be
of purely historical interest. On this basis, he has been transcribing the papers
occasionally and is close to halfway through early in 2005. The papers will be
made available together with the Ms.ULS and the February 1945 summary of WA
once the editing of these materials is complete.
The Gentzen papers were selected out and organized by Gentzen as being of
possible later use for him.
The last items are from the late summer of 1944.
Gentzen may have thought that the papers were in a safer place if not in Prague.
He took them to his mother’s place on the Baltic island of R¨ugen.
The Gentzen papers consist of stenographic manuscripts that should amount
to well over 500 printed pages. They are divided into a “blue” and a “violet”
folder and are written between 1931 and 1944.
They are further divided into
various series with page numberings and, usually, a date here and there. These
manuscripts give a unique insight into the way Gentzen worked. With the birth of
natural deduction, for example, he would work through meticulously alternative
possibilities, such as the treatment of variable conditions, substitution, discharge
of assumptions, and so on. From the extensive notes he would distill work to be
published, altogether 11 papers of exceptional quality in respect of novelty and
execution (except perhaps the 1936 consistency paper that was modiﬁed at proof
stage with a result that did not satisfy him). The most essential feature of these

716
Jan von Plato
papers is their development of new ideas without any errors being committed.
We give here a chronological description of the diﬀerent series. Occasional notes
from later times are sometimes added in between the pages belonging to a series.
The ﬁrst series is designated VOR. The remaining few pages, with numbers
between 13 and 20, have been written in the fall of 1931, so after the work on Hertz
systems in the preceding summer. Gentzen treats mainly the question of functions
vs. relations, i.e., the formulation of axiomatic theories with operations against a
formulation with relations. The topic is treated in Hilbert and Ackermann’s book
of 1928 which was Gentzen’s main source early on. A relational axiomatization of
(parts of) arithmetic is included in VOR. The method is also applied in Gentzen’s
thesis in the proof of consistency of arithmetic without the principle of induction.
Gentzen kept an interest in the topic also later, which is why he kept the notes.
Gentzen’s work towards a consistency proof of arithmetic and analysis begins
early in 1932. By September, he had formulated his system of natural deduc-
tion, with an induction rule included, and had conjectured (if not proved) the
“H¨ugelsatz” we discussed in Section 5. Some pages refer to a lost series “H¨UG”
with pages like 62.
Another disappeared series had the signum D (for Dissertation?). From p. 94
on, it becomes the preserved series INH that had been kept complete and bound
together into a single piece with new page numbers 1–36. The full title is Die
formale Erfassung des Begriﬀs der inhaltlichen Richtigkeit in der reinen Zahlen-
theore (Formal conception of the notion of intuitive-concrete correctness in pure
number theory). Two-thirds of INH have been written in about a month, start-
ing in October 1932. At this time, Gentzen still believed to obtain a consistency
proof for arithmetic soon. His thought seems to have been, also on the basis of
Ms.ULS, that the normalization theorem and subformula property of natural de-
duction would extend to derivations of a contradiction in arithmetic. He found
out later that one cannot restrict the induction rule into known formulas.
The fall of 1934 sees a continuation of the INH series.
At the same time,
Gentzen began also a series BZ, for Beweistheorie der Zahlentheorie. This one runs
to January 1935 when he already had the proof of the consistency of arithmetic
ﬁnished.
There are other shorter and fragmentary series that deal with topics from propo-
sitional and predicate logic and from simple type theory, especially the role of
the axiom of choice in the last mentioned. One series of notes is called AL (for
Aussagenlogik) and has materials from various times. One that has so far been
deciphered contains a semantical decision procedure for intuitionistic propositional
logic. Gentzen sets out to deﬁne validity by the conditions that A&B be valid if
both A and B are valid, A ∨B be valid if one of A and B is valid, and A ⊃B be
valid if B is valid whenever A is valid. The only diﬃculty is when there are iter-
ated implications in the antecedents, as in (A ⊃B) ⊃C. Here C has to be shown
valid under the condition that B be valid whenever A is. One considers never the
case that the antecedent of an implication is not valid. Gentzen devises a method
that uses numerical labels for a uniform treatment of iterated implications of any

Gentzen’s Logic
717
complexity. The method is especially useful for disproving intuitionistic validity,
as Gentzen shows.
In 1939, with the work for the Habilitationsschrift (Gentzen 1943) ﬁnished,
Gentzen began two new series of notes, the BG and BTJZ. The ﬁrst stands for
“Buch ¨uber Grundlagenforschung.”
The notes were often written on pieces of
paper like pages stripped out of an almanac or at the back of the “Luftwachezettel”
that he ﬁlled during his military service close to Brunswick.
(His task was to
observe the time, type, direction, and number of aircraft that ﬂew over). The idea
with the book on foundations research was to write a popular exposition, “exciting
like a detective story,” as he put it on one note.
The signum BTJZ stands for Beweistheorie der intuitionistischen Zahlentheorie.
It comes after the deﬁnitive work on the provable initial segments of transﬁnite
induction, a work that used the classical sequent calculus LK. Now Gentzen turns
to the intuitionistic version, with notes of which some hundred-odd pages have
been preserved. The page numbers run from 133 (May 1939) to 275 (April 1943).
It would seem that a lot of progress can be made through the study of the
Gentzen papers regarding his early work, especially structural proof theory in its
two forms, natural deduction and sequent calculus, and the application of these
calculi to the consistency problem of arithmetic. A remarkable addition to our
understanding of the research into logic and foundations of mathematics in the
1930s could thus be the result. The later, long BTJZ series relates to these topics
to which also Gentzen’s published papers belong.
The biggest single series, judging from the page numbers that run beyond 339,
was the series WA. Close to a hundred of these pages have been preserved, from
between pages 77 (August 1938) and 254 (August 1943). We noted the existence
of a thirteen-page summary of WA. This series is thus the last, and also the most
enigmatic, of the series in the Gentzen papers. One gets from the transcribed
pages the impression, through a suggestive terminology drawn from geography, of
a strange country that Gentzen had created all to himself.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Ackermann, 1940] W. Ackermann. Zur Widerspruchsfreiheit der Zahlentheorie, Mathematische
Annalen, vol. 117, pp. 162–194, 1940.
[Bernays, 1936] P. Bernays. Logical Calculus. Lectures at the Institute for Advanced Study,
Princeton 1936.
[Bernays, 1936a] P. Bernays. Review of Gentzen (1936), The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 1,
p. 75, 1936.
[Bernays, 1944] P. Bernays. Review of Gentzen (1943), The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 9,
pp. 70–72, 1944.
[Bernays, 1945] P. Bernays. Review of Ketonen (1944), The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 10,
pp. 127–130, 1945.
[Bernays, 1965] P. Bernays. Betrachtungen zum Sequenzen-kalkul, in Contributions to Logic
and Methodology in Honor of J. M. Bochenski, pp. 1–44, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
[Bernays, 1970] P. Bernays. On the original Gentzen consistency proof for number theory, in J.
Myhill et al., eds, Intuitionism and Proof Theory, pp. 409–417, North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1970.
[Beth, 1947] E. Beth. Review of Popper (1947), Mathematical Reviews, MR0021924, 1947.

718
Jan von Plato
[Beth, 1955] E. Beth. Semantic entailment and formal derivability, Mededelingen der Konin-
klijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afd. Letterkunde, vol. 18, pp. 309–342,
1955.
[Church, 1932] A. Church. A set of postulates for the foundation of logic, Annals of Mathemat-
ics, vol. 33, pp. 346–366, 1932.
[Church, 1941] A. Church. The Calculi of Lambda-Conversion, Princeton University Press.
[Curry, 1963] H. Curry. Foundations of Mathematical Logic, 1963. As republished by Dover,
New York 1977.
[Curry and Feys, 1958] H. Curry and R. Feys. Combinatory Logic, vol. 1, North-Holland, Am-
sterdam, 1958.
[Dawson and Dawson, 2005] J. Dawson and C. Dawson. Future tasks for G¨odel scholars, The
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 11, pp. 150–171, 2005.
[Dragalin, 1988] A. Dragalin. Mathematical Intuitionism: Introduction to Proof Theory, Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode Island, 1988. Russian original 1979.
[Dummett, 1975] M. Dummett. The philosophical basis of intuitionistic logic, 1975. As reprinted
in Dummett, Truth and Other Enigmas, pp. 215–247, Duckworth, London 1978.
[Dyckhoﬀ, 1992] R. Dyckhoﬀ. Contraction-free sequent calculi for intuitionistic logic, The Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 57, pp. 795–807, 1992.
[Feferman, 1964] S. Feferman. Systems of predicative analysis, The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 29, pp. 1–30, 1964.
[Fenstad, 1971] J. Fenstad, ed. Proceedings of the Second Scandinavian Logic Symposium,
North-Holland, 1971.
[Gentzen, 1932] G. Gentzen. ¨Uber die Existenz unabh¨angiger Axiomensysteme zu unendlichen
Satzsysteme, Mathematische Annalen, vol. 107, pp. 329–350, 1932.
[Gentzen, 1933] G. Gentzen. ¨Uber das Verh¨altnis zwischen intuitionistischer und klassischer
Arithmetik, submitted for publication but withdrawn, published in Archiv f¨ur mathematische
Logik, vol. 16 (1974), pp. 119-132, 1933.
[Gentzen, 1934–35] G. Gentzen. Untersuchungen ¨uber das logische Schliessen, Mathematische
Zeitschrift, vol. 39, pp. 176-210 and 405-431, 1934–35.
[Gentzen, 1936] G. Gentzen. Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie, Mathematische
Annalen, vol. 112, pp. 493–565, 1936.
[Gentzen, 1936a] G.
Gentzen.
Die
Widerspruchsfreiheit
der
Stufenlogik,
Mathematische
Zeitschrift, vol. 41, pp. 357–366, 1936.
[Gentzen, 1936–37] G. Gentzen. Der Unendlichkeitsbegriﬀin der Mathematik,
Semester-
Berichte M¨unster, Winter-Semester 1936–37, pp. 65–80. Reprinted in Menzler-Trott (2001),
pp. 331–339, 1936–37.
[Gentzen, 1937] G. Gentzen. Unendlichkeitsbegriﬀund Widerspruchsfreiheit der Mathematik,
Actualit´es scientiﬁques et industrielles, vol. 535, pp. 201–205, Hermann, Paris, 1937.
Reprinted in Menzler-Trott (2001), pp. 340–342.
[Gentzen, 1938] G. Gentzen. Neue Fassung des Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweises f¨ur die reine
Zahlentheorie, Forschungen zur Logik und zur Grundlegung der exakten Wissenschaften, vol.
4, pp. 19–44, 1938.
[Gentzen, 1938a] G. Gentzen. Die gegenw¨artige Lage in der mathematischen Grundlagen-
forschung, Forschungen zur Logik und zur Grundlegung der exakten Wissenschaften, vol.
4, pp. 5-18, 1938. Reprinted in Menzler-Trot (2001), pp. 343–358.
[Gentzen, 1943] G. Gentzen. Beweisbarkeit und Unbeweisbarkeit von Anfangsf¨allen der trans-
ﬁniten Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie, Mathematische Annalen, vol. 120, pp. 140–161,
1943.
[Gentzen, 1954] G. Gentzen. Zusammenfassung von mehreren vollst¨andigen Induktionen zu
einer einzigen, Archiv f¨ur mathematische Logik, vol. 2, pp. 1–3, 1954.
[Gentzen, 1969] G. Gentzen. The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen, ed. M. Szabo, North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1969.
[Gentzen, 1974] G. Gentzen. Der erste Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweis f¨ur die klassische Zahlen-
theorie, Archiv f¨ur mathematische Logik, vol. 16, pp. 97–118, 1974.
[Girard, 1971] J.-Y. Girard. Une extension de l’interpr´etation de G¨odel `a l’analyse, et son appli-
cation `a l’elimination des coupures dans l’analyse et la th´eorie des types, in Fenstad (1971),
pp. 63–92.
[Girard, 1987] J.-Y. Girard. Proof Theory and Logical Complexity, vol. 1, Bibliopolis, Naples,
1987.

Gentzen’s Logic
719
[Glivenko, 1929] V. Glivenko. Sur quelques points de la logique de M. Brouwer, Acad´emie Royale
de Belgique, Bulletins de la Classe des Sciences, vol. 15, pp. 183–188, 1929.
[G¨odel, 1931] K. G¨odel. On formally undecidable propositions of Principia mathematica and
related systems I, 1931. (Translation of German original), in van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 596–
617. German original and translation also in G¨odel (1986).
[G¨odel, 1933] K. G¨odel. Zur intuitionistischen Arithmetik und Zahlentheorie, 1933. As reprinted
in G¨odel (1986), pp. 286–295.
[G¨odel, 1938] K. G¨odel. Lecture at Zilsel’s, 1938. A lecture ﬁrst published in G¨odel (1995), pp.
86–113.
[G¨odel, 1941] K. G¨odel. In what sense is intuitionistic logic constructive?, 1941. A lecture ﬁrst
published in G¨odel (1995), pp. 189–200.
[G¨odel, 1958] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber eine bisher noch nicht ben¨utzte Erweiterung des ﬁniten Stand-
punktes. Dialectica, vol. 12, pp. 280–287, 1958. Also in G¨odel (1990), pp. 240–251.
[G¨odel, 1986, 1990, 1995, 2003] K. G¨odel. Collected Works I–V, Oxford University Press, 1986,
1990, 1995, 2003.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, ed. From Frege to G¨odel, A Source Book in Mathe-
matical Logic, 1879–1931, Harvard University Press, 1967.
[Hertz, 1929] P. Hertz. ¨Uber Axiomensysteme f¨ur beliebige Satzsysteme, Mathematische An-
nalen, vol. 101, pp. 457–514, 1929.
[Heyting, 1930] A. Heyting. Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik, Sitzungsberichte
der Preussischen Akademie von Wissenschaften, Physikalisch-mathematische Klasse, pp. 42–
56, 1930.
[Heyting, 1931] A. Heyting. Die intuitionistische Grundlegung der Mathematik, Erkenntnis, vol.
2, pp. 106–115, 1931.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der theoretischen
Logik, Springer, Berlin, 1928.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1934, 1939] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik, 2
vols., Springer, Berlin, 1934, 1939.
[Howard, 1969] W. Howard. The formulae-as-types notion of construction, 1969. Published in
1980 in J. Seldin and J. Hindley, eds, To H. B. Curry: Essays on Combinatory Logic, Lambda
Calculus and Formalism, pp. 480–490, Academic Press, New York.
[Hudelmaier, 1992] J. Hudelmaier. Bounds for cut elimination in intuitionistic propositional
logic, Archive for Mathematical Logic, vol. 31, pp. 331–354, 1992.
[Jaskowski, 1934] S. Jaskowski. On the rules of supposition in formal logic, 1934. As reprinted
in S. McCall, ed, Polish Logic 1920–1939, pp. 232–258, Oxford 1967.
[Johansson, 1936] I. Johansson. Der Minimalkalk¨ul, ein reduzierter intuitionistischer Formalis-
mus, Compositio Mathematica, vol. 4, pp. 119–136, 1936.
[Kalmar, 1938] L. Kalmar.
¨Uber Gentzens Beweis f¨ur die Widespruchsfreiheit der reinen
Zahlentheorie, ms. dated 1938 IX.24, 21 pp., Paul Bernays archives, ETH-Zurich.
[Ketonen, 1943] O. Ketonen. “Luonnollisen p¨a¨attelyn” kalkyylista, (On the calculus of “natural
deduction,” in Finnish), Ajatus (Yearbook of the Finnish Philosophical Society), vol. 12, pp.
128–140, 1943.
[Ketonen, 1944] O. Ketonen. Untersuchungen zum Pr¨adikatenkalk¨ul, (Annales Acad. Sci. Fenn,
Ser. A.I. 23), 1944.
[Kleene, 1952] S. Kleene. Introduction to Metamathematics, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1952.
[Kleene, 1952a] S. Kleene. Permutability of inferences in Gentzen’s calculi LK and LJ, Memoirs
of the American Mathematical Society, No. 10, pp. 1–26, 1952.
[Kolmogorov, 1925] A. Kolmogorov. On the principle of excluded middle, 1925.(Translation of
Russian original), in van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 416–437.
[Kolmogorov, 1932] A. Kolmogorov. Zur Deutung der intuitionistischen Logik, Mathematische
Zeitschrift, vol. 35, pp. 58–65, 1932.
[Kreisel, 1987] G. Kreisel. G¨odel’s excursions into intuitionistic logic, in P. Weingartner and L.
Schmetterer, eds, G¨odel Remembered, pp. 65–186, Bibliopolis, Naples, 1987.
[Martin-L¨of, 1975] P. Martin-L¨of. An intuitionistic theory of types: predicative part, in H. Rose
and J. Shepherson, eds, Logic Colloquium ’73, pp. 73–118, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Martin-L¨of, 1984] P. Martin-L¨of. Intuitionistic Type Theory, Bibliopolis, Naples, 1984.
[Menzler-Trott, 2001] E.
Menzler-Trott.
Gentzens
Problem:
mathematische
Logik
im
nationalsozialistischen Deutschland, Birkh¨auser, Basel, 2001.

720
Jan von Plato
[Menzler-Trott, 2007] E. Menzler-Trott. Logic’s Lost Genius American Mathematical Society,
Providence, Rhode Island. 2007.
[Negri, 1999] S. Negri. Sequent calculus proof theory of intuitionistic apartness and order rela-
tions, Archive for Mathematical Logic, vol. 38, pp. 521–547, 1999.
[Negri, 2003] S. Negri. Contraction-free sequent calculi for geometric theories with an application
to Barr’s theorem, Archive for Mathematical Logic, vol. 42, pp. 389–401, 2003.
[Negri and von Plato, 1998] S. Negri and J. von Plato. Cut elimination in the presence of axioms,
The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 4 , pp. 418–435, 1998.
[Negri and von Plato, 2001] S. Negri and J. von Plato. Structural Proof Theory, Cambridge
University Press, 2001.
[Negri and von Plato, 2001a] S. Negri J. von Plato. Sequent calculus in natural deduction style,
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 66, pp. 1803–1816, 2001.
[Negri and von Plato, 2004] S. Negri and J. von Plato. Proof systems for lattice theory, Math-
ematical Structures in Computer Science, vol. 14, pp. 507–526, 2004.
[von Plato, 2001] J. von Plato. A proof of Gentzen’s Hauptsatz without multicut, Archive for
Mathematical Logic, vol. 40, pp. 9–18, 2001.
[von Plato, 2001a] J. von Plato. Natural deduction with general elimination rules, Archive for
Mathematical Logic, vol. 40, pp. 541–567, 2001.
[von Plato, 2003] J. von Plato. Translations from natural deduction to sequent calculus, Math-
ematical Logic Quarterly, vol. 49, pp. 435-443, 2003.
[von Plato, 2004] J. von Plato. The decision problem in projective and aﬃne geometry, to ap-
pear, 2004.
[von Plato, 2004a] J. von Plato. Ein Leben, ein Werk – Gedanken ¨uber das wissenschaftliche
Schaﬀen des ﬁnnischen Logikers Oiva Ketonen, in R. Seising, ed, Form, Zahl, Ordnung: Stu-
dien zur Wissenschafts- und Technikgeschichte, pp. 427–435, Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart,
2004.
[von Plato, 2005] J. von Plato. Gentzen’s original proof of the consistency of arithmetic revisited,
to appear, 2005.
[Popper, 1947] K. Popper. New foundations for logic, Mind, vol. 56, pp. 193–235, 1947.
[Post, 1936] E. Post. Finite combinatory processes – formulation 1, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, vol. 1, pp. 103–105, 1936.
[Prawitz, 1965] D. Prawitz. Natural Deduction: A Proof-Theoretical Study. Almqvist & Wick-
sell, Stockholm, 1965.
[Prawitz, 1971] D. Prawitz. Ideas and results in proof theory, in Fenstad (1971), pp. 235–308,
1971.
[Raggio, 1965] A. Raggio. Gentzen’s Hauptsatz for the systems NI and NK, Logique et analyse,
vol. 8, pp. 91–100, 1965.
[Rathjen, 1995] M. Rathjen. Recent advances in ordinal analysis, The Bulletin of Symbolic
Logic, vol. 1, pp. 468–485, 1995.
[Rathjen, 1999] M. Rathjen. The realm of ordinal analysis, in S. Wainer and J. Truss, eds, Sets
and Proofs, pp. 219–279, Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[Reid, 1970] C. Reid. Hilbert, Springer, 1970.
[Rosser, 1937] B. Rosser. G¨odels theorems for non-constructive logics, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, vol. 2, pp. 129–137, 1937.
[Schmidt, 1935] A. Schmidt. Review of Gentzen (1934–35), Zentralblatt f¨ur Mathematik und
ihre Grenzgebiete, vol. 10, pp. 145–146, 1935.
[Schmidt, 1936] A. Schmidt. Review of Gentzen (1936a), Zentralblatt f¨ur Mathematik und ihre
Grenzgebiete, vol. 15, p. 193, 1936.
[Schroeder-Heister, 1984] P. Schroeder-Heister. A natural extension of natural deduction, The
Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 49, pp. 1284–1300, 1984.
[Schroeder-Heister, 2002] P. Schroeder-Heister. Resolution and the origins of structural reason-
ing: early proof-theoretic ideas of Hertz and Gentzen, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 8,
pp. 246–265, 2002.
[Sch¨utte, 1950] K. Sch¨utte. Schlussweisen-Kalk¨ule der Pr¨adikatenlogik, Mathematische An-
nalen, vol. 122, pp. 47–65, 1950.
[Sch¨utte, 1965] K. Sch¨utte. Eine Grenze f¨ur die Beweisbarkeit der transﬁniten Induktion in der
verzweigten Typenlogik, Archiv f¨ur mathematische Logik, vol. 7, pp. 45–60, 1965.

Gentzen’s Logic
721
[Skolem, 1920] T. Skolem. Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen ¨uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit oder
Beweisbarkeit mathematischer S¨atze nebst einem Theoreme ¨uber dichte Mengen, 1920. As
reprinted in Skolem’s Selected Works in Logic, pp. 103–136, ed. Fenstad, Universitetsforlaget,
Oslo 1970.
[Tait, 1967] W. Tait. Intensional interpretations of functionals of ﬁnite type I, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, vol. 32, pp. 198–212, 1967.
[Tait, 2001] W. Tait. G¨odel’s unpublished papers on foundations of mathematics, Philosophia
Mathematica, vol. 9, pp. 87–126, 2001.
[Tait, 2005] W. Tait. G¨odel’s reformulation of Gentzen’s ﬁrst consistency proof for arithmetic:
the no-counterexample interpretation, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 11, pp. 225–238,
2005.
[Takeuti, 1975] G. Takeuti. Proof Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Tarski, 1933] A. Tarski. Einige Betrachtungen ¨uber die Begriﬀe der ω-Widerspruchsfreiheit und
der ω-Vollst¨andigkeit, Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, vol. 40, pp. 97–112, 1933.
[Troelstra, 1986] A. Troelstra. Comments to G¨odel (1933), in G¨odel (1986), p. 282.
[Troelstra and Schwichtenberg, 2000] A. Troelstra and H. Schwichtenberg. Basic Proof Theory,
second ed., Cambridge, 2000. First ed. 1996.


LAMBDA-CALCULUS AND COMBINATORS
IN THE 20TH CENTURY
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
1
INTRODUCTION
The formal systems that are nowadays called λ-calculus and combinatory logic
were both invented in the 1920s, and their aim was to describe the most basic
properties of function-abstraction, application and substitution in a very general
setting. In λ-calculus the concept of abstraction was taken as primitive, but in
combinatory logic it was deﬁned in terms of certain primitive operators called basic
combinators.
The present article will sketch the history of these two topics, until approxi-
mately the year 2000.
We shall assume the reader is familiar with at least one of the many versions of
these systems in the current literature. A few key technical details will be given
as footnotes, however.1 Often “combinatory logic” will be abbreviated to “CL”
and “λ-calculus” to “λ”. We shall distinguish between “pure” versions of λ or CL
(theories of conversion or reduction with nothing more) and “applied” versions
(containing extra concepts such as logical constants, types or numbers).
To understand the early history it is worth remembering that the situation
in logic and the foundations of mathematics was much more ﬂuid in the early
1900s than it is today; Russell’s paradox was relatively recent, G¨odel’s theorems
were not yet known, and a signiﬁcant strand of work in logic was the building
of systems intended to be consistent foundations for the whole of mathematical
analysis. Some of these were based on a concept of set, others on one of function,
and there was no general consensus as to which basis was better. In this context
λ and CL were originally developed, not as autonomous systems but as parts of
more elaborate foundational systems based on a concept of function.
Today, λ and CL are used extensively in higher-order logic and computing.
Rather like the chassis of a bus, which supports the vehicle but is unseen by
1A short introduction to λ-calculus is included in [Seldin, 2008] in the present volume. Oth-
ers can be found in many textbooks on computer science.
There are longer introductions in
[Hankin, 1994], [Hindley and Seldin, 1986], [Stenlund, 1972]; also in [Krivine, 1990] (in French
and English), [Takahashi, 1991] (in Japanese), and [Wolfengagen, 2004] (in Russian). A deeper
account is in [Barendregt, 1981]. For combinatory logic there are introductions in [Hindley and
Seldin, 1986, Ch.2], [Stenlund, 1972], and [Barendregt, 1981, Ch.7]; more detailed accounts are
in [Curry and Feys, 1958, Chs.5–9] and [Curry et al., 1972].
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

724
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
its users, versions of λ or CL underpin several important logical systems and
programming languages. Further, λ and CL gain most of their purpose at second
hand from such systems, just as an isolated chassis has little purpose in itself.
Therefore, to give a balanced picture the present article should really include the
whole history of function-based higher-order logic. However, it would then be too
diﬀuse, so we shall take a more restricted approach. The reader should always
keep the wider context in mind, however.
Seen in outline, the history of λ and CL splits into three main periods: ﬁrst,
several years of intensive and very fruitful study in the 1920s and ’30s; next, a mid-
dle period of nearly 30 years of relative quiet; then in the late 1960s an upsurge of
activity stimulated by developments in higher-order function theory, by connec-
tions with programming languages, and by new technical discoveries. The fruits
of the ﬁrst period included the ﬁrst-ever proof that predicate logic is undecidable.
The results of the second attracted very little non-specialist interest, but included
completeness, cut-elimination and standardization theorems (for example) that
found many uses later. The achievements of the third, from the 1960s onward,
included constructions and analyses of models, development of polymorphic type
systems, deep analyses of the reduction process, and many others probably well
known to the reader. The high level of activity of this period continues today.
The present article will describe earlier work in chronological order, but will
classify later developments by topic, insofar as overlaps allow. Each later topic
will be discussed in some breadth, to show something of the contexts in which λ
and CL are being used. However, due to lack of space and the richness of the
ﬁeld we shall not be able to be as comprehensive as we would like, and some
important sub-topics will unfortunately have to be omitted; for this we ask the
reader’s forgiveness. Although we shall try to keep a balance, our selection will
inevitably reﬂect our own experience. For example Curry’s work will be given
more space than Church’s simply because we know it better, not because we think
it more important.
A large bibliography will be included for the reader’s convenience in tracing
sources. When detailed evidence of a source is needed, the relevant precise section
or pages will be given. Sometimes the date we shall give for an idea will signiﬁ-
cantly precede its date of publication; this will be based on evidence in the source
paper such as the date of the manuscript. By the way, mention of a date and an
author for an idea should not be interpreted as a claim of priority for that au-
thor; important ideas may be invented independently almost simultaneously, and
key papers may be circulated informally for some years before being published, so
questions of priority, although very interesting, are beyond our powers to decide.
The bibliography will be nowhere near complete, nor intended to be; space
will not allow that, and two very comprehensive bibliographies on λ and CL have
already been published: [Rezus, 1982], covering up to 1980, and [Bethke, 2000].
Acknowledgements
The present account owes its beginning to a suggestion by Dirk van Dalen.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
725
For useful information and advice during its preparation, the authors are very
grateful to many helpful correspondents, in particular John Addison, Peter An-
drews, Corrado B¨ohm, Martin Bunder, Thierry Coquand, Pierre-Louis Curien,
Steven Givant, Ivor Grattan-Guinness, Peter Hancock, G´erard Huet, Reinhard
Kahle, Jan-Willem Klop, Alexander Kuzichev, William Lawvere, Bruce Lercher,
Giuseppe Longo, Per Martin-L¨of, Eugenio Moggi, John Reynolds, Simona Ronchi
della Rocca, Jonathan Seldin, John Shepherdson, William Tait, Christian Thiel,
Anne Troelstra, Pawel Urzyczyn and Philip Wadler.
This account has also been much helped by material from other historical ar-
ticles and books, especially [Barendregt, 1997], [Crossley, 1975], [Curry and Feys,
1958, §§0D, 1S, 2S, 3S, etc.], [Gandy, 1988], [Grattan-Guinness, 2000], [Heijenoort,
1967], [Hodges, 1983], [Kalman, 1983], [Kamareddine et al., 2002], [Kleene, 1981],
[Laan, 1997], [Manzano, 1997], [Nederpelt and Geuvers, 1994], [Rosser, 1984],
[Seldin, 1980a; Seldin, 1980b], and [Sieg, 1997].
However, any errors in what follows are our own responsibility.
On the ﬁnancial side, we express our gratitude to the Dipartimento di Infor-
matica of the University of Turin, and the British Council, for their very generous
support and facilities which made a crucial consultation visit possible in May 2000.
2
PRE-HISTORY
Notations for function-abstraction and substitution go back at least as far as 1889.
In Giuseppe Peano’s book on axioms for arithmetic [Peano, 1889, §VI], for any
term α containing a variable x, the function of x determined by α was called α[x],
and for φ = α[x] the equation φ x′ = α[x]x′ was given, and its right-hand side was
explicitly stated to mean the result of substituting x′ for x in α. Later, Peano
used other function-abstraction notations instead of α[x];
these included
α x
and
α|x,
in [Peano, 1958, p.277] and [Peano, 1895, Vol.3 §11] respectively.
In 1891 Gottlob Frege discussed the general concept of function and introduced
the notion of a function as a graph (Wertverlauf in [Frege, 1891]). Two years
later, notations for abstraction and application appeared in his [Frege, 1893, Vol.1
§9], where the graph of a function Φ( ) was denoted by
,ε Φ(ε), and the result of
applying the function to an argument Δ was denoted by Δ ∩
,ε Φ(ε). In the same
work Frege also proved the equation a ∩
,ε f(ε) = f(a),
[Frege, 1893, Vol.1 p.73,
§54].
Notations for class-abstraction too appeared at around the same time. The set
of all x satisfying condition α was denoted by [x ε] α in [Peano, 1889, §V], and by
x ε α in Peano’s work from 1890 onward, see [Peano, 1958, Vol.2 p.110]. The latter
notation was also used by his colleague Burali-Forti [Burali-Forti, 1894, p.71 §3].
Another class-abstraction notation, ˆz(φ z), appeared in [Russell and Whitehead,
1913, Ch.1, p.25]. The latter two authors also used ϕ ˆx for the unary propositional
function determined by ϕ x.

726
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
A function-abstraction notation was used by Bertrand Russell in 1903–5 in
unpublished notes, see [Klement, 2003].
However, none of these authors gave formal deﬁnitions of substitution and con-
version, which are characteristic of CL and λ proper. These did not appear until
the 1920s, and, although λ might seem to express the concepts involved more
directly than CL, it was actually CL that was invented ﬁrst.
3
1920S: BIRTH OF COMBINATORY LOGIC
Combinatory logic was invented by Moses Ilyich Sch¨onﬁnkel.
Sch¨onﬁnkel was
born in 1887 or ‘89 in Dniepropetrovsk in the Ukraine, and studied under the
Odessa mathematician Samuel Shatunovsky – a brilliant pupil, according to [Yan-
ovskaya, 1948, p. 31]. From 1914 to 1924 he belonged to what was probably the top
mathematics research group of the time, that led by David Hilbert in G¨ottingen,
Germany. He introduced combinators to this group in a talk on 7 December 1920,
which was published in [Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1924].
Sch¨onﬁnkel’s main aim was to eliminate bound variables, which he saw as merely
auxiliary syntactic concepts, see [Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1924, end of §1]. To do this, he
introduced ﬁve operators Z, T, I, C and S which would nowadays be called basic
combinators B, C, I, K and S respectively.2
Sch¨onﬁnkel proved that K and S are adequate to deﬁne the other three basic
combinators, and stated a form of combinatory completeness result (with a sketch
proof): namely that from K and S, together with a logical operator equivalent
to a universally quantiﬁed Sheﬀer stroke or Nand, one can generate all formulas
of predicate logic without the use of bound variables. But he treated equality
and logical equivalence only informally, as was common practice in mathematics
at that time; he did not introduce formal conversion rules. Nor was an explicit
abstraction algorithm stated in his paper, although from what was written it seems
extremely likely that he knew one.
Along the way, Sch¨onﬁnkel pointed out that multi-variable applications such as
F(x, y) could be replaced by successive single applications (f(x))(y), where f was
a function whose output-value f(x) was also a function, see [Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1924,
§2]. This replacement-process is now known in the computer-science community
as “currying”, from its use in the work of Haskell Curry; although Curry many
times attributed it to Sch¨onﬁnkel, for example in [Curry, 1930, p.512] and [Curry
and Feys, 1958, pp. 8, 11, 30, 106], and it was used even earlier by Frege, [Frege,
1893, Vol.1 §4].
2In today’s notation (following [Curry and Feys, 1958, Ch.5]) their axiom-schemes are BXY Z
= X(Y Z), CXY Z = XZY , IX = X, KXY = X, SXY Z = XZ(Y Z), and a combinator is any
applicative combination of basic combinators. A set S of combinators is called combinatorially
complete when, for every sequence x1, ..., xn of variables and every combination X of all or some of
these (possibly with some occurring more than once), there exists a combination A of members
of S such that Ax1...xn = X.
An abstraction algorithm is any algorithm for constructing a
suitable A from X. In what follows, the notation “[x1, ..., xn].X” will denote any suitable A.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
727
After his 1924 paper, Sch¨onﬁnkel published nothing more on combinators. In
fact only one other paper bears his name: [Bernays and Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1928], on
certain special cases of the Entscheidungsproblem. Both papers were prepared for
publication largely by helpful colleagues: the earlier one by Heinrich Behmann
and the later by Paul Bernays. By 1927, he was said to be mentally ill and in a
sanatorium [Curry, 1927, p.3], [Kline, 1951, p.47]. Alexander Kuzichev in Moscow
relates that Sch¨onﬁnkel’s later years were spent in Moscow in hardship and poverty,
helped by a few friends, and he died in a hospital there in 1942 following some
years of illness. After his death, wartime conditions forced his neighbours to burn
his manuscripts for heating.3
However, in the meantime the combinator idea had appeared again, though
in a very modiﬁed form.
In 1925, John von Neumann published his doctoral
thesis on axiomatizing set theory, [Neumann, 1925]. Despite its being a theory
of sets, his formal system was function-based not set-based, and one group of
his axioms postulated certain combinator-like operators which gave combinatory
completeness for all expressions built from variables and constants by pairing and
function-application, [Neumann, 1925, p.225].4
(We do not know whether von Neumann’s idea came from Sch¨onﬁnkel’s. Von
Neumann visited G¨ottingen well before 1925 and collaborated with the logic group
there, and it is hard to imagine that he did not learn of Sch¨onﬁnkel’s work there.
But the form in which the concept appeared in [Neumann, 1925] was very modiﬁed,
and his [Neumann, 1925] and [Neumann, 1928] did not mention Sch¨onﬁnkel.)
The von Neumann axioms eventually evolved, with many changes, including
from a function base to a sets-and-classes base, into the nowadays well known
Von-Neumann-Bernays-G¨odel system NBG. In that system the analogue of von
Neumann’s combinator axioms was a ﬁnite list of class-existence axioms, and the
analogue of his combinatory completeness theorem was a general class-existence
theorem. That system gave a ﬁnite axiomatization of set theory, in contrast to the
Zermelo-Fraenkel system known nowadays as ZF. It did not, however, eliminate
bound variables completely from the logic;
unlike Sch¨onﬁnkel, von Neumann did
not have that as an aim.
The next major step in CL was independent of both Sch¨onﬁnkel and von Neu-
3Little more is known about him.
We are indebted mainly to [Thiel, 1995], [Yanovskaya,
1948, pp.31–34], [Kline, 1951], and correspondence from A. S. Kuzichev, 2005. His date of birth
was 4th Sept. 1889 according to [Thiel, 1995], but 1887 according to Kuzichev.
4The relevant axioms appeared in [Neumann, 1925, §3, axiom-group II], see comments in
[Curry and Feys, 1958, pp.10–11]. We show them here in a notation chosen to emphasize their
similarity to CL. Von Neumann used two atomic predicates, “x is a function” and “x is an
argument” (not mutually exclusive), and two term-building operations: pairing, which we call
“⟨, ⟩”, and application “( )”. (For pairing, he postulated two projection-functions; we omit them
here.)
(∃fn I)(∀args x)
(Ix) = x;
(∀args x)(∃fn Kx)(∀args y)
(Kxy) = x;
(∃fn App)(∀args f, x)
f is a fn
⊃(App ⟨f, x⟩) = (fx);
(∀fns f, g)(∃fns Sf,g, Bf,g)(∀args x) (Sf,g x) = ⟨(fx), (gx)⟩∧(Bf,g x) = (f(gx)).

728
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
mann: the combinator concept was re-invented in the U.S.A. by Haskell Curry.
Curry was born in 1900.
His parents ran a school of public speaking near
Boston, U.S.A. (now called Curry College), and from them he derived an interest
in linguistics which coloured much of his later work. He began his student career
at Harvard University intending to work in medicine but quickly changed to math-
ematics, and a strong underlying inclination towards foundational questions drew
him eventually to logic.5
In propositional logic the rule of substitution is signiﬁcantly more complex than
modus ponens and the other deduction-rules, and at the time Curry began his
studies the substitution operation was largely unanalyzed.6 In particular, an ex-
plicit statement of the substitution rule was missing from Principia Mathematica
[Russell and Whitehead, 1913], as was admitted later by Russell himself, see [Rus-
sell, 1919, Ch.14, p.151]. Also the corresponding rule for predicate logic was stated
incorrectly in the ﬁrst edition of a leading textbook [Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928,
Ch.3 §5 p.53], see remarks in [Church, 1956, §49 pp. 290–291].
Around 1926–27, Curry began to look for a way to break the substitution process
down into simpler steps, and to do this, he introduced a concept of combinator
essentially the same as Sch¨onﬁnkel’s. Then in late 1927 he discovered [Sch¨onﬁnkel,
1924], and a note in his ﬁles [Curry, 1927, p.1] admits “This paper anticipates much
of what I have done”. He did not abandon his own work, however, but travelled to
G¨ottingen and in 1930 completed a doctoral thesis under the guidance of Bernays,
[Curry, 1930]. In it he set out a formal system of combinators with a proof of the
combinatory completeness of {B, C, K, W} [Curry, 1930, p.528 Hauptsatz II].7
Crucial to every such completeness proof is an abstraction algorithm. The one
in Curry’s thesis was not only the ﬁrst to appear in print, but was also much
more eﬃcient than many that followed it. He saw the problem of producing an A
such that Ax1...xn converted to X, from the point of view of building X from the
sequence x1, . . . , xn. First, A must remove from x1, . . . , xn all variables which do
not occur in X; this can be done using K and B. Then A must repeat variables
as often as they occur in X; this can be done using W and B. Next, A must
re-arrange the variables into the order in which they occur in X; this can be done
using C and B. Finally, A must insert the parentheses that occur in X, and this
can be done using B (together with I or CKK).8
But the details of Curry’s algorithm were rather complex, and it was later
replaced by ones that were much simpler to describe. These algorithms were multi-
sweep; i.e. they built [x1, . . . , xn].X by building ﬁrst [xn].X, then [xn−1].[xn].X,
etc., and their key was to build [x].X for all x and X by a direct and very simple
5For information on Curry we are indebted to [Curry and Feys, 1958, §§1S,6S,8S], [Curry,
1980], and [Seldin, 1980b; Seldin, 1980a], also to discussions with Jonathan Seldin, whose [Seldin,
2008] gives a fuller account of Curry and Church than the present one. Curry died in 1982.
6The substitution rule in propositional logic states that from a formula Q we may deduce
[P1/p1, . . . , Pn/pn]Q, where the latter is obtained from Q by substituting formulas P1, . . . , Pn
for propositional variables p1, . . . , pn which may occur in Q.
7W has the axiom-scheme WXY = XY Y .
8See [Curry, 1930, Part II, §§C–E] for details, or [Curry and Feys, 1958, §6S2] for an outline.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
729
induction on the number of symbols in X.
The ﬁrst to appear was in [Church, 1935, §3 p.278]. Church used just two basic
combinators I and J, where JUXY Z = UX(UZY ); the latter had been proposed
by Rosser in 1933 [Rosser, 1935, p.128].9
But the simple algorithm based on S and K that is used in textbooks today is
due to Paul Rosenbloom [Rosenbloom, 1950, p.117]. He seems to have been the
ﬁrst person, at least in print, to have realised that by using S in the induction step
for [x].X the proof of its main property ([x].X)Y = [Y/x]X was made trivial.10
This algorithm, with some variants, became generally accepted as standard.11
However, although neater to describe, the direct inductive algorithms were not
so eﬃcient to use: they produced considerably longer outputs than Curry’s ﬁrst
one, and in the 1970s when the desire arose to use combinators in practical pro-
gramming languages, and attention began to focus on eﬃciency, the algorithms
that were invented then were more like Curry’s original, see for example [Kearns,
1973; Abdali, 1976; Turner, 1979; Piperno, 1989].
Besides the ﬁrst abstraction algorithm, Curry’s thesis contained the ﬁrst formal
deﬁnition of conversion. Further, this deﬁnition included a ﬁnite set of axioms
from which he proved the admissibility of rule (ζ):12
(ζ)
if Ux = V x and x does not occur in UV , then U = V .
Thus the discovery that (ζ) could be ﬁnitely axiomatized was made very soon
after the birth of the theory. The theory of equality was also proved consistent in
a certain sense, see [Curry, 1930, p.528 Hauptsatz I], but without using a concept
of strong reduction or a conﬂuence theorem.
The system in [Curry, 1930] also contained some logical constants. But not all
their usual rules were included, negation was omitted, and logic was not actually
9The basis {I, J} allows [x].X to be built when x occurs in X but not when x is absent. This
corresponds to the λI-calculus, see p.731 below. Church’s algorithm is also in [Church, 1941,
p.44].
10No he wasn’t. [Seldin, 2008] points out that Curry realized this neat use of S while reading
[Rosser, 1942], though, due to war work, he did not publish it until [Curry, 1949, p.393]. Thus the
algorithm’s direct inductive form is due to Church and its neat use of S to Curry and Rosenbloom
independently.
11Some [x].X-algorithms were compared in [Curry and Feys, 1958, §§6A2–3]. Curry assumed
the basic combinators were some of B, C, I, K, S, and [x].X was built by induction on X using
some or all of the following clauses (in which U does not contain x, but V may):
(a)
[x]. U
≡KU,
(d)
[x]. UV
≡BU([x]. V ),
(b)
[x]. x
≡I,
(e)
[x]. V U
≡C([x]. V )U,
(c)
[x]. Ux ≡U,
(f)
[x]. X1X2 ≡S([x]. X1)([x]. X2).
For example, let the basis be {I, K, S}. Then algorithm (fab) builds [x].X by ﬁrst applying (f)
whenever possible, then (a), then (b) when the other two do not apply. Alternatively, (abcf) ﬁrst
tries to apply (a), then (b), then (c), and (f) only when the other three do not apply; it usually
produces shorter terms [x].X. The Curry-Rosenbloom algorithm was (fab).
If the basis is {K, S} one can ﬁrst deﬁne I ≡SKK and then use (fab) or (abcf). If the basis is
{B, C, K, W} one can deﬁne S ≡B(B(BW)C)(BB) and I ≡CKK or WK, and then use (abcdef).
12See [Curry, 1930, p.832 Satz 4] or [Curry, 1932, p.558 Theorem 5]. Rule (ζ) makes Curry’s
equality equivalent to what is nowadays called βη-equality or extensional equality.

730
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
developed beyond the theory of conversion. In fact, unlike von Neumann, Curry
aimed, not at quickly building a system strong enough to deduce a signiﬁcant part
of mathematics, but at making a thorough study of basic logical notions in as
general a setting as possible.
A consequence of this interest in generality was that for Curry, as for Sch¨on-
ﬁnkel, every combinator was allowed to be applied to every other combinator and
even to itself, in a way not commonly accepted for set-theoretic functions. This
freedom was later criticized on semantic grounds by several other leading logicians,
e.g. Willard V. Quine in [Quine, 1936a, p.88]. In fact Curry’s use of combinators
was connected very closely to his philosophy of mathematics: for him, a formal
system was not a description of some pre-existing objects, but simply a structure
built by induction from some primitives using certain rules, and he did not demand
that a semantics for such a system be a total function. In his view a system could
be used fruitfully in applications of mathematics without necessarily every part of
it having a meaning in some set-theory-based semantics, and usefulness was more
important than semantic totality.13
In [Curry, 1964] he pointed out that the combinators constructed by his original
abstraction algorithm were much easier to interpret in a set-theoretic semantics
than those built by simpler algorithms using K and S. (But, as mentioned above,
he himself was perfectly happy to use the simpler algorithms.)
However, semantic questions apart, by the end of the 1920s the combinator
concept had provided two useful formal techniques: a computationally eﬃcient
way of avoiding bound variables, and a ﬁnite axiomatization of set theory.
4
1930S: BIRTH OF λ AND YOUTH OF CL
4.1
Early λ-calculus
The λ-calculus was invented in about 1928 by Alonzo Church, and was ﬁrst
published in [Church, 1932]. Church was born in 1903 in Washington D.C. and
studied at Princeton University.
He made his career at Princeton until 1967,
though in 1928–29 he visited G¨ottingen and Amsterdam.14
Around 1928 he began to build a formal system with the aim of providing a
foundation for logic which would be more natural than Russell’s type theory or
Zermelo’s set theory, and would not contain free variables (for reasons he explained
in [Church, 1932, pp. 346–347]). He chose to base it on the concept of function
rather than set, and his primitives included abstraction λx[M] and application
{F}(X), which we shall call here “λx.M” and “(FX)”.
13See [Curry, 1951], [Curry, 1963, Chs. 2–3] or [Seldin, 1980a]. In the 1920s the general concept
of formal system was still in the process of clariﬁcation and Curry was one of the pioneers in
this.
14For more on Church’s life, see [Manzano, 1997, §2] and the obituary [Enderton, 1995]. For
more on his work, see [Manzano, 1997], [Anderson, 1998], [Enderton, 1998], [Sieg, 1997], and (on
the impact of λ-calculus) [Barendregt, 1997]. He died in 1995.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
731
(By the way, why did Church choose the notation “λ”? In [Church, 1964, §2]
he stated clearly that it came from the notation “ˆx” used for class-abstraction by
Whitehead and Russell, by ﬁrst modifying “ˆx” to “∧x” to distinguish function-
abstraction from class-abstraction, and then changing “∧” to “λ” for ease of print-
ing. This origin was also reported in [Rosser, 1984, p.338]. On the other hand, in
his later years Church told two enquirers that the choice was more accidental: a
symbol was needed and “λ” just happened to be chosen.)
As mentioned earlier, Church was not the ﬁrst to introduce an explicit notation
for function-abstraction. But he was the ﬁrst to state explicit formal conversion
rules for the notation, and to analyse their consequences in depth. (He did not
read Frege’s work until 1935, according to a letter cited in [Scott, 1980a, p.260],
and we assume he did not see Peano’s 1889 notation either.)
Church’s system as it appeared in [Church, 1932] was a type-free logic with un-
restricted quantiﬁcation but without the law of excluded middle. Explicit formal
rules of λ-conversion were included. However, almost immediately after publica-
tion a contradiction was found in it. The system was revised a year later, [Church,
1933], and in the revised paper Church stated a hope that G¨odel’s recent incom-
pleteness theorems for the system of [Russell and Whitehead, 1913] did not extend
to his own revised system, and that a ﬁnitary proof of the consistency of this sys-
tem might be found, [Church, 1933, pp. 842–843]. At that time the full power of
G¨odel’s theorems was only slowly becoming generally understood.
At the end of his 1933 paper, Church introduced the representation of the
positive integers by the λ-terms now known as the Church numerals [Church,
1933, §9]:
1 ≡λxy. xy,
Succ ≡λxyz. y(xyz),
n =β λxy. x(· · · (x
  
n times
y) · · · ).
He deﬁned the set of all positive integers in essentially the same way as the set of all
ﬁnite cardinal numbers in [Russell, 1903, §123], except that Russell’s set included
zero. The natural λ-term to represent zero would have been λxy.y, but although
Church included this term in his language, he forbade the reduction (λxy.y)FY ▷
Y and avoided zero.
(Church’s name is often associated with the λI-calculus, the version of λ-calculus
in which λx.M is only counted as a term when x occurs free in M. But he did
not limit himself so strictly to this version as is often thought. In 1932 and ’33 he
allowed non-λI-terms λx.M to exist but not to be “active”, i.e. he did not allow
a term (λx.M)N to be contracted when x did not occur free in M, see [Church,
1932, pp. 352, 355]. In his 1940 paper on type theory, where consistency would
have been less in doubt, although probably not yet actually proved, he was happy
for non-λI-terms to be active [Church, 1940, pp. 57, 60]. Only in his 1941 book
did he forbid their very existence [Church, 1941, p. 8].)15
From 1931 to 1934 in Princeton University, Church received the help of two
outstanding graduate students, Stephen Kleene and Barkley Rosser, and in a re-
15The unrestricted λ-calculus is often called the λK-calculus.

732
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
markable four years of collaboration this group made a series of major discoveries
about both Church’s 1933 logic and the underlying pure λ-calculus. Unfortunately
for the 1933 logic, one of these discoveries was its inconsistency, as a variant of the
Richard paradox was proved in the system, [Kleene and Rosser, 1935].
In contrast, the pure λ-calculus, which had at ﬁrst seemed shallow, turned out
to be surprisingly rich. (Well, Kleene was surprised, anyway, [Kleene, 1981, p.54].)
The study of its reduction-theory was begun using the method of residuals, which
was applied to prove the Church-Rosser conﬂuence theorem [Church and Rosser,
1936, p.479], and this ensured the consistency of the pure system. The system’s
relation to combinatory logic was also clariﬁed, and a simple proof of the conﬂuence
of combinatory weak reduction was given; see [Rosser, 1935, esp. pp. 145–146].16
Further, the λ-deﬁnable numerical functions were found to form a much more
extensive class than expected, and this class was eventually proved equivalent to
two deﬁnitions whose purpose was to formalize the informal concept of eﬀectively
calculable function: the Herbrand-G¨odel recursive functions, see [Kleene, 1936] and
[Church, 1936b], and the Turing computable functions, [Turing, 1937a]. In view of
this, Church conjectured that λ-deﬁnability exactly captured the informal concept
of eﬀective calculability (Church’s Thesis).17 The high point of this deﬁnability
work was Church’s negative solution of Hilbert’s long-standing Entscheidungsprob-
lem for ﬁrst-order logic: ﬁrst he proved in [Church, 1936b] that the convertibility
problem for pure λ-calculus was recursively undecidable, then he deduced that no
recursive decision procedure existed for validity in ﬁrst-order predicate logic, see
[Church, 1936a].
But this result was also proved independently almost immediately afterwards by
Alan Turing in England. In Cambridge in the 1930s the topologist Max Newman
had maintained a side-interest in the foundations, and in early 1935 he taught a
course on this topic which Turing attended. Later that year Turing wrote his now
famous paper on computability, [Turing, 1936]. He then visited Princeton and
took a doctorate under Church (in 1936–38).
Incidentally, in the course of his doctoral work Turing gave the ﬁrst published
ﬁxed-point combinator, [Turing, 1937b, term Θ]. This was seen as only having
minor interest at that time, but in view of the later importance given to such
combinators (see §8.1.2 below), we digress here to discuss them.
A ﬁxed-point combinator is any closed term Y such that Yx converts to x(Yx).
16For an introduction to reduction-theory in general, see [Klop, 1992] or (less general) [Baren-
dregt, 1981, §3.1], or (in λ) [Hindley and Seldin, 1986, §1C & Appendices 1 & 2] or [Barendregt,
1981, Chs. 11–15]. Some notation: a reducibility relation ▷is conﬂuent, or has the Church-Rosser
property, iﬀ(U ▷X & U ▷Y ) =⇒(∃Z) (X ▷Z & Y ▷Z). It is locally conﬂuent iﬀ(U ▷1 X &
U ▷1 Y ) =⇒(∃Z) (X ▷Z & Y ▷Z), where “▷1” means one-step reducibility. A one-step reduction
is called a contraction. A contraction X ▷1 Y is made by replacing an occurrence in X of a term
called a redex by another term called its contractum. In λ, a (β-) redex is any term (λx.M)N
and its contractum is [N/x]M. A term containing no redexes is called a normal form; it cannot
be reduced.
17Comments on the history of Church’s Thesis are in: [Kleene, 1981], [Kleene, 1952, §62],
[Rosser, 1984], [Davis, 1982], [Gandy, 1988] and [Sieg, 1997].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
733
Turing’s was
(λxy.y(xxy))(λxy.y(xxy)).
The next one to appear was in [Rosenbloom, 1950, pp.130–131, Exs. 3e, 5f]. It
was λx. W(Bx)(W(Bx)), which is convertible to λx. (λy.x(yy))(λy.x(yy)). The
latter has often been called Curry’s Y; in fact Curry gave no explicit ﬁxed-
point combinator before [Curry and Feys, 1958, §5G], but the accounts of Rus-
sell’s paradox in [Church, 1932, p.347] and [Curry, 1934a, §5] both mentioned
(λy.N(yy))(λy.N(yy)), where N represented negation, and Curry’s use of the lat-
ter term dated back to a letter to Hilbert in 1929.18 Note that although ﬁxed-point
combinators are often used in λ-deﬁning recursion, they are not really necessary
for recursion on the natural numbers; none was used in the λ-representation of the
recursive functions in [Kleene, 1936].
Returning to the Princeton group: their successes in pure λ-calculus were not
really matched on the applied side, but the results were by no means completely
negative. After the discovery of the Kleene-Rosser inconsistency, Church replaced
his 1933 system by a free-variable logic based on the λδ-calculus, which he proved
consistent by extending the Church-Rosser theorem. (In essence δ was a discrim-
inator between normal forms; see [Church, 1935] or [Church, 1941, §20], and the
review [Curry, 1937].) But the new system was too weak for much mathematics
and seems to have played no role in Church’s future work. In fact in the later
1930s Church retreated from the task of designing a general type-free logic to the
much less ambitious one of re-formulating simple type theory on a λ-calculus base.
In this he succeeded, publishing a smooth and natural system in [Church, 1940]
that has been the foundation for much type-theoretic work since (see §5.1 and §8
below).
4.2
CL in the 1930s
The work of Curry through the 1930s continued his earlier study of the most
basic properties of abstraction, universal quantiﬁcation and implication in as gen-
eral a setting as possible. He analysed the Kleene-Rosser proof of the inconsistency
of Church’s system, and by 1942 he had found in a logical system of his own a very
simple inconsistency now called the Curry paradox [Curry, 1942b]. This showed
combinatory completeness to be incompatible with unrestricted use of certain sim-
ple properties of implication in a very general setting.19
18Stated in [Curry and Feys, 1958, §5S]. By the way, Turing’s ﬁxed-point combinator satisﬁed
Yx ▷x(Yx), but Rosenbloom’s and Curry’s only satisﬁed “=” not “▷”. For more on ﬁxed-point
combinators, see [Barendregt, 1981, §§6.1, 6.5], [Hindley and Seldin, 1986, §3B], or [Curry et al.,
1972, §11F7].
19A general form of Curry’s paradox runs thus, cf. [Hindley and Seldin, 1986, pp.268–269].
Suppose a system S of logic has a class P of expressions such that X, Y ∈P =⇒(X ⊃Y ) ∈P,
and has an axiom-scheme (X ⊃(X ⊃Y )) ⊃(X ⊃Y ) (for all X, Y ∈P), and rules (Eq):
X, X =Y ⊢Y and (MP): X, X ⊃Y ⊢Y .
For every Z ∈P, let Z′ be λy.((yy) ⊃((yy) ⊃Z)), where y does not occur in Z, and let Z∗
be Z′Z′. It is easy to prove that Z∗= Z∗⊃(Z∗⊃Z) = (Z∗⊃(Z∗⊃Z)) ⊃(Z∗⊃Z).

734
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
Curry also began to develop a type theory. A note on types dated 1928 occurs
in his ﬁles, and he gave a talk on this topic in 1930 and wrote it up in [Curry,
1934a] and [Curry, 1936].20 He took a diﬀerent approach from Russell and from
the one that Church later took: he added to his combinator-based logic a function-
ality constant F, with the intention that an expression such as Fabf should mean
approximately (∀x)(x ∈a ⊃fx ∈b).21 This approach diﬀered from Church’s in
that Curry’s Fabf did not imply that the domain of f was exactly a, only that it
included a. In Curry’s functionality-theory a term could have an inﬁnite number
of types. Indeed his axioms for F included axioms assigning an inﬁnity of type-
expressions to each atomic combinator B, C, K, W; for example (from [Curry,
1934a, p.586] or [Curry, 1936, p.378])
Ax. (FB):
(∀x, y, z)

F(Fxy)(F(Fzx)(Fzy))

B
	
.
Curry’s approach was what we would now call polymorphic.
In contrast, in a
Church-style type-theory, for a term f α→β, its domain would be exactly α and its
type would be uniquely α →β.
Curry’s use of types diﬀered from Russell and Church in another way. Russell
had introduced type-expressions to help him restrict his language to avoid certain
troublesome expressions, and Church later had the same aim. But Curry allowed
into his language all combinators, troublesome or placid, and simply assigned
labels to some of them to tell us how they would behave.
Another early user of a polymorphic approach to types was Quine. In [Quine,
1937, pp. 78–79] he proposed restricting the comprehension axiom-scheme in set
theory to formulae he called stratiﬁed, but which we would now call typable, and
on p.79 he made a very clear argument in favour of a polymorphic approach. His
proposed system is nowadays called NF for “New Foundations”.
Its history is
beyond our scope, but the equivalence between stratiﬁcation and typability was
proved in [Newman, 1943, Thm. 4], and a general study of NF is in [Forster, 1995].
The propositions-as-types correspondence was noticed by Curry in the 1930s.
In its simplest form this is an isomorphism between the type-expressions assign-
able to combinators and the implicational formulas provable in intuitionistic logic.
The ﬁrst hint of this, at least for atomic combinators, occurs in a note dated 1930
in Curry’s ﬁles, and appeared in print in his papers [Curry, 1934a] and [Curry,
1934b].22 In [Curry, 1934a, p.588] and [Curry, 1934b, p.850] he gave his axioms
for implication the names of combinators, for example
Ax. (PB):
(∀x, y, z)

P(Pxy)(P(Pzx)(Pzy))

,
Suppose Z ∈P =⇒Z∗∈P, for all Z. Then every Z in P is provable in S. Because, the
axiom-scheme gives ⊢(Z∗⊃(Z∗⊃Z)) ⊃(Z∗⊃Z), so by rule (Eq) twice, ⊢Z∗⊃(Z∗⊃Z)
and ⊢Z∗; hence by (MP) twice, ⊢Z.
(Curry’s treatment of the Russell paradox in [Curry,
1934a, pp.588–589] was interestingly similar to this argument.)
20We are very grateful to J. P. Seldin for showing us Curry’s 1928 note (T 28.12.13.A, repro-
duced in [Seldin, 2002]).
21But only approximately; see the discussions of Π and F in [Seldin, 2008].
22We thank J. P. Seldin for a copy of Curry’s 1930 note (T 30.07.15.B, reproduced in [Seldin,
2002]). The paper [Curry, 1934b] was based on a talk given in 1932.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
735
where Pxy was his notation for x ⊃y. His name “(PB)” was clearly motivated by
the axiom’s similarity to Ax. (FB), although he did not state the P-to-F translation
explicitly in print until later, [Curry, 1942a, p.60, footnote 28]. In [Curry, 1936,
pp.391–394] he proved that if F was deﬁned as
F
≡
[a, b, f]. (∀x)(ax ⊃b(fx))
in a system with combinators and suitable rules for ∀, then each F-axiom would
be deducible from the corresponding P-axiom.
For non-atomic combinators the propositions-as-types correspondence was not
mentioned by Curry until many years later; in fact the ﬁrst discussion that included
composite combinators was in [Curry and Feys, 1958, §9E]. There it was proved
explicitly that when F was replaced by P, the set of all type-expressions assignable
to the combinators became exactly the set of all formulas provable in intuitionistic
implicational logic, provided type-assignment was made in a certain restricted
system.
This system had no ∀, had axiom-schemes instead of the previous F-
axioms for the atomic combinators, and its main rule was:
Rule F:
FABF,
AX
⊢
B(FX)
(which would become the rule of modus ponens if F was replaced by P and F,
X, FX were deleted). It had only one other rule, to ensure that interconvertible
terms received the same types, [Curry and Feys, 1958, §9A3, Rule Eq′]; this rule
did not aﬀect the total set of assignable types, and was dropped in later studies of
propositions-as-types. After dropping that rule, it became clear that there was also
a correspondence between type-assignment deductions (or typed terms) and propo-
sitional deductions. This fact, and its analogue for λ, and some possible extensions
of the correspondence, were pointed out by William Howard in a manuscript circu-
lated in 1969 and published in [Howard, 1980]. The correspondence is often called
formulae-as-types, following [Howard, 1980]23, or the Curry-Howard isomorphism.
The propositions-as-types correspondence was also discovered independently by
several other workers in the 1960s; this period will be discussed further in §8.1.4
below.
Partly as a consequence of propositions-as-types, the authors of [Curry and
Feys, 1958] were led to apply Gentzen’s methods to type-theory, an idea which is
standard now but was new then. This gave them the ﬁrst published proof of the
normalization theorem for typable terms, see §5.4 below.
In the 1930s another logician who made use of combinators was Frederic Fitch in
Yale University. Fitch’s work began with his doctoral thesis [Fitch, 1936], which
described a type-free combinator-based logic that avoided Russell’s paradox by
23Although this name was later criticised by Howard himself who said “a type should be
regarded as an abstract object whereas a formula is the name of a type”, [Howard, 1980, p.479].
By the way, in [Frege, 1879, §13] the axioms for implication were the principal types of K, S
and C. These might be seen, via propositions-as-types, as a partial anticipation of the concept of
combinator basis, at least for the typable terms. But this is probably far-fetched; in particular,
[Frege, 1879] had no explicit concept of completeness.

736
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
forbidding certain cases of abstraction [x1, ..., xn].X where X contained repeated
variables. He then developed over several decades a system CΔ, very diﬀerent from
the one in his thesis but still type-free and combinator-based, with unrestricted
quantiﬁcation and abstraction; see [Fitch, 1963]. The set of theorems of CΔ was
not recursively enumerable, [Fitch, 1963, p.87], but the system was adequate for
a considerable part of mathematical analysis and had a (non-ﬁnitary) consistency
proof. He presented a further modiﬁed system in his student-level textbook on
CL, [Fitch, 1974].
Incidentally, combinators are not the only way of eliminating bound variables:
an alternative technique is algebraic logic. Very roughly speaking, while CL alge-
braizes abstraction the latter algebraizes quantiﬁcation. In 1936 Quine sketched
how this could be done in principle by means of an algebra of relations, [Quine,
1936b]. (Such algebras had been published earlier in [Peirce, 1883] and [Schr¨oder,
1905, Vol.III].) In 1938 Leopold L¨owenheim proposed to Alfred Tarski that all
of mathematics could be expressed in a Peirce-Schr¨oder algebra, see [L¨owenheim,
1940], and in 1941 Tarski developed an abstract theory of binary relations, called
the theory of relation algebras, and used it to prove that set theory could be
formalized without variables, see [Tarski, 1941] and [Tarski, 1953]. A detailed for-
malization of set theory without variables was carried out in the book [Tarski and
Givant, 1987], completed just before Tarski died in 1983.
However, for a formalization of ﬁrst-order logic in general, Tarski’s theory was
inadequate, and to remedy this he and his co-workers developed the theory of
cylindric algebras from the late 1940s onward. A similar algebraic treatment of
bound variables was also given by the polyadic algebras of Paul Halmos in 1956,
see [Halmos, 1962]. Other signiﬁcant contributions to the algebraic approach were
made by [Bernays, 1958], and [Craig, 1974]. William Craig had previously con-
tributed to CL, see [Curry and Feys, 1958, §§5H, 7E].
For more on the history of algebraic logic, see the introductions to [Tarski and
Givant, 1987] and [Givant and Andr´eka, 2002]. A good comparison of algebraic
logic with type-free CL is in [Quine, 1972]. From the viewpoint of a semantics
based on a standard set theory such as ZF or NBG, an advantage of algebraic
logic is that it retains the restrictions of ﬁrst-order logic, and therefore its semantic
simplicity; as noted earlier, unrestricted type-free combinators are much harder to
interpret in standard set theories.
A diﬀerent algebraic approach was taken by the mathematician Karl Menger.
Menger’s method involved an algebraization of a limited form of function-com-
position, and was expounded by him in a series of papers from the 1940s to the
’60s, for example [Menger, 1944] and [Menger, 1964].
But his system is more
restricted than Tarski’s, and less mathematics has been developed in it; see the
review [Lercher, 1966].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
737
5
1940S AND 1950S: CONSOLIDATION
For many years after the mid-1930s, neither λ nor CL attracted much interest
among logicians in general. Both systems would later play a natural role in studies
of higher-order logic, but the formal metatheory of that topic had hardly begun
to be developed at that early period.
The λ-formalism had been designed to
describe substitution and application in detail and seemed oﬀ-puttingly heavy for
other purposes. It had given the ﬁrst proof of the unsolvability of the Entscheid-
ungsproblem, but Turing’s proof via his machine model of computation was much
more transparent, and even Kleene preferred other systems for his subsequent
development of computability theory.
However, on the expository side, an advance in opening up λ to non-special-
ists was made by Church with his readable introductory textbook [Church, 1941].
And Paul Rosenbloom included a section on CL in his general logic textbook
[Rosenbloom, 1950, Ch.III, §4].
Advances were made in both subjects on the
technical side too, and these helped to lay a foundation for the expansion that
came later. They can be split roughly into four main themes: simple type theory,
abstract reduction theory, reductions in CL and λ, and illative systems.
5.1
Simple type theory
Church’s simple type theory was a function-based system, stemming from ideas
of Frank Ramsey and Leon Chwistek in the 1920s, for simplifying the type theory
of [Russell and Whitehead, 1913].24 Church lectured on his system in Princeton
in 1937–38 before publishing it in [Church, 1940], and his lectures were attended
by Turing, who later made some technical contributions. These included the ﬁrst
proof of the system’s weak normalization theorem, although this lay unpublished
for nearly 40 years, see [Turing, 1980] and §8.2 below.
Church’s system was analysed and extended in a series of Princeton Ph.D. theses
from the 1940s onward, of which perhaps the best known are Leon Henkin’s in
1947, published in [Henkin, 1950], and Peter Andrews’, published in [Andrews,
1965]. Henkin gave two deﬁnitions of model of typed λ (standard and general
models),25 and proved the completeness of simple type theory with respect to
general models. Andrews extended Church’s system to make a smooth theory of
tranﬁnite types.
Church’s own interests underwent some evolution after his 1941 textbook ap-
peared. Much of his time and energy was spent on the business of the Association
for Symbolic Logic, of which he had been a co-founder in 1936 and in which he
was still a driving force, and on editing the Journal of Symbolic Logic, especially
its very comprehensive Reviews and Bibliography sections. On the research side
he became interested in intensional logic and the logic of relevant implication.
24See [Gandy, 1977] for a sketch of the origins of Church’s system (and of Turing’s contribu-
tions).
25See §8.1.2 below for the diﬀerence between these; details are in [Henkin, 1950, pp.83–85].

738
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
For the former he made axiomatizations in [Church, 1951a] and [Church, 1973],
both based on modiﬁcations of his type theory. For relevant implication he gave
a formulation, in [Church, 1951b], which was essentially equivalent, under the
propositions-as-types correspondence, to the simple type theory of pure λI-terms.
5.2
Abstract reduction theory
Probably the ﬁrst publication on abstract reduction-theory was a paper by
the mathematician Axel Thue on rewriting ﬁnite trees [Thue, 1910].26
Thue’s
paper even included a lemma that local conﬂuence implies conﬂuence if every
contraction strictly decreases a ﬁnite measure [Thue, 1910, §4 Satz 3], very like
Newman’s lemma of 30 years later that local conﬂuence implies conﬂuence if all
reduction paths are ﬁnite [Newman, 1942, Thm. 3].
But the main inspiration for abstract work in this ﬁeld was [Newman, 1942].
In the 1920s, Newman proved a crucial conﬂuence conjecture in combinatorial
topology, and a decade later his interest in logic (and probably his link with Turing)
led him to study the conﬂuence theorem for λ and the method of residuals that
Church and Rosser had used in its proof [Church and Rosser, 1936].27 The ﬁrst
part of [Newman, 1942] was a study of conﬂuence in a very general setting; in the
second, Newman gave a set of abstract axioms about the concept of residual, from
which he deduced conﬂuence. Unfortunately, due to an error involving variables,
his axioms failed to cover λ as a special case. This was ﬁrst corrected about 20
years later by David Schroer in his Ph.D. thesis [Schroer, 1965].
Newman’s analysis led in the 1970s to general methods for proving conﬂuence
and other key theorems, such as standardization, for systems of λ augmented by
extra operators, for example a primitive recursion operator. (A summary of some
results is in [Hindley, 1978b, pp.269–270].) Three inﬂuential abstract studies of
conﬂuence were [Rosen, 1973], [O’Donnell, 1977] and [Huet, 1980].
In the 1980s the abstract theory of reductions was re-organised completely and
developed by Jan-Willem Klop, beginning with his penetrating thesis [Klop, 1980],
and since then the important abstract theories of combinatory reduction systems
and term rewriting systems have evolved.
These are being actively developed
today, but go far beyond the boundaries of λ and CL and are the subjects of
good surveys in [Klop, 1992] and [Klop et al., 1993] and a comprehensive textbook
[Terese, 2003], so we shall not give details of them here.
26See [Steinby and Thomas, 2000], which contains an English summary of [Thue, 1910].
27If a term X contains redex-occurrences R1, ..., Rn, and X ▷1 Y by contracting R1, certain
parts of Y can be considered to be descendants of R2, ..., Rn in a sense; they are called residuals
of R2, ..., Rn; for details in λ, see [Curry and Feys, 1958, §§4B1–2] or [Hindley and Seldin, 1986,
Def. A1.3], or [Church and Rosser, 1936, pp.473–475].
If we reduce Y by contracting one of
these residuals, and then a residual of these residuals, etc., the reduction X ▷1 Y ▷... is called a
development of R1, ..., Rn. If it is ﬁnite and its last term contains no residuals of R1, ..., Rn, it
is called complete.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
739
5.3
Reductions in CL and λ
Besides abstract reduction theory, there was also progress in analysing the two
most important concrete reductions, weak reduction in CL and β-reduction in λ.
As mentioned earlier, Church and Rosser had begun the study of these in the
paper containing their conﬂuence proof, [Church and Rosser, 1936].
After 1950 their programme was continued by Curry. His research had been
suspended completely during the Second World War, like that of many other
academics, and did not recover momentum until quite late in the 1940s. Then
for about 20 years he put his main eﬀort into compiling two large monographs
containing much new work, [Curry and Feys, 1958] and [Curry et al., 1972]. Part of
this eﬀort consisted of a detailed study of λβ-reduction, including the ﬁrst proof of
its standardization theorem, [Curry and Feys, 1958, §4E1]. He also made the ﬁrst
study of λβη-reduction, including its conﬂuence and η-postponement theorems,
[Curry and Feys, 1958, §4D]. (But his proof of the latter contained a gap, which
was noticed and remedied ﬁfteen years later by Robert Nederpelt, [Nederpelt,
1973, Thm. 7.28].)
In 1965 the thesis of Schroer gave the ﬁrst statement and proof of the ﬁniteness-
of-developments theorem for λβ, [Schroer, 1965, Part I, Thm. 6.20]. But Schroer’s
work was never published and this theorem was not re-discovered until about 8
years later, see §7.2 below.
Weak reduction in CL is much simpler than β-reduction in λ, and was given a
straightforward systematic analysis in [Curry et al., 1972, §11B].
Curry also deﬁned a strong reduction for CL analogous to λβη-reduction, [Curry
and Feys, 1958, §6F].28 His purpose was to make later discussions of logic applica-
ble equally to languages based on CL and on λ. Strong reduction indeed allowed
this to be done to a signiﬁcant extent, but its metatheory turned out to be com-
plicated, and although simpliﬁcations were made by Roger Hindley and Bruce
Lercher in the 1960s which produced some improvement, it eventually seemed
that wherever strong reduction could be used, it would probably be easier to use λ
instead of CL. Strong reduction was therefore more or less abandoned after 1972.
However, in the 1980s a β-strong reduction was deﬁned and studied by Mohamed
Mezghiche, see [Mezghiche, 1984], and the idea of working with a combinatory
reduction which is preserved by abstraction but avoids the complexity of bound
variables is still tantalisingly attractive.
5.4
Illative systems
Turning from pure to applied CL and λ: although type-theory made important
advances in the 1950s, some logicians felt that type-restrictions were stronger than
necessary, and that type-free higher-order logic was still worth further study. Most
28In CL, βη-strong reduction >−βη is deﬁned by adding to the rules deﬁning weak reduction
the extra rule (ξ): if
X >−βηY and x is any variable, then [x]abcf.X >−βη [x]abcf.Y , where
[x]abcf is evaluated by abstraction-algorithm (abcf), see §3 above.

740
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
systems of such logic contain analogues of combinators in some form, but here we
shall only mention those in which CL or λ were more prominent.
Curry’s work on applied systems (which he called illative, from the Latin “illa-
tum” for “inferred”) was published in the books [Curry and Feys, 1958] and [Curry
et al., 1972]. He never gave up his interest in type-free logic, although one of his
main themes of study at this time was the relation between types and terms.
In his 1958 book with Robert Feys, perhaps the authors’ most important contri-
bution in the illative sections was to introduce Gentzen’s techniques into type the-
ory. As we mentioned in §4.2, this approach was not as obvious in 1958 as it is now.
Feys had written on combinatory logic and on Natural Deduction in [Feys, 1946a;
Feys, 1946b], and Curry had emphasized the importance of Gentzen’s methods in
a series of lectures on ﬁrst-order logic at the University of Notre Dame in 1948.
In [Curry and Feys, 1958, §9F] they presented a sequent-based system of type-
assignment and a proof of a cut-elimination theorem for this system, from which
they deduced the weak normalization theorem for simple type theory [Curry and
Feys, 1958, §9F6, Cor. 9F9.2]; this was the ﬁrst published proof of this theorem.
(Other proofs will be discussed in §8.2.)
Further type-theoretic properties de-
scribed in that book included the propositions-as-types correspondence in [Curry
and Feys, 1958, §9E], see §4.2 above and §8.1.4 below, and the link with grammat-
ical categories in [Curry and Feys, 1958, §8S2], see §8.1.1 below.
In [Curry et al., 1972], Curry’s main aim was to make a thorough analysis
of basic logical concepts in the settings of λ and CL, with as few restrictions
as possible and an emphasis on constructive methods.29
The book contained
a detailed comparison of logical systems based on three diﬀerent concepts: (i)
F, the functionality constant described in §4.2 above, (ii)
Ξ, where ΞAB was
approximately equivalent to (∀x)(Ax ⊃Bx), and (iii) ∀and ⊃. The formulation
of these systems beneﬁtted greatly from results and simpliﬁcations introduced by
Jonathan Seldin in his thesis [Seldin, 1968], but many variants of each system were
discussed and the resulting treatment was rather complex.
A proposal for a generalized functionality concept G was made by Curry in
[Curry and Feys, 1958, Appendix A] and [Curry et al., 1972, §§15A1, 15A8].
In terms of ∀and ⊃, GABF was intended to mean approximately (∀x)( Ax ⊃
(Bx)(Fx) ).30 This proposal was developed into a fully-ﬂedged higher-order type-
theory by Seldin in 1975, see [Seldin, 1979] or [Hindley and Seldin, 1986, 1st
edn., Ch. 17]. Seldin later became interested in Thierry Coquand’s calculus of
constructions, which was stronger, see [Seldin, 1997], and thus his work on Curry-
style illative systems gradually merged with the work of others on higher-order
systems. These will be discussed in §8.3 below.
Returning to the type-free approach to higher-order logic: in the 1950s the
main builder of type-free systems was Fitch. As described in §4.2, his work on this
29For further comments on Curry’s programme see [Seldin, 1980a, pp.22–27].
30In a G-based system the type of the output-value of a function may depend on the value of its
argument. Type systems with this property are called dependent. Other systems of dependent
types are mentioned in §8.3.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
741
continued into the 1970s. Some of his technical ideas were appreciated and used
by other workers, for example Corrado B¨ohm, see §6.3, and Solomon Feferman,
see [Feferman, 1984, p.106]. But his formal systems themselves seem to have been
little used.
The system-building tradition was continued by others, however. In 1974 in his
thesis for Doctorat d‘ Etat, Andr´e Chauvin produced a thoughtful and interesting
analysis of type-free higher-order logic and the role of combinators, and described a
formal system based on the notion of partial operation or function. Unfortunately
only a little of this thesis was published, [Chauvin, 1979].
The concept of partial function was also behind several substantial papers by
Feferman from 1975 through the 1980s, in which he examined the possibilities
for type-free systems, particularly as foundations for constructive mathematics
and for category theory, and proposed several actual systems in which “partial”
combinators played a role, see for example [Feferman, 1975a; Feferman, 1975b;
Feferman, 1977; Feferman, 1984] and [Aczel and Feferman, 1980].
An analysis of the foundations based closely on λ was made by Peter Aczel in
an inﬂuential paper [Aczel, 1980].
From 1967 onward, work on type-free illative systems was undertaken by Martin
Bunder. He made a careful study of the inconsistencies that had arisen in past
systems, and proposed several new systems that avoided these, including some
in which all of ZF set theory can be deduced; see, for example, [Bunder, 1983a]
and [Bunder, 1983c], depending on [Bunder, 1983b]. A good short overview is in
[Barendregt et al., 1993].
With Wil Dekkers and Herman Geuvers, Bunder and Barendregt published
useful comparisons between their type-free illative systems and other higher-order
formal systems such as Pure Type Systems: [Dekkers et al., 1998] and [Bunder
and Dekkers, 2005].
In 1990, Randall Holmes formulated systems of λ and CL in which abstrac-
tion was restricted by stratiﬁcation rules inspired by the stratiﬁcation concept in
Quine’s “New Foundations” system [Quine, 1937]: see [Holmes, 1991], or [Holmes,
1995] for a short overview.
In Moscow, independently of all the above, a series of type-free combinator-
based systems was proposed by Alexander Kuzichev from the 1970s onward; see,
for example, [Kuzichev, 1980; Kuzichev, 1983; Kuzichev, 1999] and the references
therein.
6
PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES
Returning to the 1960s: at about this time, λ and CL began to attract the inter-
est of a new group outside the community of logicians, namely computer scientists
involved in the theory and practice of programming languages. Perhaps the ﬁrst
published suggestion that CL or λ be used directly as a programming language
came from the logician Fitch in 1957, although for only a restricted class of prob-
lems: in his paper [Fitch, 1958] he showed how sequential logic-circuits could be

742
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
represented in CL.31 But the main characters concerned were computer scientists:
we shall look at three of these.
6.1
John McCarthy and LISP
From 1956 to ’60, John McCarthy in the U.S.A. developed the computer lan-
guage LISP, which was a list-processing language with a function-abstraction facil-
ity. McCarthy’s goal was to apply LISP eventually to problems in non-numerical
computation, especially in the newborn ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, and to en-
courage the style of program-organization that is nowadays called functional pro-
gramming.32
LISP was not directly based on λ-calculus, although it owed something to λ
(and its abstraction notation was even called “LAMBDA”). LISP’s substitution
procedure was not deﬁned exactly the same as in λ, in particular identiﬁers were
handled according to so-called “dynamic binding” rules. This choice simpliﬁed
LISP’s implementation by means of interpreters, but it greatly complicated the
use of bound variables by the programmer.33
McCarthy’s emphasis on a functional approach to programming also had in-
ﬂuence on the theoretical side, where his contributions included two important
papers on a mathematical basis for the theory of computation, [McCarthy, 1963b;
McCarthy, 1963a]. There we ﬁnd a systematic use of conditional expressions within
a functional formalism for recursively deﬁning functions over symbolic expressions
like the S-expressions of LISP, together with a thorough study of their formal
properties. Equalities among recursive functions expressed in that formalism were
proved by means of recursion induction, to be mentioned again in §8.1.2 in connec-
tion with its generalization as ﬁxed-point induction by Scott [Scott, 1969e]. Along
with recursive deﬁnitions of functions, [McCarthy, 1963a, §2.6] also discussed re-
cursive deﬁnitions of sets, like the deﬁnition of the set of S-expressions itself as a
solution of the equation S ∼= A + (S × S).
6.2
Peter Landin
In the early 1960s in England, Peter Landin proposed the use of λ-terms to code
constructs of the programming language Algol 60, see [Landin, 1965].34 While for
LISP a precise correspondence with λ was hindered by the use of dynamic binding,
for Algol its block structure perfectly matched the way names were handled in λ. In
fact, Landin’s work made it possible to look at λ itself as a programming language,
31We have recently learned that actually Fitch was not the ﬁrst; Curry suggested using com-
binators in programming, in a talk in 1952, [Curry, 1954]; see [Seldin, 2008].
32This name dates back at least to a 1963 tutorial on LISP by P. M. Woodward [Fox, 1966,
p.41].
33See [Moses, 1970] for comments. For the ideas behind LISP see [McCarthy, 1960], [McCarthy,
1963a]; for its history to 1996 see [McCarthy, 1981], [Steele and Gabriel, 1996]. One notable
descendant of LISP with the variable-binding problem ﬁxed is Scheme, see [Dybyg, 1996], dating
from about 1975.
34More precisely, λ-terms extended with some primitive operations for dealing with jumps.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
743
and one especially suited for theoretical purposes. Taking this standpoint, and in
parallel with his translation of Algol, Landin described in 1963 an abstract machine
for reducing λ-terms considered as programs, the SECD-machine of [Landin, 1964,
pp. 316–318] and [Landin, 1966a]. This consisted of a transition system whose
states were made of four components:
• a stack S for storing intermediate results of evaluation,
• an environment E, that associates values to free identiﬁers,
• a control C consisting of a list of expressions that drives the evaluation
process,
• a dump D that records a complete state of the machine, of the form
(S′, E′, C′, D′).
The transition rules of the machine implemented the order of evaluation now
known as call by value, so their results did not agree exactly with those of leftmost-
ﬁrst reduction of λ-terms. While the design of the SECD-machine was inﬂuenced
by similar earlier devices for the interpretation of programming languages, notably
the LISP interpreter devised in [Gilmore, 1963],35 it was however the ﬁrst to
be presented in a formal way, and may fairly be said to have opened the way
to the study of the formal operational semantics of λ-calculus considered as a
programming language, that would ﬁnd a systematic exposition a decade later
starting with [Plotkin, 1975].
6.3
Corrado B¨ohm: λ-calculus as a programming language
In the above developments λ and CL began to contribute ideas to the theory
of programming languages, and their inﬂuence is still active; but in the opposite
direction, programming experience had only a limited impact on the “pure” theory
of λ and CL at that time. The exception was the work of Corrado B¨ohm from the
early 1960s onward.36
B¨ohm gained his Ph.D. in 1951 at the ETH in Zurich, with a thesis which
included the ﬁrst-ever description of a complete compiler in its own language,
[B¨ohm, 1954].
While working on his thesis he came in contact with Bernays,
who introduced him to the classical formalisms for computable functions. These
included Turing machines and Post and Thue systems, but the variety of these
models of computation led B¨ohm in the following years to search for an inclusive
formalism. This aim was the origin of his interest in λ-calculus, with which he be-
came acquainted around 1954 from Church’s textbook [Church, 1941], but whose
importance he realized only at the end of the 1950s after noticing that functional
abstraction was used in LISP. A colleague, Wolf Gross, drew his attention to [Curry
and Feys, 1958] and to the third chapter of [Rosenbloom, 1950], and in the years
35See [Landin, 1966a, §20] for a discussion of related work.
A textbook treatment of the
SECD-machine is contained in [Burge, 1978].
36Our reconstruction of B¨ohm’s work has been helped by the scientiﬁc biography in [Dezani
et al., 1993, pp. 1–8], and a personal communication by B¨ohm, April 11th, 2001.

744
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
1960-61 B¨ohm and Gross together began to study combinators, λ-calculus and
recursive function theory. By 1964 they had realized that λ-terms and combina-
tors could be used directly as the basis of “a very ﬂexible description language for
machines, programs and algorithms”, [B¨ohm and Gross, 1966, p.36]. This was the
starting point of the CUCH language (a system using both CUrry’s combinators
and CHurch’s λ-terms), which was developed independently of the ideas that were
emerging at about the same time from the work of Strachey and Landin, but was
inﬂuenced partly by the use of λ-abstraction notation in [McCarthy, 1963a, §3]
(and by the use of β-reduction in Paul Gilmore’s interpreter [Gilmore, 1963, §3]),
and especially by the use of combinators to describe sequential circuits in [Fitch,
1958]. The latter gave in fact one of the ﬁrst applications of CUCH (described in
[B¨ohm and Giovannucci, 1964] together with the representation of analogue cir-
cuits), as well as the encoding of the operations of Iverson’s programming language
APL in unpublished work of Marisa Venturini Zilli in 1962-64.37
An abstract CUCH-machine was described in [B¨ohm and Dezani, 1972], and had
an actual implementation in the 1990s, in unpublished work by Stefano Guerrini.
The CUCH machine is of interest for the history of abstract interpreters for the λ-
calculus, for it used a leftmost-ﬁrst reduction strategy instead of the call-by-value
order realized by the more widely known SECD-machine of Landin.
But the main inﬂuence of B¨ohm and his students on λ and CL was through
discoveries about the pure systems. The presentation of CUCH in [B¨ohm, 1966]
and [B¨ohm and Gross, 1966] set up a uniform language for formulating technical
problems about the syntax of untyped λ and CL, and the solution of such problems
dominated much of B¨ohm’s later research activity. We shall discuss these in §7.1.
7
SYNTACTICAL DEVELOPMENTS
The revival of interest in λ and CL that began in the 1960s brought with it some
new advances in the study of their syntax.
Work by proof-theorists on G¨odel’s Dialectica paper [G¨odel, 1958], stimulated
particularly by Georg Kreisel in Stanford University, led to normalization proofs
for various typed extensions of λ and CL from 1963 onward. These will be discussed
in §8.2 below.
In 1963 Dana Scott gave lectures on λ to an autumn seminar on foundations at
Stanford [Scott, 1963]. These were partly motivated by “a certain lack of satisfac-
tion with systems for functions suggested in papers of John McCarthy”, with the
hope “that the underlying philosophy will . . . lead to the development of a general
programming language for use on computers” [Scott, 1963, p. 1.2]. Scott’s syntac-
tical innovations included a new representation of the natural numbers for which
the predecessor combinator was much simpler than those known for Church’s nu-
merals,38 and the following neat and general new undecidability theorem for λ: if
37Almost 20 years later, [B¨ohm, 1982] described a combinatory representation of Backus’
systems of functional programming, [Backus, 1978], that are in many respects similar to APL.
38Scott’s numerals were 0 ≡K, succ ≡λuxy. yu, see [Scott, 1963, §3] or [Curry et al., 1972,

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
745
two non-empty sets of terms are closed under expansion (i.e. reversed reduction),
then the pair cannot be recursively separated, i.e. there is no total recursive func-
tion which outputs 1 on the members of one set and 0 on the other; see [Scott, 1963,
§9] or [Barendregt, 1981, §6.6] or [Curry et al., 1972, §13B2]. Incidentally, Curry
independently proved a similar undecidability theorem, though his was slightly
less general than Scott’s and was made a few years later (but before seeing Scott’s
theorem), see [Curry, 1969b, p.10] or [Curry et al., 1972, p.251, footnote 7].
Scott’s next major contribution to the theory of λ was on the semantic side in
1969 and radically changed both the subject itself and its more general context,
the study of higher-order functions; see §9.1 below.
In 1971 appeared the inﬂuential thesis of Henk Barendregt, [Barendregt, 1971].
Part of its motivation was semantical, so we shall discuss it in §9.2 p.779, but its
results and methods were syntactical and stimulated much work on syntactical
properties of pure λ in the 1970s. Some of this work will be described in §7.2, and
many of its pre-1981 results were incorporated into the monograph [Barendregt,
1981], which became the standard reference for the core properties of λ.
7.1
Contributions from the programming side
In Italy, the work of B¨ohm on the λ-based language CUCH led him to ask a
series of technical questions about the syntax of λ which came to have an important
inﬂuence on the development of the subject, both through the questions themselves
and through the later activities of the students he attracted to his work. The ﬁrst
of these questions, at the end of a talk given in 1964 [B¨ohm, 1966, p.194], was
whether it was possible to discriminate between any two distinct closed normal
forms F, G by constructing a λ-term ΔF,G such that
ΔF,GF =βη λxy.x,
ΔF,GG =βη λxy.y.
A few years later the answer “yes” was proved for βη-normal forms by B¨ohm him-
self, [B¨ohm, 1968]; this result is now known as B¨ohm’s theorem.39 B¨ohm’s proof
of his theorem was analysed by Reiji Nakajima and by Barendregt independently,
see [Nakajima, 1975] and [Barendregt, 1977, §6], and from these analyses came
the now well-known concept of B¨ohm tree, as well as the use of this concept in
the study of models of λ (see §9.2 below).40 In [Barendregt, 1981, Ch. 10] there is
pp. 260–261]. For them, pred ≡λx. x0I. Some predecessors known for the Church numerals
are given in [Curry et al., 1972, pp. 218, 226]. Other numeral systems have been proposed and
used, for example in [Barendregt, 1976, §4.1], in [Wadsworth, 1980], and by B¨ohm, see below.
Numeral systems in general have been discussed, with examples, in [Curry et al., 1972, §§13A1,
13C1] and [Barendregt, 1981, §§6.4, 6.8].
39A well organised proof of B¨ohm’s theorem is in [Krivine, 1990, pp. 68–74]. A fuller proof
which has been mechanised in the language CAML is in [Huet, 1993]; it deals with problems
about bound variables which are usually ignored but become serious when inﬁnite trees are
involved.
40Although for terms in normal form the B¨ohm tree concept had already appeared in [B¨ohm
and Dezani, 1974].

746
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
a careful account of the ideas behind the proof (including the name B¨ohming out
for the technique of extracting subtrees of a B¨ohm tree by means of contexts).
Another conjecture of B¨ohm’s, made in [B¨ohm, 1968, p.4], was what is now
called the Range theorem: the range of a combinator F is the set of all βη-
convertibility classes of closed λ-terms of the form FM, and the theorem states
that this set is either inﬁnite or a singleton. This theorem was proved within a year
by Myhill and Barendregt independently. A constructive version of the theorem,
prompted by a remark of Dirk van Dalen, together with some historical remarks
on the various proofs, is in [Barendregt, 1993].
B¨ohm’s aim of using CUCH as a real programming language led him to study
various ways of coding data structures as λ-terms. He coded natural numbers
as the Church numerals [B¨ohm, 1966, Appendix II], although he also considered
alternative representations, for example
n
≡
λx.⟨x, . . . , x
  
n times
⟩
as described in [B¨ohm, 1966, Appendix VI]. Vectors ⟨X1, . . . , Xn⟩were represented
as terms of the form λx.xX1 . . . Xn with projections U n
i deﬁned by λx1 . . . xn.xi,
[B¨ohm, 1966, Appendix IV]. B¨ohm saw both data and programs as higher-order
functions that should be represented by terms in normal form (or by strongly
normalizing terms).
This led him to the problem of structuring the set of all
normal forms algebraically, which became especially important in his work. He
wished to ﬁnd an algebraic structure of normal forms suitable for representing
data structures as initial algebras, and over which iterative, primitive recursive
and even total recursive functions could be represented by terms in normal form.
He explored this representation from 1983 onwards, and reported the results in a
long series of works: [B¨ohm and Berarducci, 1985], [B¨ohm, 1986; B¨ohm, 1988b;
B¨ohm, 1988a; B¨ohm, 1989].
The ﬁrst of these, with Alessandro Berarducci in
Rome, investigated the representation of data structures in second order λ-calculus
and, as we shall discuss in §8.3, was very inﬂuential in investigations of polymorphic
λ-calculi.
The quest for algebraic structure in combinatory logic led also to the study of the
monoid structure of combinators (modulo η-conversion), extending an early idea
of Church [Church, 1937], and even to combinatory groups through the study of
invertible terms. In 1976 his co-worker and former student Mariangiola Dezani41
in Turin made a characterization of the invertible normalizable terms of λβη-
calculus, [Dezani, 1976], and her result was extended to all terms by Klop and
Jan Bergstra, [Bergstra and Klop, 1980]. With Francoise Ermine, Dezani then
gave a description of maximal monoids of normal forms, using an early version
of intersection types, [Dezani and Ermine, 1982]. Monoids of combinators were
studied further in [B¨ohm and Dezani, 1989]. (A detailed account of the results in
this area until 1980 is in [Barendregt, 1981, Ch. 21].)
41Married name Mariangiola Dezani Ciancaglini.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
747
Taking a similar algebraic approach, around 1977 B¨ohm proposed a simple rein-
terpretation of combinatory logic by regarding combinators as generalized numer-
als [B¨ohm, 1979; B¨ohm, 1980]; this was suggested by the fact that exponentiation
mn of Church numerals m, n is just nm. He regarded combinators as a structure
with sum, product and exponentiation with the usual arithmetical axioms, plus a
non-arithmetical constant for pairing.
James H. Morris at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology was another inﬂu-
ential contributor who, like B¨ohm, was motivated by an interest in programming
languages; his thesis [Morris, 1968] acknowledged an intellectual debt to Landin,
although most of the results in it concerned the syntax of untyped and simply
typed λ-calculus.
That thesis contained the ﬁrst formulation of “pure” simply typed λ in isolation
without the extra logical axioms and rules that the systems of Church and Curry
had contained. Morris’ formulation was what is nowadays called “Curry-style”;
types were assigned to untyped pure λ-terms. In [Morris, 1968, p.107] he proved
weak normalization by a method essentially the same as in Turing’s unpublished
note, see §8.2 below, and in [Morris, 1968, pp.100–105] he described and veriﬁed
a test for typability, see §8.5 below.
Morris’ thesis also contained perhaps the ﬁrst application of B¨ohm’s Theorem,
in a result which, although syntactical, later played a signiﬁcant role in the model
theory of λ. Morris suggested looking at a λ-term M as a partial function consist-
ing of those pairs ⟨⟨M1, . . . , Mn⟩, N⟩such that reduction starting at MM1 . . . Mn
halts with the normal form N. The problem with this idea was that βη-conversion
does not coincide with equality of partial functions, so Morris introduced the fol-
lowing preorder on terms [Morris, 1968, p.50]:
Given λ-terms M, N:
M extends N if, for all contexts C[ ], if C[M]
has a normal form then C[N] has the same normal form.
The equivalence relation on terms generated by the extension preorder came later
to be called contextual equivalence. Morris proved it to be, essentially, the largest
congruence on (pure) λ-terms that non-trivially extends βη-convertibility, by ap-
plying the newly-published B¨ohm Theorem [Morris, 1968, p.53, Cor. 5].
A point worth noting in Morris’ deﬁnition of the extension preorder was the
use of contexts: these became an ubiquitous tool for the deﬁnition of equivalences
on both untyped and typed terms (see §9.2 and §10 later). Morris also proved
that the ﬁxed-point combinator Y commonly attributed to Curry yields the least
ﬁxed point under the extension preorder [Morris, 1968, Ch. III, §C, Cor. 7(a)],
by a complicated analysis of reductions. This result is used to justify, by way of
example, a form of McCarthy’s principle of Recursion Induction.
Near the end of his thesis, Morris argued for the usefulness of allowing circular
type-expressions in simply typed λ-calculus, like the solution of the type equation
α = α →β, remarking that “we have only a limited intuition about what kind
of an object a circular type expression might denote (possibly, a set of functions,
some of which have themselves as arguments and values)”, [Morris, 1968, p.123].

748
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
The answer to this puzzle was to be found less than one year later by Dana Scott
with his set-theoretic model for the λ-calculus, see §9.1 below.
7.2
Theory of reductions
Ever since the original proof of the conﬂuence of λβ-reduction in [Church
and Rosser, 1936], a general feeling had persisted in the logic community that a
shorter proof ought to exist. The work on abstract conﬂuence proofs described in
§5.2 did not help, as it was aimed mainly at generality, not at a short proof for λβ
in particular.
For CL, in contrast, the ﬁrst conﬂuence proof was accepted as reasonably simple;
its key idea was to count the simultaneous contraction of a set of non-overlapping
redexes as a single unit step, and conﬂuence of sequences of these unit steps was
easy to prove, [Rosser, 1935, p.144, Thm. T12].
Then in 1965 William Tait presented a short conﬂuence proof for CL to a
seminar on λ organized by Scott and McCarthy at Stanford. Its key was a very
neat deﬁnition of a unit-step reduction by induction on term-structure. Tait’s units
were later seen to be essentially the same as Rosser’s, but his inductive deﬁnition
was much more direct. Further, it could be adapted to λβ. (This possibility was
noted at the seminar in 1965, see [Tait, 2003, p.755 footnote]). Tait did not publish
his method directly, but in the autumn of 1968 he showed his CL proof to Per
Martin-L¨of, who then adapted it to λβ in the course of his work on type theory
and included the λβ proof in his manuscript [Martin-L¨of, 1971b, pp.8–11, §2.5].
Martin-L¨of’s λβ-adaptation of Tait’s proof was quickly appreciated by other
workers in the subject, and appeared in [Barendregt, 1971, Appendix II], [Sten-
lund, 1972, Ch. 2] and [Hindley et al., 1972, Appendix 1], as well as in a report by
Martin-L¨of himself, [Martin-L¨of, 1972b, §2.4.3].42
In λ, each unit step deﬁned by Tait’s structural-induction method turned out to
be a minimal-ﬁrst development of a set of redexes (not necessarily disjoint). Curry
had introduced such developments in [Curry and Feys, 1958, p.126], but had used
them only indirectly; Hindley had used them extensively in his thesis, [Hindley,
1969a, p.547,“MCD”], but only in a very abstract setting. They are now usually
called parallel reductions, following Masako Takahashi. In [Takahashi, 1989] the
Tait-Martin-L¨of proof was further reﬁned, and the method of dividing reductions
into these unit steps was also applied to simplify proofs of other main theorems
on reductions in λ.
Tait’s structural-induction method is now the standard way to prove conﬂuence
in λ and CL. However, some other proofs give extra insights into reductions that
this method does not, see for example the analysis in [Barendregt, 1981, Chs. 3,
11–12].
42The earlier manuscript [Martin-L¨of, 1971b] was not published, as the system described in
it was inconsistent from the standpoint of the propositions-as-types correspondence, see §8.1.4
below; but its conﬂuence proof for λβ was not faulty.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
749
Besides conﬂuence, major themes in the study of λβ-reductions have been given
by theorems on ﬁniteness of developments, standardisation and the equivalence of
complete developments, all depending either directly or indirectly on the concept
of residual. The ﬁrst two of these theorems were proved for λI-terms in [Church
and Rosser, 1936, Lemma 1], and the second was proved for CL in [Rosser, 1935,
p.142, Thm. T9]; but their analogues for the full λK-calculus are more subtle and
did not come until much later.
The ﬁniteness-of-developments theorem for λK was ﬁrst proved by Schroer in his
unpublished thesis [Schroer, 1965, Part I, Thm. 6.20]. It was re-proved by others
using various methods, for example [Hyland, 1975, Thm. 3.6], [Hindley, 1978a,
Thm. 1], and [Vrijer, 1985]. A proof by Barendregt, Bergstra, Klop and Volken
in [Barendregt et al., 1976, pp.14–17] used a particularly neat labelling technique
and a strong normalization theorem for labelled reductions, see [Barendregt, 1981,
§11.2].
Labelling techniques to follow components of terms down through reductions
were ﬁrst used in [Hyland, 1976, §2] and [Wadsworth, 1978, §4], in proofs of the
limit theorem for approximants, see §9.2 below. In [Wadsworth, 1976, p.508] the
idea was attributed by Wadsworth to a 1972 communication from Martin Hyland.
It was extended by Jean-Jacques L´evy in 1974 [L´evy, 1976, pp. 106–114] and
in [L´evy, 1978, Ch. II], and applied to prove the completeness of “inside-out”
reductions and the other main theorems on reductions. A good general account
of labelling is in [Barendregt, 1981, Ch. 14].
The standardization theorem for λK ﬁrst appeared in [Curry and Feys, 1958,
§4E1], though with a proof that depended on the ﬁniteness of leftmost-ﬁrst devel-
opments. In 1975 Curry’s proof was much simpliﬁed by Gerd Mitschke, [Mitschke,
1979]. A consequence of standardization is the coﬁnality of leftmost reductions, i.e.
that the leftmost reduction of a term is ﬁnite if and only if the term has a normal
form. In the early 1970s Barendregt pointed out that the reductions most often
used in practice were quasi-leftmost, not leftmost, and proved the corresponding
coﬁnality theorem for these reductions too [Barendregt, 1981, Thm. 13.2.6].43 In
his 1976 report with Bergstra, Klop and Volken the more general concept of reduc-
tion strategy was introduced and studied, see [Barendregt et al., 1976, pp.33–43]
or [Barendregt, 1981, Ch. 13].
The basic equivalence theorem for complete developments in λK was ﬁrst stated
and proved in [Curry and Feys, 1958, pp.113–130]. In 1978 it was improved by
L´evy to a stronger equivalence, see [L´evy, 1978, pp. 37, 65] or [Barendregt, 1981,
§§12.2.1, 12.2.5]. L´evy’s equivalence theorem led to a new view of β-reductions,
embodied in the thesis [Klop, 1980]. The transformations involved in proofs of
conﬂuence and standardization were seen as conversions of reduction diagrams,
and the reasonably tidy underlying structure that had been sought for the theory
of β-reduction for the previous forty years was at last achieved. (An account is in
[Barendregt, 1981, Chs. 11–14].)
For λβη, conﬂuence and the postponement of η-steps were known since Curry’s
43A reduction is quasi-leftmost iﬀ, for every non-leftmost step, some later step is leftmost.

750
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
work in the 1950s, as was mentioned in §5.3, but no standardization theorem
had been proved analogous to that for β, nor had any coﬁnality theorem been
proved for leftmost reductions, despite attempts. The ﬁrst successful proofs of
these theorems were made in [Klop, 1980, Ch. IV].
Returning to λβ: problems involved in making reduction more eﬃcient began
to attract attention in the 1970s, stimulated by programming needs. One such
problem was that of ﬁnding a reduction of a term to its normal form that was
optimal in some reasonable sense. For CL this problem was studied in 1972 by
John Staples, though his work was not published until 9 years later, [Staples, 1981].
In 1974 for a system of recursive programs, Jean Vuillemin formulated a “delay
rule” for reducing ﬁrst-order terms with function symbols deﬁned by a recursive
program, [Vuillemin, 1974a, §3]. This rule in Vuillemin’s system could be proved
optimal and easily implementable, but the problem of optimality turned out to
be more diﬃcult in the case of λ-calculus. However, L´evy extended Vuillemin’s
idea to λ in his thesis [L´evy, 1978], by an in-depth analysis of the lattice of β-
reductions starting at a term, and by exploiting his labelling technique to deﬁne
certain families of redexes that can be shared through reductions.44
L´evy also
proved the completeness of inside-out β-reductions (almost the opposite of leftmost
reductions), which had been conjectured in [Welch, 1975], see [L´evy, 1976].
Substitution was another topic which aroused interest from a computing point of
view. Its correct deﬁnition had been settled years ago, but its eﬃcient implemen-
tation now became an important problem; for example in LISP in the 1950s some
of the details had been over-simpliﬁed and had had to be corrected, see §6.1 above.
With the implementation problem in mind, in 1978 Gyorgy R´ev´esz proposed an
interesting new alternative to β-reduction. It generated the usual equivalence re-
lation =β, was conﬂuent, had the same normal forms as the usual β-reduction,
and broke substitutions into smaller steps; see [R´ev´esz, 1978] or [R´ev´esz, 1985].
Another approach to the problem of implementing substitution eﬃciently was
to extend the λ-language by introducing an explicit substitution operator with
suitable reduction rules. This idea, which had occurred independently to Mitsch-
ke and Barry Rosen for use in conﬂuence proofs for λβ-reduction ([Mitschke, 1973,
pp. 150–151], [Rosen, 1973, §9]), led in the 1990s to several formal systems which
are still being developed; a few examples of papers on these are [Komori, 1990],
[Abadi et al., 1991], [Kamareddine and Nederpelt, 1993], [Curien et al., 1996],
[Benaissa et al., 1996], [Kamareddine and Rios, 1997], [Bloo and Geuvers, 1999],
and [Kamareddine and Rios, 2000].
A special case of substitution was the problem of changing bound variables
eﬃciently.
In 1972 de Bruijn described a formalism which avoided this prob-
lem completely, by numbering all λs in a term and replacing bound variables by
number-indices to show which λ bound them, [Bruijn, 1972]. De Bruijn’s formal-
44A suitable data structure for implementing the sharing required for optimal reductions was
described in 1990, independently in [Lamping, 1990] and [Kathail, 1990].
Then in [Gonthier
et al., 1992] and [Asperti, 1995] the technique was related to Girard’s geometry of interaction
[Girard, 1989a].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
751
ism was used in the compiler of the programming language ML in the 1980s, and
has been used in many explicit substitution systems.
8
TYPES
8.1
The general development of type theories
In the type theory of Russell and Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica and its
simpliﬁcations by Chwistek and Ramsey [Russell and Whitehead, 1913; Chwistek,
1922; Ramsey, 1926], there was little agreement as to what kind of entities types
should be. Already in [Russell, 1903, §497] we ﬁnd at least two ways in which
types can be intended:
(1) Types as ranges of signiﬁcance of propositional functions: given a proposi-
tional function ϕ(x), there is a class of objects, the type of x, such that ϕ
has a value whenever it is applied to a member of this type.
(2) Types as sets: individuals form the lowest type of objects, then there are sets
of individuals, sets of sets of individuals and so on, ad inﬁnitum.
The ﬁrst interpretation of types is related to the theory of grammatical categories.
The view of types as sets underlies, of course, the early developments in set theory,
cf. [Quine, 1963, Ch. XI], but most notably from a λ-viewpoint it underlies the
deﬁnition of the hierarchy of simple types in [Church, 1940] and much of the
research on set-theoretical models of type theories.
The later grafting of the type-theoretic tradition onto λ and CL, and the math-
ematical study of the models of the resulting theories, contributed to the discovery
of new ways in which types could be interpreted. A new unifying paradigm that
became (and still is) very inﬂuential in research in type theory was introduced
by Lawvere in 1969 and Lambek in the 1970s [Lawvere, 1969a; Lawvere, 1969b;
Lambek, 1974; Lambek, 1980b; Lambek, 1980a]:
(3) Types as objects in a category, especially a cartesian closed category, whose
deﬁnition provides a general framework for a formulation of the set-theor-
etical bijection between functions of several arguments and unary functions
with functions as values.
In addition, research in proof-theory and the semantics of intuitionistic mathe-
matics showed that it was in many cases fruitful to view
(4) Types as propositions: in either λ or CL, terms of a given type play the role
of codes for proofs of (the proposition coded by) that type.
We shall now follow the historical development of each of these threads in turn.45
45We shall not try to survey all of type-theory, but only the parts that are most relevant to λ
and CL. In particular, we shall not discuss the type-concept implicit in ZF set theory.

752
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
8.1.1
Types as grammatical categories
The theory of categorial grammars began in about 1900 with the attempt of
Edmund Husserl to develop a theory of pure, a priori laws that underlie the com-
position of meanings, [Husserl, 1922, Fourth Investigation]. Through the teaching
of Kazimierz Twardowski, Husserl’s ideas inﬂuenced the Lw´ow school of logicians,
and in particular the design of the logical systems of Le´sniewski [Le´sniewski, 1929],
where they replaced the logical types of Russell. Ajdukiewicz was the ﬁrst to give
a self-contained formalization of a system of categorical grammar, [Ajdukiewicz,
1935]. There, it is assumed that to each word of a language can be assigned one
or more indices, that are symbolic representations of the grammatical categories
to which the word belongs. Starting from indices n for noun phrases and s for
propositions, one can obtain inﬁnitely many new indices α/β for phrases that yield
a phrase of index α whenever preﬁxed to a phrase of index β. The concatenation
of two words with respective indices α and β has index αβ, and one is allowed
to replace each subsequence of the form (α/β)β by α. This basic system can be
extended by forming the index α\β for phrases that yield a phrase of index β when-
ever suﬃxed to a phrase of index α, with a rule that allows a subsequence of the
form α(α\β) to be replaced by β, [Bar-Hillel, 1953; Bar-Hillel, 1959; Lambek, 1958;
Lambek, 1961]. Writing x →y to mean that every expression of category x has
also category y, one can prove theorems like, for example, that xy →z implies
y →x\z. Lambek introduced a Gentzen-like calculus for deriving theorems of this
form, and proved its decidability through a cut-elimination theorem, [Lambek,
1958].
Curry, because of his interest in the formal study of natural languages, knew
about the theory of categorial grammar,46 and noticed that his theory of function-
ality (see §4.2) had a grammatical interpretation in which types could be regarded
as grammatical categories. This was in harmony with his early ideas on the theory
of functionality, which was intended to be a tool for drawing categorial distinc-
tions between the terms of systems of illative combinatory logic, with the idea
that “a theory of types is essentially a device for saying that certain combinations
are not propositions”, see [Curry, 1980, §9]. The grammatical interpretation of
functionality was described in [Curry, 1961];47 it regarded the combination Fαβ
as the category of those functors that take an argument of category α and give
a result of category β, in the context of a formal system whose only operation
is application. (For example, if nouns and noun-phrases have category N, then
adjectives have category FNN, adverbs (as modiﬁers of adjectives) have category
F(FNN)(FNN), and the suﬃx “-ly” (which changes adjectives to adverbs) has
category F(FNN)(F(FNN)(FNN)).)
The possibility of describing grammatical categories by means of types has also
played a role in formalizing the syntax of logical theories within typed λ-calculi.
This has happened, for example, with the theory of expressions that underlies
Martin-L¨of’s intuitionistic theory of types (described for the ﬁrst time by Martin-
46In particular, about [Ajdukiewicz, 1935], see the remark in [Curry and Feys, 1958, §8S1].
47Based on [Curry, 1948], summarized brieﬂy in [Curry and Feys, 1958, §8S2, pp.274–275].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
753
L¨of in his lecture at the Brouwer Centenary in 1981; see [Nordstr¨om et al., 1990,
p.13]) and the more recent Edinburgh Logical Framework [Harper et al., 1993]. In
a broader perspective, the same connection has been exploited in mathematical
linguistics in the area known as Montague grammar, [Montague, 1974].
8.1.2
Types as sets
There was a clear set-theoretic intuition behind the hierarchy of simple types
in [Church, 1940]: Church used a type-expression βα to denote a set of functions
from the set (denoted by) α to the set (denoted by) β. This intuition can readily
be extended to yield a notion of model for the simply typed λ-calculus as a set-
theoretic structure D consisting of a family of sets {Dα}α∈T, where T is the set
of all type-expressions of the system, such that Dβα is the set of all functions
from Dα to Dβ, with a family of application-functions ·α,β : (Dβα × Dα) →Dβ,
for α, β ∈T, that correspond to the application of a function of type βα to an
argument of type α with result of type β. This notion is essentially that of standard
model introduced by Leon Henkin in [Henkin, 1950, pp.83–85], who also considered
general models where Dβα is only assumed to be some class of functions from Dα
to Dβ.48
The interpretation of types as sets led to developments that became important
also for later extensions of this rather limited framework. One of these was the
notion of logical relation between models D and E, deﬁned as a family of relations
Rα ⊆Dα × Eα indexed over types, such that49
Rα→β(f, g) ⇐⇒

(∀x ∈Dα, y ∈Eα) Rα(x, y) ⇒Rβ(f ·α,β x, g ·α,β y)

.
An early instance of the use of logical relations was the proof of completeness
of typed βη-conversion with respect to any standard model (over an inﬁnite set
of individuals) of simply typed λ-calculus, given by Harvey Friedman in 1970
and published in [Friedman, 1975]. This result exploited the properties of partial
homomorphisms of models, where a partial homomorphism from D to E is deﬁned
as a family of partial surjections fα : Dα ⇀Eα from D to E for each type α,
with the property that f β(x ·α,β y) ≃f α→β(x) ·α,β f α(y). The graph of a partial
homomorphism is then a logical relation from D to E.
Later research showed that logical relations aﬀord a convenient framework for
formulating and proving the main properties of simply typed λ-calculi. On the
syntactic side, the various forms of the notion of “computability” used in Tait-
style normalization proofs can be described as logical relations, as well as some
other properties of reduction like conﬂuence and η-postponement, [Statman, 1985].
On the semantic side, the extensional collapse of an applicative structure uses
logical partial equivalence relations (a result from 1971 of JeﬀZucker, reported
in [Troelstra, 1973, §2.4.5]; see also [Statman, 1983]). Special classes of logical
48Church’s system had an extensionality axiom; for systems without this, the deﬁnition of
model would be more complicated than in [Henkin, 1950]; see, for example, [Barendregt, 1981,
2nd edn., Ch.5] or [Hindley and Seldin, 1986, §11A].
49From now on we write the nowadays-common notation α →β instead of Church’s βα.

754
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
relations were used in the characterization of deﬁnability in D∞models of the
type-free λ-calculus and in standard models of the simply-typed λ-calculus by
[Plotkin, 1973] (where the name ‘logical relation’, attributed to Mike Gordon,
seems to have ﬁrst appeared). See also [Plotkin, 1980].
The research on higher-order notions of computability in the 1950s produced a
host of type structures or even models for simply typed λ in which function types
are interpreted by some set of computable function(al)s.50 Especially important
from our standpoint is the search for a suitable notion of partial computable func-
tional, leading to the partial monotone functionals studied in Richard Platek’s
Stanford PhD thesis [Platek, 1966] (see [Longley, 2001, §4.1.1] and [Moldestad,
1977]).
The idea of an ordering on functionals, stressed by Platek, together with the
mathematical theory of computation of McCarthy [McCarthy, 1963a], are at the
basis of the theory of computable functions of higher type described in a privately
circulated typescript written in October 1969 by Dana Scott [Scott, 1969e] (see
also [Scott, 1969d]). Scott proposed there a typed alternative to the (type-free)
programming languages introduced in [B¨ohm, 1966; B¨ohm and Gross, 1966] and
[Landin, 1966b], which amounted to a simply typed λ-calculus with ground types ι
for integers and o for truth values, and containing a functional Y : (τ →τ) →τ, for
all types τ, for forming (least) ﬁxed-points of functions of type τ →τ (suggested
by Platek’s thesis), and McCarthy’s conditional operator. In addition, there were
constants Ωι and Ωo denoting the “undeﬁned” integer and truth value, respectively,
so that partial numerical functions could be described as continuous total functions
that may take value Ωι at some argument. The intended model for this system was
based on the interpretation of types as domains, i.e. partially ordered sets D with
a least element ⊥D and least upper bounds of increasing chains. Functions over
domains were required to be continuous: these are the functions that preserve least
upper bounds of chains. The judgements of the system exploited the semantical
ordering between values: notably, there was a rule of induction of the form:
Φ ⊢g(Ω) ≤h(Ω)
Φ, g(x) ≤h(x) ⊢g(f(x)) ≤h(f(x))
Φ ⊢g(Y(f)) ≤h(Y(f))
.
This rule was considered by Scott to be the main advantage of the system (Scott
[Scott, 1969e, §3]), as compared e.g. to the principle of recursion induction arising
from the work of McCarthy [McCarthy, 1963a, §8].
The resulting system was the basis of the LCF project (LCF stands for “Logic
for Computable Functions”, the name given to Scott’s system by Robin Milner)
developed from 1972 onward by a group at Stanford University led by Milner.
The functional programming language ML in [Gordon et al., 1979] was originally
developed in order to check proofs in a version of LCF, see [Gordon, 2000]. Further-
50For a thorough historical account of this ﬁeld, highlighting its many intersections with our
present subject, we refer the reader to [Longley, 2001]. Longley (ibid., §3.3.1) also points out
[Kreisel, 1959] as the source of many ideas that have played a key role in the later development
of λ.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
755
more, the typed λ-calculus that constitutes its logic-free part became the language
PCF (“Programming language for Computable Functions”, [Plotkin, 1977]), that
is widely used as the prototype functional programming language for many theoret-
ical purposes, in particular the study of the important property of full abstraction
(see later, §10).
8.1.3
Types as objects
The connection between type theory and category theory that underlies a large
amount of current research shows up along the lines set by the works of Joachim
Lambek and F. William Lawvere.
The latter realized in the early 1960s that certain basic mathematical transfor-
mations of a general nature in what he later called categorical dynamics [Lawvere,
1979] were in fact also basic structural ingredients of several other categories of
foundational interest. In fact, these transformations were those used later to deﬁne
the notion of cartesian closed category [Eilenberg and Kelly, 1966].
Though Lambek did not stress the category theoretic content of his results on
the syntactic calculus in [Lambek, 1958; Lambek, 1961], we mention his ideas
here because they represent an alternative route to the applications of cartesian
closed categories to λ-calculus via deductive systems and a related notion of func-
tional completeness, inspired by the abstraction algorithms of combinatory logic
(§3 above).
Furthermore, he later explicitly described formally the connection
of the syntactic calculus with closed categories [Lambek, 1968; Lambek, 1988;
Lambek, 1995], providing, with hindsight, the unifying framework for his work
and that of Lawvere.
Lambek used the system of categorial grammar described in §8.1.1 as a formal
tool in the construction of canonical mappings between functors of bimodules over
associative rings.51 There, the following correspondence between the constructors
of syntactic types and operation on bimodules was exploited:
AB
=def
A ⊗S B
C/B
=def
HomT (B, C)
A\C
=def
HomR(A, C)
for an R-S-bimodule A, an S-T-bimodule B and an R-T-bimodule C. There is an
evident closed category structure in this example, in the form of what was called
a residuated category in [Lambek, 1968]. In fact, already in his ﬁrst published
paper on the syntactic calculus, [Lambek, 1958, §10], Lambek noted the formal
similarity between the operation of (right and left) division in the calculus of
51This application seems to have been one main mathematical motivation for the development
of the syntactic calculus.
It originated from work carried out by Lambek jointly with G. D.
Findlay in 1955, described in the manuscript [Lambek and Findlay, 1955] (unpublished, but
summarized in [Lambek, 1961, Appendix II]). According to [Lambek, 1988, p.297], the relation
of this formalism to natural language was already clear to him at an early stage, but it was only
later that, through a bibliographic search, he discovered the paper [Bar-Hillel, 1953] on categorial
grammars.

756
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
syntactic types and residuation in lattice theory, the operation normally used to
interpret implication in algebraic logic.
The notion of cartesian closed category emerged gradually, basically through
the work of Lawvere who in 1959 became aware of the central role of exponential
objects BA, characterized by the isomorphisms C × A →B ∼= C →BA.52 An
early example of this transformation came from the description of the motion of
a material body seen as a mapping T × M →E that gives the position of each
of its particles at each time instant, or equivalently, as its trajectory T →EM
through time, or as the path M →ET followed by each of its particles, [Lawvere,
1976, p.123].
There are other instances of exponentiation that played an important role in the
development of the notion of cartesian closed category. The introductory chapter
of Lawvere’s PhD thesis [Lawvere, 1963] contains the description of the category
of categories, where the exponential of two objects (namely, categories) A and B
is the category of all functors from A to B.53 Later, in the years 1963–64, Lawvere
investigated an elementary54 axiom system for the category of sets in order to
develop a basic framework for analysis, [Lawvere, 1964]: the exponential BA of
two objects A and B is here the set of all functions with domain A and codomain
B. The relation of exponentiation to λ-abstraction is mentioned for the ﬁrst time
in this work, but no formal detail is given. During his stay in Berkeley in 1961–62,
Lawvere had noted that Heyting algebras are cartesian closed categories: more
generally, a preordered set with ﬁnite products has a monoidal structure which
is closed if and only if the preorder is residuated, that is, iﬀit also satisﬁes the
equivalence:
p ∧q ≤r if and only if p ≤q ⇒r,
where ⇒is the residuation operation. (This example appears in [Eilenberg and
Kelly, 1966, Chapter IV, §4]). This is one of the possible ways of arriving at what
was later called the “propositions as types” correspondence (§8.1.4).
A general notion of category C with exponentiation, that took the name of
cartesian closed category after discussions with Eilenberg and Kelly [Eilenberg and
Kelly, 1966, Chapter IV, §2], was described by Lawvere by the following adjoint
situations [Lawvere, 1969a]:
– a terminal object, given by a functor 1 : 1 →C right adjoint to the unique
functor from C to the category 1 with one object;
– a bifunctor × : C × C →C (cartesian product) right adjoint to the diagonal
functor Δ : C →C × C that transforms an object C of C into the object
⟨C, C⟩of C × C; and ﬁnally
52Intuitively, these may be thought of as the tranformation of a two-argument mapping
f : C × A →B into the one-argument mapping ˆf : C →BA which outputs a function as value.
See §3, currying.
53This was later published as [Lawvere, 1966].
54In this context, “elementary” refers to the fact that the axioms are sentences of a multi-sorted
ﬁrst-order language—for example, with one sort for maps and another for objects.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
757
– a right adjoint (·)A : C →C to the functor A × (·) : C →C, for each object A
of C. The counit of each adjunction A × (·) ⊣(·)A is a family of morphisms
indexed by objects B of C, εB : BA × A →B, called evaluation.
The explicit connection between cartesian closed categories and type theory
was highlighted in Lawvere’s unpublished manuscript “Category-valued higher-
order logic”, distributed in 1967 to the Los Angeles Set Theory Symposium, whose
contents were later published as [Lawvere, 1969a; Lawvere, 1969b; Lawvere, 1970a].
The central categorical notion in these papers is that of a hyperdoctrine, and was
intended to capture some of the examples that would later lead to the notion
of elementary topos [Lawvere, 1970b]. A hyperdoctrine is deﬁned by a cartesian
closed category T of types, whose morphisms are regarded as terms.
For each
type X in T, there is a cartesian closed category P(X) of attributes of type X,
whose morphisms are called deductions over X. The terminal object of P(X) is
regarded as the identically true attribute of type X, whereas cartesian product and
exponentiation represent conjunction and implication of attributes, respectively,
evaluation being modus ponens. For every term f : X →Y in T, there are adjoint
situations

f
⊣
f · (
)
⊣

f
that correspond to existential quantiﬁcation, substitution along f, and universal
quantiﬁcation, respectively.
Examples of hyperdoctrines include, of course, the syntactical hyperdoctrine
whose types are the type symbols of a formal type theory and whose attributes of
type X are the formulas whose free variables have types corresponding to X. More
interesting from the present point of view (see also later, §8.1.4), is an example
suggested by the work of H. L¨auchli [L¨auchli, 1970], in which a complete semantics
for intuitionistic predicate calculus is described in terms of a set-theoretic notion
of construction inspired by Kleene’s notion of realizability and the theories of
constructions of Goodman, Kreisel, Troelstra and Scott.55 In this example T is
the category Set of sets, and for any set X seen as a type, the category of attributes
of type X is Set/X, so that each attribute ϕ of type X may be regarded as an
X-indexed family of sets, whose x-th coordinate is written as x · ϕ. A noteworthy
feature of this hyperdoctrine is the interpretation of the logical connectives in the
category of attributes of type X, for example [Lawvere, 1970a]:
– ϕ ⊃ψ is a family of sets whose x-th coordinate is (x · ψ)(x·ϕ). Unfolding the
deﬁnitions, this means that a proof over X of ϕ ⊃ψ is a function which, for
every x ∈X, assigns a proof of x · ψ to a proof of x · ϕ;
55[L¨auchli, 1970] appeared in the proceedings of a conference held at Buﬀalo in 1968, but an
earlier manuscript was circulated already in the Spring of 1967 and was discussed by Lawvere and
Dana Scott in San Francisco in the same year. See also [Lawvere, 1996], from which it appears
that his manuscript “Category-valued higher-order logic” was discussed also at the symposium
on Automatic Demonstration, where the two fundamental papers on the interpretation of proofs
as typed λ-terms, [Scott, 1970a] and [Bruijn, 1970], were presented. We shall discuss later, in
§8.1.4, the relation between the works of Lawvere and Scott.

758
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
– y · 
f(ϕ) = 
f(x)=y x · ϕ. This means that a proof over Y of 
f(ϕ) is a
function assigning to every y ∈Y an ordered pair ⟨x, d⟩where f(x) = y and
d is a proof of x · ϕ.
In the meantime, in a series of papers on “deductive systems and categories”,
Lambek was exploiting the description of categories by means of equational theo-
ries over what he called deductive systems [Lambek, 1968; Lambek, 1969; Lambek,
1972]. These are essentially (oriented multi)graphs with an edge 1A : A →A for
every node A and an edge g ◦f : A →C for every pair of edges f : A →B and
g : B →C. In the case of cartesian closed categories, the right kind of deductive
system has the following additional structure [Lambek, 1974; Lambek, 1980a]:
– a node T with an edge 0A : A →T for each node A;
– a node A×B for every pair of nodes A, B, with edges πA,B : A × B →A and
π′
A,B : A × B →B and ⟨f, g⟩: C →A × B for every pair of edges f : C →A
and g : C →B;
– a node BA for every pair of nodes A, B, and edges εB,A : BA × A →B and
ˆh : C →BA for every edge h : C × A →B.
Observe that a deductive system as described here is neutral as to the interpre-
tation of its nodes and edges as formulas and proofs of the positive intuitionistic
propositional calculus or as objects and morphisms of a cartesian closed category,
respectively. Therefore, equations between edges of a deductive system can be
interpreted either as describing a notion of equivalence of proofs for intuitionistic
sequents56 or as the equational presentation of a cartesian closed category.
The equational presentation of cartesian closed categories allowed Lambek to
give a smooth proof of their functional completeness [Lambek, 1972; Lambek,
1974], thus making fully explicit the connection with typed λ-calculus already
hinted at by Lawvere. If D is a deductive system, then an assumption of a formula
A may be regarded as an indeterminate, i.e. as a new edge x : T →A. The edges
ϕ(x) : B →C of a deductive system D[x] obtained by adding to D the indeter-
minate x can be interpreted either as proofs of an intuitionistic sequent B →C
depending on the assumption x, or as polynomials in a cartesian closed category.
The following property, proved in [Lambek, 1974, Th. 3.6], subsumes therefore
both the deduction theorem of the positive intuitionistic propositional calculus
and the functional completeness of a simply typed λ-calculus with ﬁnite products
(and surjective pairing):
56The theme of equivalence of proofs is a recurring one in Lambek’s works: it was already a
motivation for his study of the syntactic calculus, leading to a technique for proving coherence
theorems in category theory [Kelly and Mac Lane, 1972] based on [Lambek, 1968], and also
opened the way for the categorical analysis of proofs pursued in [Szabo, 1974; Szabo, 1978] and
[Mann, 1975].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
759
With every ϕ(x):B →C in D[x: T →A] there is associated in D an f :
A×B →C such that
f ◦⟨x ◦0B, 1B⟩=x
ϕ(x) : B →C,
where =x is the extension of the equivalence of edges of D to D[x].
Functional abstraction λx: A . ϕ(x) is then just deﬁned to be ψ : B →CA, where
ψ = f ◦⟨π′
B,A, πB,A⟩.
One of the outcomes of the categorical formalization of
type theories consisted in providing a way of speaking of types without necessarily
assuming that they are sets in a strict sense, because categories with a rich enough
structure have an internal logic that still allows one to reproduce set-theoretical
arguments to a signiﬁcant extent. This was exploited systematically by Lawvere in
his work on elementary topoi, regarded as universes of “variable sets”, [Lawvere,
1970b; Lawvere, 1972; Lawvere, 1976].
This insight set the stage for the most advanced developments in domain theory,
especially the idea of synthetic domain theory (§10 below) as a comprehensive
framework unifying constructive mathematics and computation theory.
8.1.4
Types as propositions
The interpretation of types as objects of a cartesian closed category, and the
observation that such a category corresponds precisely to positive intuitionistic
propositional calculus, is only one way of arriving at the analogy between types
and formulas that is nowadays called the “propositions as types” correspondence.
As mentioned in §4.2, the ﬁrst published hints of this correspondence date back to
[Curry, 1934a] and [Curry, 1934b], and it was ﬁrst described explicitly in [Curry
and Feys, 1958, §9E], as an isomorphism between the provable formulae of intu-
itionistic implicational logic and the type-expressions assignable to closed terms.
(In the early 1950s, Carew Meredith had observed that proofs in this logic
corresponded to composite combinators, and that certain fragments of this logic
corresponded to restricted sets of terms, but his observations were not published
till later, see §7 of Notes on the axiomatics of the propositional calculus by C. A.
Meredith and A. N. Prior, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 4 (1963), 171–
187.)
In 1969 Curry’s correspondence was extended by Howard to one between proofs
in a sequent calculus version of intuitionistic logic and typed λ-terms. He further
observed (after [Tait, 1965]) that cut-elimination was a consequence of the normal-
ization of terms. Howard’s 1969 manuscript circulated informally and became the
locus classicus of the correspondence, especially in the proof-theoretic literature,
after [Prawitz, 1971] and [Girard, 1972]. It was eventually published in [Howard,
1980]. (Roughly, the idea behind Howard’s contribution may be described as a
generalization of G¨odel’s theory of primitive recursive functionals of ﬁnite type by
extending the set of types to formulas of Heyting arithmetic.)
Independently of these proof-theorists and with very diﬀerent motivations, but
at about the same time, there were also two other eﬀorts that led to formalisms

760
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
centred systematically around the correspondence between proofs and terms, and
whose technical and philosophical insights still underlie current work on applica-
tions of typed λ-calculi to the mechanization of mathematical proofs. These were
Dana Scott’s work on “constructive validity” [Scott, 1970a], motivated explicitly
by an attempt to analyze the notion of construction as used by the intuitionists,
and Nicolaas de Bruijn’s Automath family of languages for checking the correct-
ness of ordinary mathematical proofs, [Bruijn, 1980].
The starting point of the Automath project was around 1967, when de Bruijn
began to look at the problem of devising a formal language such that the correct-
ness of a completely formalized mathematical proof can be veriﬁed by a computer
program [Bruijn, 1970].57 The design of the Automath languages did not depend
on any philosophical position concerning the foundations of mathematics; in fact,
it is possible to describe the overall format of an Automath text (called a book in
the Automath jargon) by asking what items of information a machine would need
in order to check its correctness. First of all, the text is subdivided into lines, each
of them composed of the following items: (1) an identiﬁer to refer to that line
later in the book; (2) a deﬁnition, indicating whether the identiﬁer is a primitive
notion, a free variable or the abbreviation of a compound expression formed from
previous identiﬁers; (3) a context that keeps track of which assumptions are valid
and which identiﬁers are currently visible at that line, and ﬁnally (4) a category
for the identiﬁer, including a primitive category type.58
The context structure
of the Automath languages is a way of describing proofs in a natural deduction
format, and was suggested by the similarity between the block structure of the
programming language Algol [Naur and others, 1963] and the way mathemati-
cians structure proofs.59 The λ-notation was familar to de Bruijn, who used it
systematically in his work in analysis, and it was natural for him to include (typed)
λ-terms in Automath in order to discharge assumptions by binding free variables,
thus making contexts shrink as well as expand.
More relevant from the point of view of this Section is the interpretation of
the category part of an Automath line. The leading formal insight here consists
in unifying the treatment of proofs and objects by observing that in informal
mathematical discourse the two notions play the same role. In the statement of a
theorem T it is usual to declare the category of the objects involved, e.g. “Let x
be an integer,” and the properties that these objects have to satisfy, e.g. “Assume
that x > 0.” The conclusion of the theorem then states a property that depends
57Our description here is based on [Bruijn, 1994], which contains several remarks of historical
interest on the Automath languages. More details can be found in [Bruijn, 1980], and the editors’
introduction to [Nederpelt et al., 1994], which is a collection of the basic papers on Automath
by de Bruijn and others.
58For a heuristic explanation of how the format of Automath lines can be motivated starting
from a complete formalization of natural deduction proofs, see [Daalen, 1980]. Observe that,
except for the identiﬁer part, the components of a line correspond to those of an ordinary typing
judgement Γ ⊢e : C, for a context Γ, an expression e and a category C.
59See [Bruijn, 1994]; the natural deduction formalism used by de Bruijn is close to that used
by [Fitch, 1952]. It is worth remarking that the block structure of Algol 60 led Landin to the
formal analysis of that language by means of λ-calculus [Landin, 1965].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
761
on the (free) name x, which can be instantiated to any speciﬁc object k provided
that k is an integer and that we have a proof that k > 0. Then the theorem T
is more faithfully represented by an expression of the form T(k, π), showing its
dependence on both k and a proof π that k > 0. In a line where the identiﬁer a
has the expression e of category C as deﬁniens (in a context Γ), a has two possible
interpretations: as the name of the object e of type C, or as the name of a proof
e of a proposition P, provided that C can be interpreted as the type Proof(P) of
proofs of P.60 Types are not formally identical to propositions; rather, to every
proposition can be assigned a type, the type of its proofs, and asserting a propo-
sition amounts to saying that the type of its proofs is inhabited [Bruijn, 1970].61
This paradigm of “proofs as objects” specializes to the constructive interpretation
of logical constants following [Heyting, 1956] where, for example, a construction
of an implication A ⊃B is a function that maps each construction of A to a con-
struction of B. This is recognized in [Bruijn, 1994, p.205] to have been one of the
clues to the interpretation of proof classes as types.62
Typed λ-abstraction is denoted, in languages of the Automath family, by [x:A]B
where B might be a type. If, in a context Γ extended with the assumption that
x: A, the expression e (possibly depending on x) has type B, then the abstrac-
tion [x: A]e has type [x: A]B; but observe that here the expression B can also
depend on the variable x: A (i.e., B may contain free occurrences of x). One in-
terpretation of the type [x: A]B is set-theoretic: it is the type of functions that
assign a result of type B(a) to every argument a of type A, a type that may be
written as 
x:A B(x).63 When B does not depend on x, [x: A]B is just another
notation for the function type A →B. Another interpretation is logical: if A and
B represent the proof classes Proof(P) and Proof(Q), respectively, then the type
[x: Proof(P)] Proof(Q) represents the proof class Proof(∀x: P. Q), where the for-
mula ∀x: P. Q specializes to P ⊃Q when Q does not contain free occurrences of
x.
A more uniform approach is obtained in later languages of the Automath family,
[Daalen, 1973], where besides the category type there is a category prop intended
to represent the type of proofs of propositions. If A: prop and B : prop whenever
x: A, then [x: A] B can be read as an abbreviation of ∀x: A. B and, when x: A is
not free in B, of A ⊃B.
A diﬀerent and more complex background was behind [Scott, 1970a]. Scott was
interested in setting up a formal calculus of constructions that would substantiate
Heyting’s claim that “there is no essential diﬀerence between logical and mathe-
matical theorems, because both sorts of theorems aﬃrm that we have succeeded
60In de Bruijn’s papers, this type was denoted by TRUE(P).
61This is similar to Kreisel’s notion of modiﬁed realizability [Kreisel, 1959] for HAω, where the
type of realizers of a formula A ⊃B is the function-set σ →τ, if σ is the type of realizers of A
and τ of those of B. See [Oosten, 2002] for a history of realizability.
62The constructive explanation of the meaning of logical constants was learned by de Bruijn
directly from Heyting, who was one of his colleagues in Amsterdam from 1952 to 1960.
63If B contains x free, this is a dependent type; for other examples, see §8.3 and G in §5.4.

762
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
in performing constructions satisfying certain conditions” [Heyting, 1958].64
The work [Scott, 1970a] lay at the conﬂuence of several threads. On the one
hand Kreisel’s papers [Kreisel, 1962; Kreisel, 1965] aroused Scott’s interest in the
problem of ﬁnding a theory of proofs and constructions on which the interpretation
of intuitionistic logic could be based. Kreisel’s project was taken up by Goodman
[Goodman, 1970] (based on his PhD thesis in Stanford in 1968, supervised by Dana
Scott), who deviated from the original formulation in allowing partial functions,
represented by type-free combinators.
On the other hand, there was the work of L¨auchli [L¨auchli, 1965; L¨auchli, 1970]
on a set-theoretical version of Kleene’s recursive realizability interpretation of intu-
itionistic logic [Kleene, 1945], that we have seen in §8.1.3 above to have inﬂuenced
also Lawvere’s work in categorical logic.65
Scott took as central the connection, already exploited by L¨auchli and Lawvere,
between the universal quantiﬁer and the cartesian product of an indexed family of
species, and considered also the dual notion of the sum of such a family, with the
evident connection to existential quantiﬁcation. In general terms, Scott’s system
was “an attempt at axiomatizing in a constructive way a theory of both functions
and families of sets of functions” [Scott, 1970a, p.241].66 The system of Scott uses
intuitionistic sequents Δ ⊢A where formulas A are of the two shapes A ∈B and
A = B, for terms A, B that may denote functions or species depending on the con-
text, where species here should be understood as types. Term-forming operations
include typed functional abstraction λx∈A. B, which satisﬁes standard rules with
the notable exception of rule (ξ) to allow for an intensional interpretation. The
type of the above λ-abstract is a dependent product given by the rule:
Δ, x ∈A
⊢B ∈C
Δ
⊢(λx ∈A . B) ∈(∀x ∈A . C)
(where x ̸∈Δ)
which is at the same time the ∀-introduction rule. The dual elimination rule is
64A detailed description of the motivations behind [Scott, 1970a], on which our account is
based, is contained in that paper on pp.237–242. The development of Scott’s theory of construc-
tions was also inﬂuenced at an early stage by the design of Automath: a preliminary version
of the above paper, containing a discussion of de Bruijn’s language, was presented in November
1968 at Troelstra’s seminar [Scott, 1968], while Scott was on sabbatical leave in Amsterdam. The
paper itself was read in December of the same year at the Versailles conference on Automatic
Demonstration, whose proceedings also include the ﬁrst published paper on Automath, [Bruijn,
1970].
65The Russian logician Ju. T. Medvedev in [Medvedev, 1962] had described an interpreta-
tion of the positive part of the intuitionistic propositional calculus in terms of ﬁnite problems,
following Kolmogorov, that is quite close to that given by L¨auchli. In particular, Medvedev in-
terpreted conjunction, disjunction and implication by means of cartesian product, disjoint union
and exponentiation of sets, as L¨auchli did.
66The attempt to develop a purely category-theoretic treatment of parameterized families of
sets started around 1970 in Lawvere’s lectures at Dalhousie University, was further developed in
[Lawvere, 1972] and led to the theory of indexed categories, [Johnstone et al., 1978], that may be
seen as a continuation of Lawvere’s earlier work on hyperdoctrines (§8.1.3). A related approach
was that of [B´enabou, 1985] using ﬁbrations, and both approaches are relevant to the semantics
of dependent types and higher-order type theories discussed later, in §8.3.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
763
the typing rule for application:
Δ, f ∈(∀x ∈A . B), x ∈A
⊢f(x) ∈B.
The usual (non-dependent) function type becomes A →B =def ∀x ∈A . B where B
does not depend on x ∈A. It is under this identiﬁcation that the correspondence
between types and propositions becomes evident, and in fact a theorem of this
calculus of constructions like
x ∈A
⊢
[∀f ∈(∀x ∈A . B) . f(x)] ∈(∀x ∈A . B) →B
is the logical axiom of universal instantiation [Scott, 1970a, p.248]. The clearest
statement of how the correspondence works in general is to be found in this paper
(p.260):
“We began by regarding species and constructions as mathematical
objects and found that there were some simple axioms governing their
properties. It then became slowly apparent that these properties were
highly analogous to properties familiar from formal logic.
We then
turned this analogy into a dogma by insisting that the logical formulas
be read (better: interpreted) as (mathematically meaningful) terms of
the theory of constructions. This interpretation requires that validity
be asserted by the act of giving an explicit construction belonging to the
(interpretation of the) formula. Validity is established by giving a proof
from the axioms for constructions of the membership assertion. [. . . ] a
proposition does not simply degenerate to one of two truth values but
instead is represented by a complex species of possible constructions
that conceivably can be used in its validation.”
Scott’s full description of the correspondence follows almost verbatim the expla-
nations of the meaning of the logical constants given in [Heyting, 1956; Heyting,
1958]:
Formula
Construction
A ∧B
a pair of constructions, the ﬁrst of which justiﬁes A, and
the second B
A ∨B
a pair whose ﬁrst coordinate is either 0 or 1: if 0 then the
second coordinate justiﬁes A; if 1, then B
⊤
the justiﬁcation is 0, as ⊤=def {0}
⊥
no justiﬁcation is known, as ⊥=def {
}
∀x ∈A . B
a construction that maps every element a ∈A into a jus-
tiﬁcation of B(a)
∃x ∈A . B
a pair whose ﬁrst coordinate is an element a ∈A and whose
second coordinate justiﬁes B(a).
The correspondence between proposition and types was used systematically in
the intuitionistic type theory of Martin-L¨of. That theory was ﬁrst proposed in 1971

764
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
but then underwent several revisions; cf. [Martin-L¨of, 1971b; Martin-L¨of, 1972b;
Martin-L¨of, 1975; Martin-L¨of, 1984].67 Martin-L¨of had learned about this corre-
spondence from Howard in early December 1968, and had exploited it already in a
paper, written in March 1969 and eventually published as [Martin-L¨of, 1972a], on
the inﬁnitary proof theory implicit in [Tait, 1965]. The ﬁrst proposal of intuition-
istic type theory included a type constant V such that A : V meant that A is a
type, with the axiom that V : V . This assumption allowed for a very succinct sys-
tem: the primitive notions could be reduced, essentially, to typed λ-abstraction,
dependent product and the constant V , using the coding of Russell and Prawitz
to deﬁne the following basic type constructors (i.e., logical connectives) [Russell,
1903, §§18,19], [Prawitz, 1965, Ch. V, Thm. 1]:
⊥
=def
∀X : V . X
A × B
=def
∀X : V . (A →B →X) →X
A + B
=def
∀X : V . (A →X) →(B →X) →X
∃x :A . B(x)
=def
∀X : V . (∀x : A . (B(x) →X) →X.
There were substantial motivations for making the strong impredicative assump-
tion of a type of all types, based on the simultaneous acceptance of
“the following three principles. First, quantiﬁcation over propositions,
as in impredicative second order logic. Second, Russell’s doctrine of
types according to which the ranges of signiﬁcance of propositional
functions form types so that, in particular, it is only meaningful to
quantify over all objects of a certain type. Third, the identiﬁcation of
propositions and types” [Martin-L¨of, 1971a, p.5].
However, the theory turned out to be inconsistent, as a form of the Burali-
Forti paradox could be coded in it.68
The impredicative character of the the-
ory was removed in its subsequent versions [Martin-L¨of, 1972b; Martin-L¨of, 1975;
Martin-L¨of, 1982; Martin-L¨of, 1984]. Broadly, the outcome can be described as an
intuitionistic theory of iterated inductive deﬁnitions developed in the framework
of dependent types,69 but here the correspondence between types and proposi-
tions is even more systematically exploited than in the systems discussed earlier.
The correspondence suggests a formulation of the rules for type-forming opera-
tions as introduction and elimination rules, as in [Gentzen, 1935].
This yields
67Martin-L¨of’s work on this theory began in October 1970.
It grew out of earlier proof-
theoretical work on normal form theorems (Haupts¨atze) for the intuitionistic theory of iterated
inductive deﬁnitions, the theory of species and intuitionistic simple type theory, and also an
interest in category theory, which was found inadequate as a foundational framework because of
its lack of a clear distinction between extensional and deﬁnitional equality.
68This was proved by Girard [Girard, 1972, III, Annexe A], and his paradox was studied in
[Coquand, 1986]; for a study of this system from a diﬀerent point of view, see [Jacobs, 1989],
who suggested that Girard’s paradox could be viewed as a version of the paradox of Mirimanoﬀ
on the universe of well-founded sets [Mirimanoﬀ, 1917].
69This appropriate description was given in [Coquand and Dybjer, 1994].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
765
automatically a notion of reduction for terms as deductions as in [Prawitz, 1965;
Prawitz, 1971], from which computation rules can be read oﬀdirectly. The result-
ing system then becomes a functional programming language including its own
logic, whose formulas are regarded as program speciﬁcations, as Martin-L¨of him-
self pointed out in [Martin-L¨of, 1982].70
It was that paper that ﬁrst outlined
a correspondence between proof-theory and the theory of functional program-
ming languages that had a widespread conceptual and terminological inﬂuence on
logically-oriented functional programming. In particular, under the identiﬁcation
of propositions with types, the introduction rules behave as the constructors of
[Landin, 1964], while logical constants correspond to operations that form new
types by specifying what are their canonical elements (i.e., those whose outermost
symbol is a constructor), like the concrete data types of functional programming
languages since [Burstall, 1977] (see [Peyton Jones, 1987, §4.1.4]).
On the more philosophical side, these ideas are also in accordance with a theory
of meaning that started from [Gentzen, 1935, §II.5.13], according to which the
meaning of a logical constant is determined by its introduction rules in a system
of natural deduction, whereas the corresponding elimination rules depend on this
meaning. It was this idea that led to a precise formulation in [Prawitz, 1965] of
the “inversion principle” of [Lorenzen, 1955], where it contributed to isolating the
reduction rules for derivations in natural deduction. The meanings of the constants
of Martin-L¨of’s intuitionistic theory of types were ﬁrst studied in [Hancock and
Martin-L¨of, 1975] for a simple language of primitive recursive deﬁnitions; these
studies were brought to a more mature state with [Martin-L¨of, 1984; Martin-L¨of,
1985; Martin-L¨of, 1987], and were very relevant to the work on the semantics of
intuitionistic logical constants, and more generally to the constructive theories of
meaning and the philosophical foundations of the intuitionistic interpretation of
mathematical propositions (see [Sundholm, 1986] for a survey of this area until
1985).
Work related in several ways to Martin-L¨of’s theory of types had also been
carried out at Cornell University by Robert Constable and his collaborators from
the early 1970s.
Constable attributed to Kleene’s work on realizability in the
1940s the awareness that various kinds of constructive proofs can be compiled into
executable code, [Constable, 1982, p.3]. For instance a proof of an assertion of the
form “for all integers n there is an integer y such that R(n, y)” can be compiled
into a computable function f such that R(n, f(n)).
He proposed in [Constable, 1971] that certain constructive formal systems could
be used directly as programming languages, and designed a programming logic
based on this idea in [Constable and O’Donnell, 1978]. Further reﬁnements of this
system, [Constable, 1980; Constable, 1985; Bates and Constable, 1985], together
with the inclusion of ideas from [Martin-L¨of, 1982] and from Edinburgh LCF
(§8.1.2), led eventually to the Nuprl system [Constable and others, 1986] that
70The particular technique used in describing the computation rules in [Martin-L¨of, 1982] is
closely related to what is now called “structured operational semantics”, cf. [Plotkin, 1981] and
[Kahn, 1988].

766
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
manipulated proofs directly in a version of Martin-L¨of’s intuitionistic type theory.
From the researchers in the Nuprl group also emerged an extension of the “types
as propositions” idea to classical logic.
In particular, Tim Griﬃn and Chetan
Murthy ([Griﬃn, 1990], [Murthy, 1991]) observed a correspondence between the
continuation passing style translation of control operators for λ-calculus [Felleisen
et al., 1987] and the double-negation translation of classical into intuitionistic logic
as described, for example, in [Friedman, 1978].
8.2
Early normalization proofs
From a syntactic point of view, the most desirable properties of a system of typed
terms include the weak normalization (WN) property that every typed term has a
normal form, and, better, the strong normalization (SN) property that no inﬁnite
reductions exist.
The ﬁrst proof of such a property for λ or CL was by Turing, as mentioned in
§5.1. Turing’s proof covered λ-terms with pure arrow types and β-reduction. It
was found in a typewritten note among his papers after his death, and is known
to have been composed before 1942, but was not published until about 40 years
later, when it appeared as [Turing, 1980].
In the meantime Curry made a very diﬀerent WN proof in the 1950s using cut-
elimination, and this was the ﬁrst proof to be published; it appeared in [Curry
and Feys, 1958, §9F6, Cor. 9F9.2].71
The method used by Turing was re-discovered independently several times in
the 1960s and ’70s, for example by James H. Morris in his unpublished thesis
[Morris, 1968, p.107 Thm. 2], and by Garrel Pottinger in [Pottinger, 1978, p.448]
(with ordinals added in). The ﬁrst published proof using Turing’s method was in
[Andrews, 1971, p.417, Prop. 2.7.3], where the author’s source for the proof was
given as James Guard, who was, like Andrews, a 1960s student of Church, and the
theorem was attributed to “folklore”.
For stronger type-systems, several WN proofs were made in the 1960s. The
initial stimulus was G¨odel’s Dialectica paper [G¨odel, 1958], together with studies of
the ideas behind it led by Kreisel in Stanford University. Roughly speaking, G¨odel
interpreted ﬁrst-order arithmetic in a logic-free theory T of primitive recursive
functionals of ﬁnite type, and deduced the consistency of arithmetic by ﬁnitary
reasoning from an assumption that all closed terms in T of numerical type (closed
type-0 terms) computed to unique numerals. One way of formalizing T was as
a version of typed CL or λ augmented by primitive-recursion operators, and the
above computability property of T then became the statement that WN held for
all closed type-0 terms of the augmented CL or λ..72 This drew the problem of
71 Curry’s WN theorem was for CL with βη-strong reduction. It was deduced via a λ-CL
translation from his cut-elimination theorem for a system based on λβ, see §5.4 above.
Its proof seems to have been made independently of Curry’s co-author Robert Feys; no sign
of any input from Feys was found in a recent search of Curry’s detailed notes by J. P. Seldin,
[Seldin, 2008, §2.6].
72A simple formalization of G¨odel’s T is the system (CL+R)t deﬁned in outline in [Hindley and

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
767
verifying the WN theorem for such extensions of CL and λ to the forefront, and
at least ﬁve diﬀerent WN proofs came into being by 1966. Two were made around
1963 by Tait. One of these was published in [Tait, 1965]; it covered a version of λ
augmented by certain inﬁnite terms, but based on a weak λ-reduction analogous to
weak reduction in CL. The other was reported in the informally circulated notes of
a seminar held at Stanford in 1963 (Section V Appendix B), but was not actually
published until [Tait, 1967]; it covered CL augmented by operators for primitive
recursion and bar-recursion. It introduced the method due to Tait that is now
more or less standard, of deﬁning by a carefully organised induction on types a
computability predicate that implies normalizability, and proving by induction on
terms that all terms satisfy this predicate.73
Other early normalization proofs for versions of G¨odel’s T included ones in 1965
by Luis Sanchis for (CL+R)t [Sanchis, 1967, Thm. 8], in 1966 by Justus Diller for
(λβ +R′)t [Diller, 1968, §6], in 1966 by Yoshito Hanatani [Hanatani, 1966], in 1967
by Shigeru Hinata [Hinata, 1967], and in 1968 by A. G. Dragalin [Dragalin, 1968].
For more on normalization proofs stemming from G¨odel’s T, see [Troelstra, 1973,
§§2.2.1–2.3.13, esp. 2.2.35].
The property SN can be seen as a safety feature for computing systems. But
at ﬁrst there was no interest in this property, as WN was all that was needed in
consistency proofs; the WN proof in [Tait, 1967] would have needed almost no
change to give SN had Tait wanted it. The ﬁrst explicit SN proof was Sanchis’
1965 proof mentioned above. An SN proof by directly assigning ordinals to terms
was made by Howard in 1968, [Howard, 1970]; it worked for weak λ-reduction
augmented by R, but not for full-strength λβR-reduction. (An extension to that
reduction had to wait for nearly 30 years, until Gunnar Wilken and Andreas
Weiermann’s [Wilken and Weiermann, 1997].)
After the 1960s, most workers
studying normalization aimed to prove SN whenever possible.
Normalization proofs for Gentzen-style natural deduction systems of logic are
also relevant here, because deductions in such systems can be viewed as a kind of
typed λ-terms. Some such proofs will be mentioned in the following sections. For
others, the reader is referred to the history of mainstream proof theory.
Seldin, 1986, 1st edition, pp.297–299]. It consists of CL with weak reduction plus a constant Rτ
for every type-expression τ, with reduction-rules RτXY 0 ▷X, RτXY (succ n) ▷Y n(RτXY n).
(Types are omitted here, and 0 and succ are atoms.) A proof of WN (indeed SN) for (CL+R)t
is in [Hindley and Seldin, 1986, 1st edition, Appendix 2], based on the method in [Tait, 1967].
By the way, although Rτ was adequate to formalize T, [Tait, 1967] and many other formaliza-
tions were actually equivalent to a slightly stronger operator R′
τ with the rule R′
τXY (succ Z) ▷
Y Z(R′
τXY Z).
73In [Tait, 2001, §5] Tait expressed the opinion that his computability idea had been anticipated
by G¨odel in unpublished notes in 1938 and lectures which were given in 1941 but not published
in print, see [G¨odel, 1995, items *1938a, *1941]. But our interest here is only in explicit proofs
of WN, and none occurs in these sources.

768
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
8.3
Higher-order type theories
In 1953, Gaisi Takeuti formulated a sequent calculus GLC for higher-order logic
and conjectured that the cut-elimination property would hold for it, i.e. that if a
formula had a derivation D in GLC then it would have a derivation D∗in which
the cut-rule was not used, [Takeuti, 1953].
After 13 years, two proofs of Takeuti’s conjecture were eventually found for the
second-order fragment of GLC [Tait, 1966; Prawitz, 1967], and Moto-o Takahashi
and Dag Prawitz found proofs for the whole of GLC [Takahashi, 1967; Prawitz,
1968]. But these proofs gave no procedure for ﬁnding D∗from D; they all relied on
a result of Kurt Sch¨utte which reduced the conjecture to the problem of proving
that every partial valuation could be extended to a total valuation [Sch¨utte, 1960].
The ﬁrst proof to contain a procedure to ﬁnd D∗was made by Jean-Yves Girard
in 1970, see [Girard, 1971; Girard, 1972].
Girard formulated two systems of typed λ-calculus, F corresponding to the
second-order fragment of GLC, and the system nowadays called Fω corresponding
to full GLC, and he solved Takeuti’s problem via proofs of SN for these systems.
The key idea in his SN proofs, candidats de r´eductibilit´e, was a development of
Tait’s computability method, [Tait, 1967], and was very quickly adopted and ex-
tended by other workers in proof-theory and has been used widely since.74
Girard’s system F is particularly important in our story.75 Its main novelties
were the possibility of forming universally quantiﬁed types ∀t.σ, and the operation
of applying a term M of type ∀t.σ to a type τ. Corresponding to this operation
there was an abstraction operation Λt.M to represent a function whose application
to a type τ reduced to the term M{τ} of type [τ/t]σ. The impredicativity im-
plicit in this extension, whereby the type variable t in ∀t.σ ranged over all types,
including ∀t.σ itself, made the SN proof for reductions in this calculus far from
obvious.
The impact of system F was limited to proof theory in the years immediately
following its invention, but the idea of having λ-terms taking types as parame-
ters was also becoming important in those years in the theory of programming
languages (see, for example, [Cheatham Jr. et al., 1968]). It is not surprising,
then, that almost the same system was independently reinvented in 1974 by John
Reynolds, [Reynolds, 1974].76 One motivation for the development of a system of
quantiﬁed types was the formalization of ideas on polymorphism in programming
languages expressed by Christopher Strachey (see, e.g., [Strachey, 1967, §3.6.4]),
especially the notion of parametric polymorphism. Take, for example, the function
map that applies a function f to all elements of a list. If f : σ →τ, then it is
natural to assign to map(f) the type List(σ) →List(τ) that depends parametrically
74An analysis of Girard’s method, and of several SN proofs that use it, is [Gallier, 1990].
75For an introduction to system F, see [Girard et al., 1989].
76Reynolds has often pointed out that he presented his paper in April 1974 at a meeting
at Paris VII University, where Girard was teaching, but nobody in the audience noticed the
similarity of the two systems or brought Girard’s work to his attention.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
769
on σ and τ. By using universally quantiﬁed types, map could be assigned the type
∀s.∀t. (s →t) →(List(s) →List(t)).
An important remark was that polymorphic terms can be used to represent
basic data structures; for example the natural numbers can be represented by
polymorphic Church numerals of the form
Λt. λf : t →t. λx : t. f(· · · (fx) · · · ),
each having type
nat = ∀t. (t →t) →(t →t),
see [Girard, 1972, p. I.5.5]. Representations which occurred in [Girard, 1972, pp.
I.5.2, I.5.3], also in [Martin-L¨of, 1971b, §3] which referred to [Russell, 1903], were
σ × τ
=
Λt. ((σ →(τ →t)) →t),
σ + τ
=
Λt. ((σ →t) →((τ →t) →t)).
The boolean values had representations
Λt. λx : t. λy : t. x,
Λt. λx : t. λy : t. y
of type
bool
=
∀t. t →(t →t).
The representation of a list [e1, . . . , en] of elements of some type s appeared in
[Reynolds, 1983, p.520] as the term
Λt. λf : s →(t →t). λx : t. fe1(· · · (fenx) · · · )
of type
list(s)
=
∀t. (s →(t →t)) →(t →t)
and was said to have been “suggested by a functional encoding of lists devised by
C. B¨ohm”.
Another source for representations by polymorphically typed terms was [Lei-
vant, 1983]; this had some inﬂuence on B¨ohm and Berarducci [B¨ohm and Berar-
ducci, 1985] which contained a systematic account of how to encode many-sorted
term algebras as closed types of the polymorphic λ-calculus, together with the
iteratively deﬁned functions over them as polymorphic terms.77
We have remarked that the main motivation for Reynolds’ development of the
polymorphic typed λ-calculus was the formal clariﬁcation of Strachey’s notion of
parametricity, by describing the uniform dependence of a polymorphic term Λt.M
upon an input type. Informally, the behaviour of a parametric function deﬁned by
77There are several accounts of these representations in the literature: for example [Girard et
al., 1989, §§11.3,11.4,11.5] and [Leivant, 1990, §3], besides the original papers.

770
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
such a term should not depend on the input type or, in other words, should be the
same for all input types [Reynolds, 1983, p.519]. The main technical diﬃculty was
to compare values whose types were diﬀerent, and Reynolds proposed a semantic
criterion of parametricity, consisting in the property of terms of the form Λt.M
of preserving certain hereditarily deﬁned relations between sets corresponding to
diﬀerent types [Reynolds, 1983].78 Reynolds’ notion of parametricity was based,
however, on a set-theoretical interpretation of polymorphic types extending the
general models of Henkin (§8.1.2 above). Accordingly, the relational account of
parametricity showed several similarities with the theory of logical relations, in
particular with the treatment of deﬁnability in [Plotkin, 1980].
The existence of a set-theoretic model for the polymorphic typed λ-calculus
was conjectured in [Reynolds, 1983]. But a year later Reynolds disproved his own
conjecture by showing that the functor (over the category of sets and functions)
(2X)X is deﬁnable by a type expression, hence should have an initial algebra A ∼=
(2A)A, which is impossible by a cardinality argument.79
The model theory of system F was initiated by Girard in his [Girard, 1972,
§II.5], which contained the description of a model HEO2 (and its generalizations
to higher-orders HEOn) based on the Kleene applicative structure ⟨N, ·⟩, where
n · m denoted the result of applying the n-th partial recursive function to the
argument m. Every type σ was interpreted as a pair consisting of a set Dσ ⊆
N × {σ} and an equivalence relation =σ over Dσ.
For functional types σ →τ this interpretation was speciﬁed by the clauses:
– Dσ→τ is the set of all pairs (e, σ →τ) such that for all (e1, σ) and (e2, σ)
in Dσ, e · ei is deﬁned for i = 1, 2 and is an element of Dτ, and
(e · e1, τ) =τ (e · e2, τ) whenever (e1, σ) =σ (e2, σ);
– (e1, σ →τ) =σ→τ (e2, σ →τ) iﬀ(e1 · x, τ) =τ (e2 · x, τ) for all (x, σ) in Dσ.
The interpretation of for-all-types used the notion of primary type P, deﬁned
as a set A ⊆N containing 0 together with an equivalence relation on A. Then the
pair D∀t.σ with the equivalence =∀t.σ was speciﬁed by the clauses:
– D∀t.σ is the set of all pairs (e, ∀t.σ) such that (e, [P/t]σ) ∈D[P/t]σ for all
primary types P;
– (e1, ∀t.σ) =∀t.σ (e2, ∀t.σ) iﬀ(e1, [P/t]σ) =[P/t]σ (e2, [P/t]σ) for all primary
types P.
78Formal systems based on this relational approach to parametricity are described in [Abadi
et al., 1993] and [Plotkin and Abadi, 1993]. For a survey of parametricity see also [Longo et al.,
1993, §1] and [Longo, 1995].
79Reynolds’ result was generalized by Plotkin in a letter to Reynolds dated July 16, 1984.
His remarks led to [Reynolds and Plotkin, 1990]. (By the way, [Reynolds, 1974] contained a
proposal for a model of Reynolds’ ﬁrst polymorphic system, but with a warning that its discussion
contained a “serious lacuna”. As he has pointed out since, this warning turned out to be justiﬁed,
in that the proposed model did not work.)

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
771
With some simpliﬁcations, see [Troelstra, 1973, §§2.4.11, 2.9.7], this was to
become probably the best-known model for the polymorphic typed λ-calculus, the
model based on partial equivalence relations (PERs), i.e., symmetric and transitive
relations over some type-free structure like ⟨N, ·⟩or, later, over some model of
untyped λ-calculus [Scott, 1976, §7].80
Reynolds’ proof of the non-existence of set-theoretic models of polymorphism
made an essential appeal to classical logic. In fact, two years after Reynolds’ result,
it turned out that, within a constructive metatheory provided by the internal
logic of an elementary topos, the set-theoretic intuitions behind the polymorphic
λ-calculus could be rescued by internalizing the constructions of category theory
within such a topos, looking at the latter as a constructive universe of sets [Pitts,
1987].
Already in 1984, Eugenio Moggi described to Martin Hyland, then visiting Pisa,
a way of looking at a model of polymorphic λ-calculus as an internal cartesian
closed category M in a topos E, with M having all products indexed over the
objects of M itself. Moggi found such a model in 1986 by taking E to be the
eﬀective topos of [Hyland, 1982] and M as the category of modest sets, which
was equivalent to the familiar category of partial equivalence relations over the
applicative structure ⟨N, ·⟩, directly related to Girard’s HEO2 model of system F.
The right notion of completeness needed to make M a small complete category
was then found by [Hyland, 1988].
Remarkably, the intersection of a family of partial equivalence relations becomes
their product under internalization. It is the existence of such a small complete
category inside a universe of constructive sets that enables one to interpret a poly-
morphic type ∀X.A[X], roughly, as a product 
X∈M AX of a family of elements
of M indexed by M itself.81 In particular, completeness of M implies that every
functor T : M →M has an initial algebra ⟨A, a : TA →A⟩, which is the stumbling
block to the construction of a set-theoretic model of system F.
From the present point of view, it is of some interest to observe that these
developments exploit in an essential way the language of category theory, espe-
cially the notion of indexed category [Johnstone et al., 1978], which has become a
fundamental tool in the semantical description of theories of dependent types and
may be regarded as a natural outgrowth of Lawvere’s work on hyperdoctrines and
topoi in the 1970s.
A polymorphic type ∀t.σ is, implicitly, a dependent type (Πt:type). σ, provided
suitable rules about the constant type are added to systems with dependent types
like those of §8.1.4 or §5.4. As mentioned in §5.4, a general system of dependent
types was developed and studied from 1972 to 1975 by Seldin, [Seldin, 1979]. But
a stronger system oﬀering an integration of polymorphism with dependent types
80Some historical remarks on the notion of PER as an interpretation of types are given in
[Bruce et al., 1990], where we learn that they were introduced in [Myhill and Shepherdson, 1955]
for types of ﬁrst-order functions, and then extended to simple types by [Kreisel, 1959].
81This result was announced in a famous message by Moggi to the types electronic forum, at
that time moderated by Albert Meyer, dated February 10, 1986. The result and its background
are discussed in much more detail in [Longo and Moggi, 1992] and [Asperti and Longo, 1991].

772
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
was the calculus of constructions, developed by Thierry Coquand and G´erard Huet
from 1984 onwards. It was described in a series of papers starting with Coquand’s
Th`ese de Troisi`eme Cycle: [Coquand, 1985], [Coquand and Huet, 1985], [Coquand
and Huet, 1988], [Coquand, 1990]. The calculus of constructions has been concisely
described as “a version of type theory that expresses naturally Heyting semantics
of intuitionistic higher-order logic” [Coquand, 1990, p.91]. Paradoxes like that
described by Girard for Martin-L¨of’s impredicative version of intuitionistic type
theory were avoided by adopting a restricted form of the identiﬁcation between
types and propositions, which only assumed that to each proposition is associated
the type of its proofs. But the other two points in Martin-L¨of’s argument for
introducing a type of all types quoted on page 764 above, namely quantiﬁcation
over propositions and the doctrine of types as ranges of signiﬁcance of propositional
functions, were preserved.
The resulting system was therefore quite similar to
that described in [Martin-L¨of, 1971b], and also to some of the systems in the
Automath family, extended by quantiﬁcation over elements of type, a possibility
already envisaged in [Bruijn, 1970, §12.6]. For the calculus of constructions a weak
normalization proof was given in [Coquand, 1985, §4, Cor. 1], together with some
hints on how Girard’s notion of candidat de r´eductibilit´e might be extended to
give an SN proof for this system. A proof of SN for deductions and for terms was
included in [Seldin, 1987, §4.3] and [Seldin, 1997, §3].
8.4
Intersection types and recursive types
In systems where types denote sets, a natural extension of the language of simple
type theory would be to adjoin types of the form σ ∩τ to denote the intersection
of whatever sets were denoted by σ and τ.82 This extension was actually made in
the late 1970s. Its history was, however, less simple than might be expected given
the naturalness of the idea.
Systems of intersection types are usually “Curry-style” systems, in which types
are assigned to untyped terms by rules and an inﬁnite number of types may be
assigned to one term, rather than “Church-style” systems, in which each term
has a unique built-in type. They also use types, not as safety-devices to avoid
paradoxes, as Russell and Church did, but simply as labels to describe the formal
computational behaviour of terms.
According to ideas of B¨ohm on the use of λ-calculus as a programming language
(cf. §6.3), data and programs are represented by λ-terms thought of as states
of a computation that evolves by applications of the rule of β-reduction, with
normal forms corresponding to ﬁnal states. The notion of program equivalence
that arises from this approach regards two programs (i.e. λ-terms) P and P ′ as
equivalent if, for every argument F, either PF and P ′F both have normal form
and PF =β P ′F, or both fail to have a normal form.83 In order to match this
notion of equivalence with convertibility, it turned out to be essential that P, P ′
82In the present subsection and §8.5, “type” is short for “type-expression”.
83This is close to the notion of contextual equivalence in [Morris, 1968] discussed in §7.1.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
773
and F have normal forms, see [B¨ohm and Dezani, 1975]. This remark prompted a
search for a classiﬁcation of normal forms according to their normalizability when
applied to other normal forms.
Starting in 1975, a suitable classiﬁcation was deﬁned and analysed by B¨ohm and
his former students in Turin, Mariangiola Dezani and Mario Coppo; see [B¨ohm
and Dezani, 1975], [Dezani, 1975], and [B¨ohm et al., 1977]. The theme of types
was introduced in [Dezani, 1975]; each normal form was given a ﬁnite sequence
(m, j, h1, . . . , hn) or (ω, h1, . . . , hn), called its “type”, which encoded a description
of its computational behaviour.
Types appeared again in [Coppo and Dezani,
1978], written in 1977, in which simple types were assigned to all normal forms,
including those untypable in previous simple type theories, by new rules involving
two formally deﬁned relations between types, an equivalence and a pre-order. The
atomic types were 0, to represent the set of all normal forms, and 1 for the set of
all terms whose application to any ﬁnite sequence of normal forms always reduces
to a normal form.
In 1977 Coppo and Dezani put forward the idea of assigning a ﬁnite sequence of
types to a term to say that this term denoted a member of a ﬁnite intersection. This
was published in [Coppo and Dezani, 1978], and the results in that paper included
the theorem that the types received by a term were invariant under conversion in
the λI-calculus.
The sequence idea was extended by Patrick Sall´e in Toulouse, [Sall´e, 1978,
§5]. He adjoined a new atomic type-constant ω to denote the universal set, and
by this means he extended the conversion-invariance theorem from λI to the full
λK-calculus, and described the connection between non-ω types and head-normal
forms, see [Sall´e, 1978, Thms. 9–12] and the joint paper [Coppo et al., 1979, Thms.
1, 2]. The system with sequences and ω was further studied in [Coppo et al., 1980]
and [Coppo et al., 1981]. In §5 of the former paper, Betti Venneri showed that, by
interpreting a closed term as the set of all its types, one could obtain a new model
of untyped λ-calculus.
The intersection idea was also invented independently by Pottinger, who proved
some of its basic properties in [Pottinger, 1980].
But although the intersection system was perfectly adequate for its original
purpose, it was not semantically complete. Suitable extra deduction-rules to make
it complete were ﬁrst formulated in 1980, by Coppo, Dezani and Barendregt to-
gether, [Barendregt et al., 1983], and by Hindley independently, [Hindley, 1982].
The system given in [Barendregt et al., 1983] soon became standard: its types
were built from variables and ω by means of constructors →and ∩, and it con-
tained rules deﬁning a relation ≤between types analogous to the subset relation.
In what is nowadays often called the “generation lemma” [Barendregt et al., 1983,
Lemma 2.8] the invertibility of its main rules was proved, and from this a normal-
ization theorem for deductions was deduced, [Barendregt et al., 1983, Cor. 4.9].
In [Barendregt et al., 1983, §3] the ﬁrst of the interesting class of λ-models called
ﬁlter models was deﬁned, whose elements were ﬁlters (i. e., ≤-upward closed and
∩-closed sets) in the set of all types. These models turned out to be closely related

774
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
to the original Scott construction to be discussed below in §9.1.
Over the next 10 years the system of [Barendregt et al., 1983] was studied in-
tensively, with many interesting results emerging, for example an analysis of its
principal types by Simonetta Ronchi della Rocca and Venneri in [Ronchi della
Rocca and Venneri, 1984] and [Ronchi della Rocca, 1988]. Applications of inter-
section types included their use in type systems for the control of interference in
Algol-like languages, [Reynolds, 1989] and in static analysis of functional programs,
[Coppo and Ferrari, 1993].
The use of types for describing behavioural properties of terms motivated several
other type systems in the 1980s, for statically detecting properties of λ-terms and
(functional) programs. Among these, the recursive types (see, e.g., [MacQueen et
al., 1984], [Coppo, 1985] and [Cardone and Coppo, 1991]) were a natural extension
of Curry’s type inference system by adjoining types of the form μt.σ to represent
the solution of the equation t = σ, where the type variable t may occur in σ. (The
possibility of having circular type expressions was already considered in [Morris,
1968], see above §7.1.) Clearly, recursively typed λ-terms lack the normalization
property, e.g. ΔΔ, where Δ ≡λx.xx, can be assigned every type σ, provided x
is given type μt.t →σ (which is equivalent to (μt.t →σ) →σ). But there is a
principal typing algorithm for the basic type inference system for recursive types
(extending fairly directly the one for Curry’s system, §8.5), and this makes it a
rather practical tool for preventing incorrect applications when special constants
like e.g. arithmetical primitives are added to the λ-calculus [Wand, 1987; Cardone
and Coppo, 1991].
The semantics of recursive types systematically exploited the techniques in-
vented towards the end of the 1960s for solving recursive equations involving sets.
Typical among these is the solution of the equation D = D →D satisﬁed by a
model of pure, extensional λ-calculus that will be discussed at some length in §9.1.
Recursive types are also interesting when added to higher order type systems
like system F, or to systems that include a subtyping relation: such a system was
ﬁrst proposed by Luca Cardelli and Peter Wegner in [Cardelli and Wegner, 1985]
as a tool for analyzing certain features of object-oriented programming languages,
originating a whole new ﬁeld of research; see, for example, [Gunter and Mitchell,
1994] and [Pierce, 2002].
8.5
Algorithms for simple types
For a given system of terms and types, a typability test decides whether an un-
typed term M is typable in the system; it is called a principal type algorithm if it
furthermore assigns to any typable term its principal type, i.e. the most general
type it can receive under the system’s rules. Such algorithms have no meaning for
a Church-style type-system, which has no untyped terms in its language, but only
for Curry’s style, in which types are assigned to untyped terms by rules, cf. §4.2.
In §4.2 we mentioned that Quine’s concept of stratiﬁed formula was based on
a Curry-style approach, [Quine, 1937, pp. 78–79]. In 1942 a test for stratiﬁcation

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
775
was invented by M. H. Newman and stratiﬁcation was proved equivalent to typa-
bility, [Newman, 1943, §§1–4]. But Newman also extended his algorithm to give
a typability test for λ-calculus, and included a proof of its correctness. Unfortu-
nately his exposition was rather abstract, and his paper seems not to have been
read by any later worker on typability tests until the preparation of the present
history, as far as we know, see [Hindley, 2008].
Newman’s typability test was not a principal type algorithm; indeed, his pa-
per contained no concept of principal type. A more direct test, which moreover
gave principal types, was described informally in [Curry and Feys, 1958, §§9B2–4].
Roughly speaking, for a given term M its method is to list all M’s subterm-
occurrences with their types given as type-variables, write out equations connect-
ing these variables, and then solve these equations as generally as possible. Several
examples were worked out in detail in [Curry and Feys, 1958], but the method was
not stated explicitly as a formal algorithm there. Curry ﬁrst wrote it out as a
formal algorithm, with a proof of its correctness, in private notes [Curry, 1966]
which led to a paper [Curry, 1969a].
A diﬀerent principal type algorithm, which used the uniﬁcation algorithm of
[Robinson, 1965] to save itself some work, was made and proved correct by Hindley
for CL in 1967, [Hindley, 1969b, §3]. (Curry and Hindley communicated during
the writing of [Curry, 1969a] and [Hindley, 1969b] but deliberately kept their
approaches diﬀerent.)
A Curry-style equation-solving algorithm for λ was made, with a correctness
proof, by James H. Morris in his thesis [Morris, 1968, Ch. 4, §E], independently
of Curry’s and Hindley’s 1966–69 work.
Then the 1970s and ’80s saw the development of the programming language ML
by the group led by Robin Milner in Edinburgh. ML included a type-assignment
system for λ plus the extra operator let, and Milner described a principal type algo-
rithm for it in [Milner, 1978, §4.1, Algorithm W]. This algorithm was uniﬁcation-
based like that in [Hindley, 1969b], though it was invented independently.
It
was rewritten and extended in [Damas and Milner, 1982], and its correctness was
proved by Luis Damas in his thesis [Damas, 1984].
After 1980, typability and principal-type algorithms were made for various more
complex systems, some depending on pre-existing uniﬁcation algorithms and some
being self-suﬃcient: for a survey see [Tiuryn, 1990]. A long-standing open problem
was the existence of a typability test for Girard’s system F (see §8.3 above); this
was raised by Daniel Leivant in [Leivant, 1983], and was solved in the negative by
Joe Wells in 1994; indeed Wells proved that not even type-checking for this system
was decidable, [Wells, 1994; Wells, 1999].
But the history of principal type algorithms is not conﬁned to type theory,
strange to say.
Under the propositions-as-types correspondence, simple types
whose atoms are variables become propositional formulas, and a combinator M
with principal type τ becomes a proof of τ by the propositional rule called con-
densed detachment.
Roughly speaking, the condensed detachment rule corresponds to the construc-

776
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
tion of the principal type of a term PQ from those of P and Q. It was invented by
the Dublin logician Carew Meredith at some time before 1954, and was ﬁrst used
in print in [Lemmon et al., 1957, §9]. Meredith never published a formal statement
of it, but his cousin David Meredith was taught the rule by him in 1954, wrote it
up as a program, and ran it on the computer UNIVAC1 in the U.S.A. in 1957.84
Thus, by 1957 the key step in a principal-type algorithm had not only been stated
formally, but had been implemented on a machine.
Looking further back: an argument very like an analysis of a particular case of
condensed detachment was used in [Lukasiewicz, 1939, Engl. edn., p.276]. Lukasie-
wicz attributed his method to Tarski, and in [Lukasiewicz and Tarski, 1930, Engl.
edn., p.44] a method was mentioned which might perhaps be the one to which he
referred. But the method was not actually described there, and “might perhaps”
is conjecture not history. (See [Kalman, 1983, §4] for further comments.)
Furthermore, there is a big diﬀerence between an algorithm’s key step and the
whole algorithm with its necessary correctness-proof added. So, although there
were partial precursors, and logicians as strong as Lukasiewicz and Tarski could
surely have done more if they had wished to, we must conclude that the ﬁrst
typability algorithm was Newman’s and the ﬁrst principal-type algorithm was
Curry’s.85
Other algorithms for the simple type theory of pure λ and CL include the
counting algorithm made by Choukri-Bey Ben-Yelles in 1979 for counting and
listing the normal inhabitants of a given type, see [Ben-Yelles, 1979, Ch. 3] or
[Hindley, 1997, Ch. 8].86 Ben-Yelles’ method was later modiﬁed by Sabine Broda
and Luis Damas to give an algorithm which counts and lists just the principal
normal inhabitants, [Broda and Damas, 1999].
Several algorithms for constructing a principal inhabitant of a type from any
other inhabitant have also been published. The ﬁrst was in [Hindley, 1969b, §6],
for full λK. Others, which worked also for restricted sets of terms such as λI, were
made by Robert Meyer in 1986, Grigori Mints and Tanel Tammet in 1988, and
Norman Megill and Martin Bunder in 1994; see [Meyer and Bunder, 1988], [Meyer
et al., 1991, §4], [Mints and Tammet, 1991], [Megill and Bunder, 1996].
As David Meredith noted in [Meredith, 1980], such an algorithm provides a
proof that the condensed detachment rule is complete for the weak implicational
logic corresponding to the restricted λ-calculus in question.
84For a formal statement of the condensed detachment rule, see [Kalman, 1983, §2] or [Hindley,
1997, §7D]. For further historical information, see those references and [Meredith, 1977]. The
rule has similarities with the well known resolution rule of J. A. Robinson, and pre-dates it.
85There is no sign that Curry’s 1958 co-author Feys contributed to the invention of his algo-
rithm, see Footnote 71 or [Seldin, 2008, §2.6].
86An inhabitant of a type τ is any closed term M with type τ. It is normal iﬀit contains no
β-redexes. It is principal iﬀτ is its principal type.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
777
9
MODELS FOR λ
9.1
Scott’s D∞model
The ﬁrst set-theoretical model for untyped λ was made by Dana Scott while he
was in Oxford to work with Strachey during a leave from the Princeton Phi-
losophy Department.87
In [Scott, 1969c, p.51] he gives a precise date for the
idea: 14 November 1969. Only one month before, he had strongly advocated a
typed alternative to the (untyped) programming languages deﬁned in [B¨ohm, 1966;
B¨ohm and Gross, 1966] and [Landin, 1966b], in a privately circulated manuscript
written for Strachey ([Scott, 1969e], mentioned in §8.1.2 above). His model was
unexpected, and showed that despite his previous criticisms of untyped languages
they could be given a mainstream mathematical sense. Further, the means he used
for this turned out to be a natural outgrowth of the notions on which his earlier
typed alternative had been based.
In the ﬁrst versions of Scott’s model construction, domains were complete lat-
tices, [Scott, 1969b]. In a later account of the construction in [Scott, 1970c], he
introduced continuous lattices, characterized algebraically as those complete lat-
tices D where, for every y ∈D,
y =

{

U | y ∈U and U is Scott-open and U ⊆D},
or topologically as those T0-spaces such that every continuous f : X →D from a
subspace X ⊆Y can be extended to a continuous f : Y →D.88 It was this exten-
sion property that made continuous lattices especially attractive for “a coherent
theory of partial functions (in extension)” [Scott, 1973, p.178], and more precisely
for “an extensional theory of functions, related directly to computability, where
functions (rather than syntactic representations or programs for the functions) can
be treated as objects in themselves” (Scott, in [Stoy, 1977, p.xxviii]).89
From a global point of view, domains and Scott-continuous functions formed
cartesian closed categories where the exponential objects [D →E] were the com-
plete lattices of Scott-continuous functions from D to E: this made them suitable
for the semantics of typed λ-calculus (see §8.1.3). But they also contained re-
ﬂexive domains D∞, that solved the equation D∞= [D∞→D∞] non-trivially
87The history of this collaboration, and the circumstances in which the model was invented,
are given in Scott’s foreword to [Stoy, 1977], in his Turing Award lecture [Scott, 1977], in [Scott,
2000], and in his comments in the 1993 published version of [Scott, 1969e].
88See [Scott, 1972] for details. Here W and V are the usual lattice operators. A Scott-open
subset U of a domain D is an upward closed set such that if W Δ ∈U for a directed Δ ⊆D
then U ∩Δ ̸= ∅. A function f : D →D′ is (Scott-) continuous iﬀit is monotonic and preserves
the least upper bounds of directed subsets of D. An instance of this topology had already been
considered in [Nerode, 1957; Nerode, 1959], and even before, in [Uspenskii, 1955]. The interplay
of algebraic and topological notions has been a fruitful one in recent developments of domain
theory, see §10 later.
89The theory of continuous lattices gained further impetus from their rediscovery and appli-
cation in analysis, functional analysis and topological algebra, as documented in [Gierz et al.,
1980]. Their connection with interval analysis was pointed out in [Scott, 1970b, p.87].

778
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
(up to isomorphism), and these yielded models of the untyped λ-K-calculus with
βη-conversion.
The insight that led Scott to the construction of reﬂexive domains consisted
basically in extending to operations on domains, in particular F(D) = [D →D],
the iterative construction of the least ﬁxed-point of a continuous function f : D →
D as
ﬁx(f)
=def

n∈ω
f n(⊥).
(1)
The technical device needed for this extension was later recognized by Scott him-
self [Scott, 1973, p.181] to be the most original step of his construction: given
domains D and E, an embedding-projection pair from D to E is a pair of (Scott-)
continuous functions i : D →E,
j : E →D such that j ◦i = idD and i ◦j ⊑idE,
where the order relation on functions is deﬁned pointwise. Embedding-projection
pairs deﬁned an approximation relation on domains in analogy to the approxima-
tion relation on elements of domains described by the partial ordering. Reﬂexive
domains were built as inverse limits of sequences of projections
⟨Dn
jn
←Dn+1⟩n∈ω
where D0 was arbitrary and Dn+1 was deﬁned as [Dn →Dn], with a suitable choice
of the initial embedding-projection pair ⟨i0, j0⟩. These spaces were “function-space
analogues to the simple types of the Russell-Zermelo theory” [Scott, 1969b, p.24],
and Scott always regarded his models as spaces of functions of inﬁnite type, rather
than of untyped functions, [Scott, 1975, pp.348–349].90
Soon after Scott’s D∞models, several other models were invented by other
workers, see 9.3 below, and there was intensive research on the structure of D∞and
its application to the denotational semantics of programming languages. Probably
the ﬁrst result in this area was due to David Park [Park, 1976], who proved in
early 1970 that the interpretation of the Rosenbloom-Curry combinator Y in D∞
coincided with the least ﬁxed point operator deﬁned iteratively as in (1) above.
On the negative side, Park also showed that this deﬁnability result could be ruined
by a diﬀerent choice of the initial embedding-projection pair ⟨i0, j0⟩from D0 to
D1.
9.2
Computational and denotational properties
A subject of extensive research in the early 1970s was the relation between the
operational properties of λ-terms and their denotations as elements of some D∞
model. A particularly interesting problem was to relate the lattice structure of
the models, where the order relation among elements reﬂected their amount of
information in an abstract sense (see, for example, [Scott, 1970c, p.171]), to the
90Actually, in his ﬁrst note on the construction, in [Scott, 1969a], Scott used direct limits of
sequences of embeddings, obtaining an equivalent result. This was the ﬁrst instance of what is
now called the limit-colimit coincidence [Smyth and Plotkin, 1982], that lies at the heart of the
categorical versions of the construction.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
779
intuition that some terms are more informative than others in an operational sense.
For example, there are λ-terms X such that, for all contexts C[
] and all normal
forms N,
if C[X] =β N then C[M] =β N for every other term M;
(2)
one of these is ΔΔ, where Δ ≡λx.xx. Such terms contribute no information
to the surrounding context C[
], and could therefore be interpreted as the least
element ⊥in any model. This problem was investigated thoroughly by Christo-
pher Wadsworth, who was at the time a graduate student of Strachey at Ox-
ford University, in his 1971 PhD thesis and two later papers, [Wadsworth, 1971;
Wadsworth, 1976; Wadsworth, 1978].91
He found a precise and easily grasped
characterization of the sense in which reduction of a term M can be said to de-
velop information out of better and better approximations of a normal form of M
(if one exists). He extended the λ-calculus with a new constant Ω representing the
undeﬁned value, and deﬁned an approximate normal form to be a term of the ex-
tended language (a λ-Ω-term) without β-redexes.92 An approximate normal form
A could then be said to match an ordinary λ-term except at occurrences of Ω in
A, and this was exploited by Wadsworth in deﬁning the set of approximate normal
forms of M. One of his main results was the “limit theorem”, [Wadsworth, 1976,
Thm. 5.2], later called the “approximation theorem”, [Barendregt, 1981, Thm.
19.2.2], which stated that the interpretation of a term M in Scott’s D∞model is
the least upper bound of the interpretations of its approximate normal forms.
A key technical concept throughout was that of a term M having a head normal
form, that is, being convertible to a term of the form λx1 . . . xn.zX1 . . . Xm, for
some n, m ≥0. The identiﬁcation of diverging computations with terms without
a head normal form was found to be a natural one: for terms without head nor-
mal form, property (2) held, [Wadsworth, 1976, Cor. 5.5], and furthermore the
interpretation of every such term in standard D∞models was the least element ⊥
(ibid., Corollary 5.3).
Independently, Henk Barendregt, in June 1971 in his PhD thesis [Barendregt,
1971], proposed identifying diverging computations with what he called unsolvable
terms, namely those λ-terms M such that
MX1 . . . Xk =β I
(3)
held for no sequence of terms X1, . . . , Xk with k ≥0. Barendregt was then at-
tempting to construct a model for the λ-K-calculus based on recursion-theoretic
91Another important contribution of Wadsworth dating back from the same period (October
1970) was the idea of continuations as a technique for the denotational semantics of jumps.
Publication of this, as a joint report [Strachey and Wadsworth, 1974], was delayed because of
work on his thesis. The history of his work on continuations can be found in [Wadsworth, 2000].
The notion of continuation was also invented by several other people at about the same time;
see the historical account in [Reynolds, 1993].
92This extension was suggested to Wadsworth by Dana Scott in conversation, in October 1970,
see [Wadsworth, 1976, fn.4, p.506].

780
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
notions, related to the model of hereditarily recursive operations for the simply
typed λ-calculus described in [Kreisel, 1958].93
A natural problem in this setting was to ﬁnd out whether non-normalizing terms
like ΔΔ were deﬁned in the recursion-theoretic interpretation.94
However, the
notion of undeﬁnedness induced by divergence of partial recursive functions turned
out to be too strong, and the identiﬁcation of undeﬁnedness with unsolvability
emerged through an analysis of terms that do not have a normal form, yet possess
a meaningful computational behavior that prevents them from all being identiﬁed
consistently.95 The consistency of the theory resulting from the identiﬁcation of all
unsolvable terms was then proved by proof-theoretic means in [Barendregt, 1971,
Cor. 3.2.15 and Remark 3.2.16].
Also, by using unsolvable terms to represent
undeﬁned values f(n) of a partial recursive function f, Barendregt obtained a
simpler new proof that all partial recursive functions were λ-deﬁnable, [Barendregt,
1971, §1.3] or [Barendregt, 1981, §8.4].
It was Wadsworth (and Hyland, independently) who realized that a term M
had no head normal form if and only if it was unsolvable [Wadsworth, 1971, p.94a],
[Wadsworth, 1976, Cor. 5.3], allowing him to obtain a semantical version of Baren-
dregt’s consistency result by an immediate application of his limit theorem. (On
the other hand, for the λI-calculus, Barendregt proved in 1973 that a term is
unsolvable if and only if it has no normal form, [Barendregt, 1973].)
The interpretation of λ-terms in a D∞model induces a preorder on terms,
deﬁned by M ⩽N if and only if the interpretation of M is less than the in-
terpretation of N for every choice of the interpretation of variables free in MN.
The characterization of this preorder was given in [Wadsworth, 1976, Thm. 6.3]
by introducing a notion of semi-separability of λ-terms, according to which M
is semi-separable from N (M ̸≲N) iﬀthere is a head context C[
] such that
C[M] =β I but C[N] is unsolvable. Then M ̸≲N if and only if M ̸⩽N. Indepen-
dently, Hyland and Reiji Nakajima, then a student of Morris, obtained the same
result for D∞[Hyland, 1975; Hyland, 1976; Nakajima, 1975], and Hyland found a
similar characterization for the model P(ω).96 Behind all these studies lie, more or
less explicitly, the techniques introduced by B¨ohm in the proof of his separability
theorem [B¨ohm, 1968]: [Wadsworth, 1976] refers to a paper on “A general form of
a theorem of B¨ohm and its application to Scott’s models for the λ-calculus”, that
apparently was never published, while all the above results can be reformulated,
following [Barendregt, 1977; Barendregt, 1981], using the notion of B¨ohm tree, cf.
93[Barendregt, 1996] gives a very clear account of this attempt and of the positive results arising
from it. These include, in particular, the partial validity of the ω-rule (i.e. if FZ = GZ for all
closed terms Z then F = G) for λβη-conversion, when F and G are not universal generators like
those constructed later in [Plotkin, 1974].
94In this interpretation, Δ becomes a partial recursive function ϕe such that ϕe(x) ≃ϕx(x).
95An example is the pair of terms λx.x(ΔΔ)K and λx.x(ΔΔ)(KI), whose identiﬁcation would
lead immediately to the equation K = KI.
96Hyland played an important role in these developments:
for example, in January 1972
he suggested the typed λ-calculus used in Wadsworth’s proof of the approximation theorem,
[Wadsworth, 1978]; see [Wadsworth, 1976, fn.5, p.508].
§7.1.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
781
Jean-Jacques L´evy in his Th`ese d’´Etat [L´evy, 1978] used λ-Ω-terms as the
building blocks of an “algebraic” model for the λ-calculus, much in the tradition
of the French school of algebraic semantics of recursive programs [Nivat, 1973;
Vuillemin, 1974b].
At about this time the question arose of saying what exactly the phrase “model
of λ” meant in general. This was examined in 1978 by Hindley and Giuseppe
Longo, [Hindley and Longo, 1980, §§2–3] and further in 1980 by Albert Meyer
[Meyer, 1982, §6]. There turned out to be several variant concepts: λ-model, λ-
algebra, combinatory algebra, as well as a category-based deﬁnition (see [Koymans,
1982, §§3–4]).97 Each of these has given rise to further studies, some of which will
be mentioned below. Another deﬁnition, related to λ as cylindric and polyadic
algebras are related to ﬁrst-order predicate calculus, was that of lambda abstraction
algebra, introduced by Don Pigozzi and Antonio Salibra (and independently by
Z. B. Diskin) around 1993; see [Pigozzi and Salibra, 1998] for a good overview.
We should mention here that the informal set theory in which Scott built D∞
corresponded to the standard Zermelo-Fraenkel system, in which self-membership
and inﬁnite descending ∈-chains x1 ∋x2 ∋x3 ∋. . . are forbidden by the axiom
of foundation. But “non-well-founded” set theories have been proposed at various
times, in which such chains are allowed, and in such a theory the construction of a
model of λ is very much simpler to carry out. This was ﬁrst done by Michael von
Rimscha in 1978, [Rimscha, 1980]. Some comments on non-well-founded models
are in [Plotkin, 1993, pp.375–377], and [Aczel, 1988] is a general account of non-
well-founded set theories.
9.3
Other models
After Scott’s construction of the D∞models, Plotkin observed in 1972 [Plotkin,
1993, Part I] that a suitable generalization of the notion of graph of a function
yielded a new family of models, now collectively called the graph models. For this
generalization, he took an arbitrary atom ι and deﬁned inductively a set TC by
the clauses:
– ι ∈TC,
– if μ, ν are ﬁnite subsets of TC, then ⟨μ, ν⟩∈TC.
Then the powerset P(TC) became a (non-extensional) model of the λ-calculus
when application was deﬁned by
x · y =def

{ν | ∃μ ⊆y. ⟨μ, ν⟩∈x}.
(4)
A similar idea had also occurred to Bob Meyer in 1973–’74, stimulated by some
work of Larry Powers, and resulted in a graph model of CL that he called the
97A combined account is in [Barendregt, 1981, 2nd. edition, Ch. 5].

782
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
Fool’s model, [Meyer et al., 1991, §5]. But this models reduction not equality. A
related structure, for λβ-reduction, is described in [Plotkin, 1994, §4].
Other models in this family include those of [Scott, 1980a] and [Engeler, 1981],
but the best-known of them is certainly P(ω) of [Scott, 1976]. The model P(ω)
was motivated by “the project of making the connections with ordinary recursion
theory easier to comprehend, since a satisfactory theory of computability and
programming language semantics had to face this problem” [Scott, 1976, Appendix
B]. The story of this model started at Easter 1973, when it was presented by Scott
for the ﬁrst time in Oberwolfach; later in the same year Scott realized that the idea
behind it was essentially the same as Plotkin’s deﬁnition (4), and that the same
idea was “already implicit in a very precise form in much earlier work by Myhill-
Shepherdson [Myhill and Shepherdson, 1955] and Friedberg-Rogers [Friedberg and
Rogers, 1959] (see also [Rogers, 1967]) on enumeration operators” (Scott, ibid.
p.576).98
The deﬁnition of application in P(ω) needed the standard Cantor coding of
pairs of natural numbers and an enumeration {en}n∈ω of ﬁnite subsets of ω. Then
the graph of a continuous function f : P(ω) →P(ω) on the (complete algebraic)
lattice P(ω) was deﬁned by
{⟨n, m⟩| n ∈f(em)},
and (4) became, under coding,
x · y =def {n ∈ω | ∃em ⊆y. ⟨m, n⟩∈x}.
One of the aspects of P(ω) that turned out to be important, especially for later
investigations on the semantics of type theories, was the peculiar semantics of
types allowed by the properties of this model. A closure is a continuous function
a : P(ω) →P(ω) such that a(a(x)) = a(x) ⊇x for all x ∈P(ω). Then a may be
thought of as a type, namely the type of all x ∈P(ω) such that a(x) = x. For
example, when a, b are closures, deﬁne a ◦→b as λu. b◦u◦a, obtaining thus a closure
that represents the type of (continuous) functions from a to b. Furthermore, there
is a closure V : P(ω) →P(ω) such that a ∈P(ω) is a closure if and only if
V(a) = a. Such a V may be deﬁned by V =def λa.λx. ∞
n=0 x(n), where x(0) = ∅
and x(n+1) = x ∪a(x(n)), or equivalently by:
V(a)(x) =def

{y ∈P(ω) | x ⊆y and a(y) ⊆y}.
The lattice of closures therefore directly yields a model for a type system with
a type of all types, like Martin-L¨of’s ﬁrst version of intuitionistic type theory.
The construction of V is due essentially to Martin-L¨of and Peter Hancock (circa
1974), and was devised in the course of Martin-L¨of’s attempts to extend Kreisel’s
topological interpretation to type theory. This extension was carried out essentially
98This story has had a recent – though implicit – continuation, in the study of equilogical
spaces of [Scott, 1996], [Bauer et al., 2004].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
783
by means of spaces described by formal neighborhoods, similar to the information
systems studied later by Scott as the canonical description of domains [Scott,
1982a]. In order to handle universes, they needed a “space of spaces”, for which
the quantiﬁers and the type operations were continuous. The construction of that
space was described by Hancock (then a PhD student in Oxford) to Scott, and he
soon adapted it to P(ω).
Therefore, the domain P(ω) was also the ﬁrst example of a universal domain,
in two diﬀerent senses: every countably based algebraic (continuous) lattice is
the image of a closure (retraction) over P(ω), where a retraction is a continuous
endofunction of P(ω) idempotent with respect to composition, see [Scott, 1976].
This result set up a powerful tool for solving recursive domain equations (up to
equality) inside P(ω): in particular, the model D∞is represented by the least
ﬁxed-point of the closure λa. a◦→a (see [Scott, 1976], and [Drakengren, 1996] who
showed that this solution is unique, amending an incorrect statement in [Scott,
1976, p.553]).
These remarks gave rise to two diﬀerent lines of research. On the one hand, there
was a search for other similar universality results: progress in this area was based
initially on modiﬁcations of the proofs for P(ω), like Plotkin’s universal domain
Tω in [Plotkin, 1978b], or properties of the free Boolean algebra on ℵ0 generators
[Scott, 1982b]. Later it turned out that universal domains could be built uni-
formly by exploiting model-theoretic properties [Gunter, 1987; Gunter and Jung,
1990], in particular the amalgamation property [Droste and G¨obel, 1993], that
allowed homogeneous universal domains to be constructed for several classes of
domains, unique up to isomorphism. On the other hand, the ﬂexibility of retracts
and related classes of endofunctions over universal domains in modelling type
constructors suggested their use for interpreting higher-order type systems, espe-
cially the polymorphic λ-calculus. Types were interpreted as closures over P(ω) in
[McCracken, 1979], as retracts in [McCracken, 1982], and as ﬁnitary projections in
[Amadio et al., 1986]. Barendregt and Rezus also used closures for the semantics of
Automath and related systems with dependent types [Barendregt and Rezus, 1983;
Rezus, 1986].
10
DOMAIN THEORY
10.1
Classical domain theory
It is not completely clear what we can take as the starting date of a theory of
domains, but by 1978 there was already a considerable bulk of results on categories
of domains, many of them due to the eﬀorts of Gordon Plotkin and collected in
his notes for a lecture course in Pisa ([Plotkin, 1978a], complemented later by the
notes [Plotkin, 1981]). The guiding analogy in that presentation was that between
the complete partial order structure of domains and the approximation structure
on domains induced by embedding-projection pairs. The iterative construction of
the least ﬁxed-point of a continuous endofunction of a domain corresponded in

784
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
this analogy to Scott’s inverse limit construction; in the meantime the latter had
been given a categorical description through the contributions of Reynolds, Wand,
Smyth and Plotkin himself [Reynolds, 1972; Wand, 1974; Wand, 1977; Wand, 1979;
Smyth and Plotkin, 1982].99
However, the main impetus to the study of the structure of domains was given
not so much by the models of untyped λ as by the full abstraction problem for
the typed λ-system PCF, the logic-free part of Milner’s LCF ([Milner, 1972] and
§8.1.2 above). This problem was described in 1975 in two papers, [Milner, 1977]
and [Plotkin, 1977],100 and concerns the relations between operational and denota-
tional equivalence on programs.101 Operationally, we say that two terms M and N
of the same type σ are observationally equivalent, written M ≈N, when, for every
context C[
] with one hole of type σ such that C[M] and C[N] are programs, we
have that C[M] ⇓v if and only if C[N] ⇓v. This relation was ﬁrst introduced in
[Milner, 1975] in the context of a semantics of parallel computation, although it
owed much to [Morris, 1968] and the early studies of the denotational properties
of untyped λ-terms by Hyland, Wadsworth and Plotkin described in §9.2 above.
Writing [[P]] for the denotation of a program P in some type structure, we say
that programs P, Q are equivalent iﬀ[[P]] = [[Q]], and a denotational semantics is
fully abstract [Milner, 1977] when [[P]] = [[Q]] is equivalent to P ≈Q for all PCF
programs P, Q.
Plotkin showed that the standard model of PCF based on domains and Scott-
continuous functions was not fully abstract [Plotkin, 1977, pp.234-236], but that it
became so if one added parallel conditional operators :⊃σ of type o →(σ →(σ →
σ)), where σ = o or σ = ι. The interpretation of :⊃σ was the following continuous
function:
:⊃σ (p)(x)(y) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
x
if p = true
y
if p = false
x
if x = y and p = ⊥o
⊥σ
if x ̸= y and p = ⊥o.
On the other hand, [Milner, 1977, p.19, Cor. 3] proved that there is a unique fully
abstract model for PCF (up to isomorphism); he constructed it essentially as a
(quotiented) term model. The full abstraction problem consists basically in the
99Scott had already mentioned in [Scott, 1972, pp.128-129] a suggestion of Lawvere to the eﬀect
that the inverse limit construction of D∞could be carried out by regarding [D →D′] as a functor
(over the category of continuous lattices with projections as morphisms) whose second argument
preserved inverse limits and whose ﬁrst argument turned direct into inverse limits. The proof
that D∞∼
= [D∞→D∞] was then a direct consequence of these facts. A more general categorical
framework for the solution of recursive domain equations was later described in [Freyd, 1990;
Freyd, 1991; Freyd, 1992].
100See also the independent work carried out in the same year by Vladimir Yu. Sazonov and
described in [Sazonov, 1976c; Sazonov, 1976b; Sazonov, 1976a].
101By a program in this context is meant a closed PCF-term of type either o, with values true
and false, or ι, whose values are the numerals n for each natural number n. If a program M
reduces to a value v, we write M ⇓v.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
785
search for a syntax-independent description of Milner’s model.102
The failure of full abstraction for the semantics of PCF based on Scott contin-
uous functions is due to the presence of parallel functions, like the “parallel or”
connective V : o →(o →o), already considered in [Platek, 1966, pp.127–131] and
discussed there and in [Scott, 1969e], deﬁned by the truth-table
V
⊥
false
true
⊥
⊥
⊥
true
false
⊥
false
true
true
true
true
true.
This fact drew attention to the problem of developing a semantic notion of sequen-
tiality in order to “deﬁne a ‘smaller’ collection of domains containing only functions
capable of deterministic realization” [Plotkin, 1977, p.236]. Deﬁnitions of sequen-
tial function had already been given in [Milner, 1977, p.20] and [Vuillemin, 1974a,
§3.3]. However, these were coextensive only for Scott-continuous functions deﬁned
over ﬂat domains (i. e., those where every chain had at most two elements) and
depended upon a speciﬁc way of choosing the number of arguments of functions.
A more general notion of sequentiality arose from the theory of concrete domains
introduced in the Fall of 1975 by Gilles Kahn and Gordon Plotkin in [Kahn and
Plotkin, 1978], where they axiomatized an abstract notion of “argument place” of
a function by means of information matrices (or concrete data structures), over
which computation proceeds by occurrence of events that consist in ﬁlling cells
by values, subject to an accessibility relation that constrains the order in which
cells are able to be ﬁlled. A domain is generated by an information matrix as
the collection of its conﬁgurations, where each conﬁguration is a set of events that
represents the history of a computation over the matrix.
Though the general deﬁnition of sequential function based on concrete domains
did not appear in [Kahn and Plotkin, 1978], the idea circulated widely, especially
in the group of young French researchers at Sophia-Antipolis (including G´erard
Berry and Pierre-Louis Curien). In [Berry, 1978], Berry used the algebraic model of
[L´evy, 1976] to show that computation in pure untyped λ-calculus was essentially
sequential in the sense of Kahn and Plotkin, extending L´evy’s continuity theorem
(these results are described in detail in [Barendregt, 1981, §§14.3–4]).
Later, Berry and Curien [Curien, 1979; Berry and Curien, 1982] introduced
the notion of sequential algorithm over concrete data structures as a semantical
framework for PCF. While sequential algorithms are not functions in the set-
theoretic sense, they do form a cartesian closed category and therefore provide a
102We do not pursue further the technical aspects of full abstraction, although they determined
much of the course of research on domains from 1975 onwards, for at least 20 years after. A
comprehensive account of the strategies for solving it (and of the technical advances produced
by those attempts) is in [Ong, 1995]. The solutions of the full abstraction problem obtained
independently by Abramsky, Jagadeesan and Malacaria and Hyland and Ong, rely on a game
semantics for PCF whose applications are still being investigated, [Abramsky et al., 1994; Hyland
and Ong, 2000]. See below, §10.3.

786
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
categorical model for PCF [Berry, 1981; Curien, 1986].103 The calculations needed
in the study of the category of concrete data structures and sequential algorithms
also led Curien to introduce categorical combinators [Curien, 1985]; these became
important in computational applications, starting from [Curien, 1986] (see also
[Huet, 1990a]) who used them as instructions of an abstract machine [Cousineau
et al., 1987] for the implementation of the functional programming language ML.
A determinism condition on the computation of continuous functions that was
close to sequentiality was devised by Berry, who called it stability, [Berry, 1976;
Berry, 1978].
Stable functions satisfy a minimum data property whereby, for
every ﬁnite approximation e of a value f(x) there exists a minimum d ⊑x such
that e ⊑f(d). Observe that the “parallel or” function is not stable. A more
algebraic description of stability was possible in most cases of interest [Berry, 1976,
Prop.II.2.1], just by saying that a Scott-continuous function is stable iﬀf(x ∧y)
= f(x) ∧f(y) provided x and y have a common upper bound. At higher orders,
stable functions are ordered by f ≤st g iﬀf(x) ⊑f(y)∧g(x) whenever x ⊑y; and
with this deﬁnition, stable functions on appropriate domains (e.g. the dI-domains
of [Berry, 1978, Def. 4.3.2], satisfying some of the properties of concrete domains)
yield cartesian closed categories and, therefore, models of PCF.
The notion of stability was later rediscovered from a diﬀerent point of view
by [Girard, 1986]. Since the mid-1970s, Girard had been developing a theory of
ordinals whose emphasis was on their geometric structure. The basic idea was that
ordinal operations can be ﬁrst deﬁned on natural numbers and then extended to the
whole class of ordinals by regarding it as a category whose objects are ordinals and
whose morphisms are strictly increasing functions. The essential technical device
to achieve this program was the notion of dilator [Girard, 1981], namely an endo-
functor of the category of ordinals that preserves directed colimits and pullbacks.
When specialised to domains regarded as categories, the preservation properties
of dilators deﬁned exactly the stable functions, and this was the starting point
of the development of qualitative domains in [Girard, 1986] and [Girard, 1988,
Annex A], and their simpliﬁcation as coherence spaces in [Girard, 1986]. These
yielded interesting models of his System F in which types were interpreted as
domains. They also suggested the analysis of the (stable) function type D →st E
as !D ⊸E, where ! was a unary constructor on coherence spaces and ⊸was
linear implication, that would become the basic connective of linear logic [Girard,
1986], a logical system whose importance for the whole ﬁeld of the semantics of
computation is only beginning to be fully appreciated.
The representation of concrete domains as sets of conﬁgurations of information
matrices was the central result in the monograph [Kahn and Plotkin, 1978, §7].
This suggested similar representation theorems for other categories of domains. In
his lecture course at Merton College Oxford in 1981 [Scott, 1982b], Scott repre-
sented (Scott-) domains as the partially ordered sets of ﬁlters of structures that
described the basis of a domain and therefore determined its whole partial or-
103There is a large literature on categorical models of typed and untyped λ-calculus, stimulated
by the work of Lambek and also by [Scott, 1980b]: see [Koymans, 1982].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
787
der structure (neighbourhood systems).104 The next year, [Scott, 1982a] gave an
equivalent representation of domains in terms of information systems: these were
essentially abstract intuitionistic sequent calculi, which determined a set of ele-
ments (i.e., the elements of the represented domains) identiﬁed with Horn theories.
Another approach to the ﬁnitary representation of domains arose from an unex-
pected connection between Scott domains and the ﬁlter models built by means of
intersection types (§8.4). The idea of using types to build models was not new, for
example it was the main motivation of Plotkin’s 1972 report [Plotkin, 1993, Part
I, p.365].105 Extending the ideas that led to the ﬁlter model of [Barendregt et al.,
1983], Coppo, Dezani, Honsell and Longo proved a precise correspondence between
ﬁlter models built from what they called extended applicative type structures in
[Coppo et al., 1983] and [Coppo et al., 1984], generalizing the set of intersection
types, and the applicative information systems that form a subclass of the infor-
mation systems used in [Scott, 1982a]. This was also recognized by Scott (ibid.),
who remarked that intersection types could be regarded as just another represen-
tation of the ﬁnite elements of a domain. Filter models built from intersection
types with additional constants – essentially a reformulation in this new context
of [Coppo and Dezani, 1978] – were then used in [Coppo et al., 1987] to build a
model for untyped λ which was isomorphic to a non-standard D∞whose theory
coincided with Morris’ extensional theory [Morris, 1968].106
In the same years, Mike Smyth (and also Plotkin, in unpublished work) proposed
looking at the open subsets of a topological space as computable properties of its
points ([Smyth, 1983]; [Plotkin, 1981, Ch. 8, Exs.94–96]). Specialized to the Scott
topology of a domain, this view complemented the identiﬁcation of continuity
and (abstract) computability suggested originally in [Scott, 1969e; Scott, 1969d]
and [Plotkin, 1978a, §1]. This led to further representation results for domains,
as characterized by the structure of the complete lattices of their open subsets.
These results (thoroughly surveyed in [Abramsky and Jung, 1994]) were in eﬀect
an extension of the representation theory for Boolean algebras via Stone duality
[Johnstone, 1982], inﬂuenced by closely related results in the theory of continuous
lattices [Gierz et al., 1980, §V.5] and the domain interpretation of Martin-L¨of’s
type theory [Martin-L¨of, 1983; Martin-L¨of, 1986]. They were exploited in a logic
of observable properties of domains ﬁrst described systematically in [Vickers, 1989]
and [Abramsky, 1991], and opened the way to the application of point-less topology
in a computational setting, which was seen as very desirable from a constructive
standpoint [Johnstone, 1982; Fourman and Grayson, 1982; Coquand, 1992, p.119],
104The basis of a domain D is the set of its ﬁnite elements, with the partial order inherited
from D, where d ∈D is ﬁnite (or algebraic) iﬀd ⊑WΔ for some directed Δ ⊆D implies d ⊑e
for some e ∈Δ. A cpo D is algebraic iﬀevery d ∈D is the least upper bound of the directed set
of ﬁnite elements below it, and a Scott domain is an algebraic cpo with a countable basis and
least upper bounds of upper bounded subsets. This deﬁnition goes back to [Scott, 1969d].
105In fact, the graph models and ﬁlter models are presented together in [Plotkin, 1993, Part II,
p.373ﬀ.].
106The connections between ﬁlter models and the inverse limit construction have been explored
in [Coppo et al., 1984] and in [Plotkin, 1993].

788
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
and led to the point-free study of domain theory within Martin-L¨of’s intuitionistic
type theory [Sambin, 1987].
10.2
Eﬀective domains and Synthetic Domain Theory
We have remarked that computability considerations were at the basis of the very
notions of domain and continuous function.
Soon after those workers involved
came to see algebraic and consistently complete partial orders as a convenient
class of domains, much research was devoted to studying computability theory
over eﬀectively given domains; these allowed researchers to consider computable
constructions in the concrete sense of classical recursion theory, [Constable and
Egli, 1974], [Egli and Constable, 1976], [Smyth, 1977], [Kanda, 1979], [Plotkin,
1981, Ch. 7], [Scott, 1982b, Lecture VII]. Early ideas in this area had been put
forward by Yu. Ershov using the theory of numbered sets proposed by Malcev,
where a numbered set A consists of a set A with a surjective coding function eA
from A onto ω. In particular, in Ershov’s framework the notion of constructive
domain was deﬁned, and it was proved that the Scott topology on such domains
coincided with a topology that was induced in a natural way by its numbering
(the Malcev-Ershov topology, see [Giannini and Longo, 1984; Rosolini, 1986] and
the survey in [Longo, 1987]).
However, the resulting theory was still complicated by the need to manipulate
the codes of elements of domains explicitly. A proposal to overcome these com-
plications was put forward by Dana Scott, as the program of synthetic domain
theory. A synthetic approach to computation consists in the study of construc-
tive universes in which it is possible to regard domains just as special kinds of
sets.107 The name was suggested by an analogy with Synthetic Diﬀerential Ge-
ometry, where generalized manifolds are manipulated as sets of a special kind.
Scott proposed such a research program in a talk at the Peripatetic Seminar on
Sheaves and Logic in Sussex University in 1980, and later described its aim as that
of having “a universe that combines logic and mathematics in a natural way and
permits a development of ﬁnitary recursion theory in a suﬃciently abstract way”
[Scott, 1986].
The need for a treatment of partialness within intuitionistic universes of sets,
described as toposes, led Scott’s student Giuseppe Rosolini to introduce the basic
notion in synthetic domain theory, namely that of dominance, a subset Σ of the
set Ω of truth values that classiﬁes the domains of deﬁnition of partial functions
[Rosolini, 1986]. Intuitively, the elements of Σ are interpretations of the Σ0
1 propo-
sitions in Ω. An important example of dominance arises in the eﬀective topos Eﬀ
of [Hyland, 1982], where all functions on natural numbers are recursive, by setting
Σ
=
{p ∈Ω | ∃f ∈NN. p ↔(∃z. f(z) = 0)},
107Our short account of synthetic domain theory is based on the introduction to Rosolini’s PhD
thesis [Rosolini, 1986], on [Hyland, 1991], and on the section on synthetic domain theory by
Moggi and Rosolini in [Jung (editor), 1996].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
789
as was ﬁrst done by Scott in a lecture in Pisa in the Fall of 1983. By exploiting this
notion it was possible to deﬁne subcategories of the ambient topos whose objects
might be taken as “Scott domains”, and to prove for them the basic properties that
categories of domains must have in order to support the denotational semantics of
programming languages. The work on eﬀective domains was therefore subsumed
under the synthetic approach. Early contributions to this area include the work
of Wesley Phoa [Phoa, 1990] on complete Σ-spaces as a synthetic counterpart
to (pre)domains, and the alternative approach of [Freyd et al., 1990]; and the
axiomatic presentation of the fundamental ideas in [Hyland, 1991] and [Taylor,
1991]. Even more important, in demonstrating the uniﬁcation achieved by means
of a synthetic approach within the eﬀective topos, was the discovery by Moggi and
Hyland mentioned in §8.3 above that the category of modest sets yields a model
of the polymorphic λ-calculus.
10.3
Game semantics
The full abstraction problem for PCF, that oriented much research on domain
theory since the mid-70s [Milner, 1977; Plotkin, 1977], was given a solution by two
independent teams: Abramsky, Jagadeesan and Malacaria from Imperial College,
London [Abramsky et al., 1994], and Hyland and Ong from Cambridge. Both
groups announced their result in a message to the types mailing list on July
27th, 1993. Both used games as the semantic counterparts of types, and inter-
preted typed λ-terms as strategies, achieving what is called an intensionally fully
abstract model for PCF, namely an algebraic model where every isolated element
is deﬁnable.108
The use of games (and strategies) did not come abruptly out
of the blue, however, and has in fact a long history in the semantics of logical
systems; under the correspondence between propositions and types, part of that
tradition can be seen to be directly relevant to typed λ-calculi. From our point
of view, the starting point of game semantics can be found in the works of Paul
Lorenzen and his school from 1961 onward on dialogue games formalizing a de-
bate between a Proponent and an Opponent, where the Opponent tries to attack
a ﬁrst-order formula defended by the Proponent [Lorenzen, 1961; Felscher, 1986;
Lorenz, 2001]. The game-theoretical notion of validity was intended by Lorenzen
to coincide with intuitionistic validity; a connection with typed λ-calculus was
not made, even implicitly. This had to wait until the early 1990s, when it was
exploited in the context of a semantical analysis of Girard’s Linear Logic. The
ﬁrst mention of games in the context of linear logic goes back to a paper by Yves
Lafont and Thomas Streicher [Lafont and Streicher, 1991], where a game was
seen as a structure ⟨A⋆, A⋆, e : (A⋆× A⋆) →K⟩consisting of two sets with a
“payoﬀ” function valued in a set K. A little earlier, Valeria de Paiva had given
108A quotient of the game model then yielded the order-extensional fully abstract model for
PCF, as announced in a further message by Abramsky to the types mailing list on September
8th of the same year. It can be argued that the way to a direct (i.e., not quotiented) construction
of the fully abstract model for PCF is barred by the undecidability of observational equivalence,
shown by [Loader, 2001].

790
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
a related categorical account of G¨odel’s Dialectica interpretation [Paiva, 1989a;
Paiva, 1989b] and had used it to interpret linear logic.109
The Lorenzen tradition was then brought into the semantics of linear logic by
Andreas Blass in [Blass, 1992], building on his previous work on determinacy
of (inﬁnite) games [Blass, 1972]. With Blass’ paper the use of dialogue games
and strategies became a powerful tool for model construction, and in fact he was
able to obtain a completeness theorem for the additive fragment of linear logic
with respect to his games, stating that a sequent is provable if and only if there
is a winning strategy for Proponent in the associated game.110 One important
drawback of this model was that composition of strategies was not associative,
hence there was no category of games arising from Blass’ work. On the other
hand, a monoidal closed category of games (in the sense of [Conway, 1976]) had
been already studied by Andr´e Joyal in [Joyal, 1977], who had noticed that it was
a natural context for a “combinatorial” calculus of strategies. A category of games
suitable for interpreting the multiplicative fragment of linear logic was introduced
in 1992 by [Abramsky and Jagadeesan, 1994], who proved what they called a “full
completeness” theorem: proofs in the multiplicative fragment of linear logic plus
the MIX rule
⊢Γ
⊢Δ
⊢Γ, Δ
correspond bijectively to winning strategies.111 The perfect harmony of semanti-
cal objects (strategies) and syntactical structures (proofs) established by the full
completeness theorem was exactly the kind of correspondence needed for build-
ing the fully abstract model of PCF of [Abramsky et al., 1994], which in fact
owed much to the framework set up for obtaining that theorem.
In addition,
the interpretation of composition of strategies as “parallel composition plus hid-
ing” suggested by Abramsky [Abramsky, 1994; Abramsky and Jagadeesan, 1994]
opened the way to the application of game semantics and ideas from linear logic to
the theory of concurrent processes, especially process algebras; [Abramsky, 1994;
Abramsky, 2000].112
Less closely related to the developments in linear logic was the approach of
Hyland and Ong [Hyland and Ong, 2000]. They too used games, but their approach
was more directly inﬂuenced by attempts to ﬁnd a suitable notion of sequentiality
109Both these approaches are related to a method for building ∗-autonomous categories from
suitably complete symmetric monoidal categories, invented by Po-Hsiang Chu and described in
[Barr, 1979, Appendix]. [Seely, 1989] observed that ∗-autonomous categories yield categorical
models for linear logic (see also [Barr, 1991]).
110Blass’ model actually validates the Weakening rule (from Γ ⊢B deduce Γ, A ⊢B), and is
therefore a model of what is called aﬃne logic.
111This kind of result can be traced back to L¨auchli’s completeness theorem for his interpretation
of intuitionistic logic [L¨auchli, 1965; L¨auchli, 1970].
112The research in this direction was strongly inﬂuenced by Girard’s idea of a geometry of
interaction [Girard, 1987b; Girard, 1989a; Girard, 1989b], where the correctness criterion for
(multiplicative) proof-nets – the natural deduction formulation of (the multiplicative fragment
of) linear logic, [Girard, 1987a] – is expressed in terms of geometrical properties of graphs [Danos
and Regnier, 1989].

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
791
at higher types, much in the same line as the theory of sequentiality of [Kahn
and Plotkin, 1978] and [Berry and Curien, 1982], see [Ong, 1995], and by the
compositional approach to games arising from [Blass, 1972] and [Joyal, 1977]. (In
later presentations of game semantics, however, the technical framework set up
by Hyland and Ong was used to build categories of games suitable for modelling
(some fragment of) linear logic; see e.g., [Abramsky and McCusker, 1998].)
In the same direction, and with a bias towards the problem of extending Chur-
ch’s thesis to higher-type computability, there was already in the 1980s a series
of papers by Kleene, who used dialogue games to interpret his higher-type recur-
sion schemes [Kleene, 1978; Kleene, 1980; Kleene, 1982; Kleene, 1985]. Kleene’s
problem, the attempt to ﬁnd “a class of functions which shall coincide with all the
partial functions which are ‘computable’ or ‘eﬀectively decidable’, so that Church’s
1936 Thesis will apply with the higher types included” [Kleene, 1978, §1.2], led him
to consider, though implicitly, the full abstraction problem for PCF.113 Kleene’s
ideas were then pursued by Gandy and his student Giovanni Pani for continu-
ous functionals [Gandy, 1993]. They emphasized the conditions of “no dangling
question mark” for the game-theoretic analysis of computability in PCF, and this
inﬂuenced, through informal discussions with Hyland, the formulation of the games
of Hyland and Ong. Also seeming to be rooted in Kleene’s work were the games
used by [Nickau, 1994], that were in fact of the same kind as those of Hyland and
Ong.
Beside the applications of game semantics to the interpretation of programming
languages (surveyed, for example, in [Abramsky and McCusker, 1998]), there are
developments of this area that pertain closely to the foundations of logic.
An
early example is [Coquand, 1995], where winning strategies in games associated
to arithmetic propositions allow a reformulation of the analysis of their “ﬁni-
tist sense” provided by the consistency proofs of Gentzen and Novikoﬀ.
Here,
for the ﬁrst time, Lorenzen’s view of proofs as strategies is applied to a dy-
namic analysis of cut-elimination.
Another important example is ludics, a re-
search program started by Girard in the late 1990s [Girard, 1998; Girard, 2000;
Girard, 2001]. On a generically philosophical side, ludics is motivated by a critical
revision of the traditional relations between syntax and semantics of logic, with
a special emphasis on the meaning of logical rules: according to [Girard, 1998,
p.215], this “is to be found in the well-hidden geometrical structure of the rules
themselves: typically, negation should [be interpreted] by the exchange between
Player and Opponent”. The resulting emphasis on the symmetries of computa-
tion, already brought to the fore by linear logic, currently inspires much of the
research at the border between logic and computation.
But this belongs to the 21st century, so our history stops here.
113Kleene’s work was also independent from the parallel work on characterizations of sequential-
ity at higher-types by means of concrete data structures as in [Berry and Curien, 1982], that have
been shown to have substantial game theoretic content, e.g., by Fran¸cois Lamarche [Lamarche,
1992] and by Pierre-Louis Curien [Curien, 1994], [Amadio and Curien, 1998, §14.3].

792
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Abadi et al., 1991] M. Abadi, L. Cardelli, P.-L. Curien, and J.-J. L´evy. Explicit substitutions.
Journal of Functional Programming, 1:375–416, 1991.
[Abadi et al., 1993] M. Abadi, L. Cardelli, and P.-L. Curien. Formal parametric polymorphism.
Theoretical Computer Science, 121:9–58, 1993.
[Abdali, 1976] S. K. Abdali. An abstraction algorithm for combinatory logic. Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, 41:222–224, 1976.
[Abramsky and Jagadeesan, 1994] S. Abramsky and R. Jagadeesan. Games and full complete-
ness for multiplicative linear logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 59:543–574, 1994.
[Abramsky and Jung, 1994] S. Abramsky and A. Jung. Domain theory. In S. Abramsky, D. Gab-
bay, and T. Maibaum, editors, Handbook of Logic in Computer Science, volume 3, pages
1–168. Clarendon Press, Oxford, England, 1994.
[Abramsky and McCusker, 1998] S. Abramsky and G. McCusker. Game semantics. In U. Berger
and H. Schwichtenberg, editors, Computational Logic, pages 1–56. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1998.
[Abramsky et al., 1994] S. Abramsky, R. Jagadeesan, and P. Malacaria. Full abstraction for
PCF (extended abstract). In H. Hagiya and J. C. Mitchell, editors, Theoretical Aspects of
Computer Software. International Symposium TACS ’94, volume 789 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 1–15. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994.
[Abramsky, 1991] S. Abramsky. Domain theory in logical form. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 51:1–77, 1991.
[Abramsky, 1994] S. Abramsky. Proofs as processes. Theoretical Computer Science, 135:5–9,
1994.
[Abramsky, 2000] S. Abramsky.
Process realizability.
In F. L. Bauer and R. Steinbr¨uggen,
editors, Foundations of Secure Computation, pages 167–180. IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2000.
[Aczel and Feferman, 1980] P. Aczel and S. Feferman. Consistency of the unrestricted abstrac-
tion principle using an intensional equivalence operator. In Hindley and Seldin [1980], pages
67–98.
[Aczel, 1980] P. Aczel.
Frege structures and the notions of proposition, truth and set.
In
J. Barwise, H. J. Keisler, and K. Kunen, editors, The Kleene Symposium, pages 31–59. North-
Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1980.
[Aczel, 1988] P. Aczel. Non-Well-Founded Sets. CSLI (Centre for the Study of Language and
Information), Ventura Hall, Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA 94305-4115, U.S.A., 1988.
[Ajdukiewicz, 1935] K. Ajdukiewicz. Die syntaktische Konnexit¨at. Studia Philosophica, 1:1–27,
1935. English transl: Syntactic Connexion in Polish Logic 1920–1939, ed. by Storrs McCall,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1967, pp. 207–231.
[Amadio and Curien, 1998] R. Amadio and P.-L. Curien. Domains and Lambda-Calculi, vol-
ume 46 of Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, England, 1998.
[Amadio et al., 1986] R. Amadio, K. Bruce, and G. Longo. The ﬁnitary projection model for
second order lambda calculus and solutions to higher order domain equations. In Proceed-
ings First Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic In Computer Science, pages 122–130. IEEE
Computer Society, Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A., 1986.
[Anderson, 1998] C. A. Anderson. Alonzo Church’s contributions to philosophy and intensional
logic. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 4:129–171, 1998.
[Andrews, 1965] P. B. Andrews. A Transﬁnite Type Theory with Type Variables. North-Holland
Co., Amsterdam, 1965.
[Andrews, 1971] P. B. Andrews. Resolution in type theory. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 36:414–
432, 1971.
[Asperti and Longo, 1991] A. Asperti and G. Longo.
Categories, Types and Structures. An
Introduction to Category Theory for the Working Computer Scientist. Foundations of Com-
puting. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A., 1991.
[Asperti, 1995] A. Asperti. Linear logic, comonads and optimal reductions. Fundamenta Infor-
maticae, 22(1–2):3–22, 1995.
[Backus, 1978] J. Backus. Can programming be liberated from the von Neumann style? Com-
munications of the ACM, 21(8):613–641, 1978.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
793
[Bar-Hillel, 1953] Y. Bar-Hillel. A quasi-arithmetical notation for syntactic description. Lan-
guage, 29:47–58, 1953.
[Bar-Hillel, 1959] Y. Bar-Hillel. Decision procedures for structure in natural languages. Logique
et analyse, 2:19–29, 1959.
[Barendregt and Rezus, 1983] H. P. Barendregt and A. Rezus. Semantics for classical AUTO-
MATH and related systems. Information and Control, 59:127–147, 1983. (Journal now called
Information and Computation).
[Barendregt et al., 1976] H. P. Barendregt, J. Bergstra, J. W. Klop, and H. Volken.
Repre-
sentability in lambda algebras.
Koninkl. Nederlands Akad. van Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A,
79:377–387, 1976. Vol. also publ. as Indagationes Mathematicae 38.
[Barendregt et al., 1983] H. P. Barendregt, M. Coppo, and M. Dezani. A ﬁlter lambda model
and the completeness of type assignment. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 48:931–940, 1983.
[Barendregt et al., 1993] H. Barendregt, M. Bunder, and W. Dekkers. Systems of illative combi-
natory logic complete for ﬁrst order propositional and predicate calculus. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 58:769–788, 1993.
[Barendregt, 1971] H. P. Barendregt. Some extensional term models for combinatory logics and
λ-calculi. PhD thesis, Univ. Utrecht, Netherlands, 1971.
[Barendregt, 1973] H. P. Barendregt. A characterization of terms of the λ-I-calculus having a
normal form. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 38:441–445, 1973.
[Barendregt, 1976] H. P. Barendregt. A global representation of the recursive functions in the
λ-calculus. Theoretical Computer Science, 3:225–242, 1976.
[Barendregt, 1977] H. P. Barendregt.
The type-free lambda calculus.
In J. Barwise, editor,
Handbook of Mathematical Logic, pages 1091–1132. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1977.
[Barendregt, 1981] H. P. Barendregt. The Lambda Calculus, its Syntax and Semantics. North-
Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1981. 2nd (revised) edn. 1984.
[Barendregt, 1993] H. P. Barendregt.
Constructive proofs of the range property in lambda
calculus. Theoretical Computer Science, 121 (B¨ohm Volume):59–69, 1993.
[Barendregt, 1996] H. P. Barendregt.
Kreisel, lambda calculus, a windmill and a castle.
In
P. G. Odifreddi, editor, Kreiseliana, about and around Georg Kreisel, pages 3–14. A. K.
Peters, Wellesley, Massachusetts, 1996.
[Barendregt, 1997] H. P. Barendregt. The impact of the lambda calculus in logic and computer
science. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 3:181–215, 1997.
[Barr, 1979] M. Barr. ∗-autonomous Categories, volume 752 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1979.
[Barr, 1991] M. Barr. ∗-autonomous categories and linear logic. Mathematical Structures in
Computer Science, 1:159–178, 1991.
[Bates and Constable, 1985] J. L. Bates and R. L. Constable. Proofs as programs. ACM Trans-
actions on programming Languages and Systems, 7(1):113–136, 1985.
[Bauer et al., 2004] A. Bauer, L. Birkedal, and D. S. Scott.
Equilogical spaces.
Theoretical
Computer Science, 315:35–59, 2004.
[Ben-Yelles, 1979] C-B. Ben-Yelles.
Type-assignment in the Lambda-calculus.
PhD thesis,
Math. Dept., Univ. Wales Swansea, Swansea SA2 8PP, U.K., 1979.
[B´enabou, 1985] J. B´enabou. Fibered categories and the foundations of naive category theory.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 50:10–37, 1985.
[Benaissa et al., 1996] Z. Benaissa, D. Briaud, P. Lescanne, and J. Rouyer-Degli.
λv, a cal-
culus of explicit substitutions which preserves strong normalisation. Journal of Functional
Programming, 6:699–722, 1996.
[Bergstra and Klop, 1980] J. Bergstra and J. W. Klop. Invertible terms in the lambda calculus.
Theoretical Computer Science, 11:19–37, 1980.
[Bernays and Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1928] P. Bernays and M. Sch¨onﬁnkel.
Zum Entscheidungsproblem
der mathematischen Logik. Mathematische Annalen, 99:342–372, 1928.
[Bernays, 1958] P. Bernays. ¨Uber eine nat¨urliche Erweiterung des Relationenkalkuls. In A. Hey-
ting, editor, Constructivity in Mathematics, pages 1–14. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam,
1958.
[Berry and Curien, 1982] G. Berry and P.-L. Curien. Sequential algorithms on concrete data
structures. Theoretical Computer Science, 20:265–321, 1982.
[Berry, 1976] G. Berry. Bottom-up computation of recursive programs. RAIRO Informatique
Th´eorique et Applications, 10:47–82, 1976.

794
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Berry, 1978] G. Berry. Stable models of typed λ-calculi. In G. Ausiello and C. B¨ohm, editors,
Automata, Languages and Programming, Fifth Colloquium, volume 62 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 72–89. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1978.
[Berry, 1981] G. Berry. On the deﬁnition of λ-calculus models. In J. Diaz and I. Ramos, editors,
International Colloquium on Formalization of Programming Concepts, Proceedings, volume
107 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 218–230. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1981.
[Bethke, 2000] I. Bethke. Annotated Bibliography of Lambda Calculi, Combinatory Logics and
Type Theory. URL www.adam.science.uva.nl/ inge/, 2000. File type ‘.ps’, 587 pp. if printed.
[Blass, 1972] A. Blass. Degrees of indeterminacy of games. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 77:151–
166, 1972.
[Blass, 1992] A. Blass. A game semantics for linear logic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic,
56(1–3):183–220, 1992.
[Bloo and Geuvers, 1999] R. Bloo and J. H. Geuvers. Explicit substitution: on the edge of strong
normalization. Theoretical Computer Science, 211:375–395, 1999.
[B¨ohm and Berarducci, 1985] C. B¨ohm and A. Berarducci.
Automatic synthesis of typed λ-
programs on term algebras. Theoretical Computer Science, 39:135–154, 1985.
[B¨ohm and Dezani, 1972] C. B¨ohm and M. Dezani. A CUCH machine: The automatic treatment
of bound variables. International Journal of Computer and Information Sciences, 1:171–191,
1972. See also Notes on “A CUCH machine: the automatic treatment of bound variables”,
ibid 2 (1973), 157–160.
[B¨ohm and Dezani, 1974] C. B¨ohm and M. Dezani. A parenthesis machine for string manip-
ulation. Revue Fran¸cais d’Automatique, Informatique et Recherche Op´erationelle, 8:37–46,
1974.
[B¨ohm and Dezani, 1975] C. B¨ohm and M. Dezani.
λ-terms as total or partial functions on
normal forms. In B¨ohm [1975], pages 96–121.
[B¨ohm and Dezani, 1989] C. B¨ohm and M. Dezani. Combinatory logic as monoids. Fundamenta
Informaticae, 12(4):525–540, 1989.
[B¨ohm and Giovannucci, 1964] C. B¨ohm and R. Giovannucci. Circuiti sequenziali e analogici e
loro descrizione mediante il CUCH. Istituto per le Applicazioni del Calcolo, C.N.R., Roma,
1964.
[B¨ohm and Gross, 1966] C. B¨ohm and W. Gross. Introduction to the CUCH. In E. Caianiello,
editor, Automata Theory, pages 35–65. Academic Press, New York, 1966. (Preprints available
1964).
[B¨ohm et al., 1977] C. B¨ohm, M. Coppo, and M. Dezani. Termination tests inside λ-calculus.
In A. Salomaa and M. Steinby, editors, Automata, Languages and Programming, Fourth
Colloquium, volume 52 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 95–110. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1977.
[B¨ohm, 1954] C. B¨ohm. Calculatrices digitales. Du d´echiﬀrage des formules logico-math´emat-
iques par la machine mˆeme dans la conception du programme. Annali di Matematica Pura e
Applicata, 37(4):1–51, 1954.
[B¨ohm, 1966] C. B¨ohm. The CUCH as a formal and description language. In T. B. Steel, Jr.,
editor, Formal Language Description Languages for Computer Programming, pages 179–197.
North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1966. Proc. conference in 1964.
[B¨ohm, 1968] C. B¨ohm. Alcune propriet`a delle forme β-η-normali nel λ-K-calcolo. Pubblicazione
no. 696, Istituto per le Applicazioni del Calcolo, C.N.R., Roma, 1968.
[B¨ohm, 1975] C. B¨ohm, editor. λ-Calculus and Computer Science Theory, volume 37 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[B¨ohm, 1979] C. B¨ohm.
Un mod`ele arithm´etique des termes de la logique combinatoire.
In
B. Robinet, editor, Lambda Calcul et S´emantique Formelle des Langages de Programmation.
Actes de la Sixi`eme Ecole de Printemps d’Informatique Theorique, La Chˆatre, 1978, pages
97–108. LITP et ENSTA, Paris, 1979.
[B¨ohm, 1980] C. B¨ohm. Logic and computers. In E. Agazzi, editor, Modern Logic — A Survey,
pages 297–309. D. Reidel Co., Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1980.
[B¨ohm, 1982] C. B¨ohm. Combinatory foundations of functional programming. In Proceedings of
the 1982 ACM Symposium on Lisp and Functional Programming, pages 29–36. Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, 1982.
[B¨ohm, 1986] C. B¨ohm. Reducing recursion to iteration by algebraic extension. In B. Robinet
and R. Wilhelm, editors, European Symposium on Programming, volume 213 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 111–118. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
795
[B¨ohm, 1988a] C. B¨ohm. Functional programming and combinatory algebras. In M. P. Chytil,
L. Janiga, and V. Koubek, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, volume
324 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 14–26. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988.
[B¨ohm, 1988b] C. B¨ohm. Reducing recursion to iteration by means of pairs and n-tuples. In
M. Boscarol, L. Carlucci Aiello, and G. Levi, editors, Foundations of Logic and Functional
Programming, volume 306 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 58–66. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1988. Proc. workshop in 1986.
[B¨ohm, 1989] C. B¨ohm. Subduing self-application. In G. Ausiello, M. Dezani, and S. Ronchi
della Rocca, editors, Automata, Languages and Programming, 16th International Colloquium,
volume 372 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 108–122. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1989.
[Broda and Damas, 1999] S. Broda and L Damas. Counting a type’s principal inhabitants. In
J.-Y. Girard, editor, Typed Lambda Calculi and Applications, 4th International Conference,
TLCA’99, volume 1581 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 69–82. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1999. Fuller version: Fundamenta Informaticae 45 (2001), 33–51.
[Bruce et al., 1990] K. Bruce, A. A. Meyer, and J. C. Mitchell. The semantics of second-order
lambda calculus. In Huet [1990b], pages 273–284.
[Bruijn, 1970] N. G. de Bruijn. The mathematical language AUTOMATH. In M. Laudet, D. La-
combe, L. Nolin, and M. Sch¨utzenberger, editors, Symposium on Automatic Demonstration,
volume 125 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 29–61. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1970.
[Bruijn, 1972] N. G. de Bruijn. Lambda calculus notation with nameless dummies, a tool for
automatic formula manipulation. Indagationes Mathematicae, 34:381–392, 1972.
[Bruijn, 1980] N. G. de Bruijn. A survey of the project AUTOMATH. In Hindley and Seldin
[1980], pages 579–606.
[Bruijn, 1994] N. G. de Bruijn.
Reﬂections on Automath.
In Nederpelt et al. [1994], pages
201–228.
[Bunder and Dekkers, 2005] M. W. Bunder and W. Dekkers. Equivalences between pure type
systems and systems of illative combinatory logic.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
46:181–205, 2005.
[Bunder, 1983a] M. W. Bunder. A one axiom set theory based on higher order predicate calculus.
Archiv f¨ur Mathematische Logik, 23:99–107, 1983.
[Bunder, 1983b] M. W. Bunder. Predicate calculus of arbitrarily high ﬁnite order. Archiv f¨ur
Mathematische Logik, 23:1–10, 1983.
[Bunder, 1983c] M. W. Bunder.
Set theory in predicate calculus with equality.
Archiv f¨ur
Mathematische Logik, 23:109–113, 1983.
[Burali-Forti, 1894] C. Burali-Forti. Logica Matematica. Manuali Hoepli. U. Hoepli, Milano,
1894.
[Burge, 1978] W. H. Burge.
Recursive Programming Techniques.
Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Mass., U.S.A., 1978.
[Burstall, 1977] R. M. Burstall. Design considerations for a functional programming language.
In The Software Revolution; Proceedings of the Infotech State of the Art Conference, Copen-
hagen 1977, pages 45–57. Infotech and Pergamon Press, U.K., 1977.
[Cardelli and Wegner, 1985] L. Cardelli and P. Wegner. On understanding types, data abstrac-
tion and polymorphism. ACM Computing Surveys, 17:471–522, 1985.
[Cardone and Coppo, 1991] F. Cardone and M. Coppo. Type inference with recursive types.
Syntax and Semantics. Information and Computation, 92(1):48–80, 1991.
[Chauvin, 1979] A. Chauvin. Theory of objects and set theory: introduction and semantics.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 10:37–54, 1979. (English transl. of part of thesis Th´eorie
des Objets et Th´eorie des Ensembles, Universit´e de Clermont-Ferrand, France, 1974.).
[Cheatham Jr. et al., 1968] T. E. Cheatham Jr., P. Fischer, and P. Jorrand. On the basis of
ELF – An extensible language facility. In AFIPS Conference Proceedings, San Francisco,
California, pages 937–948. Thompson Book Co., Washington, D.C., 1968.
[Church and Rosser, 1936] A. Church and J. B. Rosser. Some properties of conversion. Trans-
actions of the American Mathematical Society, 39:472–482, 1936.
[Church, 1932] A. Church. A set of postulates for the foundation of logic. Annals of Mathemat-
ics, Series 2, 33:346–366, 1932.
[Church, 1933] A. Church. A set of postulates for the foundation of logic (second paper). Annals
of Mathematics, Series 2, 34:839–864, 1933.

796
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Church, 1935] A. Church. A proof of freedom from contradiction. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 21:275–281, 1935.
[Church, 1936a] A. Church. A note on the Entscheidungsproblem. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
1:40–41, 1936. See also correction in pp. 101–102.
[Church, 1936b] A. Church. An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory. American
Journal of Mathematics, 58:345–363, 1936.
[Church, 1937] A. Church. Combinatory logic as a semi-group. Bulletin of the American Math-
ematical Society, 43:333, 1937. Only an abstract.
[Church, 1940] A. Church. A formulation of the simple theory of types. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 5:56–68, 1940.
[Church, 1941] A. Church. The Calculi of Lambda Conversion. Princeton Univ. Press, Prince-
ton, New Jersey, U.S.A., 1941. Reprinted 1951 and 2000.
[Church, 1951a] A. Church. A formulation of the logic of sense and denotation. In P. Henle,
H. Kallen, and S. Langer, editors, Structure, Method and Meaning, Essays in Honor of Henry
M. Sheﬀer, pages 3–24. Liberal Arts Press, New York, 1951. See also abstract with same title,
in J. Symbolic Logic 11 (1946), p. 31.
[Church, 1951b] A. Church. The weak theory of implication. In A. Menne, A. Wilhelmy, and
H. Angstl, editors, Kontrolliertes Denken, Untersuchungen zum Logikkalk¨ul und zur Logik
der Einzelwissenschaften (Festgabe zum 60. Geburtstag von Prof. W. Britzelmayr), pages
22–37. Verlag Karl Alber, M¨unchen, 1951. (Sonderdruck).
[Church, 1956] A. Church. Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Princeton Univ. Press, Prince-
ton, New Jersey, U.S.A., 1956.
[Church, 1964] A. Church, 7 July 1964. Unpublished letter to Harald Dickson.
[Church, 1973] A. Church. Outline of a revised formulation of the logic of sense and denotation,
Part I. Noˆus, 7:24–33, 1973.
[Chwistek, 1922] L. Chwistek. ¨Uber die Antinomien der Prinzipen der Mathematik. Mathema-
tische Zeitschrift, 14:236–243, 1922.
[Constable and Egli, 1974] R. L. Constable and H. Egli. Computability on continuous higher
types and its role in the semantics of programming languages. Technical report TR-74-209,
Department of Computer Science, Cornell Univ. , Ithaca, New York, 1974.
[Constable and O’Donnell, 1978] R. L. Constable and M. J. O’Donnell. A Programming Logic.
Winthrop, Cambridge, 1978.
[Constable and others, 1986] R. L. Constable et al. Implementing Mathematics with the Nuprl
Proof Development System. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J., U.S.A., 1986.
[Constable, 1971] R. L. Constable. Constructive mathematics and automatic program writers.
In Proceedings of the IFIP Congress, pages 229–233, Ljubljana, 1971.
[Constable, 1980] R. L. Constable.
Programs and types.
In 21st IEEE Symposium on the
Foundations of Computer Science, pages 118–128, Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A., 1980.
IEEE Computer Society.
[Constable, 1982] R. L. Constable. Programs as proofs. Technical report TR-82-532, Dept. of
Computer Science, Cornell Univ. , Ithaca, New York, 1982.
[Constable, 1985] R. L. Constable. Constructive mathematics as a programming logic I: Some
principles of theory. Annals of Discrete Mathematics, 24:21–38, 1985.
[Conway, 1976] J. H. Conway.
On Numbers and Games, volume 6 of London Mathematical
Society Monographs. Academic Press, London, 1976.
[Coppo and Dezani, 1978] M. Coppo and M. Dezani. A new type assignment for λ-terms. Archiv
f¨ur Mathematische Logik, 19:139–156, 1978.
[Coppo and Ferrari, 1993] M. Coppo and A. Ferrari.
Type inference, abstract interpretation
and strictness analysis. Theoretical Computer Science, 121:113–143, 1993.
[Coppo et al., 1979] M. Coppo, M. Dezani, and P. Sall´e. Functional characterization of some se-
mantic equalities inside λ-calculus. In H. Maurer, editor, Automata, Languages and Program-
ming, Sixth Colloquium, volume 71 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 133–146.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1979.
[Coppo et al., 1980] M. Coppo, M. Dezani, and B. Venneri.
Principal type-schemes and λ-
calculus semantics. In Hindley and Seldin [1980], pages 535–560.
[Coppo et al., 1981] M. Coppo, M. Dezani, and B. Venneri. Functional characters of solvable
terms. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 27:45–58, 1981.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
797
[Coppo et al., 1983] M. Coppo, M. Dezani, F. Honsell, and G. Longo. Applicative information
systems. In G. Ausiello and M. Protasi, editors, Colloquium on Trees and Algebra in Pro-
gramming, volume 159 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 33–64. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1983.
[Coppo et al., 1984] M. Coppo, M. Dezani, F. Honsell, and G. Longo. Extended type structures
and ﬁlter lambda models. In G. Lolli, G. Longo, and A. Marcja, editors, Logic Colloquium
’82, pages 241–262. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1984.
[Coppo et al., 1987] M. Coppo, M. Dezani, and M. Zacchi. Type theories, normal forms and
D∞-lambda models. Information and Computation, 72:85–116, 1987.
[Coppo, 1985] M. Coppo. A completeness theorem for recursively deﬁned types. In W. Brauer,
editor, Automata, Languages and Programming, 12th International Colloquium, volume 194
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 120–129, Berlin, 1985. Springer-Verlag.
[Coquand and Dybjer, 1994] T. Coquand and P. Dybjer. Inductive deﬁnitions and type theory:
an introduction (preliminary version). In P. S. Thiagarajan, editor, Foundations of Software
Technology and Theoretical Computer Science, 14th Conference, Madras, India, December
15-17, 1994, Proceedings, pages 60–76, 1994.
[Coquand and Huet, 1985] T. Coquand and G. Huet. Constructions: a higher order proof system
for mechanizing mathematics. In B. Buchberger, editor, EUROCAL’85, Proceedings Volume
1, volume 203 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 151–184, Berlin, 1985. Springer-
Verlag.
[Coquand and Huet, 1988] T. Coquand and G. Huet. The calculus of constructions. Information
and Computation, 76:95–120, 1988.
[Coquand, 1985] T. Coquand. Une th´eorie des constructions. Th`ese de Troisi`eme Cycle, Uni-
versit´e Paris VII, 1985.
[Coquand, 1986] T. Coquand. An analysis of Girard’s paradox. In Proceedings First Annual
IEEE Symposium on Logic In Computer Science, pages 227–236. IEEE Computer Society,
Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A., 1986.
[Coquand, 1990] T. Coquand. Metamathematical investigations of a calculus of constructions.
In P. Odifreddi, editor, Logic and Computer Science, volume 31 of APIC Studies in Data
Processing, pages 91–122. Academic Press, London, 1990.
[Coquand, 1992] T. Coquand. An intuitionistic proof of Tychonoﬀ’s theorem. Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, 57:28–32, 1992.
[Coquand, 1995] T. Coquand.
A semantics of evidence for classical arithmetic.
Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 60(1):325–337, 1995.
[Cousineau et al., 1987] G. Cousineau, P.-L. Curien, and M. Mauny. The categorical abstract
machine. Science of Computer Programming, 8:173–202, 1987.
[Craig, 1974] W. Craig. Logic in an Algebraic Form, Three Languages and Theories. North-
Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1974.
[Crossley, 1975] J. N. Crossley. Reminiscences of Logicians. In J. Crossley, editor, Algebra and
Logic, volume 450 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 1–62. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1975.
[Curien et al., 1996] P.-L Curien, T. Hardin, and J.-J. L´evy. Conﬂuence properties of weak and
strong calculi of explicit substitutions. Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery,
43:362–397, 1996.
[Curien, 1979] P.-L. Curien. Algorithmes sequentiels sur structures de donnees concretes. In
B. Robinet, editor, Lambda Calcul et S´emantique Formelle des Langages de Programmation.
Actes de la Sixi`eme Ecole de Printemps d’Informatique Th´eorique, pages 157–182. LITP et
Ecole Nationale Sup´erieure de Techniques Avanc´ees, 1979.
[Curien, 1985] P.-L. Curien. Typed categorical combinatory logic. In H. Ehrig, C. Floyd, M. Ni-
vat, and J. Thatcher, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Software Development, Proceed-
ings 1985, Volume 1, CAAP’85, volume 185 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
157–172. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1985.
[Curien, 1986] P.-L. Curien. Categorical Combinators, Sequential Algorithms and Functional
Programming.
Pitman (London) and Wiley (New York), 1986.
(2nd edn. 1993 publ. by
Birkh¨auser, U.S.A.).
[Curien, 1994] P.-L. Curien.
On the symmetry of sequentiality.
In S. Brookes, M. Main,
A. Melton, M. Mislove, and D. Schmidt, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Program-
ming Semantics, 9th International Conference, volume 802 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 29–71. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994.

798
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Curry and Feys, 1958] H. B. Curry and R. Feys. Combinatory Logic, Volume I. North-Holland
Co., Amsterdam, 1958. (3rd edn. 1974).
[Curry et al., 1972] H. B. Curry, J. R. Hindley, and J. P. Seldin. Combinatory Logic, Volume
II. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1972.
[Curry, 1927] H. B. Curry.
Sch¨onﬁnkel, M. ¨Uber die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik,
1927. Note dated Nov. 28th. 1927, 3 pages, ﬁled as T271128A in Curry archive, Pennsylvania
State Univ., U.S.A. Reproduced on website of Southern Alberta Digital Library, http://
www.sadl.uleth.ca.
[Curry, 1930] H. B. Curry.
Grundlagen der kombinatorischen Logik.
American Journal of
Mathematics, 52:509–536, 789–834, 1930.
[Curry, 1932] H. B. Curry. Some additions to the theory of combinators. American Journal of
Mathematics, 54:551–558, 1932.
[Curry, 1934a] H. B. Curry. Functionality in combinatory logic. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 20:584–590, 1934.
[Curry, 1934b] H. B. Curry. Some properties of equality and implication in combinatory logic.
Annals of Mathematics, Series 2, 35:849–860, 1934.
[Curry, 1936] H. B. Curry. First properties of functionality in combinatory logic. Tˆohoku Math-
ematical Journal, 41:371–401, 1936.
[Curry, 1937] H. B. Curry. Review of Church’s lecture notes Mathematical Logic given at Prince-
ton Univ. in 1936. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 2:39–40, 1937.
[Curry, 1942a] H. B. Curry. The combinatory foundations of mathematical logic. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 7:49–64, 1942.
[Curry, 1942b] H. B. Curry. The inconsistency of certain formal logics. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 7:115–117, 1942.
[Curry, 1948] H. B. Curry.
The logical structure of grammar, 1948.
Unﬁnished manuscript
mimeographed at Univ. Chicago and privately distributed, from a lecture given in Nov. 1948.
[Curry, 1949] H. B. Curry. A simpliﬁcation of the theory of combinators. Synthese, 7:391–399,
1949.
[Curry, 1951] H. B. Curry. Outlines of a Formalist Philosophy of Mathematics. North-Holland
Co., Amsterdam, 1951.
[Curry, 1954] H. B. Curry. The logic of program composition. In Applications Scientiﬁques de la
Logique Math´ematique, Actes du Deuxieme Colloque International de Logique Math´ematique,
Paris 1952, pages 97–102. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1954.
[Curry, 1961] H. B. Curry.
Some logical aspects of grammatical structure.
In R. Jakobson,
editor, Structure of Language and its Mathematical Aspects, number 12 in Proceedings of
Symposia in Applied Mathematics, pages 56–68. American Mathematical Society, Providence,
R.I., U.S.A., 1961.
[Curry, 1963] H. B. Curry. Foundations of Mathematical Logic. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1963.
Reprinted 1977 by Dover, Inc., New York.
[Curry, 1964] H. B. Curry. The elimination of variables by regular combinators. In M. Bunge,
editor, The Critical Approach to Science and Philosophy, pages 127–143. Free Press, U.S.A.,
1964.
[Curry, 1966] H. B. Curry. Technique for evaluating principal functional character, 1966. Note
dated March 17th. 1966, 5 pages, ﬁled as T660317A in Curry archive, Pennsylvania State
Univ. , U.S.A.
[Curry, 1969a] H. B. Curry. Modiﬁed basic functionality in combinatory logic. Dialectica, 23:83–
92, 1969.
[Curry, 1969b] H. B. Curry. The undecidability of λK-conversion. In J. Bulloﬀ, T. Holyoke,
and S. Hahn, editors, Foundations of Mathematics, Symposium Papers Commemorating the
Sixtieth Birthday of Kurt G¨odel, pages 10–14. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1969.
[Curry, 1980] H. B. Curry. Some philosophical aspects of combinatory logic. In J. Barwise, H. J.
Keisler, and K. Kunen, editors, The Kleene Symposium, pages 85–101. North-Holland Co.,
Amsterdam, 1980.
[Daalen, 1973] D. T. van Daalen. A description of Automath and some aspects of its language
theory. In P. Braﬀort, editor, Proceedings of the Symposium APLASM, volume I, Orsay, 1973.
Also in [Nederpelt et al., 1994], Item A.3 pp. 101–126.
[Daalen, 1980] D. T. van Daalen. The Language Theory of AUTOMATH. PhD thesis, Tech-
nische Hogeschool Eindhoven, Netherlands, 1980. Main parts also in [Nederpelt et al., 1994],
Items A.6 (pp.163–200), B.6 (pp.303–312), C.5 (pp.493–654).

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
799
[Damas and Milner, 1982] L. Damas and R. Milner. Principal type-schemes for functional pro-
gramming languages. In Ninth Annual A.C.M. Symposium on the Principles of Programming
Languages (POPL), pages 207–212. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 1982.
[Damas, 1984] L. Damas. Type Assignment in Programming Languages. PhD thesis, Computer
Science Dept., Univ. Edinburgh, U.K., 1984.
[Danos and Regnier, 1989] V. Danos and L. Regnier. The structure of multiplicatives. Archive
for Mathematical Logic, 28:181–203, 1989.
[Davis, 1982] M. Davis. Why G¨odel didn’t have Church’s Thesis. Information and Control,
54:3–24, 1982. Journal now called Information and Computation.
[Dekkers et al., 1998] W. Dekkers, M. W. Bunder, and H. Barendregt.
Completeness of the
propositions-as-types interpretation of intuitionistic logic into illative combinatory logic. Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic, 63:869–890, 1998.
[Dezani and Ermine, 1982] M. Dezani and F. Ermine. Maximal monoids of normal forms. Fun-
damenta Informaticae, 2:130–141, 1982.
[Dezani et al., 1993] M. Dezani, S. Ronchi della Rocca, and M. Venturini Zilli, editors. A Col-
lection of Contributions in Honour of Corrado B¨ohm, 1993. Theoretical Computer Science
special issue Vol. 121.
[Dezani, 1975] M. Dezani. A type theory for λ-β-normal forms. Proceedings of the Symposium
Informatica 75, Bled, Slovenia, 1975.
[Dezani, 1976] M. Dezani. Characterization of normal forms possessing inverse in the λ-β-η-
calculus. Theoretical Computer Science, 2:323–337, 1976.
[Diller, 1968] J. Diller. Zur Berechenbarkeit primitiv-rekursiver Funktionale endlicher Typen.
In H. A. Schmidt, editor, Contributions to Mathematical Logic, pages 109–120. North-Holland
Co., Amsterdam, 1968. Proc. conf. Hannover 1966.
[Dragalin, 1968] A. Dragalin.
The computation of primitive recursive terms of ﬁnite type,
and primitive recusive realization. Zapiski Naucnyh Seminarov Leningradskogo Otdeleniya
Matematicheskogo Instituta imeni V.A. Steklova, Akademii Nauk S.S.S.R. (L.O.M.I.), 8:32–
45, 1968. In Russian.
[Drakengren, 1996] T. Drakengren. Uniqueness of Scott’s reﬂexive domain in Pω. Theoretical
Computer Science, 155:267–276, 1996.
[Droste and G¨obel, 1993] M. Droste and R. G¨obel. Universal domains and the amalgamation
property. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 3:137–159, 1993.
[Dybyg, 1996] K. Dybyg. The Scheme Programming Language. Prentice-Hall, U.S.A., 1996.
[Egli and Constable, 1976] H. Egli and R. Constable. Computability concepts for programming
language semantics. Theoretical Computer Science, 2:133–145, 1976.
[Eilenberg and Kelly, 1966] S. Eilenberg and G. M. Kelly. Closed categories. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Categorical Algebra, La Jolla, 1965, pages 412–562. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1966.
[Enderton, 1995] H. B. Enderton. In memoriam: Alonzo Church 1903–1995. Bulletin of Symbolic
Logic, 1:486–488, 1995.
[Enderton, 1998] H. B. Enderton. Alonzo Church and the Reviews. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic,
4:172–181, 1998.
[Engeler, 1981] E. Engeler. Algebras and combinators. Algebra Universalis, 13:389–392, 1981.
[Feferman, 1975a] S. Feferman. A language and axioms for explicit mathematics. In J. Cross-
ley, editor, Algebra and Logic, volume 450 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 87–139.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[Feferman, 1975b] S. Feferman.
Non-extensional type-free theories of partial operations and
classiﬁcations, I. In J. Diller and G. M¨uller, editors, Proof Theory Symposion, Kiel 1974,
volume 500 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 73–118. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[Feferman, 1977] S. Feferman. Categorical foundations and foundations of category theory. In
R. Butts and J. Hintikka, editors, Logic, Foundations of Mathematics and Computability
Theory, pages 149–169. D. Reidel Co., Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1977.
[Feferman, 1984] S. Feferman. Towards useful type-free theories, I. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
49:75–111, 1984. No Part II has been published.
[Felleisen et al., 1987] M. Felleisen, D. Friedman, E. Kohlbecker, and B. Duba.
A syntactic
theory of sequential control. Theoretical Computer Science, 52:205–237, 1987.
[Felscher, 1986] W. Felscher. Dialogues as a foundation for intuitionistic logic. In D. Gabbay
and F. Guenthner, editors, Handbook of Philosophical Logic, volume 3, pages 341–372. D.
Reidel Co., Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1986.

800
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Feys, 1946a] R. Feys. La technique de la logique combinatoire. Revue Philosophique de Louvain,
44:74–103, 237–270, 1946.
[Feys, 1946b] R. Feys. Les m´ethodes r´ecentes de d´eduction naturelle. Revue Philosophique de
Louvain, 44:370–400, 1946.
[Fitch, 1936] F. B. Fitch. A system of formal logic without an analogue to the Curry W operator.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1:92–100, 1936.
[Fitch, 1952] F. B. Fitch. Symbolic Logic, an Introduction. The Ronald Press, New York, 1952.
[Fitch, 1958] F. B. Fitch. Representation of sequential circuits in combinatory logic. Philosophy
of Science, 25:263–279, 1958. Talk given 1957.
[Fitch, 1963] F. B. Fitch. The system CΔ of combinatory logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
28:87–97, 1963.
[Fitch, 1974] F. B. Fitch.
Elements of Combinatory Logic.
Yale Univ. Press, New Haven,
U.S.A., 1974.
[Forster, 1995] T. L. Forster, editor. Set Theory with a Universal Set. Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1995. 1st edn. was 1992.
[Fourman and Grayson, 1982] M. Fourman and R. Grayson. Formal spaces. In A. S. Troelstra
and D. van Dalen, editors, The L. E. J. Brouwer Centenary Symposium, pages 107–122.
North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1982.
[Fox, 1966] L. Fox, editor. Advances in Programming and Non-numerical Computation. Perg-
amon Press, Oxford, 1966. Proceedings of a 1963 summer school.
[Frege, 1879] G. Frege. Begriﬀsschrift. Verlag Louis Nebert, Halle, 1879. Reprinted in Begriﬀ-
sschrift und Andere Aufs¨atze, ed. by I. Angelelli, publ. 1964 by Georg Olms, Hildesheim,
Germany. Engl. transl: Begriﬀschrift, in [Heijenoort, 1967], pp. 1–82.
[Frege, 1891] G. Frege. Funktion und Begriﬀ. Vortrag Gehalten in der Sitzung vom 9. Januar
1891 der Jenaischen Gesellschaft f¨ur Medizin und Naturwissenschaft, 1891. English transl:
Function and Concept in Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, ed.
P. Geach and M. Black, publ. Blackwell, Oxford, England, 1960 (2nd edn.), pp. 21–41. Same
transl. also in Gottlob Frege Collected Papers on Mathematics, Logic and Philosophy, ed. B.
McGuinness, Blackwell 1984, pp. 137–156.
[Frege, 1893] G. Frege. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik. Verlag Hermann Pohle, Jena, 1893. Two
vols. Reprinted as one vol. in 1962 by Georg Olms, Hildesheim, Germany, and in 1966 as
No. 32 in series Olms Paperbacks. Partial English transl. in The Basic Laws of Arithmetic,
Exposition of the System, ed. M. Furth, Univ. California Press, Berkeley, U.S.A., 1964.
[Freyd et al., 1990] P. Freyd, P. Mulry, G. Rosolini, and D. Scott. Extensional PERs. In Pro-
ceedings Fifth Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic In Computer Science, pages 346–354. IEEE
Computer Society, Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A., 1990.
[Freyd, 1990] P. J. Freyd.
Recursive types reduced to inductive types.
In Proceedings Fifth
Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic In Computer Science, pages 498–507. IEEE Computer
Society, Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A., 1990.
[Freyd, 1991] P. J. Freyd. Algebraically complete categories. In A. Carboni, M. Pedicchio, and
G. Rosolini, editors, Proceedings of the 1990 Como Category Theory Conference, volume 1488
of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 131–156. Springer-Verlag, 1991.
[Freyd, 1992] P. J. Freyd. Remarks on algebraically compact categories. In M. Fourman, P. John-
stone, and A. Pitts, editors, Applications of Categories in Computer Science, volume 177 of
London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes Series, pages 95–106. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992.
[Friedberg and Rogers, 1959] R. M. Friedberg and H. Rogers. Reducibilities and completeness
for sets of integers. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik,
5:117–125, 1959.
[Friedman, 1975] H. Friedman. Equality between functionals. In R. Parikh, editor, Logic Col-
loquium, Symposium on Logic held at Boston, 1972–73, volume 453 of Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, pages 22–37. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[Friedman, 1978] H. Friedman. Classically and intuitionistically provably recursive functions.
In G. M¨uller and D. Scott, editors, Higher Set Theory, volume 669 of Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, pages 21–27. Springer-Verlag, 1978.
[Gallier, 1990] J. H. Gallier. On Girard’s “Candidats de reductibilit´e”. In P. Odifreddi, editor,
Logic and Computer Science, volume 31 of APIC Studies in Data Processing, pages 123–203.
Academic Press, London, 1990.
[Gandy, 1977] R. O. Gandy. The simple theory of types. In R. Gandy and M. Hyland, editors,
Logic Colloquium ’76, pages 173–181. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1977.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
801
[Gandy, 1988] R. O. Gandy. The conﬂuence of ideas in 1936. In R. Herken, editor, The Universal
Turing Machine: A Half-Century Survey, pages 51–102. Oxford Univ. Press, England, 1988.
(2nd edn. 1995, publ. Springer-Verlag).
[Gandy, 1993] R. O. Gandy. Dialogues, Blass games, sequentiality for objects of ﬁnite type.
Unpublished manuscript, 1993.
[Gentzen, 1935] G. Gentzen. Untersuchungen ¨uber das logische Schliessen. Mathematische Zeit-
schrift, 39:176–210, 405–431, 1935. English transl: Investigations into logical deduction, in
The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen, ed. by M. Szabo, North-Holland Co., Amsterdam,
1969.
[Giannini and Longo, 1984] P. Giannini and G. Longo. Eﬀectively given domains and lambda
calculus semantics. Information and Control, 62:36–63, 1984. Journal now Information and
Computation.
[Gierz et al., 1980] G. Gierz, K. Hofmann, K. Keimel, J. Lawson, M. Mislove, and D. Scott. A
Compendium of Continuous Lattices. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1980.
[Gilmore, 1963] P. C. Gilmore. An abstract computer with a LISP-like machine language with-
out a label operator. In P. Braﬀort and D. Hirschberg, editors, Computer Programming and
Formal Systems, pages 71–86. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1963.
[Girard et al., 1989] J.-Y. Girard, Y. Lafont, and P. Taylor. Proofs and Types. Cambridge Univ.
Press, England, 1989.
[Girard, 1971] J.-Y. Girard.
Une extension de l’interpr´etation de G¨odel `a l’analyse, et son
application `a l’´elimination des coupures dans l’analyse et la th´eorie des types. In J. E. Fenstad,
editor, Proceedings of the Second Scandinavian Logic Symposium, pages 63–92. North-Holland
Co., Amsterdam, 1971.
[Girard, 1972] J.-Y. Girard. Interpr´etation fonctionnelle et ´elimination des coupures de l’arith-
m´etique d’ordre sup´erieur. Th`ese de Doctorat d’´Etat, Univ. Paris VII, Place Jussieu, Paris,
1972.
[Girard, 1981] J.-Y. Girard. Π1
2-logic, part I: dilators. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 21:75–219,
1981.
[Girard, 1986] J.-Y. Girard. The system F of variable types, ﬁfteen years later.
Theoretical
Computer Science, 45:159–192, 1986.
[Girard, 1987a] J.-Y. Girard. Linear logic. Theoretical Computer Science, 50:1–102, 1987.
[Girard, 1987b] J.-Y. Girard. Multiplicatives. Rendiconti del Seminario Matematico dell’ Univ-
ersit`a e del Politecnico di Torino, Fascicolo speciale: “Logic and Computer Science: New
Trends and Applications”:11–34, 1987. Edited by G. Lolli.
[Girard, 1988] J.-Y. Girard. Normal functors, power series and λ-calculus. Annals of Mathe-
matical Logic, 37:129–177, 1988.
[Girard, 1989a] J.-Y. Girard. Geometry of interaction I: interpretation of system F. In R. Ferro,
C. Bonotto, S. Valentini, and A. Zanardo, editors, Logic Colloquium ’88, pages 221–260.
North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1989.
[Girard, 1989b] J.-Y. Girard. Towards a geometry of interaction. In J. W. Gray and A. Scedrov,
editors, Categories in Computer Science and Logic, volume 92 of Contemporary Mathematics,
pages 69–108. American Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode Island, 1989.
[Girard, 1998] J.-Y. Girard. On the meaning of logical rules I: syntax vs. semantics. In U. Berger
and H. Schwichtenberg, editors, Computational Logic, pages 215–272. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1998. Proc. of meeting 1997.
[Girard, 2000] J.-Y. Girard. On the meaning of logical rules II: multiplicative/additive case. In
F. L. Bauer and R. Steinbr¨uggen, editors, Foundations of Secure Computation. IOS Press,
Amsterdam, 2000. Preprint 1998, Inst. de Math. de Luminy, Marseilles.
[Girard, 2001] J.-Y. Girard.
Locus solum.
Mathematical Structures in Computer Science,
11:299–506, 2001.
[Givant and Andr´eka, 2002] S. Givant and H. Andr´eka. Groups and algebras of binary relations.
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 8:38–64, 2002.
[G¨odel, 1958] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber eine bisher noch nicht ben¨utzte Erweiterung des ﬁniten Stand-
punktes. Dialectica, 12:280–287, 1958. Engl. transl: On a hitherto unexploited extension of
the ﬁnitary standpoint, in Journal of Philosophical Logic 9 (1980) pp. 133–142. Two other
Engl. transls. with notes: in [G¨odel, 1990, pp. 217–251, 271–280].
[G¨odel, 1990] K. G¨odel. Collected Works, Vol. 2: Publications 1938–1974. Oxford Univ. Press,
New York and Oxford, 1990. (Eds. S. Feferman et al.).

802
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[G¨odel, 1995] K. G¨odel. Collected Works, Vol. 3: Unpublished Essays and Lectures. Oxford
Univ. Press, New York and Oxford, 1995. (Eds. S. Feferman et al.).
[Gonthier et al., 1992] G. Gonthier, M. Abadi, and J.-J. Levy. The geometry of optimal lambda
reduction.
In Nineteenth Annual A.C.M. Symposium on the Principles of Programming
Languages (POPL), pages 15–26, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1992. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York.
[Goodman, 1970] N. D. Goodman.
A theory of constructions equivalent to arithmetic.
In
A. Kino, J. Myhill, and R. Vesley, editors, Intuitionism and Proof Theory, pages 101–120.
North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1970.
[Gordon et al., 1979] M. Gordon, R. Milner, and C. Wadsworth. Edinburgh LCF. A Mechanical
Logic of Computation, volume 78 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1979.
[Gordon, 2000] M. Gordon. From LCF to HOL: a short history. In G. Plotkin, C. Stirling,
and M. Tofte, editors, Proof, Language and Interaction: Essays in Honour of Robin Milner.
M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A., 2000.
[Grattan-Guinness, 2000] I. Grattan-Guinness. The Search for Mathematical Roots, 1870–1940.
Princeton Univ. Press, U.S.A., 2000.
[Griﬃn, 1990] T. Griﬃn.
The formulae-as-types notion of control.
In Seventeenth Annual
A.C.M. Symposium on the Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), pages 47–58.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 1990.
[Gunter and Jung, 1990] C. Gunter and A. Jung. Coherence and consistency in domain. Journal
of Pure and Applied Algebra, 63:49–66, 1990.
[Gunter and Mitchell, 1994] C. Gunter and J. C. Mitchell. Theoretical Aspects of Object-Orient-
ed Programming: Types, Semantics and Language Design. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
U.S.A., 1994.
[Gunter, 1987] C. Gunter. Universal proﬁnite domains. Information and Computation, 72:1–30,
1987.
[Halmos, 1962] P. Halmos. Algebraic Logic. Chelsea Publishing Co., New York, 1962.
[Hanatani, 1966] Y. Hanatani. Calculabilit´e des fonctionnels recursives primitives de type ﬁni
sur les nombres naturels. Annals of the Japan Association for the Philosophy of Science,
3:19–30, 1966. (Revised version: Calculability of the primitive recursive functionals of ﬁnite
type over the natural numbers, in Proof Theory Symposion, Kiel 1974, ed. by J. Diller and
G. M¨uller, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 500, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975, pp. 152–163).
[Hancock and Martin-L¨of, 1975] P. Hancock and P. Martin-L¨of. Syntax and semantics of the
language of primitive recursive functions. Technical Report 3, Univ. Stockholm, 1975.
[Hankin, 1994] C. Hankin. Lambda Calculi. Clarendon Press, Oxford, England, 1994.
[Harper et al., 1993] R. Harper, F. Honsell, and G. D. Plotkin. A framework for deﬁning logics.
Journal of the ACM, 40:143–184, 1993.
[Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort. From Frege to G¨odel: A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic 1879–1931. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A., 1967.
[Henkin, 1950] L. Henkin.
Completeness in the theory of types.
Journal of Symbolic Logic,
15:81–91, 1950.
[Heyting, 1956] A. Heyting. Intuitionism, an Introduction. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam,
1956. (3rd edn. 1973).
[Heyting, 1958] A. Heyting. Intuitionism in mathematics. In R. Klibansky, editor, Philosophy
in the Mid-century, pages 101–115. La Nuova Italia, Firenze, 1958.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der Theoretischen
Logik. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1928. (English transl. of 2nd (1938) edn., with some correc-
tions: Principles of Mathematical Logic, Chelsea Publ. Co., New York 1950).
[Hinata, 1967] S. Hinata. Calculability of primitive recursive functionals of ﬁnite type. Science
Reports of the Tokyo Kyoiku Daigaku, Section A, 9(226):42–59, 1967.
[Hindley and Longo, 1980] J. R. Hindley and G. Longo. Lambda-calculus models and exten-
sionality. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 26:289–310,
1980.
[Hindley and Seldin, 1980] J. R. Hindley and J. P. Seldin, editors. To H. B. Curry, Essays on
Combinatory Logic, Lambda Calculus and Formalism. Academic Press, London, 1980.
[Hindley and Seldin, 1986] J. R. Hindley and J. P. Seldin. Introduction to Combinators and
λ-calculus. Cambridge Univ. Press, England, 1986.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
803
[Hindley et al., 1972] J. R. Hindley, B. Lercher, and J. P. Seldin. Introduction to Combinatory
Logic. Cambridge Univ. Press, England, 1972.
[Hindley, 1969a] J. R. Hindley. An abstract form of the Church-Rosser theorem, I. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 34:545–560, 1969. From author’s PhD thesis, Univ. Newcastle upon Tyne,
England, 1964.
[Hindley, 1969b] J. R. Hindley. The principal type-scheme of an object in combinatory logic.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 146:29–60, 1969.
[Hindley, 1978a] J. R. Hindley. Reductions of residuals are ﬁnite. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 240:345–361, 1978.
[Hindley, 1978b] J. R. Hindley. Standard and normal reductions. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 241:253–271, 1978.
[Hindley, 1982] J. R. Hindley. The simple semantics for Coppo-Dezani-Sall´e types. In M. Dezani
and U. Montanari, editors, International Symposium on Programming, Proceedings 1982,
volume 137, pages 212–226. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982.
[Hindley, 1997] J. R. Hindley. Basic Simple Type Theory. Cambridge Univ. Press, England,
1997.
[Hindley, 2008] J. R. Hindley. M. h. newman’s typability algorithm for lambda-calculus. Journal
of Logic and Computation, 2008.
[Hodges, 1983] A. Hodges. Alan Turing: The Enigma. Burnett Books, London, 1983. Also
published 1988 by Vintage, London.
[Holmes, 1991] M. R. Holmes. Systems of combinatory logic related to Quine’s ’New Founda-
tions’. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 53:103–133, 1991.
[Holmes, 1995] M. R. Holmes.
Untyped λ-calculus with relative typing.
In M. Dezani and
G. Plotkin, editors, Typed Lambda Calculi and Applications, Second International Confer-
ence, TLCA ’95, number 902 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 235–248. Springer-
Verlag, 1995.
[Howard, 1970] W. A. Howard. Assignment of ordinals to terms for primitive recursive func-
tionals of ﬁnite type. In A. Kino, J. Myhill, and R. Vesley, editors, Intuitionism and Proof
Theory, pages 443–458. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1970. Proc. conf. at Buﬀalo, N.Y.,
1968.
[Howard, 1980] W. A. Howard. The formulæ-as-types notion of construction. In Hindley and
Seldin [1980], pages 479–490. Manuscript circulated 1969.
[Huet, 1980] G. Huet. Conﬂuent reductions. Journal of the Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, 27:797–821, 1980.
[Huet, 1990a] G. Huet. Cartesian closed categories and lambda-calculus. In Huet [1990b], pages
7–23.
[Huet, 1990b] G. Huet, editor. Logical Foundations of Functional Programming. Univ. Texas
at Austin Year of Programming. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., U.S.A., 1990.
[Huet, 1993] G. Huet.
An analysis of B¨ohm’s theorem.
Theoretical Computer Science, 121
(B¨ohm Volume):154–167, 1993.
[Husserl, 1922] E. Husserl.
Logische Untersuchungen.
Max Niemeyer, Halle, Germany, 3rd
edition, 1922. (1st edn. was 1900–1901).
[Hyland and Ong, 2000] J. M. E. Hyland and C.-H. L. Ong.
On full abstraction for PCF:
I. Models, observables and the full abstraction problem, II. Dialogue games and innocent
strategies, III. A fully abstract and universal game model. Information and Computation,
163:285–408, 2000.
[Hyland, 1975] J. M. E. Hyland. A survey of some useful partial order relations on terms of the
lambda calculus. In B¨ohm [1975], pages 83–95.
[Hyland, 1976] J. M. E. Hyland. A syntactic characterization of the equality in some models
for the lambda calculus. Journal of the London Mathematical Society, Series 2, 12:361–370,
1976.
[Hyland, 1982] J. M. E. Hyland. The eﬀective topos. In A. S. Troelstra and D. van Dalen, editors,
The L.E.J. Brouwer Centenary Symposium, pages 165–216. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam,
1982.
[Hyland, 1988] J. M. E. Hyland. A small complete category. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic,
40:135–165, 1988.
[Hyland, 1991] J. M. E. Hyland. First steps in synthetic domain theory. In A. Carboni, editor,
Conference on Category Theory, number 1488 in Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 131–
156. Springer-Verlag, 1991.

804
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Jacobs, 1989] B. Jacobs.
The inconsistency of higher order extensions of Martin-L¨of’s type
theory. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 18(4):399–422, 1989.
[Johnstone et al., 1978] P. Johnstone, R. Par´e, R. Rosebrugh, S. Schumacher, R. Wood, and
G. Wraith.
Indexed Categories and their Applications.
Number 661 in Lecture Notes in
Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, 1978.
[Johnstone, 1982] P. Johnstone. Stone Spaces. Number 3 in Cambridge Studies in Advanced
Mathematics. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1982.
[Joyal, 1977] A. Joyal. Remarques sur la th´eorie des jeux a deux personnes. Gazette des Sciences
Math´ematiques du Quebec, 1(4), 1977.
[Jung (editor), 1996] A. Jung (editor). Domains and denotational semantics: history, accom-
plishments and open problems. Bulletin of the European Association for Theoretical Com-
puter Science, 59:227–256, 1996.
[Kahn and Plotkin, 1978] G. Kahn and G. D. Plotkin. Domaines concr`ets. Rapport 336, IRIA
Laboria, 1978. English transl. in Theoretical Computer Science 121 (B¨ohm Volume 1993),
pp. 187–277.
[Kahn, 1988] G. Kahn. Natural semantics. In K. Fuchi and M. Nivat, editors, Programming of
Future Generation Computers, pages 237–258. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1988.
[Kalman, 1983] J. Kalman. Condensed detachment as a rule of inference. Studia Logica, 42:443–
451, 1983.
[Kamareddine and Nederpelt, 1993] F. Kamareddine and R. P. Nederpelt. On stepwise explicit
substitutions. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science, 4:197–240, 1993.
[Kamareddine and Rios, 1997] F. Kamareddine and A. Rios. Extending a λ-calculus with ex-
plicit substitution which preserves strong normalisation into a conﬂuent calculus on open
terms. Journal of Functional Programming, 7:395–420, 1997.
[Kamareddine and Rios, 2000] F. Kamareddine and A. Rios. Relating the lambda-sigma and
lambda-s styles of explicit substitutions.
Journal of Logic and Computation, 10:349–380,
2000.
[Kamareddine et al., 2002] F. Kamareddine, T. Laan, and R. P. Nederpelt. Types in logic and
mathematics before 1940. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 8:185–245, 2002.
[Kanda, 1979] A. Kanda. Fully eﬀective solutions of recursive domain equations. In J. Be¸cvar,
editor, Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, volume 74 of Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1979.
[Kathail, 1990] V. Kathail. Optimal interpreters for lambda-calculus based functional languages.
PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1990.
[Kearns, 1973] J. T. Kearns. The completeness of combinatory logic with discriminators. Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 14:323–330, 1973.
[Kelly and Mac Lane, 1972] G. M. Kelly and S. Mac Lane.
Coherence in closed categories.
Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, 1:97–140, 1972.
[Kleene and Rosser, 1935] S. C. Kleene and J. B. Rosser. The inconsistency of certain formal
logics. Annals of Mathematics, Series 2, 36:630–636, 1935.
[Kleene, 1936] S. C. Kleene.
λ-deﬁnability and recursiveness.
Duke Mathematical Journal,
2:340–353, 1936.
[Kleene, 1945] S. C. Kleene. On the interpretation of intuitionistic number theory. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 10:109–124, 1945.
[Kleene, 1952] S. C. Kleene. Introduction to Metamathematics. Van Nostrand, New York, 1952.
[Kleene, 1978] S. C. Kleene. Recursive functionals and quantiﬁers of ﬁnite types revisited I. In
J. E. Fenstad, R. O. Gandy, and G. E. Sacks, editors, Generalized Recursion Theory II, pages
185–222. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1978.
[Kleene, 1980] S. C. Kleene. Recursive functionals and quantiﬁers of ﬁnite types revisited II.
In J. Barwise, H. J. Keisler, and K. Kunen, editors, The Kleene Symposium, pages 1–29.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1980.
[Kleene, 1981] S. C. Kleene.
Origins of recursive function theory.
Annals of the History of
Computing, 3:52–67, 1981. Preliminary version in: 20th IEEE Symposium on the Foundations
of Computer Science, publ. by IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A.,
1979, pp. 371–382.
[Kleene, 1982] S. C. Kleene. Recursive functionals and quantiﬁers of ﬁnite types revisited III. In
G. Metakides, editor, Patras Logic Symposium, pages 1–40. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam,
1982.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
805
[Kleene, 1985] S. C. Kleene. Unimonotone functions of ﬁnite types (Recursive functionals and
quantiﬁers of ﬁnite types revisited IV). In A. Nerode and R. A. Shore, editors, Recursion
Theory, pages 119–138. American Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode Island, 1985.
[Klement, 2003] K. C. Klement. Russell’s 1903–1905 anticipation of the lambda calculus. History
and Philosophy of Logic, 24:15–37, 2003.
[Kline, 1951] G. L. Kline. Review of: Yanovskaya, S. A.: Osnovaniya matematiki i matematich-
eskaya logika (Foundations of mathematics and mathematical logic).
Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 16:46–48, 1951. Article reviewed: pp. 9–50 of Matematika v SSSR za Tridkat let 1917–
1947 (Mathematics in the USSR in the 30 Years 1917–1947), in Russian, publ. OGIZ, Moscow,
1948.
[Klop et al., 1993] J. W. Klop, V. van Oostrom, and F. van Raamsdonk. Combinatory reduction
systems: introduction and survey. Theoretical Computer Science, 121(1–2):279–308, 1993.
[Klop, 1980] J. W. Klop. Combinatory Reduction Systems. PhD thesis, Univ. Utrecht, 1980.
Publ. by Mathematisch Centrum, 413 Kruislaan, Amsterdam.
[Klop, 1992] J. W. Klop. Term Rewriting Systems. In S. Abramsky, D. Gabbay, and T. Mai-
baum, editors, Handbook of Logic in Computer Science, Volume 2: Background, Computa-
tional Structures, pages 1–116. Oxford Univ. Press, England, 1992.
[Komori, 1990] Y. Komori. λ-calculus with simultaneous substitution as a primitive symbol. In
Proceedings of the 13th Symposium on Semigroups, pages 20–26. Kyoto Sangyo Univ., 1990.
(Symposium in 1989).
[Koymans, 1982] C. P. J. Koymans. Models of the lambda calculus. Information and Control,
52:306–332, 1982. (Journal now called Information and Computation).
[Kreisel, 1958] G. Kreisel. Constructive mathematics, 1958. Mimeographed notes of a course
given at Stanford Univ., 1958–59.
[Kreisel, 1959] G. Kreisel. Interpretation of analysis by means of constructive functionals of ﬁnite
type. In A. Heyting, editor, Constructivity in Mathematics, pages 101–128. North-Holland
Co., Amsterdam, 1959.
[Kreisel, 1962] G. Kreisel. Foundations of intuitionistic logic. In E. Nagel, P. Suppes, and A. Tar-
ski, editors, Logic, Methodology, and the Philosophy of Science, pages 198–210, Stanford,
1962.
[Kreisel, 1965] G. Kreisel.
Mathematical logic.
In T. L. Saaty, editor, Lectures on Modern
Mathematics, volume 3, pages 95–195. Wiley, New York, 1965.
[Krivine, 1990] J.-L. Krivine. Lambda-calcul, Types et Mod`eles. Masson, Paris, 1990. English
transl: Lambda-Calculus, Types and Models, Ellis-Horwood (U.S.A.) and Prentice-Hall (U.K.),
1993.
[Kuzichev, 1980] A. S. Kuzichev. Sequential systems of λ-conversion and of combinatory logic.
In Hindley and Seldin [1980], pages 141–155.
[Kuzichev, 1983] A. S. Kuzichev.
Set theory in type-free combinatorially complete systems.
Vestnik, Moscow State University, Series Math./Mechan., pages 36–42, 1983. In Russian.
[Kuzichev, 1999] A. S. Kuzichev. A version of formalization of Cantor’s set theory. Doklady
Mathematics, 60:424–426, 1999.
[Laan, 1997] T. D. L. Laan. The Evolution of Type Theory in Logic and Mathematics. PhD
thesis, Tech. Univ. Eindhoven, Netherlands, 1997.
[Lafont and Streicher, 1991] Y. Lafont and T. Streicher. Games semantics for linear logic. In
Proceedings Sixth Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic In Computer Science, pages 43–50.
IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A., 1991.
[Lamarche, 1992] F. Lamarche. Sequentiality, games and linear logic, 1992. Unpublished paper,
from a lecture to the CLiCS Symposium (Aarhus Univ., March 23–27, 1992).
[Lambek and Findlay, 1955] J. Lambek and G. D. Findlay. Calculus of bimodules, 1955. Un-
published manuscript.
[Lambek, 1958] J. Lambek. The mathematics of sentence structure. American Mathematical
Monthly, 65:154–170, 1958.
[Lambek, 1961] J. Lambek. On the calculus of syntactic types. In R. Jakobson, editor, Structure
of Language and its Mathematical Aspects, number 12 in Proceedings of Symposia in Applied
Mathematics, pages 56–68. American Math. Soc. Providence, R.I., U.S.A., 1961.
[Lambek, 1968] J. Lambek. Deductive systems and categories, I: syntactic calculus and residu-
ated categories. Mathematical Systems Theory, 2(4):287–318, 1968.

806
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Lambek, 1969] J. Lambek. Deductive systems and categories, II: standard constructions and
closed categories. In P. Hilton, editor, Category Theory, Homology Theory and their Applica-
tions II, volume 86 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 76–122. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1969.
[Lambek, 1972] J. Lambek. Deductive systems and categories, III: cartesian closed categories,
intuitionist propositional calculus, and combinatory logic. In W. F. Lawvere, editor, Toposes,
Algebraic Geometry and Logic, volume 274 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 57–82.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1972.
[Lambek, 1974] J. Lambek. Functional completeness of cartesian categories. Annals of Mathe-
matical Logic, 6:259–292, 1974.
[Lambek, 1980a] J. Lambek. From λ-calculus to cartesian closed categories. In Hindley and
Seldin [1980], pages 375–402.
[Lambek, 1980b] J. Lambek. From types to sets. Advances in Mathematics, 36:113–164, 1980.
[Lambek, 1988] J. Lambek. Categorial grammars and natural language structures. In R. Oehrle,
E. Bach, and D. Wheeler, editors, Categorial and Categorical Grammars. D. Reidel Co.,
Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1988.
[Lambek, 1995] J. Lambek. Bilinear logic in algebra and linguistics. In J.-Y. Girard, Y. Lafont,
and L. Regnier, editors, Advances in Linear Logic, pages 43–59. Cambridge Univ. Press,
England, 1995. (Proc. 1993 Workshop on Linear Logic, Ithaca, N.Y., U.S.A.).
[Lamping, 1990] J. Lamping. An algorithm for optimal lambda calculus reduction. In Seven-
teenth Annual A.C.M. Symposium on the Principles of Programming Languages (POPL),
pages 16–30. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 1990.
[Landin, 1964] P. J. Landin. The mechanical evaluation of expressions. The Computer Journal,
6:308–320, 1964. Actually appeared 1963.
[Landin, 1965] P. J. Landin. A correspondence between ALGOL 60 and Church’s lambda no-
tation. Communications of the ACM, 8:89–101, 158–165, 1965.
[Landin, 1966a] P. J. Landin.
A lambda-calculus approach.
In L. Fox, editor, Advances in
Programming and Non-numerical Computation, pages 97–141. Pergamon Press, England,
1966.
[Landin, 1966b] P. J. Landin. The next 700 programming languages. Communications of the
ACM, 9(3):157–166, 1966.
[L¨auchli, 1965] H. L¨auchli. Intuitionistic propositional calculus and deﬁnably non-empty terms.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 30:263, 1965. Abstract only.
[L¨auchli, 1970] H. L¨auchli. An abstract notion of realizability for which intuitionistic predicate
calculus is complete. In A. Kino, J. Myhill, and R. Vesley, editors, Intuitionism and Proof
Theory, pages 227–234. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1970. Proc. 1968 conference at Buf-
falo, N.Y.
[Lawvere, 1963] F. W. Lawvere. Functorial semantics of algebraic theories. PhD thesis, Col-
umbia Univ., 1963.
[Lawvere, 1964] F. W. Lawvere. An elementary theory of the category of sets. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 52(6):1506–1511, 1964. Extended abstract
of a typescript with the same title (1964, Univ. Chicago).
[Lawvere, 1966] F. W. Lawvere. The category of categories as a foundation for Mathematics. In
Proceedings of the La Jolla conference on Categorical Algebra, pages 1–20. Springer-Verlag,
1966.
[Lawvere, 1969a] F. W. Lawvere. Adjointness in Foundations. Dialectica, 23:281–296, 1969.
[Lawvere, 1969b] F. W. Lawvere. Diagonal arguments and cartesian closed categories. In P. Hil-
ton, editor, Category Theory, Homology Theory and their Applications II, volume 92 of Lec-
ture Notes in Mathematics, pages 134–145. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1969.
[Lawvere, 1970a] F. W. Lawvere.
Equality in hyperdoctrines and comprehension schema as
an adjoint functor. In A. Heller, editor, Applications of Categorical Algebra, volume 17 of
Proceedings of Symposia on Pure Mathematics, pages 1–14. American Math. Soc., Providence,
R.I., U.S.A., 1970. Proc. of a symposium in New York 1968.
[Lawvere, 1970b] F. W. Lawvere. Quantiﬁers and sheaves. In Actes du Congr`es International
des Math`ematiques, Nice 1970, pages 329–334, 1970. tome I.
[Lawvere, 1972] F. W. Lawvere. Category theory over a base topos, 1972. Unpubl. lecture notes.
[Lawvere, 1976] F. W. Lawvere. Variable quantities and variable structures in topoi. In Algebra,
Topology and Category Theory. A collection of Papers in Honor of Samuel Eilenberg, pages
101–131. Academic Press, London and New York, 1976.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
807
[Lawvere, 1979] F. W. Lawvere.
Categorical dynamics.
In Proceedings of the Aarhus Open
House on Topos Theoretic Methods in Geometry, May 1978, Aarhus, Denmark, 1979.
[Lawvere, 1996] F. W. Lawvere. Adjoints in and among bicategories. In A. Ursini and P. Aglian`o,
editors, Logic and Algebra. Proceedings of the 1994 Siena Conference in memory of Roberto
Magari, volume 180 of Lecture Notes in Pure and Applied Algebra, pages 181–189. Marcel
Dekker, Inc., New York, Basel and Hong Kong, 1996.
[Leivant, 1983] D. Leivant. Polymorphic type inference. In Tenth Annual A.C.M. Symposium on
the Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), pages 88–98. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, 1983. Cf. also pp. 155–166.
[Leivant, 1990] D. Leivant. Contracting proofs to programs. In P. Odifreddi, editor, Logic and
Computer Science, volume 31 of APIC Studies in Data Processing, pages 279–327. Academic
Press, London, 1990.
[Lemmon et al., 1957] E. J. Lemmon, C. A. Meredith, D. Meredith, A. N. Prior, and I. Thomas.
Calculi of pure strict implication. Informally distributed, 1957. Publ. 1969 in Philosophical
logic, ed. by Davis and Hockney and Wilson, D. Reidel Co., Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp.
215–250.
[Lercher, 1966] B. Lercher. Review of: K. Menger: the algebra of functions: past, present, future.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 31:272, 1966.
[Le´sniewski, 1929] S. Le´sniewski. Grundz¨uge eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathe-
matik. Fundamenta Mathematicæ, 14:1–81, 1929.
[L´evy, 1976] J.-J. L´evy. An algebraic interpretation of λβK-calculus, and an application of a
labelled λ-calculus. Theoretical Computer Science, 2:97–114, 1976. Preliminary version 1975
in [B¨ohm, 1975] pp. 147–165.
[L´evy, 1978] J.-J. L´evy. R´eductions correctes et optimales dans le λ-calcul. Th`ese de Doctorat
d’Etat, Univ. Paris VII, Paris, 1978.
[Loader, 2001] R. Loader.
Finitary PCF is not decidable.
Theoretical Computer Science,
266:341–364, 2001.
[Longley, 2001] J. R. Longley. Notions of computability at higher types, I. In Logic Colloquium
2000, volume 19 of Lecture Notes in Logic, pages 32–142. A. K. Peters, 2001.
[Longo and Moggi, 1992] G. Longo and E. Moggi. Constructive natural deduction and its mod-
est interpretation. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 1:215–254, 1992.
[Longo et al., 1993] G. Longo, K. Milsted, and S. Soloviev. The genericity theorem and para-
metricity in the polymorphic λ-calculus. Theoretical Computer Science, 121:323–349, 1993.
[Longo, 1987] G. Longo. From numbered sets to type theories. Rendiconti del Seminario Matem-
atico dell’Universit`a e del Politecnico di Torino, Fascicolo speciale: “Logic and Computer
Science: New Trends and Applications”:41–73, 1987. Ed. by G. Lolli.
[Longo, 1995] G. Longo. Parametric and type-dependent polymorphism. Fundamenta Infor-
maticae, 22:69–92, 1995.
[Lorenz, 2001] K. Lorenz. Basic objectives of dialogue logic in historical perspective. Synthese,
127:255–263, 2001.
[Lorenzen, 1955] P. Lorenzen. Einf¨uhrung in die Operative Logik und Mathematik. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, G¨ottingen, Heidelberg, 1955.
[Lorenzen, 1961] P. Lorenzen. Ein dialogisches Konstructivit¨atskriterium. In Inﬁnitistic Meth-
ods, pages 193–200. Pergamon Press and PWN, Oxford and Warsaw, 1961.
[L¨owenheim, 1940] L. L¨owenheim. Einkleidung der Mathematik in Schr¨oderschen Relativkalkul.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 5:1–15, 1940.
[Lukasiewicz and Tarski, 1930] J. Lukasiewicz and A. Tarski. Untersuchungen ¨uber den Aus-
sagenkalk¨ul. Comptes Rendus des S´eances de la Societ´e des Sciences et des Lettres de Varso-
vie, 23:30–50, 1930. Engl. transl: Investigations into the sentential calculus, in Logic, Seman-
tics, Metamathematics, by A. Tarski, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1956, pp. 38–59.
[Lukasiewicz, 1939] J. Lukasiewicz.
Der ¨aquivalenzenkalk¨ul.
Collectanea Logica, 1:145–169,
1939. Journal vol. never appeared. Engl. transl: The equivalential calculus, in Polish Logic,
ed. by S. McCall, Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp. 88–115, and in Jan Lukasiewicz Selected
Works, ed. by L. Borkowski, North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1970, pp. 250–277.
[MacQueen et al., 1984] D. MacQueen, G. D. Plotkin, and R. Sethi. An ideal model for recursive
polymorphic types. In Eleventh Annual A.C.M. Symposium on the Principles of Programming
Languages (POPL), pages 165–174. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 1984.
[Mann, 1975] C. R. Mann. The connection between equivalence of proofs and cartesian closed
categories. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 31(3):289–310, 1975.

808
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Manzano, 1997] M. Manzano.
Alonzo Church: his life, his work and some of his miracles.
History and Philosophy of Logic, 18:211–232, 1997.
[Martin-L¨of, 1971a] P. Martin-L¨of. On the strength of intuitionistic reasoning, 1971. Unpub-
lished contribution to Symposium on Perspectives in the Philosophy of Mathematics at 4th
International Congress for Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, Bucharest.
[Martin-L¨of, 1971b] P. Martin-L¨of. A Theory of Types, 1971. Informally circulated.
[Martin-L¨of, 1972a] P. Martin-L¨of. Inﬁnite terms and a system of natural deduction. Compositio
Mathematica, 24(1):93–103, 1972.
[Martin-L¨of, 1972b] P. Martin-L¨of. An Intuitionistic Theory of Types. Technical report, Dept.
of Mathematics, Univ. Stockholm, 1972. Published in Twenty-Five Years of Constructive
Type Theory, edited by Giovanni Sambin and Jan Smith, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1998, pp.
127–172.
[Martin-L¨of, 1975] P. Martin-L¨of. An intuitionistic theory of types: Predicative part. In H. Rose
and J. Shepherdson, editors, Logic Colloquium ’73, pages 73–118. North-Holland Co., Ams-
terdam, 1975.
[Martin-L¨of, 1982] P. Martin-L¨of. Constructive mathematics and computer programming. In
L. J. Cohen, J. Los, H. Pfeiﬀer, and K-P. Podewski, editors, Logic, Methodology and Philos-
ophy of Science, VI, pages 153–175. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1982.
[Martin-L¨of, 1983] P. Martin-L¨of. The domain interpretation of type theory. In K. Karlsson and
K. Petersson, editors, Workshop on the Semantics of Programming Languages, Abstracts and
Notes. Programming Methodology Group, Chalmers Univ. Technology and Univ. G¨oteborg,
August 1983.
[Martin-L¨of, 1984] P. Martin-L¨of. Intuitionistic Type Theory. Studies in Proof Theory. Bib-
liopolis, Napoli, Italy, 1984. Notes by Giovanni Sambin of lectures given in Padova, June
1980.
[Martin-L¨of, 1985] P. Martin-L¨of. On the meanings of the logical constants and the justiﬁca-
tions of the logical laws. In C. Bernardi and P. Pagli, editors, Atti degli Incontri di Logica
Matematica, pages 203–281. Univ. di Siena, 1985. Reprinted with bibliographical additions
in Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic, 1:11–60, 1996.
[Martin-L¨of, 1986] P. Martin-L¨of. Unifying Scott’s theory of domains for denotational seman-
tics and intuitionistic type theory. In V. Michele Abrusci and Ettore Casari, editors, Atti
del congresso Logica e Filosoﬁa della Scienza, Oggi, San Gimignano, 7–11 Dicembre 1983,
volume I: Logica, pages 79–82. CLUEB, Bologna, 1986.
[Martin-L¨of, 1987] P. Martin-L¨of. Truth of a proposition, evidence of a judgement, validity of
a proof. Synthese, 73:407–420, 1987.
[McCarthy, 1960] J. McCarthy. Recursive functions of symbolic expressions and their compu-
tation by machine. Communications of the ACM, 3:184–195, 1960.
[McCarthy, 1963a] J. McCarthy. A basis for a mathematical theory of computation. In P. Braf-
fort and D. Hirschberg, editors, Computer Programming and Formal Systems, pages 33–70.
North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1963. Earlier version publ. in Proc. of 1961 Western Joint
Computer Conference.
[McCarthy, 1963b] J. McCarthy. Towards a mathematical science of computation. In C. M.
Popplewell, editor, Information Processing 62: Proceedings of the IFIP Congress 1962, pages
21–28. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1963.
[McCarthy, 1981] J. McCarthy. History of LISP. In R. Wexelblat, editor, History of Program-
ming Languages, pages 173–197. Academic Press and Association for Computing Machinery
(A.C.M.), New York, 1981. Also published in A.C.M. SIGPLAN Notices 13 (1978), 217–223.
[McCracken, 1979] N. J. McCracken. An investigation of a programming language with a poly-
morphic type structure. PhD thesis, Syracuse Univ., N.Y., U.S.A., 1979.
[McCracken, 1982] N. J. McCracken.
A ﬁnitary retract model for the polymorphic lambda-
calculus. Technical report, Syracuse Univ., N.Y., U.S.A., 1982. Unpublished.
[Medvedev, 1962] J. T. Medvedev. Finite problems. Soviet Mathematics Doklady, 3:227–230,
1962.
[Megill and Bunder, 1996] N. Megill and M. W. Bunder. Weaker D-complete logics. Journal of
the Interest Group on Propositional Logics, 4:215–225, 1996.
[Menger, 1944] K. Menger.
Tri-operational algebra.
Reports of a Mathematical Colloquium,
5:3–10, 1944. Series publ. by Univ. Notre Dame, Indiana, U.S.A.
[Menger, 1964] K. Menger. On substitutive algebra and its syntax. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematis-
che Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 10:81–104, 1964.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
809
[Meredith, 1977] D. Meredith. In memoriam Carew Arthur Meredith. Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic, 18:513–516, 1977.
[Meredith, 1980] D. Meredith. Problems in the analogy between λ-calculus and positive logic.
Bulletin of the European Association for Theoretical Computer Science, 11:136–137, 1980.
[Meyer and Bunder, 1988] R. K. Meyer and M. W. Bunder. Condensed detachment and combi-
nators. Technical Report TR-ARP-8/88, Research School of the Social Sciences, Australian
National Univ., Canberra, Australia, 1988.
[Meyer et al., 1991] R. K. Meyer, M. W. Bunder, and L. Powers.
Implementing the ”fool’s
model” of combinatory logic. Journal of Automated Reasoning, 7:597–630, 1991.
[Meyer, 1982] A. R. Meyer. What is a model of the lambda calculus? Information and Control,
52:87–122, 1982. Preprint circulated 1980. Journal title now Information and Computation.
[Mezghiche, 1984] M. Mezghiche.
Une nouvelle Cβ-r´eduction dans la logique combinatoire.
Theoretical Computer Science, 31:151–164, 1984.
[Milner, 1972] R. Milner. Logic for computable functions; description of a machine implemen-
tation. Technical Report STAN-CS-72-288, Stanford Univ., 1972.
[Milner, 1975] R. Milner. Processes: a mathematical model of computing agents. In H. Rose
and J. Shepherdson, editors, Logic Colloquium ’73, pages 157–174. North-Holland Co., Ams-
terdam, 1975.
[Milner, 1977] R. Milner. Fully abstract models of typed λ-calculi. Theoretical Computer Sci-
ence, 4:1–22, 1977.
[Milner, 1978] R. Milner. A theory of type polymorphism in programming. Journal of Computer
and System Sciences, 17:348–375, 1978.
[Mints and Tammet, 1991] G. Mints and T. Tammet. Condensed detachment is complete for
relevance logic: a computer-aided proof. Journal of Automated Reasoning, 7:587–596, 1991.
[Mirimanoﬀ, 1917] D. Mirimanoﬀ. Les antinomies de Russell et de Burali-Forti et le probl`eme
fondamental de la th´eorie des ensembles. L’Enseignement Mathematique, 19:37–52, 1917.
[Mitschke, 1973] G. Mitschke. Ein algebraischer Beweis f¨ur das Church-Rosser Theorem. Archiv
f¨ur Mathematische Logik, 15:146–157, 1973. From author’s 1970 PhD thesis, Univ. Bonn, Eine
Algebraische Behandlung von λK-Kalk¨ul und Kombinatorischer Logik.
[Mitschke, 1979] G. Mitschke. The standardization theorem for the λ-calculus. Zeitschrift f¨ur
Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 25:29–31, 1979.
[Moldestad, 1977] J Moldestad. Computations in Higher Types. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977.
Series Lecture Notes in Mathematics No. 574.
[Montague, 1974] R. Montague. Formal Philosophy. Selected Papers. Yale Univ. Press, New
Haven U.S.A. and London, 1974.
[Morris, 1968] J. H. Morris. Lambda-calculus Models of Programming Languages. PhD thesis,
Massachusetts Inst. Technology, Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A., 1968.
[Moses, 1970] J. Moses. The Function of FUNCTION in LISP, 1970. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Project MAC report AI–199. Available on Web at ftp://publications.ai.mit.edu/
ai-publications/0-499/AIM-199.ps.
[Murthy, 1991] C. Murthy. An evaluation semantics for classical proofs. In Proceedings Sixth
Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic In Computer Science, pages 96–107. IEEE Computer
Society, Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A., 1991.
[Myhill and Shepherdson, 1955] J. Myhill and J. C. Shepherdson. Eﬀective operations on partial
recursive functions. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik, 1:310–317, 1955.
[Nakajima, 1975] R. Nakajima. Inﬁnite normal forms for the λ-calculus. In B¨ohm [1975], pages
62–82.
[Naur and others, 1963] P. Naur et al. Revised report on the algorithmic language ALGOL 60.
Communications of the ACM, 6:1–17, 1963.
[Nederpelt and Geuvers, 1994] R. P. Nederpelt and J. H. Geuvers. Twenty-Five Years of Auto-
math Research. In Nederpelt et al. [1994], pages 3–54.
[Nederpelt et al., 1994] R. P. Nederpelt, J. H. Geuvers, and R. C. de Vrijer, editors. Selected
Papers on Automath. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1994.
[Nederpelt, 1973] R. Nederpelt. Strong normalization in a typed lambda calculus with lambda
structured types. PhD thesis, Technical Univ. Eindhoven, Netherlands, 1973. Publ. 1994 in
[Nederpelt et al., 1994], pp. 389–468.
[Nerode, 1957] A. Nerode. General topology and partial recursive functionals. Summaries of
talks at the Cornell Summer Institute of Symbolic Logic, 1957.

810
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Nerode, 1959] A. Nerode. Some Stone spaces and recursion theory. Duke Mathematical Journal,
26:397–405, 1959.
[Neumann, 1925] J. von Neumann. Eine Axiomatizierung der Mengenlehre.
Journal f¨ur die
Reine und Angewandte Mathematik, 154:219–240, 1925. (Correction in Ibid. 155, p. 128.)
English transl: An Axiomatization of Set Theory, in [Heijenoort, 1967], pp. 393–413.
[Neumann, 1928] J. von Neumann.
Die Axiomatizierung der Mengenlehre.
Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 27:669–752, 1928.
Based on author’s doctoral thesis in Hungarian, Univ. Bu-
dapest Sept. 1925 (author’s footnote p.669). Reprinted in The Collected Works of J. von
Neumann, Vol. 1, ed. by A. H. Taub, Pergamon Press, Oxford, England 1961, pp.339–422.
[Newman, 1942] M. H. A. Newman. On theories with a combinatorial deﬁnition of “equiva-
lence”. Annals of Mathematics, 43(2):223–243, 1942.
[Newman, 1943] M. H. A. Newman. Stratiﬁed systems of logic. Proceedings of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society, 39:69–83, 1943. Reviewed by A. Church in J. Symbolic Logic 9 (1944),
pp. 50–52.
[Nickau, 1994] H. Nickau. Hereditarily sequential functionals. In A. Nerode and Y. V. Matiya-
sevich, editors, Proceedings of the Symposium on Logical Foundations of Computer Science,
volume 813 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 253–264. Springer-Verlag, 1994.
[Nivat, 1973] M. Nivat. Langages alg´ebriques sur le magma libre et s´emantique des sch´emas
de programme. In M. Nivat, editor, Automata, Languages and Programming. North-Holland
Co., Amsterdam, 1973. Proc. of 1972 conference.
[Nordstr¨om et al., 1990] B. Nordstr¨om, K. Petersson, and J. M. Smith. Programming in Martin-
L¨of’s Type Theory. Oxford Univ. Press, England, 1990.
[O’Donnell, 1977] M.˜J. O’Donnell. Computing in Systems Described by Equations, volume 58
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977.
[Ong, 1995] C.-H. L. Ong. Correspondence between operational and denotational semantics. In
S. Abramsky, D. Gabbay, and T. S. E. Maibaum, editors, Handbook of Logic in Computer
Science, volume 4, pages 269–356. Oxford Univ. Press, England, 1995.
[Oosten, 2002] J. van Oosten.
Realizability: a historical essay.
Mathematical Structures in
Computer Science, 12:239–263, 2002.
[Paiva, 1989a] V. de Paiva. The Dialectica categories. In J. W. Gray and A. Scedrov, editors,
Categories in Computer Science and Logic, volume 92 of Contemporary Mathematics, pages
47–62. American Math. Society, Providence, R.I., U.S.A., 1989.
[Paiva, 1989b] V. de Paiva. A Dialectica-like model of linear logic. In Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Category Theory and Computer Science, volume 389 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 341–356. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989.
[Park, 1976] D. Park. The Y combinator in Scott’s lambda calculus models. Theory of Compu-
tation Report 13, Dept. of Computer Science, Univ. Warwick, 1976. First version presented
1970 at Symposium on Theory of Programming, Univ. Warwick.
[Peano, 1889] G. Peano. Arithmetices Principia, Nova Methodo Exposita. Fratelli Bocca, Tor-
ino, Italy, 1889. Also in [Peano, 1958], Vol. 2, Item 16, pp. 20–55. Engl. transls: (1) The
Principles of Arithmetic, in Selected Works of Giuseppe Peano, ed. H. Kennedy, publ. Allen
and Unwin, London, 1973, pp. 101–134; (2) The Principles of Arithmetic, in [Peano, 1958],
pp. 83–97.
[Peano, 1895] G. Peano.
Formulaire de Math´ematiques.
Fratelli Bocca, Torino, Italy, 1895.
Publ. in 5 vols. 1895–1908. Later vols. overlapped and revised earlier vols. Vol. 3 publ. Carr´e
et Naud, Paris, 1901. Vol. 5 titled Formulario Mathematico in Peano’s language Latino sine
ﬂexione.
[Peano, 1958] G. Peano. Opere Scelte. Edizioni Cremonese, Milano, 1958. Three volumes.
[Peirce, 1883] C. S. Peirce. The logic of relatives. In C. S. Peirce, editor, Johns Hopkins Studies
in Logic, pages 187–203. Little, Brown & Co., Boston, U.S.A., 1883. Reprinted in Collected
Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Vol. 3, Exact Logic, ed. by C. Hartshorne & P. Weiss,
Harvard Univ. Press, U.S.A., pp. 195–209.
[Peyton Jones, 1987] S. Peyton Jones. The Implementation of Functional Programming Lan-
guages. Prentice-Hall, England, 1987.
[Phoa, 1990] W. Phoa. Eﬀective domains and intrinsic structure. In Proceedings Fifth Annual
IEEE Symposium on Logic In Computer Science, pages 366–377. IEEE Computer Society,
Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A., 1990.
[Pierce, 2002] B. C. Pierce. Types and Programming Languages. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
2002.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
811
[Pigozzi and Salibra, 1998] D. Pigozzi and A. Salibra. Lambda abstraction algebras: coordina-
tizing models of lambda calculus. Fundamenta Informaticae, 33:149–200, 1998.
[Piperno, 1989] A. Piperno. Abstraction problems in combinatory logic; a compositive approach.
Theoretical Computer Science, 66:27–43, 1989.
[Pitts, 1987] A. M. Pitts. Polymorphism is set theoretic, constructively. In D. H. Pitt, A. Poign´e,
and D. E. Rydeheard, editors, Category Theory and Computer Science, Proc. Edinburgh 1987,
volume 283 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 12–39, Berlin, 1987. Springer-Verlag.
[Platek, 1966] R. A. Platek. Foundations of Recursion Theory. PhD thesis, Stanford Univ.,
1966.
[Plotkin and Abadi, 1993] G. D. Plotkin and M. Abadi. A logic for parametric polymorphism.
In M. Bezem and J. Groote, editors, Typed Lambda Calculi and Applications, TLCA ’93,
volume 664 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 361–375. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1993.
[Plotkin, 1973] G. D. Plotkin. Lambda-deﬁnability and logical relations. Technical Report SAI-
RM-4, School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Univ. Edinburgh, U.K., 1973.
[Plotkin, 1974] G. D. Plotkin.
The λ-calculus is ω-incomplete.
Journal of Symbolic Logic,
39:313–317, 1974.
[Plotkin, 1975] G. D. Plotkin. Call-by-name, call-by-value and the λ-calculus. Theoretical Com-
puter Science, 1:125–159, 1975.
[Plotkin, 1977] G. D. Plotkin. LCF considered as a programming language. Theoretical Com-
puter Science, 5:223–257, 1977.
[Plotkin, 1978a] G. D. Plotkin.
The category of complete partial orders: a tool for making
meanings. Lectures, summer school, Dipartimento di Informatica, Universit`a di Pisa, Italy,
1978.
[Plotkin, 1978b] G. D. Plotkin. T ω as a universal domain. Journal of Computer and System
Sciences, 17:209–236, 1978.
[Plotkin, 1980] G. D. Plotkin. Lambda-deﬁnability in the full type hierarchy. In Hindley and
Seldin [1980], pages 363–373.
[Plotkin, 1981] G. D. Plotkin. Post-graduate lecture notes in advanced domain theory. Dept.
Computer Science, Univ. Edinburgh, 1981.
[Plotkin, 1993] G. D. Plotkin. Set-theoretical and other elementary models of the λ-calculus.
Theoretical Computer Science, 121 (B¨ohm Volume):351–409, 1993. (Part 1 issued 1972 as A
set-theoretical deﬁnition of application, Report MIP-R-95 of School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Univ. Edinburgh.).
[Plotkin, 1994] G. D. Plotkin. A semantics for static type-inference. Information and Compu-
tation, 109:256–299, 1994.
[Pottinger, 1978] G. Pottinger. Proofs of the normalization and Church-Rosser theorems for the
typed λ-calculus. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 19:445–451, 1978.
[Pottinger, 1980] G. Pottinger. A type assignment for the strongly normalizable λ-terms. In
Hindley and Seldin [1980], pages 561–579.
[Prawitz, 1965] D. Prawitz. Natural Deduction. Almqvist and Wiksell, Stockholm, 1965.
[Prawitz, 1967] D. Prawitz. Completeness and Haupsatz for second order logic. Theoria, 33:246–
258, 1967.
[Prawitz, 1968] D. Prawitz. Hauptsatz for higher order logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 33:452–
457, 1968.
[Prawitz, 1971] D. Prawitz. Ideas and results in proof theory. In J. E. Fenstad, editor, Pro-
ceedings of the Second Scandinavian Logic Symposium, pages 235–307. North-Holland Co.,
Amsterdam, 1971.
[Quine, 1936a] W. V. Quine. A reinterpretation of Sch¨onﬁnkel’s logical operators. Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society, 42:87–89, 1936.
[Quine, 1936b] W. V. Quine. Towards a calculus of concepts. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1:2–25,
1936.
[Quine, 1937] W. V. Quine. New foundations for mathematical logic. American Mathematical
Monthly, 44:70–80, 1937.
[Quine, 1963] W. V. Quine. Set Theory and its Logic. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
U.S.A., 1963. (Revised edn. 1969).

812
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Quine, 1972] W. V. Quine. Algebraic logic and predicate functors. In R. Rudner and I. Scheﬄer,
editors, Logic and Art: Essays in Honor of Nelson Goodman, pages 214–238. Bobbs Merrill
Co., Indianapolis and New York, 1972. (Also publ. 1971 by Bobbs Merrill Co. as a booklet
Algebraic Logic and Predicate Functors).
[Ramsey, 1926] F. P. Ramsey. The foundations of mathematics. Proceeding of the London Math-
ematical Society, Series 2, 25:338–384, 1926. Reprinted in: F. P. Ramsey: The Foundations
of Mathematics and other Logical Essays, ed. by R. B. Braithwaite, publ. Routledge and
Kegan Paul, New York and London, 1931, pp. 1–61.
[R´ev´esz, 1978] G. R´ev´esz.
λ-calculus without substitution.
Technical report, Computer and
Automation Institute, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 1978.
[R´ev´esz, 1985] G. R´ev´esz. Axioms for the theory of lambda-conversion. SIAM Journal of Com-
puting, 14:373–382, 1985.
[Reynolds and Plotkin, 1990] J. C. Reynolds and G. D. Plotkin. On functors expressible in the
polymorphic typed lambda calculus. In Huet [1990b], pages 127–152.
[Reynolds, 1972] J. C. Reynolds. Notes on a lattice-theoretic approach to the theory of compu-
tation. Report, Syracuse Univ., Syracuse, New York, October 1972. Revised March 1979.
[Reynolds, 1974] J. C. Reynolds. Towards a theory of type structure. In B. Robinet, editor,
Programming Symposium, Proceedings, Colloque sur la Programmation, Paris, volume 19 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 408–425, Berlin, 1974. Springer-Verlag.
[Reynolds, 1983] J. C. Reynolds. Types, abstraction and parametric polymorphism. In R. Ma-
son, editor, Information Processing 83, pages 513–523. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1983.
[Reynolds, 1989] J. C. Reynolds.
Syntactic control of interference, part 2.
In G. Ausiello,
M. Dezani, and S. Ronchi della Rocca, editors, Automata, Languages and Programming, 16th
International Colloquium, volume 372 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 704–722.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989.
[Reynolds, 1993] J. C. Reynolds. The discoveries of continuations. Lisp and Symbolic Compu-
tation, 6:233–247, 1993.
[Rezus, 1982] A. Rezus. A Bibliography of Lambda-Calculi, Combinatory Logics and Related
Topics. Mathematisch Centrum, 413 Kruislaan, Amsterdam, 1982. ISBN 90–6196234–X.
[Rezus, 1986] A. Rezus. Semantics of constructive type theory. Libertas Mathematica (Arling-
ton, TX), 6:1–82, 1986.
[Rimscha, 1980] M. von Rimscha.
Mengentheoretische Modelle des λK-Kalk¨uls.
Archiv f¨ur
Mathematische Logik, 20:65–74, 1980.
[Robinson, 1965] J. A. Robinson. A machine-oriented logic based on the resolution principle.
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, 12:23–41, 1965.
[Rogers, 1967] H. Rogers. Theory of Recursive Functions and Eﬀective Computability. McGraw
Hill, New York, 1967.
[Ronchi della Rocca and Venneri, 1984] S. Ronchi della Rocca and B. Venneri. Principal type
schemes for an extended type theory. Theoretical Computer Science, 28:151–171, 1984.
[Ronchi della Rocca, 1988] S. Ronchi della Rocca. Principal type schemes and uniﬁcation for
intersection type discipline. Theoretical Computer Science, 59:181–209, 1988.
[Rosen, 1973] B. K. Rosen. Tree manipulating systems and Church-Rosser theorems. Journal
of the Association for Computing Machinery, 20:160–187, 1973.
[Rosenbloom, 1950] P. Rosenbloom.
The Elements of Mathematical Logic.
Dover Inc., New
York, 1950.
[Rosolini, 1986] G. Rosolini.
Continuity and Eﬀectiveness in Topoi.
PhD thesis, Carnegie
Mellon Univ., 1986.
Tech. Report CMU-CS-86-123, Dept. of Computer Science, Carnegie
Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, U.S.A.
[Rosser, 1935] J. B. Rosser. A mathematical logic without variables, Part 1. Annals of Math-
ematics, Series 2, 36:127–150, 1935. Also Part 2: Duke Mathematical Journal 1 (1935), pp.
328–355.
[Rosser, 1942] J. B. Rosser. New sets of postulates for combinatory logics. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 7:18–27, 1942.
[Rosser, 1984] J. B. Rosser. Highlights of the history of the lambda calculus. Annals of the
History of Computing, 6:337–349, 1984.
[Russell and Whitehead, 1913] B. Russell and A. N. Whitehead. Principia Mathematica. Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, England, 1913. In 3 parts, appeared 1910–1913. New edn.
1925–1927.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
813
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge Univ. Press, England,
1903. Also 2nd. edn. 1937, reprinted 1992 by Routledge and Kegan Paul, England.
[Russell, 1919] B. Russell. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. Allen and Unwin, London,
1919.
[Sall´e, 1978] P. Sall´e. Une extension de la th´eorie des types en λ-calcul. In G. Ausiello and
C. B¨ohm, editors, Automata, Languages and Programming, Fifth Colloquium, volume 62 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 398–410. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1978.
[Sambin, 1987] G. Sambin. Intuitionistic formal spaces: a ﬁrst communication. In D. Skordev,
editor, Mathematical Logic and its Applications, pages 187–204. Plenum Press, New York,
1987.
[Sanchis, 1967] L. E. Sanchis. Functionals deﬁned by recursion. Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic, 8:161–174, 1967. Informally circulated 1965.
[Sazonov, 1976a] V. Yu. Sazonov.
Degrees of parallelism in computations.
In Mathematical
Foundations of Computer Science, volume 45 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
517–523. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1976.
[Sazonov, 1976b] V. Yu. Sazonov.
Expressibility of functionals in D. Scott’s LCF language.
Algebra i Logika, 15(3):308–330, 1976.
[Sazonov, 1976c] V. Yu. Sazonov. Functionals computable in series and in parallel. Sibirskii
Matematicheskii Zhurnal, 17:648–672, 1976.
[Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1924] M. Sch¨onﬁnkel. ¨Uber die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik. Mathema-
tische Annalen, 92:305–316, 1924. English transl: On the building blocks of mathematical
logic, in [Heijenoort, 1967], pp. 355–366.
[Schr¨oder, 1905] E. Schr¨oder. Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik (Exakte Logik). Teubner,
Leipzig, Germany, 1905. (In fact publ. in parts. I: 1890, II/1: 1891, III: 1895, II/2: 1905).
[Schroer, 1965] D. E. Schroer. The Church-Rosser Theorem. PhD thesis, Cornell Univ., 1965.
Informally circulated 1963. 673 pp. Obtainable from University Microﬁlms Inc., Ann Arbor,
Michigan, U.S.A., Publication No. 66-41.
[Sch¨utte, 1960] K. Sch¨utte. Syntactical and semantical properties of simple type theory. Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 25:305–326, 1960.
[Scott, 1963] D. S. Scott. A System of Functional Abstraction, 1963. Lecture notes, Stanford
Univ., informally distributed.
[Scott, 1968] D. S. Scott. An Abstract Theory of Constructions, 1968. Lecture notes, Amster-
dam Univ., informally distributed.
[Scott, 1969a] D. S. Scott. A construction of a model for the λ-calculus. Informally distributed,
1969. Notes for a November 1969 seminar, Oxford Univ.
[Scott, 1969b] D. S. Scott. Lattice-theoretic models for the λ-calculus, 1969. Incomplete type-
script, 50 pp., Merton College, Oxford Univ.
[Scott, 1969c] D. S. Scott.
Models for the λ-calculus.
Informally distributed, 1969.
Notes,
December 1969, Oxford Univ.
[Scott, 1969d] D. S. Scott. A theory of computable functions of higher type. Informally dis-
tributed, 1969. Notes for a November 1969 seminar, Oxford Univ.
[Scott, 1969e] D. S. Scott. A type-theoretical alternative to ISWIM, CUCH, OWHY. Infor-
mally distributed, 1969. Dated October 1969. Publ. with additions by author in Theoretical
Computer Science 121 (1–2) (1993), pp. 411–420.
[Scott, 1970a] D. S. Scott. Constructive validity. In M. Laudet, D. Lacombe, L. Nolin, and
M. Sch¨utzenberger, editors, Symposium on Automatic Demonstration, volume 125 of Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, pages 237–275. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1970.
Proc. conference in
Versailles 1968.
[Scott, 1970b] D. S. Scott. Lattice theory, data types and semantics. In R. Rustin, editor, Formal
Semantics of Programming Languages, pages 65–106. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J.,
U.S.A., 1970.
[Scott, 1970c] D. S. Scott. Outline of a mathematical theory of computation. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Annual Princeton Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, pages
169–176. Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Princeton Univ., 1970. Also publ. 1970 as Tech.
Monograph PRG-2, Programming Research Group, Oxford Univ., England.
[Scott, 1972] D. S. Scott. Continuous lattices. In F. W. Lawvere, editor, Toposes, Algebraic
Geometry and Logic, volume 274 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 97–136, Berlin, 1972.
Springer-Verlag. Preliminary version publ. 1970 as Tech. Monograph PRG-7, Programming
Research Group, Oxford Univ., England.

814
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Scott, 1973] D. S. Scott. Models for various type-free calculi. In P. Suppes and others, ed-
itor, Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science IV, pages 157–187. North-Holland Co.,
Amsterdam, 1973. Proc. conference in 1971.
[Scott, 1975] D. S. Scott.
Some philosophical issues concerning theories of combinators.
In
B¨ohm [1975], pages 346–366.
[Scott, 1976] D. S. Scott. Data types as lattices. SIAM Journal on Computing, 5:522–587, 1976.
[Scott, 1977] D. S. Scott. Logic and programming languages. Communications of the ACM,
20:634–641, 1977.
[Scott, 1980a] D. S. Scott. Lambda calculus: some models, some philosophy. In J. Barwise et al.,
editors, The Kleene Symposium, pages 223–265. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1980.
[Scott, 1980b] D. S. Scott. Relating theories of the λ-calculus. In Hindley and Seldin [1980],
pages 403–450.
[Scott, 1982a] D. S. Scott. Domains for denotational semantics. In M. Nielsen and E. Schmidt,
editors, Automata, Languages and Programming, Ninth International Colloquium, volume
140 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 577–613. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982.
[Scott, 1982b] D. S. Scott. Lectures on a mathematical theory of computation. In M. Broy and
G. Schmidt, editors, Theoretical Foundations of Programming Methodology. D. Reidel Co.,
Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1982. Also publ. 1981 as Tech. Monograph PRG-19, Programming
Research Group, Oxford Univ., England.
[Scott, 1986] D. S. Scott. Church’s thesis and a uniﬁcation of type universes. Lecture at con-
ference in Utrecht on Church’s Thesis ﬁfty years later, 14–15 June 1986.
[Scott, 1996] D. S. Scott. A new category? Domains, Spaces and Equivalence relations. Un-
published manuscript, December 1996.
[Scott, 2000] D. S. Scott. Some reﬂections on Strachey and his work. Higher order and Symbolic
Computation, 13:103–114, 2000.
[Seely, 1989] R. A. G. Seely. Linear logic, ∗-autonomous categories and cofree coalgebras. In
J. W. Gray and A. Scedrov, editors, Categories in Computer Science and Logic, volume 92
of Contemporary Mathematics, pages 371–382. American Mathematical Society, Providence,
R.I., 1989.
[Seldin, 1968] J. P. Seldin. Studies in Illative Combinatory Logic. PhD thesis, Inst. voor Gronds-
lagenonderzoek, Univ. Amsterdam, 1968.
[Seldin, 1979] J. P. Seldin. Progress report on generalized functionality. Annals of Mathemat-
ical Logic, 17:29–59, 1979. Condensed from manuscript Theory of Generalized functionality
informally circulated 1975. Journal now Annals of Pure and Applied Logic.
[Seldin, 1980a] J. P. Seldin. Curry’s program. In Hindley and Seldin [1980], pages 3–33.
[Seldin, 1980b] J. P. Seldin.
A short biography of Haskell B. Curry.
In Hindley and Seldin
[1980], pages vii–xx. Includes a bibliography.
[Seldin, 1987] J. P. Seldin. MATHESIS: The mathematical foundation of ULYSSES. Technical
Report RADC-TR-87-223, Odyssey Research Associates, Rome Air Development Center, Air
Force Systems Command, Griﬃss Air Force Base, NY 13441-5700, 1987.
[Seldin, 1997] J. P. Seldin. On the proof theory of Coquand’s calculus of constructions. Annals
of Pure and Applied Logic, 83:23–101, 1997.
[Seldin, 2002] J. P. Seldin. Curry’s anticipation of the types used in programming languages.
Proceedings of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics, 15:148–163,
2002.
[Seldin, 2008] J. P. Seldin.
Church and Curry: the lambda calculus and combinatory logic.
In D. M. Gabbay and J. Woods, editors, The Handbook of the History of Logic, volume 5.
Elsevier Co., Amsterdam, 2008.
[Sieg, 1997] W. Sieg. Step by recursive step: Church’s analysis of eﬀective calculability. Bulletin
of Symbolic Logic, 3:154–180, 1997.
[Smyth and Plotkin, 1982] M. B. Smyth and G. D. Plotkin. The category-theoretic solution of
recursive domain equations. S.I.A.M. Journal of Computing, 11:761–783, 1982.
[Smyth, 1977] M. B. Smyth. Eﬀectively given domains. Theoretical Computer Science, 5:257–
274, 1977.
[Smyth, 1983] M. B. Smyth. Powerdomains and predicate transformers: a topological view. In
J. Diaz, editor, Automata, Languages and Programming, Tenth International Colloquium,
volume 154 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 662–675. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1983.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
815
[Staples, 1981] J. Staples. Eﬃcient combinatory reduction. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik,
27:391–402, 1981.
[Statman, 1983] R. Statman. λ-deﬁnable functionals and βη-conversion. Archiv f¨ur Mathema-
tische Logik, 23:21–26, 1983.
[Statman, 1985] R. Statman.
Logical relations and the typed λ-calculus.
Information and
Computation, 65:85–97, 1985.
[Steele and Gabriel, 1996] G. L. Steele and R. P. Gabriel. The evolution of LISP. In T. Bergin
and R. Gibson, editors, History of Programming Languages – II, pages 233–330. Addison-
Wesley and Association for Computing Machinery (A.C.M.), New York, 1996.
[Steinby and Thomas, 2000] M. Steinby and W. Thomas. Trees and term rewriting in 1910:
on a paper by Axel Thue. Bulletin of the European Association for Theoretical Computer
Science, 72:256–269, 2000. October 2000.
[Stenlund, 1972] S. Stenlund. Combinators, λ-terms and Proof Theory. D. Reidel Co., Dor-
drecht, Netherlands, 1972.
[Stoy, 1977] J. Stoy. Denotational Semantics: The Scott-Strachey Approach to Programming
Language Theory. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A., 1977. (Foreword by D. Scott).
[Strachey and Wadsworth, 1974] C. Strachey and C. Wadsworth. Continuations: a mathemat-
ical semantics for handling full jumps. Technical Report PRG-11, Oxford Univ. Computing
Laboratory, 1974. Reprinted in Higher-Order and Symbolic Computation 13:135–152, 2000.
[Strachey, 1967] C. Strachey. Fundamental concepts in programming languages. International
Summer School in Computer Programming, Copenhagen, 1967. Reprinted in Higher Order
and Symbolic Computation 13:11–49, 2000.
[Sundholm, 1986] G. Sundholm.
Proof theory and meaning.
In D. Gabbay and F. Guenth-
ner, editors, Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Volume III, pages 471–506. D. Reidel Co.,
Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1986.
[Szabo, 1974] M. E. Szabo. A categorical equivalence of proofs. Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic, 15:177–191, 1974.
[Szabo, 1978] M. E. Szabo, editor. Algebra of Proofs. North-Holland Co., Amsterdam, 1978.
[Tait, 1965] W. W. Tait. Inﬁnitely long terms of transﬁnite type. In J. Crossley and M. Dum-
mett, editors, Formal Systems and Recursive Functions, pages 176–185. North-Holland Co.,
Amsterdam, 1965. Proc. conference 1963.
[Tait, 1966] W. W. Tait.
A nonconstructive proof of Gentzen’s Haupsatz for second order
predicate logic. Bulletin of the American Math. Society, 72:980–983, 1966.
[Tait, 1967] W. W. Tait. Intensional interpretations of functionals of ﬁnite type. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 32:198–212, 1967.
[Tait, 2001] W. W. Tait. G¨odel’s unpublished papers on foundations of mathematics. Philo-
sophiae Mathematica, 9:87–126, 2001.
[Tait, 2003] W. W. Tait. The completeness of Heyting ﬁrst-order logic. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 68:751–763, 2003.
[Takahashi, 1967] Moto-o Takahashi. A proof of cut-elimination in simple type-theory. Journal
of the Mathematical Society of Japan, 19:399–410, 1967.
[Takahashi, 1989] Masako Takahashi.
Parallel reductions in λ-calculus.
Journal of Symbolic
Computation, 7:113–123, 1989. (Revised version: Information and Computation 118 (1995),
pp. 120–127).
[Takahashi, 1991] Masako Takahashi.
Theory of Computation, Computability and Lambda-
calculus. Kindai Kagaku Sha, Tokyo, 1991. In Japanese.
[Takeuti, 1953] G. Takeuti. On a generalised logical calculus. Japanese Journal of Mathematics,
23:39–96, 1953.
[Tarski and Givant, 1987] A. Tarski and S. Givant. A Formalization of Set Theory Without
Variables, volume 41 of Colloquium publications. American Mathematical Society, 1987.
[Tarski, 1941] A. Tarski. On the calculus of relations. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 6:73–89, 1941.
[Tarski, 1953] A. Tarski. A formalization of set theory without variables. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 18:189, 1953. (Abstract only).
[Taylor, 1991] P. Taylor.
The ﬁxed point property in synthetic domain theory.
In Proceed-
ings Sixth Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic In Computer Science, pages 152–160. IEEE
Computer Society, Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A., 1991.
[Terese, 2003] Terese. Term Rewriting Systems. Cambridge Univ. Press, England, 2003. Au-
thors: ‘Terese’ research group. Editors M. Bezem, J.-W. Klop, R. de Vrijer.

816
Felice Cardone and J. Roger Hindley
[Thiel, 1995] C. Thiel. Sch¨onﬁnkel, Moses. In J. Mittelstrass, editor, Enzyklop¨adie Philosophie
und Wissenschaftstheorie, pages 726–727. J. B. Metzler, Stuttgart, Germany, 1995.
[Thue, 1910] A. Thue. Die L¨osung eines Spezialfalles eines generellen logischen Problems. Cris-
tiania Videnskabsselskabs Skrifter. I. Mat.-Nat. Kl. 1910, 8, 1910.
Reprinted in Selected
Mathematical Papers of Axel Thue, ed. by T. Nagel et al., Universitetsforlaget Oslo, 1977,
pp. 273–310.
[Tiuryn, 1990] J. Tiuryn. Type inference problems: a survey. In B. Rovan, editor, Mathematical
Foundations of Computer Science 1990, volume 452 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 105–120. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990.
[Troelstra, 1973] A. S. Troelstra, editor.
Metamathematical Investigations of Intuitionistic
Arithmetic and Analysis, volume 344 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1973. (2nd edn. 1993, publ. as Preprint no. X-93-05 by Institute for Logic, Language
and Computation, Univ. Amsterdam, Plantage Muidergracht 24, 1018TV Amsterdam).
[Turing, 1936] A. M. Turing. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entschei-
dungsproblem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Series 2, 42:230–265, 1936.
Also see correction in Ibid. 43 (1937), pp. 544–546.
[Turing, 1937a] A. M. Turing. Computability and λ-deﬁnability. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
2:153–163, 1937.
[Turing, 1937b] A. M. Turing. The p-function in λ-K-conversion. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
2:164, 1937.
[Turing, 1980] A. M. Turing. Proof that every typed formula has a normal form. Manuscript
undated but probably 1941 or ’42. Publ. in An early proof of normalization by A. M. Turing
by R. O. Gandy, in [Hindley and Seldin, 1980], pages 453–455, 1980.
[Turner, 1979] D. A. Turner. A new implementation technique for applicative languages. Soft-
ware – Practice and Experience, 9:31–49, 1979.
[Uspenskii, 1955] V. A. Uspenskii.
On enumeration operators.
Doklady Akademii Nauk
S.S.S.R., 103:773–776, 1955.
[Vickers, 1989] S. Vickers. Topology via Logic. Cambridge Univ. Press, England, 1989.
[Vrijer, 1985] R. C. de Vrijer. A direct proof of the ﬁnite developments theorem. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 50:339–343, 1985.
[Vuillemin, 1974a] J. Vuillemin. Correct and optimal implementations of recursion in a simple
programming language. Journal of Computer and System Science, 9:332–354, 1974.
[Vuillemin, 1974b] J. Vuillemin. Syntaxe, s´emantique et axiomatique d’un langage de program-
mation simple. Th`ese de Doctorat d’Etat, Universit´e de Paris VII, Paris, 1974.
[Wadsworth, 1971] C. P. Wadsworth. Semantics and pragmatics of the lambda-calculus. PhD
thesis, Univ. Oxford, England, 1971.
[Wadsworth, 1976] C. P. Wadsworth.
The relation between computational and denotational
properties for Scott’s D∞models of the lambda-calculus.
SIAM Journal of Computing,
5:488–521, 1976.
[Wadsworth, 1978] C. P. Wadsworth.
Approximate reduction and lambda-calculus models.
SIAM Journal of Computing, 7:337–356, 1978.
[Wadsworth, 1980] C. P. Wadsworth. Some unusual λ-calculus numeral systems. In Hindley
and Seldin [1980], pages 215–230.
[Wadsworth, 2000] C. P. Wadsworth. Continuations revisited. Higher-Order and Symbolic Com-
putation, 13:131–133, 2000.
[Wand, 1974] M. Wand.
On the recursive speciﬁcation of data types.
In E. G. Manes, edi-
tor, Category Theory Applied to Computation and Control, volume 25 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 214–217. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1974.
[Wand, 1977] M. Wand. Fixed-point constructions in order-enriched categories. Technical Re-
port 23, Computer Science Dept., Indiana Univ., Bloomington, Indiana, 1977.
[Wand, 1979] M. Wand.
Fixed-point constructions in order-enriched categories.
Theoretical
Computer Science, 8:13–30, 1979.
[Wand, 1987] M. Wand. A simple algorithm and proof for type inference. Fundamenta Infor-
maticae, 10:115–122, 1987.
[Welch, 1975] P. H. Welch. Continuous semantics and inside-out reductions. In B¨ohm [1975],
pages 122–146.

Lambda-calculus and Combinators in the 20th Century
817
[Wells, 1994] J. B. Wells. Typability and type checking in the second-order lambda-calculus
are equivalent and undecidable. In Proceedings Ninth Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic In
Computer Science, pages 176–185. IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, California, U.S.A.,
1994.
[Wells, 1999] J. B. Wells. Typability and type checking in System F are equivalent and unde-
cidable. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 98(1–3):111–156, 1999.
[Wilken and Weiermann, 1997] G. Wilken and A. Weiermann.
Sharp upper bounds for the
depths of reduction trees of typed λ-calculus with recursors, 1997. Unpublished manuscript.
[Wolfengagen, 2004] V. E. Wolfengagen. Methods and Means for Computation with Objects.
JurInfoR Ltd., Moscow, Russia, 2004. In Russian.
[Yanovskaya, 1948] S. A. Yanovskaya. Osnovaniya matematiki i matematicheskaya logika. In
Matematika v SSSR za Tridkat let 1917–1947, pages 9–50. OGIZ, Moscow, 1948. In Russian.
Reviewed by G. L. Kline in J. Symbolic Logic 16 (1951), pp.46–48.


THE LOGIC OF CHURCH AND CURRY
Jonathan P. Seldin
In the ordinary set-theoretic foundations of mathematics, functions are deﬁned
to be sets of ordered pairs in which no two distinct pairs have the same ﬁrst
element. Then if x is in the domain of a function f, f(x) is deﬁned to be the
second element of the ordered pair whose ﬁrst element is x. Thus, for example,
the squaring function on the real numbers would be deﬁned as
f = {(x, x2) : x is a real number},
and f(3) = 32 = 9.
However, there is another way to think of functions: as rules of correspondence.
Thinking of the squaring function on the real numbers this way, we might represent
it using the notation
x →x2,
and the evaluation of the function at x = 3 would be written
(x →x2)(3) = 32 = 9.
In fact, this idea occurred in the late 1920s to Alonzo Church, although instead of
x →x2 he wrote
λx . x2,
and for the evaluation of the function at x = 3 he wrote
(λx . x2)3 = 32 = 9.1
This approach to functions is the basis of the work of both Alonzo Church (1903-
1995) and Haskell Brooks Curry (1900-1982). Both of them set out to base logic
and mathematics on functions instead of on set theory, and although neither of
them achieved the kind of success he ﬁrst sought, both of them wound up making
major contributions to the foundations of logic and mathematics. Furthermore, the
results of their work have come to be extremely important in theoretical computer
1This was not his original notation; his original notation was {λx[x2]}(3) = 32 = 9;
see [Church, 1932]. But the notation given in the text had become standard by 1941 [Church,
1941]. By the way, Church did not write “=” here, but wrote “conv” for conversion. In this
paper, I will write =∗for an unspeciﬁed conversion relation.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

820
Jonathan P. Seldin
science. The system introduced by Church is λ-calculus, the system of Curry is
combinatory logic.2
For the convenience of readers, a complete description of lambda-calculus and
combinatory logic is given in the Appendix of this article.
A history of both lambda-calculus and combinatory logic appears in this vol-
ume [Cardone and Hindley, 2008]. To avoid unnecessary duplication, I will follow
a systematic rather than a historical order. Although combinatory logic began
earlier than λ-calculus, it is easier to understand combinatory logic if one already
knows λ-calculus. Therefore, I will begin with the latter.
I would like to thank Roger Hindley and Martin Bunder for their helpful com-
ments and suggestions.
1
LAMBDA-CALCULUS
1.1
Background of Alonzo Church
Alonzo3 Church was born on June 14, 1903 in Washington D. C. He received his
A.B. at Princeton University in 1924. In later life, he reported that he was drawn to
things of a fundamental nature, and while he was an undergraduate he published a
minor paper about the Lorentz transformation, the foundation of the special theory
of relativity [Church, 1924]. He also caught the eye of Oswald Veblen, who made
important contributions to projective and diﬀerential geometry and topology, and
who was interested in foundational issues in the sense of postulate systems for
geometry. After Church graduated, the Department of Mathematics at Princeton
gave him a fellowship to go to graduate school. While he was a graduate student,
he published another paper related to foundational matters, [Church, 1925]. He
completed his Ph.D. in 1927 with a dissertation on systems in which the axiom of
choice might be false [Church, 1927].
After ﬁnishing his Ph.D., Church spent two years on a National Research Fel-
lowship, one year at Harvard and another year at G¨ottingen and Amsterdam.
Then, in 1929, he returned to Princeton to take up a faculty position in the De-
partment of Mathematics. During this period, he published [Church, 1928], which
was related to foundational matters, though not to those which later led him to
introduce lambda-calculus.
2Curry came to use the name “combinatory logic” to refer to both his system, which he called
synthetic combinatory logic, and λ-calculus, but most people now use the name only for a variant
of Curry’s system.
3The material in this section comes from [Enderton, 1995] and from the transcript of
an interview of Church by William Aspray on 17 May 1985,
available on the web at
http://libweb.princeton.edu/libraries/firestone/rbsc/finding aids/mathoral/
pmc05.htm.

The Logic of Church and Curry
821
1.2
Origins of Lambda-Calculus
Until he completed his Ph.D., Church’s approach to foundational matters in the
above mentioned papers been informal, but while he held his National Research
Fellowship, in 1928–29, Church began to develop a system of formal logic that he
hoped would be adequate for the foundations of mathematics. He wanted to build
a type-free system in which all variables occurred only bound, and he hoped to
avoid contradiction by restricting the law of excluded middle.4 He included in this
system notations for function application and abstraction, which had previously
appeared in the work of Peano and Frege [Cardone and Hindley, 2008, §2], but
apparently Church was not then familiar with these works [Cardone and Hindley,
2008, §4.1]. However, unlike Peano and Frege, Church gave formal rules for them
and began to analyze their consequences in depth. This system was published
in [Church, 1932]. His atomic constants were all logical operators, Π for a relative
universality,5 Σ for existence, & for conjunction, ∼for negation, ι for the deﬁnite
article, and A for a kind of abstraction operator.
Well-formed formulas were
formed from these atomic constants and variables by means of application and λ-
abstraction, where in the latter, λx . M was well-formed whether or not x occurred
free in M. In addition to rules for the logical constants and certain axioms, he had
three rules of procedure for abstraction, application, and substitution: (1) change
of bound variables (α-conversion, using modern terminology); (2) β-contraction,
where, in the redex (λx . M)N, x must occur free in M; (3) the reverse of 2. There
were also two rules for logical operators:6 (4) for well formed M and N,
MN ⊢ΣM,
and (5) for well formed M, N, and P,
ΠMN, MP ⊢NP.
The paper concluded with proofs of a combination of the deduction and general-
ization theorems for Π:
1. Let x be a variable occurring free in M, and let ⊢Σ(λx . M), and let
M ⊢N. Then if x occurs free in N, then ⊢Π(λx . M)(λx . N). If x does
not occur free in N, then ⊢N.
4The idea was that without the law of excluded middle, the existence of the Russell class R
would not imply a contradiction, since it would not be true that R is the sort of thing which
can be an element of R, and without the law of excluded middle it would be impossible to prove
R ∈R ∨R ̸∈R. In Church’s system, as in Curry’s, this paradox would be represented not in
terms of classes, but in terms of predicates, so that instead of the Russell class R, there would
be a Russell predicate R, such that RR is equivalent to ∼(RR). Then, if R is not automatically
in the domain of R, one would need RR ∨∼(RR) to derive the paradox.
5ΠMN is to be distinguished from (∀x)(Mx ⊃Nx). The latter requires that MP and NP
be deﬁned for all possible values of P, whereas the former only requires that NP be deﬁned and
true whenever MP is true, so that NP may be undeﬁned if MP is deﬁned and not true.
6Stated here in modern notation.

822
Jonathan P. Seldin
2. If ⊢ΣM and x does not occur free in N and Mx ⊢Nx, then ⊢ΠMN.
3. If ⊢ΣM and x does not occur free in N and Mx ⊢N, then ⊢N.
Church did not have in this paper a general notion of deduction from premises,
only deduction from one premise.
Very soon after writing [Church, 1932], Church discovered that his list of axioms
was contradictory, so in [Church, 1933] he modiﬁed it to avoid that contradiction,
discussed the possibility of a consistency proof, derived a large number of results
in the system, discussed the term that represents the Russell paradox, and ended
with his proposal, now well-known, for representing the natural numbers, here
given in modern notation: see Remarks 9 and 10 in Appendix A. In terms of these
deﬁnitions, Church deﬁned
N ≡λx . (∀P)(P1 ∧(∀u)(Pu ⊃P(σu)) ⊃Px).
Church noted that the ﬁrst two Peano axioms and the induction axiom follow
immediately from these deﬁnitions.
By this time, Church had two graduate students who later became two of the
leaders of mathematical logic, Steven Cole Kleene (1909–1994) and John Barkley
Rosser (1907–1989). Church set Kleene the problem of studying his system, es-
pecially the theory of natural numbers. Both worked on matters connected with
Church’s formal logic: Kleene, who started ﬁrst, worked on the system itself, while
Rosser worked on its connection to Curry’s combinatory logic.
The ﬁrst result of these studies was [Kleene, 1934], which showed that arguments
using the intuitive rule of proof by cases could be carried out in that system.
This made possible deﬁnition by cases, which Kleene needed for his dissertation.
Kleene modiﬁed Church’s system in relatively minor ways, the most important
being that λx . M was to be well-formed only when x occurred free in M. This
modiﬁcation was retained in all later publications having to do with untyped λ-
calculus by Church, Kleene, and Rosser. In this paper Kleene also published for
the ﬁrst time a deﬁnition of combination by deﬁning I to be λx . x and, following
Rosser, J to be λuxyz . ux(uzy) and then taking combinations to be terms formed
from I and J by applications. Kleene then reproduced a result from Rosser’s as
yet unpublished dissertation that for any term a combination could be found to
which the term converts. He needed this result to show that deﬁnitions by cases
and proofs by cases could be carried out in Church’s system. This was the ﬁrst
published result relating λ-calculus and combinatory logic. (Rosser’s dissertation
was later published as [Rosser, 1935a; Rosser, 1935b]; see § 2.3 below.)
Next came Kleene’s dissertation [Kleene, 1935], which was based on Church’s
deﬁnition of natural numbers. Kleene showed that Church’s system was adequate
for the elementary theory of natural numbers by proving the third and fourth
Peano axioms. In the course of doing this, he showed that a number of (recursive)
functions could be represented as λ-terms, including functions such as the prede-
cessor which Church had not thought could be represented that way. Rosser had
also found some such representations in work that was never published, and by

The Logic of Church and Curry
823
the fall of 1933, Church began to speculate that every function of positive integers
that can be eﬀectively calculated can be represented as a λ-term. By early the
following year, Church was convinced of what is now known as “Church’s Thesis.”
See [Rosser, 1984, p. 334].
But meanwhile, in late 1934, Kleene and Rosser succeeded in proving that
Church’s system of logic was inconsistent by showing that Richard’s paradox could
be derived in it. [Kleene and Rosser, 1935]. Their proof also applied to the system
of combinatory logic then being developed by Curry (see §2.3 below).
Church, Kleene, and Rosser responded to this inconsistency by extracting from
Church’s system of logic what is now called the pure λ-calculus: the part of the
system involving the formation of λ-terms and the rules for reduction and con-
version. In Church’s Thesis they already had an indication of the importance of
pure λ-calculus, and in the years following the discovery of the inconsistency, they
obtained a number of major results, results which fully justiﬁed treating the pure
λ-calculus as a system on its own.
1.3
First Important Results using Pure λ-Calculus
The ﬁrst result needed to justify the pure λ-calculus was a consistency proof,
and one was published as [Church, 1935]. This result was actually proved for an
extension of the pure λ-calculus which included an axiom, 2 (here taken as the
truth value for “true”), and a new operator δ with axioms to ensure that δMN = 2
if M and N are in normal form and they diﬀer only by changes of bound variables
and δMN = 1 (here taken as the truth value for “false”) if M and N are in
normal form and are not the same except for changes of bound variables. Church’s
intention was to incorporate logic by using 2 and 1 as the truth values, and he
deﬁned the logical connectives for negation and conjunction simply as functions on
natural numbers and then deﬁned the logical quantiﬁers in such a way that when a
quantiﬁer formula is true it converts to 2 but otherwise has no normal form. The
consistency result depended on some results that Church obtained with Rosser
and which were published soon after in [Church and Rosser, 1936]. This latter
paper proved what is now known as the “Church-Rosser Theorem” or “conﬂuence
theorem,” which is now considered basic in term rewriting. It says that if M  P
and M  Q, then there is a term N such that P  N and Q  N. See Theorem 11
in Appendix A below.
This was followed by a result of Kleene showing that the functions that can be
represented as λ-terms are precisely those which are recursive in the Herbrand-
G¨odel sense [Kleene, 1936b]. This gave important support to Church’s Thesis,
which received additional support a couple of years later by work of Alan Tur-
ing [1936–1937; 1937a; 1937b].
But the most important result derived at this time from pure λ-calculus, the
result for which Church is most famous, is his proof that there are unsolvable
problems [Church, 1936c]. In this paper, Church proved that there is no eﬀec-
tively computable procedure (in the form of a recursive function) which will decide

824
Jonathan P. Seldin
whether or not two given terms convert to each other, and he also proved that
there is no eﬀectively computable procedure that will determine whether or not a
term has a normal form. A G¨odel numbering converts these problems into prob-
lems of elementary arithmetic, and Church ended his paper by pointing out that
his result implies that any formal system which includes elementary arithmetic
and is ω-consistent is undecidable. In [Church, 1936b; Church, 1936a], Church
extended this result to the undecidability of ﬁrst-order logic. Rosser, in his [1936],
showed that the assumption of ω-consistency is unnecessary, both for G¨odel’s in-
completeness theorem and Church’s undecidability result.
There was one more use of λ-calculus made in the 1930s by Church and Kleene,
who showed in their [1936] how to represent some ordinal numbers as λ-terms.
Church discussed this representation and its relation to constructivity in his [1938].
A summary of all results on λ-calculus up to this point appears in [Church,
1941].
After these results were obtained, Church, Kleene, and Rosser gave up on basing
a system of logic on λ-calculus. Kleene moved on to recursive function theory,
starting with [Kleene, 1936a]. When he wrote further on ordinal notations, he did
not deal with representations in λ-calculus [Kleene, 1938; Kleene, 1944; Kleene,
1955].7 Rosser’s work on combinatory logic will be taken up in §2.3 below. And
Church himself gave up on trying to construct a type-free logic based on λ-calculus.
1.4
Church’s Type Theory
Although he had given up on basing type-free logic on λ-calculus, he did use λ-
calculus as a basis for a system of simple type theory [Church, 1940].
In this
system, the types were deﬁned as in Deﬁnition 4 of Appendix B, where the atomic
types were o for propositions and ι for individuals.8 Terms were allowed in the
system only if they could be assigned types by the typing rules of TAChλ of
Deﬁnition 5 of Appendix B. The atomic terms included terms for the boolean
logical operators negation and disjunction and also a universal quantiﬁer for every
type and, in addition, a deﬁnite descriptions operator ια(oα) of type (α →o) →α
for every type α. The axioms and rules were suﬃcient to give higher-order classical
logic with equality and descriptions, and there was an axiom which asserted the
existence of two distinct individuals.
In the paper, Church proved the Peano
postulates using the typed version of his representation of the natural numbers,
and he also proved that the deﬁnition of functions by primitive recursion could be
carried out in the system.
A few years later, Church [1951] used this type theory in formulating a logic of
sense and denotation. And still later, he applied this type theory in a number of
papers including his [1973; 1974; 1989; 1993].
7Kleene says in his [1981] that he stopped using λ-calculus as a basis for his work because of
the negative reactions of audiences to his early papers which did use λ-calculus. The only later
paper he wrote that was based in λ-calculus is [Kleene, 1962].
8But Church wrote ‘(βα)’ for α →β.

The Logic of Church and Curry
825
Otherwise, he published nothing further involving λ-calculus.
Leon Henkin [1950] proved Church’s type theory complete. In his [1963], he gave
a formulation in which the only primitive constants are the identity relations over
each type. Peter B. Andrews extended it to include transﬁnite types in his [1965],
and more recently he has included it in an introductory textbook, his [1986].
This kind of system has been extended in ways important for theorem provers
and proof development systems. The ﬁrst such extensions were due to Per Martin-
L¨of [1975; 1984] and Jean-Yves Girard [1971; 1972].
Martin-L¨of’s type theory
was used by Robert Constable and his team as the basis for the Nuprl proof
development system [Constable and others, 1986], while the systems of Girard
were extended by Coquand and Huet to the calculus of constructions [Coquand
and Huet, 1988], which formed the basis for the Coq proof assistant.9
For a general overview of typed systems see [Kamareddine et al., 2004].
2
COMBINATORY LOGIC
2.1
Background of Haskell Brooks Curry
Haskell10 Brooks Curry was born on September 12, 1900 at Millis, Massachusetts.
His parents ran the School for Expression, now known as Curry College. Curry
entered Harvard University as an undergraduate in 1916, and originally intended
to study medicine. However, when the United States entered World War I, he
changed his major to mathematics.
His original motivation was patriotic: he
thought knowing mathematics would enable him to serve his country in an artillery
unit. After his eighteenth birthday, he joined the Student Army Training Corps,
but before he saw any action, the war ended.
Curry graduated from Harvard with the degree of A.B. in 1920 and began his
graduate work in a program in electrical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology that involved working half-time at the General Electric Company.
However, he became dissatisﬁed with the engineers because they did not share
his interest in why results were true, so after two years he returned to Harvard
University as a student of physics. For the ﬁrst year he was in that program,
1922–23, he was a half-time research assistant to P. W. Bridgeman. He received
his M.A. in physics in 1924. He then went back to mathematics, where he entered
a Ph.D. program and was eventually assigned by George D. Birkhoﬀa dissertation
topic on diﬀerential equations. However, he was becoming increasingly interested
in logic, and this led him eventually to combinatory logic.
9See http://coq.inria.fr/.
10Much of the information in this section and those which follow comes from my personal
association with Curry. I was his research assistant at the Pennsylvania State University from
1964–1966, helped him train new assistants at the University of Amsterdam in 1966–67, ﬁnished
my doctorate under his direction in 1968, and then became a co-author. I remained in touch
with him for the rest of his life.

826
Jonathan P. Seldin
2.2
Origins of combinatory logic
Curry’s ﬁrst look at a work on logic came in May of 1922, when he ﬁrst stud-
ied [Whitehead and Russell, 1910–1913]. He immediately noticed that of the two
rules of inference in Chapter 1 of that work, the rule of substitution is substan-
tially more complicated than the rule of modus ponens.11 He gradually began to
feel a desire to break down the rule of substitution into simpler rules, and during
1926–1927 this brought him to the combinators I, B, C, and W12 and the appli-
cation operation. At that time it was standard to make underlying assumptions
about substitution as part of what Curry called the “prelogic” of a system, not
stated explicitly. Curry felt that it was important to write these assumptions out
formally, so that they could be analyzed. At this point, he decided that he wanted
to work in logic, and so he abandoned his work in diﬀerential equations. However,
there was nobody at Harvard who could supervise a dissertation on this topic.
As a result, for the year 1927–1928, Curry took an instructorship at Princeton
University.13 During that year, he discovered in a library search that his work had
been anticipated by Moses Sch¨onﬁnkel [1924]. Sch¨onﬁnkel had shown that all the
combinators could be deﬁned in terms of K and S, and Curry immediately saw the
point of K and incorporated it in his system along with I, B, C, and W. However,
for some years, Curry did not see the point of replacing I, B, C, and W by S. Curry
also noticed that Sch¨onﬁnkel had taken equality (conversion) informally, without
giving any axioms or rules for it. Curry realized that despite Sch¨onﬁnkel’s work,
there was scope for a dissertation on this subject.
For this purpose, Curry sought the advice of Oswald Veblen. Veblen and Curry
then sought information about Sch¨onﬁnkel from the topologist Paul Alexandroﬀ,
who was visiting Princeton that year. Alexandroﬀinformed them that Sch¨onﬁnkel
had returned to the USSR and was in a mental instution, so there was no chance
that Curry could work with him. However, Sch¨onﬁnkel’s paper was based on a
talk he had given to the G¨ottingen Mathematical Society in December of 1920,
and there were people there who knew about this subject: Heinrich Behmann and
Paul Bernays.
So Curry decided to go to G¨ottingen to get his doctorate. He wrote his ﬁrst
paper, [Curry, 1929], as part of an application for a grant to make that trip. In this
paper, Curry followed Sch¨onﬁnkel in taking K and S as basic combinators, appli-
cation as the operation that formed terms, and =∗(which Curry then wrote as
‘=’ and thought of as equality) as the only other primitive, but unlike Sch¨onﬁnkel
he gave formal axioms and rules for his system. He called attention to the fact that
the reason for the interest in this system is its combinatory completeness, which
11The notes Curry made at the time can be seen on http://www.sadl.uleth.ca under the title
“Works of Haskell Curry.” Search by date for the item of 20 May 1922.
12See Appendix C for the deﬁnitions.
Curry’s original notation for these combinators was
I, B, C, and W. Curry ﬁrst used the sans-serif notation for combinators and other constants
in [Curry and Feys, 1958].
13He just missed Alonzo Church, who had completed his Ph.D. and left to study elsewhere for
two years. See § 1.1 above.

The Logic of Church and Curry
827
says that if X is any term in which some of the variables x1, x2, . . . , xn occur, then
there is a term A, in which none of these variables occur, such that
Ax1x2 . . . xn =∗X.
Curry wanted this A to be uniquely determined by X and the variables x1, x2, . . . , xn,
so one of his rules was a generalization of rule (ζ)14: if
Xx1x2 . . . xn =∗Y x1x2 . . . xn
for variables x1, x2, . . . , xn which do not occur in X or Y , then
X =∗Y.
However, this rule was too complicated from the point of view of analyzing the
logical rule of substitution into simpler rules, so Curry wanted to ﬁnd a set of
postulates which would imply this rule. In [Curry, 1929], he gave axioms that
imply this rule in a special case, which he predicted would be important for the
analysis of substitution.
Curry spent the year 1928–1929 in G¨ottingen completing his dissertation [Curry,
1930].
His oﬃcial supervisor was David Hilbert, but he actually worked with
Bernays. Church was in G¨ottingen for half of that year, and in his later years
Curry remembered seeing a manuscript of Church’s with many occurrences of
the symbol ‘λ’, but at the time he had no idea that this manuscript had any
connection with what he was doing. He did not realize there was a connection
until he saw [Church, 1932] a few years later.
The system of [Curry, 1930] is based on the combinators B, C, W, and K, and
had addional atomic terms Q (for logical identity, which here meant conversion),
Π (for the universal quantiﬁer), P (for implication), and Λ (for conjunction). The
term forming operation was application, and formulas were of the form ‘⊢X’ for
‘X is provable.’ The axioms included
⊢Π(W(CQ)),
from which the reﬂexive law of Q can be proved (using the rules given below) and
axioms from which the generalization of rule (ζ) follows. For example, the axiom
giving the conversion rule for K is
⊢Q(KXY )X.
The rules included rules from which it can be proved that Q has all the properties
of equality and weak conversion, and the following logical rules:
Rule Π. ΠX ⊢XY ,
Rule P. PXY, X ⊢Y ,
14See Appendix A, Remark 1.

828
Jonathan P. Seldin
Rule Λ. X, Y ⊢ΛXY .
For this system, Curry proved combinatory completeness by giving an algorithm
for what he later called bracket abstraction, although at this time he did not use
that notation, and he described his algorithm as deﬁning, for a combination X in
which some of the variables x1, x2, . . . , xn occur, a term A in which none of those
variables occur such that
Ax1x2 . . . xn =∗X.
The ﬁrst step is to remove the variables from x1, x2, . . . , xn which do not occur in
X using K and B. The second step is to repeat variables as often as they occur in
X using W and B. Third, the variables must be arranged in the order in which
they occur in X using C and B. And ﬁnally, parentheses that occur in X are
inserted using B and I.
Curry also gave a consistency proof for the system he had deﬁned. However, no
logical axioms for Π, P, or Λ were given, and the development of the logical part
of the system was left for the future.
2.3
Early Development of Combinatory Logic
After ﬁnishing his dissertation, Curry joined the faculty of the Pennsylvania State
College in September 1929.
At ﬁrst, he was not happy there; he had been at
Harvard and Princeton, and Penn State did not then support research,15 he felt
that Penn State was an institution of much lower standing. However, his choice of
logic as a ﬁeld had cut down his opportunities, and the Great Depression began
that fall, so ﬁnding a job elsewhere was out of the question.
Since Penn State had heavy teaching loads, Curry did not have much time for
research there for the next three years. There was also no support for graduate
students at that time. In fact, Curry’s ﬁrst graduate student, Edward Cogan, did
not start working with him until 1950. So, unlike Church, Curry had to continue
his development of combinatory logic on his own.
However, he did manage to do some research during his ﬁrst years. During the
very ﬁrst year of teaching at Penn State, he published [Curry, 1931], in which he
added postulates for the universal quantiﬁer and proved some of its properties. But
his further research had to wait until he was able to take a year oﬀfrom teaching
as the result of a National Research Fellowship, which he started in 1931. The
fellowship was originally supposed to be for two years, from 1931 to 1933. However,
after one year, his fellowship for the second year was cancelled because he had a
job to go back to, and many others did not. Nevertheless, this one year, which he
spent at the University of Chicago, was fruitful for him. He published [Curry, 1932;
Curry, 1933; Curry, 1934a; Curry, 1934b; Curry, 1936] and the abstract [Curry,
1935], all of which were written or partly written during this year.
15It is very diﬀerent now.

The Logic of Church and Curry
829
Of these, [Curry, 1932] contained a few technical modiﬁcations of [Curry, 1930],
[Curry, 1933] introduced the notation of bracket abstraction, which allowed state-
ments using bound variables to occur as abbreviations, and [Curry, 1934b] ex-
tended the logic by introducing axioms for equality and implication; it included a
proof of the Deduction Theorem (equivalent to implication introduction in natural
deduction) and the following generalization of it [Curry, 1934b, Theorem 14]:16 if
A1, A2, . . . , Am ⊢X,
then there is a proof in which the variables x1, x2, . . . , xn do not occur of
⊢(∀x1)(∀x2) . . . (∀xn)(A1 ⊃(A2 ⊃(. . . (Am ⊃X) . . .))).
The paper [Curry, 1934a] is an extended abstract of [Curry, 1936], which Curry
had some trouble getting accepted.
In these papers, Curry proposed a theory
of predication or functionality, which would now be called a theory of categories
or types.17
These types are predicates, so what is now usually written as X :
α was written by Curry as αX, so that the type, α, is the predicate and the
term, X, is the subject. This is the source of the name of the Subject-Reduction
Theorem. The main operator of this theory is F, which is characterized by the
rule FαβX, αY ⊢β(XY ), so FαβX is essentially equivalent to X : α →β.18 This
means that Fαβ is the type of functions which map arguments of type α into values
in type β. (This does not necessarily mean that α is the domain of such functions,
only that this domain includes α.) Furthermore, subjects and predicates were not
completely separated in the original theory. In [Curry and Feys, 1958, §10A3],
Curry derives KX(WWW) for an arbitrary term X, and then applies a reduction
step to deduce X, thus proving the full free system of [Curry and Feys, 1958,
§10A3] inconsistent.
Curry had the original idea for functionality in December 1928.19 Interestingly,
his ﬁrst notation for Fαβ was Fαβ, but he found this awkward, and so tried the
current notation, [α →β], before rejecting that and settling on Fαβ.20 Among
the categories Curry wanted in his system is H (originally called Pr), standing
for proposition. Curry intended to use the theory of functionality to restrict log-
ical postulates to some appropriately deﬁned (by logical postulates) category of
propositions as a means of avoiding any paradoxes.21
16Stated here using modern abbreviations.
17However, the theory of functionality was originally much less restrictive than type theory.
It mentioned types, but it did not use them to deﬁne what it meant for a formula to be “well-
formed,” so that Curry originally anticipated allowing untyped terms in the system. This made
it much less restrictive than Church’s simple theory of types [Church, 1940].
18For Curry, this was roughly equivalent to (∀x)(αx ⊃β(Xx)), but diﬀered from that the way
Church’s ΠXY diﬀered from (∀x)(Xx ⊃Y x). See Footnote 5.
19See T281213A, the ﬁrst item for December 13, 1928, under Works of Haskell Curry at
http://www.sadl.uleth.ca.
20This became Fαβ in [Curry and Feys, 1958]. See also [Seldin, 2003].
21Curry observed in these papers that there is a term, [x](¬(xx)), which represents Russell’s

830
Jonathan P. Seldin
Meanwhile, Rosser published his dissertation [Rosser, 1935a; Rosser, 1935b], in
which he presented a system of combinatory logic based on the combinators I and
J. Rosser’s rules for combinator conversion were as follows:
IX
⇔
X,
W(IX)
⇔
WX,
W(JXY ZU)
⇔
W(XY (XUZ)),
where W is an arbitrary term.
One of Rosser’s aims was to eliminate any primitive rules whose conclusions
are not uniquely determined by the premises. One such rule is Curry’s rule for Π,
which is ΠX ⊢XY , since the choice of Y is arbitrary here. Rosser avoided this
problem by using Church’s Π, which is characterized by the rule
ΠXY, XZ ⊢Y Z.
To get the eﬀect of a universal quantiﬁer, he followed Church in using ΠE, where
E is Church’s E, which is deﬁned by
E ≡λx . (∃X)(Xx).
2.4
The Paradox of Kleene and Rosser and Curry’s New Program
for Combinatory Logic
Curry’s papers up to this time continued the development of combinatory logic
along the lines he had previously set out, and the abstract [Curry, 1935] had taken
him up to the representation of set theory in combinatory logic. He seemed on the
point of showing that combinatory logic could serve as a foundation for logic and
mathematics.
However, Kleene and Rosser proved that Curry’s system of [Curry, 1934b], like
that of Church, was inconsistent. Their result appeared in print in [Kleene and
Rosser, 1935], but Curry knew about it before that. He had been in correspondence
with Rosser, who had informed him in December, 193322 that he thought he could
prove Church’s system inconsistent. Curry mentioned in a reply dated December
18, 1933 that he would like to see the proof of the contradiction Rosser mentioned
as soon as possible. In a letter to Curry postmarked March 2, 1934, Rosser said
that he and Kleene had ﬁnished the ﬁrst draft of a proof that Church’s system is
inconsistent. Then in a joint letter dated November 15, 1934, Kleene and Rosser
sent Curry a manuscript of [Kleene and Rosser, 1935]. The text of their letter
began
paradox (stated in terms of predicates in stead of sets), and he proposed to ﬁnd postulates from
which it could not be proved that the application of this term to itself is a proposition. However,
it was important for Curry that this term exist in his system.
22Rosser did not date the letter, so I am relying on a postmark which is smudged. I think the
date is about December 10, but it might be a few days later.

The Logic of Church and Curry
831
We are sorry to say that we have a proof of the inconsistency of your
system of formal logic. We are also sorry that we did not obtain our
results in deﬁnite form in time to let you know sooner.
Curry’s reply to both of them, dated November 19, 1934, began
Your letter of November 15th enclosing reprint and manuscript has
just been received. You begin by saying that you are sorry that you
have done this dreadful thing. I am afraid that I can not share your
grief. In the ﬁrst place I do not believe a word of it;– you are not
sorry but you are full of that profound satisfaction which comes from
doing something worth while. In the second place I have no occasion to
feel sorry for myself; for I feel that whatever advances or deepens our
knowledge of the subject to which I have devoted so much attention
advances my interest as well. Consequently I am not inclined to feel
sorry but just the opposite, and I hasten to congratulate you both.
A little later, he said
. . . you seem to imply that you have refuted my position by showing
that my system as you call it is inconsistent. On the contrary your
results are in general agreement with my position and are in a sense a
continuation of my work. You allude for example to my paper [reference
to [Curry, 1934b]]. I proved in that paper (Theorem 14) that any logical
system of a certain type, which I called an L system had a certain
property, say T. As I understand it you have essentially proved that
any system having the property T is “inconsistent”. Very well, that
simply means that any L system is inconsistent, which is a very much
stronger result that (sic) which I had proved. Whether or not you
needed my result in order to establish the stronger one I do not know;
but in any case your result does not contradict mine. The conclusion
is that a consistent system of logic, if any, must be weaker than an L
system which is a positive result of some value.
Curry then went on to point out that the contradiction requires some of the pos-
tulates of his [1934b], and that the systems of his earlier papers, which did not
include these assumptions, might well be consistent.
Thus, whereas Church, Kleene, and Rosser reacted to the inconsistency by
abandoning the attempt to ﬁnd a type-free formal logic that could serve as a basis
for mathematics, Curry did not. He had already developed a strategy for dealing
with contradictions, namely using a predicate to stand for “proposition” together
with his theory of functionality to restrict the postulates for the logical operators.
The contradiction of Kleene and Rosser only meant for him that he was required
to face this problem earlier than he had anticipated in the development of the
subject.

832
Jonathan P. Seldin
The ﬁrst decision Curry made on learning of the paradox was that he needed to
study it in detail “so as to lay bare its central nerve.”23 The direct result of this
study was [Curry, 1941b], which shows how to derive Richard’s paradox in a very
general setting. Meanwhile, he also published [Curry, 1941c], in which he revised
the fundamental postulates of combinatory logic taking into account some of the
ideas of Rosser’s thesis [Rosser, 1935a; Rosser, 1935b]. This was closely followed
by [Curry, 1941a], in which he proved the consistency of a system stronger than
that of [Curry, 1930]. Finally, he found a much simpler contradiction that could
be derived under the assumptions of the Kleene-Rosser paradox in [Curry, 1942b].
This simpler contradiction, known as Curry’s paradox, can be stated easily as
follows: Suppose the system has an operator P for implication, so that X ⊃Y
is an abbreviation for PXY .
Suppose that the following rules hold, either as
primitive rules or as derived rules:
(Eq)
X
X =∗Y
Y,
(⊃E)
X ⊃Y
X
Y.
Suppose also that
(PW)
(X ⊃(X ⊃Y )) ⊃(X ⊃Y )24
is provable for arbitrary terms X and Y . Then any term can be proved in the
system. To see this, let Y be any term, and let X ≡Y(λx.x ⊃(x ⊃Y )), where Y
is a ﬁxed-point combinator,25 so that X =∗(X ⊃(X ⊃Y )). Then we can prove
Y as follows:
1.
(X ⊃(X ⊃Y )) ⊃(X ⊃Y )
By hypothesis
2.
X ⊃(X ⊃Y )
By 1 and Rule (Eq)
3.
X
By 2 and Rule (Eq)
4.
X ⊃Y
By 2, 3, and Rule (⊃E)
5.
Y
By 3, 4, and Rule (⊃E)
Before he discovered this paradox, Curry had assumed that the contradiction was
caused by his postulates for the universal quantiﬁer, but this paradox made it clear
that the problem was the postulates for implication alone.26
Curry’s next step was to set out a program to ﬁnd type-free systems based on
combinatory logic or λ-calculus that would be consistent. His idea was to deﬁne
a restricted class of terms that could represent propositions.
23[Curry and Feys, 1958, §8S1].
24This will be provable if, in addition to the above rules, the natural deduction rule (⊃I) for
introducing implication (also known as the Dedution Theorem) is either a primitive rule or a
derived rule.
25See Appendix A.
26For further conﬁrmation of this, see [Seldin, 2000].

The Logic of Church and Curry
833
For this purpose, he noted that there are diﬀerent possible sets of logical oper-
ators that could be taken as primitive.
First, he could use P and Π, as he had done in his early papers. In order to meet
Rosser’s criterion that the conclusion of every primitive rule should be uniquely
determined by the premises, he added a new atomic constant E with the property
that EX is provable for every X. Then he characterized P and Π by the rules
Rule P. PXY, X ⊢Y ,
Rule Π. ΠX, EY ⊢XY .
A second possible set consisted of Church’s Π, which Curry renamed Ξ. Its char-
acteristic rule is
Rule Ξ. ΞXY, XU ⊢Y U.
In terms of Ξ, both P and Π can be deﬁned as follows:
P
≡
λxy . Ξ(Kx)(Ky),
Π
≡
ΞE.
(Because Curry accepted the combinator K, he did not need a separate atomic
term for implication the way Church did.) Conversely, Ξ can be deﬁned in terms
of P and Π by
Ξ ≡λxy . Π(λu . P(xu)(yu)),
or, in a more commonly recognized notation,
Ξ ≡λxy . (∀u)(xu ⊃yu).
A third set of primitives consisted of just F, which is characterized by the following
rule:
Rule F. FαβX, αU ⊢β(XU).
Of course, F can be deﬁned in terms of P and Π by
F ≡λxyz . Π(λu . P(xu)(y(zu))).
or, in the more commonly recognized notation,
F ≡λxyz . (∀u)(xu ⊃y(zu)).
Using essentially the same deﬁnition, F can be deﬁned in terms of Ξ:
F ≡λxyz . Ξx(λu . y(zu)).
But Ξ can also be deﬁned in terms of F. In fact, it can be done in two ways.
Ξ ≡λxy . FxyI,
and
Ξ ≡λxy . FxIy.
Curry then proposed to study three diﬀerent classes of systems:

834
Jonathan P. Seldin
1. F1: systems of functionality, based on the logical operator F and Rule F,
2. F2: systems of restricted generality based on Ξ and Rule Ξ, and
3. F3: systems of universal generality based on P and Π and Rules P and Π.
For each kind of system, Curry proposed to ﬁnd restricted forms of introduction
rule(s) corresponding to the characteristic rules read as elimination rules, in the
sense which is standard in natural deduction. Thus, for systems F1, he wanted
to ﬁnd a class of terms called canonical27 for which he could prove the following
theorem, where lower case Greek letters represent canonical terms.
THEOREM 1
Stratiﬁcation Theorem. If Γ is any set of assumptions, and
Γ, αx ⊢βX, where the variable x does not occur free in Γ, α, or β, then
Γ ⊢Fαβ(λx . X).
For systems F2, Curry wanted to deﬁne a class of canonical terms from which
he could prove:
THEOREM 2
Deduction Theorem for Ξ. If Γ is any set of assumptions and
Γ, αx ⊢β, where x does not occur free in Γ or α, then Γ ⊢Ξα(λx . β).
Similarly, for systems F3, he wanted to deﬁne a class of canonical terms from
which he could prove the following two theorems:
THEOREM 3
Deduction Theorem for P. If Γ is any set of assumptions, and
Γ, α ⊢β, then Γ ⊢Pαβ.
THEOREM 4
Universal Generalization. If Γ is any set of assumptions, and
Γ ⊢α, where x does not occur free in Γ, then Γ ⊢Π(λx . α).
Of course, Curry wanted consistency proofs for all these systems. To obtain
them, he proposed to use systems like those of Gentzen and prove results corre-
sponding to the Cut Elimination Theorem [Gentzen, 1934].28
In his earlier versions of the above systems, the axioms of each system were pre-
sented as axiom schemes. But Curry was also interested in replacing these schemes
by single axioms. This meant incorporating the deﬁnition of canonical terms into
the logic using a new atomic constant H to indicate canonicalness. For each kind
of system Fi, Curry wanted to deﬁne a corresponding ﬁnitely axiomatized system
F∗
i .
Then the United States entered World War II. For a combination of patriotic and
ﬁnancial reasons, Curry took a leave of absence from Penn State starting in June,
1942, in order to do applied mathematics for the U. S. government. Before going,
he wrote up his current research results and published them as [Curry, 1942a;
Curry, 1942c].
Just before his leave of absence began, he ﬁnally came to understand the role of
the combinator S after reading [Rosser, 1942]. Rosser had based his postulates on
27Curry actually called them canonical obs or canobs. This is because he was using the word
‘ob’ to refer to terms. See Deﬁnition 1 of Section §3 below.
28See Section §3 below.

The Logic of Church and Curry
835
his favorite combinators, I and J. But most important for Curry’s understanding
of S, Rosser had deﬁned abstraction by induction on the structure of the term.
When Curry translated Rosser’s postulates into the more usual combinators, he
ﬁnally saw that S could be used in a very elegant deﬁnition of bracket abstraction
(see Appendix C). Because Curry was about to leave Penn State for his war eﬀort,
he was unable to write this up as a paper, so he sent his notes to Rosser.
Actually, the idea of deﬁning abstraction by a direct induction was not really
due to Rosser. The deﬁnition in [Rosser, 1942] had originally been given by Church
for combinations in λ-calculus in [Church, 1935, §3] and in [Church, 1941, Chapter
IV]. But it was [Rosser, 1942] that stimulated Curry to see how to use S.
2.5
Curry’s War Work and Combinatory Logic
Most of the work Curry did during World War II was unrelated to combinatory
logic. The greater part of it was on the ﬁre control problem, which is the mathe-
matics of aiming a projectile at a moving target, and he also did some work with
I. J. Schoenberg on splines [Curry and Schoenberg, 1947; Curry and Schoenberg,
1966]. However, at the end of the war and immediately after it, in late 1945 and
early 1946, Curry was involved with the ENIAC29 computer project. This even-
tually led to the idea of using combinators to combine computer programs [Curry,
1954].
Curry’s experience with the ENIAC project also had an after-eﬀect on his return
to Penn State in September 1946. He tried to pursuade the administration to
get some computing equipment and start what is now called a computer science
program. He had no success in this, but persisted until a colleague pointed out
to him that if he did succeed, he would be made director of the program without
any increase in salary. He then gave up trying to start such a computer science
program at Penn State, and went back to logic.
2.6
Curry’s Work on Combinatory Logic in the Early Postwar Years
The ﬁrst thing Curry did about combinatory logic after returning to Penn State
was to write to Rosser about the notes he had sent him on basing combinatory
logic on K and S and deﬁning abstraction by induction on the structure of the
term. He wanted to know whether Rosser wanted to write a joint paper about
this.
But Rosser had moved on to other things, so Curry then wrote his own
paper [Curry, 1949].
About the same time, Curry became aware of [Newman, 1942], and thought that
he could use the ideas in it to give a new proof of the Church-Rosser Theorem in
an abstract setting. In a sense he succeeded in [Curry, 1952c], since he did give
a proof of an abstract version of the theorem, but after the paper appeared it
29The ENIAC was one of the ﬁrst electronic computers, built during World War II for the
purpose of calculating the trajectories of projectiles.
See [Goldstine, 1946], now available at
http://ftp.arl.mil/ mike/comphist/46eniac-report/index.html.

836
Jonathan P. Seldin
was discovered that λ-calculus does not satisfy one of the hypotheses he assumed.
(And Newman’s proof failed for a similar reason.)
Meanwhile, Curry attended the Tenth International Congress of Philosophy in
Amsterdam in the summer of 1948.
During that congress, he was approached
by one of the editors of the new North-Holland Publishing Company and asked
to write a short monograph of at most 100 pages on combinatory logic for their
series ”Studies in Logic”.
Curry sent them a philosophical manuscript he had
ready, [Curry, 1951]. But, for combinatory logic, he realised that so much unpub-
lished research had accumulated that an adequate treatment would need to be
much longer than the editors envisaged.
Nevertheless, the idea of writing a book on this subject appealed to him. He
knew that he was not a good expository writer, so he approached Robert Feys,
who was on the faculty of the University of Louvain in Belgium and had an interest
in combinatory logic, to become a co-author. Feys accepted, and Curry applied
for and received a Fulbright fellowship to spend the year 1950–1951 at Louvain.
There, work began on [Curry and Feys, 1958].
From the beginning, the plan was for a two volume work, with the ﬁrst volume
dealing with properties of conversion, called pure combinatory logic, and the second
volume dealing with systems of logic in the ordinary sense based on combinatory
logic or λ-calculus, called illative combinatory logic. However, as the writing pro-
ceeded, it became clear that this plan needed to be modiﬁed: in particular, since
Curry was continuing to do new research, some of his newer results on the theory
of functionality came to be included in the ﬁrst volume.
Thus, [Curry and Feys, 1958] started with introductory material on formal sys-
tems (Chapter 1) and metatheory30 (Chapter 2), and then had a chapter (Chapter
3) on λ-calculus. Although the λ-calculus was basically due to Church, it was
Curry who ﬁxed some notations that became standard in subsequent works on
λ-calculus, for example the names for alpha-reduction and beta-reduction.
He
used the lower-case Greek alphabet for names of binary relations, and (α) and
(β) became his designations for Church’s Rules I and II from [Church, 1932].
The chapter on λ-calculus was followed by a chapter (Chapter 4) on the Church-
Rosser Theorem.31
This was followed by three chapters on pure combinatory
logic: Chapter 5 was on various commonly used composite combinators and the
relations between them, Chapter 6 was on what is called the “synthetic” theory
of combinators (formal deﬁnition of the system, deﬁnition of abstraction, and the
relation to λ-calculus), and Chapter 7 was on what was called “logistic founda-
tions,” which means formulations in terms of provability. Chapter 8 was a general
introduction to illative combinatory logic, and Chapters 9–10 were on the theory
of functionality.
The new research included in [Curry and Feys, 1958]32 grew out of work on
30There called “epitheory” for reasons which will be discussed in § 4 below.
31The proof presented in this chapter has since been superceded by a simpler proof; see [Hindley
and Seldin, 1986, Appendix 1].
32A careful study of Curry’s notes from the period and also of the manuscript that he had

The Logic of Church and Curry
837
the theory of functionality, that is, systems of type F1.
Curry had originally
hoped that a theory of functionality in which all terms were canonical would be
consistent, and beginning in April 1954, he spent a considerable amount of time
trying to prove this. His approach was to show ﬁrst that all inferences by Rule
Eq could be postponed to the end of any deduction and then to show that any
deduction in which the only rule was Rule F could be transformed into a standard
form. Deductions in which the only rule is Rule F are called F-deductions. During
the summer of 1954, he noticed if ξX could be deduced by an F-deduction from
a set of assumptions, then X must be irreducible and perhaps in some kind of an
even more restricted normal form. At that time, the only kind of normal form
he had for combinators was weak normal form, which means a combinatory term
with no redexes of the form KXY or SXY Z. Thus, when he ﬁrst wrote down the
Normal Form Theorem in his notes, it took the form “If ξX can be deduced from a
[set of assumptions] B, then Xλ has a normal form.”33 It took Curry some time to
prove the theorem, and the problem he had stating the theorem for combinatory
terms motivated him to introduce a new kind of reduction for combinators,34 After
proving his Normal Form Theorem, he returned to the system whose consistency
he had been trying to prove. He realized that it was, in fact, inconsistent, and in
[Curry, 1955] he published a contradiction to it. He then investigated some more
restricted systems, and found some that he could prove consistent [Curry, 1956].
This material appeared in [Curry and Feys, 1958, Chapters 9–10]. Chapter 9 was
devoted to the basic theory of functionality, in which the types are those deﬁnable
from a set of atomic types by means of the operation of forming Fαβ from α
and β. Thus, types in the basic theory of functionality are the types deﬁned in
Deﬁnition 4 in Appendix B below. The axioms were given by two axiom schemes:
(FK)
Fα(Fβα)K,
(FS)
F(Fα(Fβγ))(F(Fαβ)(Fαγ))S.
For Curry, the types were just a special kind of terms, but since the atomic types
were all assumed to be like F in being constants that do not head redexes, there
was no point in considering conversions between types. Thus, Curry restricted the
conversion rule, Rule Eq, to conversions between subjects only, and he called this
Rule Eq′:
(Eq′)
αX
X =∗Y
αY
For F-deductions, Curry proved the Subject-Construction Theorem (i.e. that de-
received from Feys shows that this work was all done by Curry with no input by Feys.
33The normal form theorem for typed λ-calculus had been stated earlier by Alan Turing in an
unpublished manuscript (see [Gandy, 1980]), but, of course, Curry did not know of this.
34See Strong Reduction below.

838
Jonathan P. Seldin
ductions always follow the construction of the subjects),35 the Subject-Reduction
Theorem (see Theorem 13 in Appendix B below), and the Stratiﬁcation Theorem
(see Theorem 1 in Section 2.3 above). He also proved that in a deduction with Rule
(Eq′), all inferences by Rule (Eq′) can be postponed until the end and combined
into one. In addition, he deﬁned a version of basic functionality for λ-calculus, in
which the axiom schemes (FK) and (FS) are replaced by a rule which he called an
axiom scheme:
(Fλ)
[α1x1, α2x2, . . . , αmxm]
βX
Fα1(. . . (Fαmβ) . . .)(λx1 . . . xm . X)
Condition:
X is a com-
bination of the variables
x1, x2, . . . , xm only, and
these variables do not oc-
cur
free
in
any
undis-
charged assumption.
Finally, he noted that if the subjects are removed from all steps of a deduction
and if each occurrence of F is changed to an occurrence of P, the result is a valid
deduction in the implication fragment of intuitionistic propositional calculus.36 He
concluded the chapter with natural deduction and Gentzen-style L-formulations,
and he used the latter to give the ﬁrst published proof of the Normal Form Theo-
rem; see Theorem 14 of Appendix B below).
In [Curry and Feys, 1958, Chapter 10], Curry presented the results of both [Curry,
1955] and [Curry, 1956]. As mentioned before, these included a proof of consistency
for a restricted system.
The problem that Curry originally had stating the Normal Form Theorem let
him to introduce another innovation in [Curry and Feys, 1958]: strong reduction
in Chapter 6. In pure combinatory logic, the natural reduction, weak reduction,
lacks a property that both λβ- and λβη-reduction satisfy, namely the property
(ξ)
X  Y →[x]X  [x]Y.
Curry studied the relation >−deﬁned by adding (ξ) to the deﬁnition of weak
reduction and inserting into the deﬁnition of bracket abstraction (see Appendix C)
the clause
(c) if x does not occur free in U, then [x](Ux) ≡U.
He called this relation strong reduction. He showed that it corresponded to λβη-
reduction, provided the combinator I was assumed to be an atom instead of being
35This theorem is based on the way he worked out examples in his attempt to prove the
consistency of the “full free” theory of functionality. He later formally deﬁned this as what is
now known as a “typing algorithm.”
36This observation, in extended form, is now well known as the formulas-as-types or
propositions-as-types or Curry-Howard isomorphism. See [Howard, 1980].

The Logic of Church and Curry
839
deﬁned as SKK.37
Six years after Curry and Feys began their work, the writing was ﬁnished, and
[Curry and Feys, 1958] appeared two years later.
Meanwhile, Curry had his ﬁrst graduate student, Edward J. Cogan.
Cogan
wrote a dissertation on set theory within illative combinatory logic, [Cogan, 1955].
The idea was to use the ideas about set theory of [G¨odel, 1940; von Neumann, 1925;
von Neumann, 1928] within the framework developed by Curry.38 Cogan chose
to represent the set theory of [G¨odel, 1940] in a system of type F∗
2 based on
Ξ, with F deﬁned in terms of Ξ.
Unfortunately, his system turned out to be
inconsistent [Titgemeyer, 1961]. The problem came from an axiom that Curry
had suggested to Cogan.
2.7
Curry’s Later Work on Combinatory Logic
After the publication of
[Curry and Feys, 1958], Curry himself, in preparation
for writing the second volume of [Curry and Feys, 1958] turned his attention to
systems of type F2, systems of restricted generality. In his [1960], Curry proved
a version of the Deduction Theorem for Ξ, namely: if ξ1, ξ2, . . . , ξm, η are all
canonical, and if
Γ, ξ1x1, ξ2x1x2, . . . ξmx1x2 . . . xm ⊢η,
where the variables x1, x2 . . . , xm do not occur free in Γ, then
Γ ⊢Ξξ1(λx1 . Ξ(ξ2x1)(. . . (λxm−1 . Ξ(ξmx1x2 . . . xm−1)(λxm . η)) . . .)).
Canonical terms were deﬁned in a such a way that the system was not really
stronger than ﬁrst order logic. Curry was unable to obtain this result by iterat-
ing Theorem 2 above because he had failed to assume an axiom generating rule.
This problem arises in ordinary predicate calculus, where one needs in addition to
modus ponens either a rule of universal generalization or else a speciﬁcation that
the universal closure of any axiom is an axiom. In his original work, Curry left
out this speciﬁcation (which I called above the axiom generating rule), although
in the paper he assumed it in the multiple form.
In his [1961], Curry gave a proof of a sort of cut-elimination theorem for a
system related to a system of type F2 the way a Gentzen L-system is related to a
natural deduction system.
Meanwhile, Curry had three more Ph.D. students.
Kenneth Loewen [1962]
wrote on the Church-Rosser Theorem and the Standardization Theorem39 for
strong reduction, and Bruce Lercher [1963] wrote on the relationship between
37The deﬁnition of a relation corresponding to λβ-reduction was not attempted.
This in-
volved some technical complications and was not done until [Mezghiche, 1984; Mezghiche, 1989;
Mezghiche, 1997].
38In a sense this set-theory already contained a combinator concept in some of its axioms,
[Curry and Feys, 1958, p. 10], [Cardone and Hindley, 2008].)
39The Standardization Theorem says roughly speaking that any reduction can be carried out
by reducing redexes from left to right.

840
Jonathan P. Seldin
strong reduction and the representation of recursive functions and functionals of
higher type. Meanwhile, Luis E. Sanchis [1963] formulated Church’s type the-
ory within combinatory logic using the theory of functionality for the types, and
proved the consistency of that system.
On April 16, 1961, Robert Feys died. This left Curry alone to work on the
second volume of [Curry and Feys, 1958]. He realized that he needed collaborators
and also realized that he needed to make a further study of the foundations of
logic, and in particular, of Gentzen-style40 proof theory before writing the second
volume. The result of this study was [Curry, 1963]. Thus, he did not get back
to work on the second volume until 1964.
That September, J. Roger Hindley
arrived at Penn State to do postdoctoral work with Curry.
Hindley had just
completed his dissertation [1964] on the Church-Rosser Theorem, and in 1965
Curry invited him to join the project.
Also in September, 1964, I began my
graduate studies with Curry. When Curry retired from Penn State in 1966 and
took up a position at the University of Amsterdam, I accompanied him. After I
ﬁnished my dissertation [1968], Curry invited me to join the project as well, and
this is how the second volume became [Curry et al., 1972], and some of the material
of [Curry et al., 1972, Chapters 14–16] came from [Seldin, 1968, Chapters 3–5].
When Curry arrived in Amsterdam, another graduate student, Martin W. Bunder
began studying with him. Curry ran a seminar at which Martin Bunder and I
presented our results, and although Martin did not become a co-author of [Curry
et al., 1972], his work did contribute to some of the later chapters.
The ﬁrst chapter of [Curry et al., 1972], Chapter 11,41 is devoted to updates to
the material on pure combinatory logic in the ﬁrst volume. Curry’s original inten-
tion was to begin with a chapter on philosophical questions, but that proved too
diﬃcult to write, and so only two subsections of the ﬁrst section of the chapter are
devoted to that. In addition to the updates to the material on pure combinatory
logic, the chapter contains a proposal due to Curry for a kind of system, which he
called a C-system, which would treat combinatory logic and λ-calculus simultane-
ously. The idea was that since the various illative systems can be deﬁned in both
λ-calculus and combinatory logic, there should be a kind of system which could
be instantiated to either. This idea was applied throughout the book, although in
several later places it was still necessary to treat combinatory logic and λ-calculus
separately.
Chapter 12 is an introduction to illative systems. Originally, illative combina-
tory logic meant combinatory logic with operators for the logical connectives and
quantiﬁers, but by the mid-1960s, Curry had decided that any applied combinatory
logic or λ-calculus should be considered an illative system.
Chapter 13 is entirely on the representation of natural numbers and recursive
functions in combinatory logic. To allow for the various known ways of coding
numerals as combinatory or lambda terms, Curry introduced two new atoms 0
40See § 3 below.
41The chapter numbering continues from [Curry and Feys, 1958].

The Logic of Church and Curry
841
and σ, and postuated what he called an iterator Z with the property that
Z (σ(σ(. . . (σ



n
0) . . .))  λxy . x(x(. . . (x



n
y) . . .)).
This system could be instantiated to any of the numerical codings by substituting
appropriate terms for 0, σ, and and constructing an appropriate pure combinator
to serve as Z. For the coding used by Church, 0 and σ would be replaced by
Church’s deﬁnitions of those terms and Z would be replaced by I. The chapter
included a proof that all recursive functions can be represented. It also discussed
the use of terms with types, or functional characters, and ended with a discussion
of G¨odel’s functionals of ﬁnite type. Included in the chapter was an undecidability
result of Curry’s for λK-calculus and equivalent combinatory systems, a result that
was stronger than Church’s result of his [1936c]. Curry [1969b] proved that the
only conversion-invariant42 recursive sets of terms were the empty set and the set
of all terms. Since the set of terms which convert to a given term and the set
of terms with a normal form were conversion-invariant, this implied Church’s two
results, but Curry’s proof required the combinator K.43
Chapter 14 is devoted to the theory of functionality. Curry had, by this time,
split Rule (Eq) into separate rules for subject and predicate:
(Eqs)
αX
X =∗Y
αY
(Eqp)
αX
α =∗β
βX
Here, (Eqs) was the rule (Eq′) of [Curry and Feys, 1958, Chapter 9], which is the
only one appropriate for basic functionality, but for stronger systems of function-
ality (Eqp) would also be appropriate. Curry called a system using these rules a
separated system, and it is with separated systems that functionality ﬁnally be-
came what is now recognized as a type theory, in which Curry’s type assignment
statements αX could be rewritten X : α. Chapter 14 also included a number of
technical improvements to the systems of [Curry and Feys, 1958, Chapters 9–10].
One of the improvements is the proof that every term with a type has a princi-
pal type scheme or principal functional character. This result was proved by two
diﬀerent methods in [Curry, 1969a] and [Hindley, 1969].
Chapter 15 is devoted to systems of restricted generality, that is systems of type
F2, based on Ξ. In it, a form of the Deduction Theorem for Ξ like Theorem 2 above
that could be iterated was proved, and with this and a cut elimination theorem
42A set of terms is conversion invariant if, whenever X is in the set and X =∗Y , then Y is in
the set. Curry called these sets equation-invariant.
43A very similar undecidability theorem had been proved by D. Scott in lecture notes in 1963,
which Curry did not see until his own proof was substantially written. See [Curry, 1969b, p.10]
or [Curry et al., 1972, p.251, footnote 7].

842
Jonathan P. Seldin
for a Gentzen-style L-system, the consistency was proved of a system whose rules
for canonicalness are essentially of the strength of ﬁrst-order logic. This settled
the theory of F2 systems. However, the F∗
2 systems were deﬁnitely not settled.
Recall that the F∗
2 systems are those in which canonicalness is deﬁned using the
theory of functionality (which can be embedded in these systems) in conjunction
with a term H representing the predicate of being a proposition.
A system of
this kind, called F∗
21, was proposed in [Seldin, 1968, Chapter 4], using an idea of
Martin Bunder to restrict the deduction theorem by placing a restriction only on
the antecedent: i.e., to take for the deduction theorem
Γ, Xx ⊢Y x
⇒
Γ, LX ⊢ΞXY,
where x does not occur free in Γ, X, or Y , and L is FEH, the category of one-place
predicates.44 In [Curry et al., 1972, §15C1] a diﬀerent system also called F∗
21 is
deﬁned. Both of these systems were deﬁned to avoid some contradictions found
by Martin Bunder in his [1969]. However, as indicated below, neither turned out
to be consistent.
Chapter 16 of [Curry et al., 1972] was on systems of universal generality, that is
systems of type F3, based on Π and P. The basic conclusion of this chapter is that
systems of universal generality are essentially equivalent to systems of restricted
generality as long as E is present in the latter. This contradicts Curry’s original
idea that F3 systems might be stronger than F2 systems. Curry also originally
assumed that both F2 and F3 systems were stronger than F1 systems, but if F1
systems are taken without the separated equality rules and Ξ is deﬁned in terms of
F in either of the ways indicated above, the result is equivalent to the corresponding
F2 system. Thus, there are equivalent versions of all three kinds of systems.
Chapter 17 was on type theory based on combinatory logic and the theory of
functionality. The chapter extended some of the results of [Sanchis, 1963; Sanchis,
1964]. One of the extensions was to a type theory with transﬁnite types, as in
[Andrews, 1965].
The writing of [Curry et al., 1972] was ﬁnished in May of 1970, and after that
Curry retired from the University of Amsterdam and returned to State College,
Pennsylvania. Except for the year 1971–1972, he spent the rest of his life there.
But before he left Amsterdam, his last Ph.D. student, Martin Bunder, ﬁnished his
dissertation [Bunder, 1969]. Bunder’s thesis showed how to interpret both ZF and
NBG set theories in a system of restricted generality. His system was similar to
the two systems F∗
21 of Seldin and Curry, but he deﬁned L to be FAH, where A is
a category of individuals and it is not the case that ⊢AX for every term X.
In his [1969, Chapter 2], Bunder gave a number of contradictions that could be
derived in various illative systems as a motivation for the limitations of his own
system (for which there was no consistency proof). Bunder later proved Seldin’s
system F∗
21 inconsistent in his [1974]. This proof of inconsistency does not apply
to the system F∗
21 of [Curry et al., 1972], but in his [Bunder, 1976] Bunder proved
44All previous proposals for this kind of system had restricted the deduction theorem by means
of restrictions on both the antecedent and the consequent.

The Logic of Church and Curry
843
this system inconsistent as well. Finally, in their [1978], Bunder and Meyer proved
inconsistent any system of illative combinatory logic which includes the following:
1. Rule (Eq),
2. Modus ponens: PXY, X ⊢Y ,
3. A deduction theorem as follows: Γ, X ⊢Y ⇒Γ, HX, HY ⊢PXY .
4. HX, HY ⊢H(PXY ),
5. X ⊢HX, and
6. ⊢H(H(. . . (H



n
X) . . .)) for a ﬁxed n and every X.
The case n = 2 of item 6, namely ⊢H(HX) for every X, was of interest because
it is equivalent to ⊢LH, which is necessary to derive any reasonable set of axioms
from the deduction theorem. Finding a set of axioms equivalent to the deduction
theorem had been one of Curry’s major aims ever since he formulated his new
program in the 1930s, and this result proved that impossible.
But even before Bunder published his contradictions, Curry became suspicious
of ⊢H(HX) for every X. His reason was that if ⊢H(HX) holds for every term
X, then it must hold for X ≡YH, where Y is a ﬁxed point combinator, and
from this follows ⊢YH, which he thought was counterintuitive. For this reason,
Curry gave up on trying to ﬁnd a system with axioms equivalent to the deduction
theorem, and, in his [1973], deﬁned a system he called F22, which was the system
F∗
21 of [Curry et al., 1972, §15C] without the postulate ⊢H(HX), and proved
it consistent in the weak sense that every theorem is canonical. Seldin obtained
stronger consistency results for this system in his [1975b; 1977] by proving cut
elimination, thus showing that there are canonical terms which are not provable.
This system is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 1. The system F22 is based on an applied λβη-calculus or equiva-
lent combinatory logic with atomic constants (that do not head redexes) Ξ, E, H,
and perhaps additional canonical atoms (i.e., atomic predicate functions) of degree
(number of arguments) n. The term F is deﬁned by
F ≡λxyz . Ξx(λu . y(zu)).
The axioms are EX for all terms X and also FEHE. The rules are as follows:
(Eq)
X
X =∗Y
Y
(ΞE)
ΞXY
XU
Y U

844
Jonathan P. Seldin
(ΞI)
[Xx]
Y x
FEHX
ΞXY
Condition: x does not oc-
cur free in X, Y , or in any
undischarged assumption.
(H)
X
HX
(Hθ)
EX1
EX2
. . .
EXn
H(θX1X2 . . . Xn)
Condition: θ is a canoni-
cal atom of degree n.
(HΞ)
FEHX
FEHY
H(ΞXY )
This was the last illative system about which Curry published any results. How-
ever, he did publish several more papers on pure combinatory logic. In his [1975b],
Curry proved for a generalized reduction of the kind used in [Curry et al., 1972,
§13A] that if a term has a normal form, then it reduces to that normal form.45 In
his [1975a], he showed how to represent Markov algorithms in combinatory logic.
His [1979] is on the representation of terms in normal form in the λβ-calculus.
And his [1980], Curry’s last published paper, is a brief survey of combinatory logic
followed by some responses to some philosophical criticisms of it.
Martin Bunder has done more than anybody else to carry on Curry’s tradition
of illative combinatory logic.
His most recent results are joint work with Wil
Dekkers and Henk Barendregt [Barendregt et al., 1993; Dekkers et al., 1998a;
Dekkers et al., 1998b], and include the consistency proof of a stronger system than
any system previously proved consistent.
3
CURRY’S WORK ON PROOF THEORY
When Curry ﬁrst read [Gentzen, 1934], he immediately realized its importance.
When he formulated his new program after learning of the paradox of [Kleene and
Rosser, 1935], he realized that Gentzen’s techniques might be useful in obtaining
the consistency proofs that his new program called for.
As a result, he started writing a paper, of which [Curry, 1937] is the abstract,
on the subject. However, this paper was never ﬁnished,46 and all he published on
this subject before World War II was [Curry, 1939a].
After the war, Curry was invited to give a series of lectures at Notre Dame
University April 12–15, 1948, and he chose as his subject an exposition of Gentzen’s
work. Instead of revising his earlier paper, he started over, and the result was
ultimately published as [Curry, 1950].
45The generalized reduction was supposed to be that for what Curry called a C-system.
46Only the ﬁrst few sections were ever typed; the rest exists only as handwritten notes.

The Logic of Church and Curry
845
In this work, Curry started from the point of view of what we might call a
Curry semantics.
Since Curry has a reputation for not having paid attention
to semantical considerations, some may ﬁnd this notion surprising, but Curry
did, in fact, have deﬁnite ideas about the meaning of the logical connectives and
quantiﬁers, and if they have been misunderstood it is because they are not based
as model theory is on set theory. Curry’s idea behind his exposition was that he
was formalizing a part of the metatheory of an elementary formal system, and he
justiﬁed the properties of the logical connectives and quantiﬁers on that basis.
Curry deﬁned a formal system as follows:
Deﬁnition 2. A formal system47 is a set48 E of statements, called elementary
statements, together with a subset T ⊆E of theorems, where the two sets satisfy
the following conditions:
1. The set T is inductive, that is, it is generated by a deﬁnite49 set of axioms
by a set of rules in such a way that there is an eﬀective procedure which
can decide, given a sequence of elementary statements, whether or not that
sequence constitutes a valid proof.
2. The set E is formed from a deﬁnite set O of formal objects and a deﬁnite
set of elementary predicates, each with a ﬁxed number of arguments.
A
statement is in E if and only if it asserts that an elementary predicate of n
arguments applies to an n-tuple of formal objects.
Formal systems are classiﬁed according to the way the set O of formal objects
is formed.
1. If the formal objects are deﬁned from primitive objects, called atoms, and
primitive operations in such a way that each formal object has a unique
construction, then the system is called an ob-system, and the formal objects
are called obs.50
2. If the formal objects are words (strings of characters) on some alphabet,51
47This is a late form of Curry’s deﬁnition, taken from [Curry, 1963]. However, the ideas behind
this deﬁnition date from the beginning of his career. For an exposition of Curry’s notion of formal
system, see [Seldin, 1975a].
48Here the word “set” is taken to mean a conceptual class, and its use does not presuppose
any formal theory of sets.
49Curry called a set deﬁnite if there is an eﬀective procedure for deciding whether or not a
given object of a suitable universe is a member of the set.
50This is a word that Curry coined for this purpose about 1950. In his earliest papers, he called
them entities, but when a philosopher told him that the word “entity” implied a meaning that
he did not intend, he switched to the word term. However, the word “term” has another use in
connection with a system of logic with quantiﬁers, and Curry felt in need of another word. In this
paper, I have used the word “term” rather than “ob” in discussing λ-calculus and combinatory
logic because the former is more common.
51In general, such words do not have unique constructions. For example, the word ‘abc’ can
be constructed by adding ‘a’ to the front of ‘bc’ or by adding ‘c’ to the end of ‘ab’.

846
Jonathan P. Seldin
then the system is called a syntactical system.52
An elementary formal system is a formal system in which all the rules have the
form
E1
E2
. . .
En
E0,
where E0, E1, E2, . . . , En are schemes for elementary statements; i.e., are expres-
sions that become elementary formal systems when formal objects are substituted
for (meta-)variables.
Ordinary formal logical calculi, such as propositional calculus and ﬁrst-order
predicate calculus, are both syntactical systems and ob systems, since the formal
objects are deﬁned to be words on an alphabet, but they are also well-formed
formulas, and well-formed formulas deﬁned in the usual way each have a unique
construction from the atomic formulas by means of the connectives and quantiﬁers.
For Curry, the elementary statements of logical calculi are deﬁned by applying
the predicate ‘is provable’ to well-formed formulas. Curry indicated this by writing
the sign ‘⊢’ in front of each well-formed formula. Thus, whereas it is usual in logic
to take a proof as a sequence of well-formed formulas A1, A2, . . . , An, Curry took
a proof as a sequence of elementary statements of the form ⊢A1, ⊢A2, . . . ⊢An,
and he wrote
P1, P2, . . . , Pm ⊢Q
as an abbreviation for the statement: if ⊢P1, ⊢P2, . . . , ⊢Pm are added to the
system as new axioms, then ⊢Q is provable.53
Among logical calculi, formal systems of what is usually called a Hilbert-style
formulation, in which the only rules are modus ponens and universal generaliza-
tion or modus ponens alone, are elementary formal systems. Natural deduction
systems, in which there are rules which discharge assumptions, are not elementary
formal systems.
Now Curry had originally deﬁned combinatory logic in his [1929] as an ob sys-
tem in which the combinatory terms are the obs and the elementary predicate is a
predicate of two arguments which he denoted by ‘=’, so that the elementary state-
ments all had the form X = Y ,54 where X and Y are combinatory terms. However,
starting in his [1930], Curry deﬁned combinatory logic to be what he later called
an assertional system, a system in which there is only one predicate, namely ⊢.
Thus, the elementary statements all asserted the provability of combinatory terms,
and X = Y became an abbreviation for QXY .
Curry considered the logical calculi he introduced in his [1950] to be formal-
izations of a part of the metatheory55 of an elementary formal system. He thus
deﬁned the following metatheoretic connectives:
52Originally, Curry considered only ob systems as formal systems.
However, starting in
his [1963], Curry included syntactical systems as formal systems.
53If m = 0, so that there are no new axioms added, this just asserts that ⊢Q is provable in
the existing system.
54There, X = Y had the meaning now denoted by X =∗Y .
55Kleene, in a review of [Curry, 1941d] published in the Journal of Symbolic Logic, 6:10–102,

The Logic of Church and Curry
847
& : E1&E2 means that there is a proof of E1 and a proof of E2,
or: E1 or E2 means that there is a proof of E1 or a proof of E2 and there is an
eﬀectively computable process for deciding which,
→: E1 →E2 means that there is an eﬀective process for converting any proof
of E1 into a proof of E2, and is regarded as vacuously true if it can be
constructively proved that there is no proof of E1,
⇄: E1 ⇄E2 means (E1 →E2) & (E2 →E1),
⇒: E1 ⇒E2 means that if E1 is adjoined to the system as an axiom, then E2
is a theorem, and
⇔: E1 ⇔E2 means (E1 ⇒E2) & (E2 ⇒E1).
(Clearly, these connectives can connect all statements formed by starting with
elementary statements and using these connectives. And it is in terms of their
meaning that Curry justiﬁed the rules of the connectives ∧, ∨, and ⊃.)56
Thus, his [1950] began with a chapter on formal systems, and throughout the
rest of the book the logical systems were designed to formalize the metatheory of an
elementary formal system S. In the second chapter, he treated the propositional
calculus without negation, so the connectives were ∧, ∨, and ⊃. The ﬁrst logical
systems introduced were the Gentzen-style L-systems, LA(S) and LC(S). The
ﬁrst, LA(S), was a singular system, one with only one formula on the right:
Γ ⊩A,
where Γ is a sequence of formulas and A is a formula. The second, LC(S), allowed
sequences with more than one formula on the right:
Γ ⊩Δ,
where Γ and Δ are sequences of formulas. Both kinds of systems had the usual
axiom A ⊩A, and both also had as axioms ⊩E, where E was an axiom of S. Both
had the usual structural rules of permutation, weakening, and thinning, although
LA had them only on the left while LC had them on the right as well, and both
had the usual rules for ∧, ∨, and ⊃on both the left and right. Both also had the
1941, objected to Curry’s use of the preﬁx “meta-”, claiming that this preﬁx should only be used
in connection with a distinction of levels of language. In 1951, Curry responded to this criticism
by deciding to use the preﬁx “meta-” only in the sense Kleene had suggested and to use the
preﬁx “epi-” instead. See the preface of [Curry, 1951]. I think that most logicians now use the
preﬁx “meta-” in the sense in which Curry had used it prior to 1951, and so I will continue to
use that preﬁx instead of “epi-” in this article.
56This reading of the connectives is close to the Brouwer-Heyting-Kolmogorov interpretation
of them. See [Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988, p. 31].

848
Jonathan P. Seldin
following rule:
⊢∗
Γ ⊩E1, Θ
Γ ⊩E2, Θ
. . .
Γ ⊩En, Θ
Γ ⊩E0, Θ
Condition:
E1, E2, . . . , En ⊢E0
in S.
(In LA(S), Θ was the void sequence.57) Curry did not postulate the rule Cut as
part of either system, but proved as a metatheorem that if the premises of Cut
were derivable, then so was the conclusion. He called this result the Elimination
Theorem.
Curry then turned to natural deduction formulations. Since he wanted to reserve
the letter ‘N’ for negation, he used the second consonant of the word ”natural” and
called the systems TA(S) and TC(S). The only axioms in either system were the
axioms of S. The rules of TA(S) were the standard introduction and elimination
rules for ∧, ∨, and ⊃. TC(S) was obtained from TA(S) by adjoining one rule:
⊃K
[A ⊃B]
A
A.
Curry also considered Hilbert-style formulations of both systems, HA and HC.
These were formulations in which the only rule was modus ponens, or ⊃E, and
the other rules of TA and TC were replaced by axiom schemes.
In the next chapter, Curry considered adding ﬁrst-order quantiﬁcation to obtain
LA*(S) and LC*(S). The L-rules on the left and right for the quantiﬁers were
standard. The T-rules and H-axioms were also standard.
In the next chapter, Curry took up negation. He deﬁned two kinds of negation:
1. Absurdity. An elementary statement is absurd if, when it is adjoined to the
system as an axiom, all elementary statements become provable.
2. Refutability. An elementary statement is refutable if, when it is adjoined to
the system as an axiom, any one of a given set of counteraxioms becomes
provable.
These two kinds of negation led to diﬀerent systems:
1. Minimal Logic, LM, which was LA plus refutability.
2. Intuitionistic Logic, which was LA plus absurdity.
3. Strict Refutability, LD, which was LA plus excluded middle.
4. Classical Logic, LK, which was LC plus absurdity, or alternatively LJ plus
excluded middle.
57If n = 0, this means that if
⊢E0 is an axiom of S, then ⊩E0 is an axiom of the L-system.

The Logic of Church and Curry
849
These were the systems of propositional logic; there were corresponding systems
with quantiﬁers.
For technical reasons, Curry was unable to use the deﬁnition
¬A ≡A ⊃⊥,
where ⊥58 stands for a ﬁxed false proposition, in the L-formulation, so in this
formulation, he took ¬ as a primitive connective. The L-rules for negation on
the left and right, ∗¬ and ¬∗, were the traditional ones. For refutability, he also
postulated
⊥∗
Γ ⊩⊥i, Θ
Γ ⊩Θ
Condition:
⊥i is a counteraxiom.
For absurdity, he postulated instead59
⊥J
Γ ⊩Θ
Γ ⊩A, Θ.
To get the law of the excluded middle, he postulated
¬X
Γ, ¬A ⊩A, Θ
Γ ⊩A, Θ.
In these rules, Θ was void in a singular system. Note that this meant that in
systems with negation, it was possible in either singular or multiple systems to
have a void right-hand side.
Then he deﬁned the following propositional systems:
LM = LA + ∗¬ + ¬∗+ ⊥∗,
LJ = LM + ⊥J,60
LD = LM + ¬X, and
LK = LC + ∗¬ + ¬∗.
Note that LM, LJ, and LD were all singular. Curry was dealing with quantiﬁed
versions of all these sytems, and he proved the Elimination Theorem for all of
them.
For the natural deduction systems, he used the deﬁnition ¬A ≡A ⊃⊥, where
⊥is a new atomic formula added to the system.61 The standard introduction and
58Curry wrote ‘F’ instead of ‘⊥’.
59There were no counteraxioms in any system in which ⊥J was postulated, so rule ⊥∗was
never postulated in such systems.
60But see the preceding footnote.
61In some systems, ⊥can be identiﬁed with a formula that is already in the system.

850
Jonathan P. Seldin
elimination rules for ¬, ¬I and ¬E, then follow from the deﬁnition of ¬A. The
other T-rules used in connection with negation were the following:
⊥I
⊥i
⊥
Condition:
⊥i is a counteraxiom.
¬J
⊥
A.
¬D
[¬A]
A
A.
¬K
¬¬A
A.
Note that the rule ¬K is equivalent to
[¬A]
⊥
A,
which is the form used by Prawitz in his [1965]. The T-systems for negation are
then deﬁned as follows:
TM = TA + ¬E + ¬I + ⊥I,
TJ = TM + ¬J,62
TD = TM + ¬D, and
TK = TM + ¬J + ¬D = TM + ¬K.
Curry also dealt with Hilbert-style systems.
The last chapter was devoted to modal logic, with operators for necessity and
possibility. Curry was unable to prove the Elimination Theorem for the modal
systems.
In the preface, Curry discussed the algebraic approach to logic, saying that
although he thought it was important, he had to leave it out of the lectures on
which
[Curry, 1950] was based, for lack of space.
In fact, the book did not
include answers to some questions left open in the lectures which he had settled
after he delivered the lectures, since he wanted the book to represent the lectures
themselves. But he did write up this work for publication:
62There are no counteraxioms for TJ or for any system in which ¬J is postulated, so ⊥I is
vacuous for TJ and TK.

The Logic of Church and Curry
851
1. In his [1952f], Curry proved some results about LD. He also suggested a
singular version of LC and LK, namely LC1 and LK1. The former was to be
deﬁned by adding to LA the rule
⊃C
Γ, A ⊃B ⊩A
Γ ⊩A.
For LK1, the rules ⊥J and ¬X were postulated.
2. In his [1952d], Curry showed how to use the deﬁnition ¬A ≡A ⊃⊥with
the L-systems. When this was done there were no void right-hand sides, and
rules ⊥∗, ⊥J, and ¬X were replaced by, respectively,
⊥∗
Γ ⊩⊥i, Θ
Γ ⊩⊥, Θ
Condition:
⊥i is a counteraxiom.
⊥J
Γ ⊩⊥, Θ
Γ ⊩A, Θ.
⊥X
Γ, A ⊃⊥⊩A
Γ ⊩A.
where, as usual, Θ was void in a singular system.
3. In his [1952e], Curry showed that under certain conditions, the order in
which rules are applied can be reversed in classical L-systems.
4. In his [1952a], Curry proved the Elimination Theorem for systems with a
necessity operator.
In his review of the ﬁrst two of the above papers, Bernays [1953] suggested
adding ⊃C to LM without adding ⊥J. This would be a system of classical refutabil-
ity, which Curry later called LE. Some properties of this system were studied based
on its H-formulation in [Kanger, 1955], and an extensive study starting from the L-
formulation was made in [Kripke, 1958]. Although Curry was busy writing [Curry
and Feys, 1958] during most of this period and was therefore unable to pursue his
work on general proof theory, he kept up with these results.
Once [Curry and Feys, 1958] was ﬁnished, Curry decided that since he expected
to make extensive use of Gentzen techniques to obtain consistency proofs in the
projected second volume, he should put his work on those techniques in better
order than it was. This work led to [Curry, 1963]. In this work, after a short
introductory chapter, there were chapters on formal systems (Chapter 2) and
epitheory (his word for metatheory, Chapter 3), which were largely rewritten from
[Curry and Feys, 1958]. Then, in Chapter 4, he included the material on algebraic
logic that he had lacked room for in his [1950]; he had been able to give a course on

852
Jonathan P. Seldin
this subject during his year at Louvain, and the course notes had been published
as [Curry, 1952b], and [Curry, 1963, Chapter 4] was expanded from this.
The real work on logical calculi begins in Chapter 5.
Unlike [Curry, 1950],
Curry started here with Hilbert-style and natural deduction systems. Chapter 5
was on propositional logic without negation, and included LA and LC. But it also
included LC1, and, to this, Curry added a multiple version of LA, LAm, which
was like LC except that the rule for implication on the right must be singular.
The chapter closed with a system for tableaux, inspired by Beth’s proof tableaux.
Chapter 6 is on negation, and here Curry added the E-systems, HE, TE, and
LE to the systems he had previously. TE was deﬁned by adding the introduction
and elimination rules for ¬ to TC, and this meant that TK could be obtained by
adding ¬J to TE. LE was deﬁned from LC the way LM was deﬁned from LA, by
adding the rules for negation on the left and right and also adding ⊥∗. For LD,
Curry replaced rule ¬X by a new one:
Γ, ¬A ⊩Δ
Γ, A ⊩Δ
Γ ⊩Δ.
He also had both singular and multiple formulations for all systems.
Another
innovation was three formulations of negation: 1) the F-formulation, where ⊥was
postulated and ¬A was deﬁned to be A ⊃⊥, 2) the N-formulation, in which ⊥
was not postulated and ¬ was primitive, and the FN-formulation, in which both
⊥and ¬ were primitive and the equivalence of ¬A and A ⊃⊥was a consequence
of the logical rules.
Chapter 7 was on quantiﬁcation, and while not much was new here, the chap-
ter was quite complete. The tableau system of Chapter 5 was extended to all
quantiﬁed systems.
Chapter 8 was on modal systems.
In his [1965], Curry gave an algorithm for converting the linear form of natural
deduction rules as used in [Ja´skowski, 1934; Fitch, 1952] to the form based on trees
used by Gentzen and Curry himself, discussed some improvements to his semantic
justiﬁcation of the L-rules, and introduced a form of dialogue or game logic based
on the ideas of [Lorenz, 1961; Lorenzen, 1961; Stegm¨uller, 1964]63 equivalent to
LJ∗.
In his [1968a], he showed how to associate formulas with sequents in such a way
that for an L-system satisfying certain conditions, if one sequent can be derived
from some others by the rules of the system, then a sequent can be proved in
which the right-hand side is the formula corresponding to the concluding sequent
and the formulas on the left are those corresponding to the premise sequents.
This was Curry’s last paper on proof theory proper. However, since his work
on proof theory was based in many ways on his idea of formal system, it is worth
mentioning that in his [1968b], he proved that his notion of formal system was
essentially equivalent to that of Smullyan [1961].
63The ﬁrst two of these works were later reprinted in [Lorenzen and Lorenz, 1978].

The Logic of Church and Curry
853
4
CURRY’S PHILOSOPHY OF MATHEMATICS
As part of his earliest work on combinatory logic, Curry developed a philosophy of
mathematics that he was to call formalism. Although he had already formulated
this philosophy in a preliminary way by 192964 the ﬁrst exposition of it came with
his [1939b], and it is best known from his [1951], most of which was written in
1939. To this day, this is all many philosophers of mathematics know of Curry’s
philosophy, even though both of these works date from 1939, early in his career.65
For Curry, the basic idea of formalism was that mathematics does not have
a subject matter that is independent of our knowledge and comes from outside
the subject. This is diﬀerent from the views of both platonists and intuitionists,
who believe that mathematics does have a subject matter external to the subject:
platonists believe that there are such things as numbers, points, lines, etc. which
exist independently of our knowledge of them, and intuitionists believe that the
subject matter of mathematics consists of mental constructions which are based on
a special kind of primordial intuition.66 For Curry, mathematics is like language,
in the sense that it is the result of human activity, and in the terms used by Karl
Popper [1968]67 it is part of the “third world.” Thus, for Curry, no mathematical
objects existed before human beings started doing mathematics.
In 1939, Curry proposed to deﬁne mathematics as the science of formal sys-
tems.68
Many logicians think in terms of formal systems whose formal objects
represent propositions. But other kinds of formal systems are possible. For exam-
ple, consider the system N:69 there is one atom, 0, and one primitive operation,
denoted by adding | on the right, so obs are represented by adding strings of the
symbol | to the right of 0. Thus, the obs all have the form
0 || . . . |
  
n
,
which represents the natural number n. There is one elementary predicate, which
takes two arguments, so an elementary statement is written
X = Y
There is one axiom, namely
0 = 0,
64See my paper [1980, page 11].
65See, for example, [Shapiro, 2000, pages 168–170].
66See [Curry, 1963, page 9].
67This paper was delivered under the title “Epistemology and Scientiﬁc Knowledge” at a
session of the Third International Congress for Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science in
Amsterdam on Friday, August 25, 1967 at a session with Curry in the chair and at which I was
present. After Popper ﬁnished speaking, Curry told me privately that he thought Popper had
made a big deal out of something that was trivially true.
68See Deﬁnition 2 above.
69This is the system N1 of [Seldin, 1975a, page 456], which is the same as the system of [Curry,
1963, page 256].

854
Jonathan P. Seldin
and there is one rule:
X = Y
⇒
X| = Y |.
It is easy to see that all the obs represent natural numbers, and all the theorems
have the form
X = X.
All of arithmetic and analysis can be constructed as part of the metatheory of
this formal system N, and by using the techniques of analytic geometry, it is also
possible to make geometry part of this metatheory. This method of reconstruct-
ing mathematics in terms of formal systems seems diﬀerent from the way most
logicians and philosophers of mathematics think of using formal systems.
The deﬁnition of mathematics as the science of formal systems led to the crit-
icism that he could not account for the existence of mathematics before formal
systems ﬁrst appeared at the end of the nineteenth century.70 By the early 1960s,
Curry proposed deﬁning mathematics as the science of formal methods.71 That
this deﬁnition is broader than the earlier one can be seen by the fact that in ele-
mentary arithmetic, the operation of recognizing what a pile of ﬁve apples has in
common with a pile of ﬁve oranges is a matter of abstracting from the kind of fruit
one has in the pile and noting that what they have in common is their cardinality.
Doing this is, in a sense, ignoring the content of the piles and noting only their
form, which is a kind of formal activity.
To further clarify this idea, consider what Curry has to say in his [1963, page12]
about natural numbers:
A formalist would not speak of “the natural numbers” but of a set or
system of natural numbers. Any system of objects, no matter what,
which is generated from a certain initial object by a certain unary
operation in such a way that each newly generated object is distinct
from all those previously formed and that the process can be continued
indeﬁnitely, will do as a set of natural numbers. He may, and usually
does, objectify this process by representing the numbers in terms of
symbols; he chooses some symbol, let us say a vertical stroke ‘|’, for
the initial object, and regards the operation as the aﬃxing of another
‘|’ to the right of the given expression. But he realizes there are other
interpretations; in particular, if one accepts the platonist or intuitionist
metaphysics, their systems will do perfectly well.
Note that this “system of objects” need not be given by a formal system. A natural
number is any object of a system of this kind.
In my opinion, this means that Curry’s formalism, at least the formalism of his
mature years, is a form of structuralism. To see this, note what Stewart Shapiro
says in his [2000, page 258]:
70See, for example, [Shapiro, 2000, page 170], but this criticism was made much earlier.
71See [Curry, 1963, page 14].

The Logic of Church and Curry
855
The structuralist vigorously rejects any sort of ontological indepen-
dence among the natural numbers. The essence of a natural number
is its relations to other natural numbers. The subject-matter of arith-
metic is a single abstract structure, the pattern common to any inﬁnite
collection of objects that has a successor relation, a unique initial ob-
ject, and satisﬁes the induction principle. The number 2 is no more
and no less than the second position in the natural number structure;
and 6 is the sixth position.
Neither of them has any independence
from the structure in which they are positions, and as positions in this
structure, neither number is independent of the other. (Emphasis in
original.)
What Curry would have said about this is that extracting the pattern to which
Shapiro refers is a matter of abstracting the form from the structure and disre-
garding the content. And if a structuralist does not assume that these structures
exists independently of our knowledge of them, Curry would have regarded that
structuralist as his kind of formalist.

856
Jonathan P. Seldin
Appendix
A
PURE λ-CALCULUS
In our discussion of functions at the beginning of this article, we mentioned two
operations:
1. The application of a function to its argument, as in f(3).
2. The abstraction operation that deﬁnes a function from an expression for its
values, as in λx . x2.
These two operations are the basis of the λ-calculus, which is a formal system for
functions interpreted as rules of calculation. The λ-calculus is the legacy of Alonzo
Church.
The λ-calculus diﬀers from ordinary mathematical practice in two essential
ways:
1. Application is taken as a binary operation. At ﬁrst glance, this may appear
to leave out functions of more than one argument. But this is not so. There
is a way to reduce functions of more than one argument to functions of
one argument, a way called currying after Haskell B. Curry. Consider the
function f(x, y) = x−y of two arguments. If we replace x by some constant,
say 4, we get g(y) = f(4, y) = 4 −y, a function of one argument. This
function can be taken as the value of a function f ∗related to f, so that
f ∗(4) = g(y) = 4 −y, and then f ∗(4)(y) = 4 −y, and f ∗(4)(3) = 4 −3 =
1.
This function f ∗is called the curried version of f, or curry f.
Thus,
(curry f) 4 3 = f(4, 3), and (curryf) x y = f(x, y).
2. In ordinary mathematical discourse, each function has a domain, and a func-
tion can only be applied to arguments from that domain. In pure λ-calculus,
every term is considered to be in the domain of every other term, and every
term is a function whose domain includes every other term. At ﬁrst glance,
this may seem counter-intuitive, and it does make models of λ-calculus very
complicated. But it does correspond, in a sense, to what goes on in a com-
puter, where the program instructions are stored in memory as is the data
to which the program is applied, and all items stored in memory are simply
strings of 0s and 1s.72 In principle, there is no reason why a computer could
not be told to take any such string as the program and any other such string
as the data; if the ﬁrst string is not in fact an executable set of instructions,
the computer will not do anything useful, but only the human user will know
that. The pure λ-calculus is simpler for not trying to deﬁne a domain for
each function, and so the applicability of any term to any other term is not
considered a problem.73
72Or, more precisely, pulses of high voltage and low voltage which are usually interpreted as
0s and 1s.
73Domains of λ-terms can be speciﬁed by using types. This is discussed in Appendix B.

The Logic of Church and Curry
857
This has to do with the formation of terms. But any formal system for functions
as rules must deal with the computations involved in calculating the values of
functions.
In the discussion of the squaring function at the beginning of this
article, we noted that to evaluate the function at an argument, we always start
by substituting the argument for the variable in the expression for the function.
Thus, we had that
(λx . x2)3 = 32.
In general, we would have
(β)
(λx . M)N = [N/x]M,
where [N/x]M represents the result of substituting N for x in M. This is, in
fact, the only means the λ-calculus has for carrying out calculations. It is perhaps
surprising that it is enough to carry out all recursive operations.
Now the substitution mentioned in the last paragraph is not simple replacement,
for we are dealing with bound variables. A bound variable is one for which no
substitution is possible, and it serves only as a place-holder. Furthermore, along
with computation rule (β), there is a rule which asserts that bound variables can
always be changed:
(α) (λx . M) = (λy . [y/x]M), if y does not occur free in M.
Finally, let us note an additional rule of computation that is often postulated.
Note that if x does not occur free in M, and if N is any term, then
(λx . Mx)N = MN.
This means that (λx . Mx) has the same eﬀect on an argument N as M. So some
systems of λ-calculus include the rule
(η) (λx . Mx) = M, if x does not occur free in M.
Without this last rule, the system is called the λβ-calculus; with it, the calculus
is called the λβη-calculus or the λη-calculus.
So far, the rules of calculation have been stated as equations. But in many actual
calculation these rules are all read one way, from left to right. One calculation
step that proceeds this way is called a contraction, and a sequence of such steps
is called a reduction.
With these ideas, the pure λ-calculus is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 3. The formal system Λ of λ-calculus is deﬁned as follows:
1. The terms are deﬁned by:
(a) Variables. There are assumed to be countably many, and it is assumed
that they come in an enumerated sequence. Here, variables will be de-
noted by lower-case Italic letters from the end of the alphabet, x, y, z,
x1, etc.

858
Jonathan P. Seldin
(b) Constants. There may not be any, or there may be several, depending
on the variant of system.
(c) Applications.
If M and N are terms, then so is (MN).
Parenthe-
ses are omitted by association to the left, so that MN1N2 . . . Nn is
(. . . ((MN1)N2) . . . Nn).
(d) Abstractions. If x is a variable and M is a term, then so is (λx . M).
Repeated abstraction (λx1 . (λx2 . . . . (λxn . M) . . .)) will be written (λx1x2 . . . xn . M).
2. An occurrence of a variable x in a term M is said to be bound if it occurs
in a subterm of M of the form (λx . N). An occurrence of a variable which
is not bound is said to be free. That a variable x has a free occurrence in a
term M is written x ∈FV(M).
3. The substitution of a term N for a variable x in a term M, denoted by
[N/x]M, is deﬁned by induction on the structure of M as follows:
(a) [N/x]x is N.
(b) If a is any variable diﬀerent from x or is a constant, then [N/x]a is a.
(c) [N/x](M1M2) is ([N/x]M1[N/x]M2).
(d) [N/x](λx . M) is (λx . M).
(e) If y is diﬀerent from x, and if either y ̸∈FV(N) or else x ̸∈FV(M),
then [N/x](λy . M) is (λy . [N/x]M).
(f) If y ∈FV(N) and x ∈FV(M), then [N/x](λy . M) is deﬁned to be
(λz . [z/y][N/x]M), where z is the ﬁrst variable in the given sequence
of variables which is not in FV(MN).
(There are many other notations for [N/x]M, including M[N/x] and M[x :=
N].)
4. There are two kinds of reduction.
That M reduces to N will be written
M  N.
(a) The ﬁrst kind, known as β-reduction, is deﬁned by the following axioms
and rules:
(α) (λx . M)  (λy . [y/x]M), where y ̸∈FV(M).
(β) ((λx . M)N)  [N/x]M.
(ρ) M  M.
(μ) If M  N, then PM  PN.
(ν) If M  N, then MP  NP.
(ξ) If M  N, then (λx . M)  (λx . N).
(τ) If M  N and N  P, then M  P.

The Logic of Church and Curry
859
This is equivalent to deﬁning β-reductions as involving two kinds of
replacements:
(α) If y ̸∈FV(M), a replacement of (λx . M) by (λy . [y/x]M).
(β) ((λx . M)N) by [N/x]M. Here ((λx . M)N) is called a β-redex,
and [N/x]M is called its contractum.
Each of these kinds of replacements is called a contraction.
The notation M β N will mean that M β-reduces to N.
(b) The second kind of reduction, βη-reduction, is deﬁned by adding to the
deﬁnition of β-reduction the axiom
(η) If x ̸∈FV(M), then (λx . Mx)  M.
This is equivalent to adding the replacement
(η) (λx . Mx) by M, provided that x ̸∈FV(M). Here (λx . Mx) is
called an η-redex and M is its contractum.
This kind of replacement is called an η-contraction.
The notation M βη N means that M βη-reduces to N.
5. Conversion. The relation M =∗N (M converts to N), is deﬁned by changing
 to =∗in the deﬁnition of reduction and adding the rule
(σ) If M =∗N then N =∗M.
Conversion can also be deﬁned as a sequence of contractions and reverse
contractions. There are two kinds of conversion: β-conversion, =β , and
βη-conversion, =βη .
REMARK 5. For =βη , we have the following derived rule:
(ζ) If Mx =βη Nx and if x ̸∈FV(MN), then M =βη N.
This rule is also called (Ext), (for extensionality).
REMARK 6. Terms which cannot be reduced (i.e., terms in which there are no
occurrences of redexes), are said to be in normal form.
REMARK 7. In general, the symbol ≡will be used to indicate identical terms. In
λ-calculus, however, it will mean terms that are (α)-equivalent (i.e., that diﬀer only
in their bound variables). This is because it is common in λ-calculus to identify
terms that diﬀer only in their bound variables, since they mean the same thing.74
REMARK 8. There is a ﬁxed-point operator Y, which, when applied to any term,
calculates a ﬁxed-point of that term. In fact, there is more than one. One example
is
Y ≡(λxz . x(zzx))(λxz . x(zzx)).
74But sometimes ignoring the diﬀerence between distinct (α)-convertible terms can lead to
technical diﬃculties.

860
Jonathan P. Seldin
It is easy to show that Yx  x(Yx).
REMARK 9. Natural numbers and numerical functions can be coded in Λ, by a
method originally due to Alonzo Church, as follows:
• 0 is deﬁned to be λxy . x
• 1 is deﬁned to be λxy . xy.
• 2 is deﬁned to be λxy . x(xy).
• ...
• n is deﬁned to be λxy . x(. . . (x(x



n
y)) . . .).
Numerical functions can be represented as terms of Λ. A numerical function can
be represented as a term in Λ if and only if it is recursive.
REMARK 10. Church did not deﬁne 0 in his system but started with 1 because he
wanted λx . M to be well-formed only if there is a free occurrence of x in M, and
so in his system 0 is not well-formed. This form of λ-calculus is called λI-calculus.
See § 1.2 above. The system Λ deﬁned here is often called λK-calculus when it
needs to be distinguished from the λI-calculus.
Since reduction represents the process of calculation, it is important to have
conﬁdence that the order in which calculation steps are performed does not make
a diﬀerence. That it does not is a result of the Church-Rosser Theorem:
THEOREM 11 Church-Rosser Theorem. If M  P and M  Q, then there is a
term N such that P  N and Q  N.
The theorem holds for both β-reduction and βη-reduction.
Corollary 1. If M =∗N, then there is a term P such that M  P and N  P.
Here, if =∗is =β , then  is β, whereas if =∗is =βη , then  is βη.
For more details, see [Hindley and Seldin, 1986] and the references given there.
B
LAMBDA-CALCULUS WITH TYPES
In pure λ-calculus, every term is in the domain of every other term.
If it is
necessary to distinguish domains of function, we use types. There are now many
versions of type assignment to λ-terms, but the original and most basic one, which
is the one we consider here, uses the simplest deﬁnition of types.
Deﬁnition 4. Types are deﬁned from atomic types θ1, θ2, . . . , θn, . . . (possibly
inﬁnitely many) by induction:
1. Every atomic type is a type.
2. If α and β are types, then so is (α →β).

The Logic of Church and Curry
861
REMARK 12. Other notations have been used in the past for the type (α →β),
including (αβ), (βα), and Curry’s notation Fαβ. The notation (α →β) is now
standard.
The outermost parentheses are often omitted.
Also, parentheses are
omitted by association to the right, so that
α1 →α2 →. . . →αn →β
is the type
(α1 →(α2 →(. . . (αn →β) . . .))).
The type (α →β) is intended to represent the type of functions which take argu-
ments of type α and have values in β.
There are two approaches to the assignment of types to λ-terms, one due to
Church and the other due to Curry.
In the Church style, every variable is assigned a unique type, and this type is
indicated in λ-abstracts, so that if x has type α, the abstraction of M with respect
to x is denoted λx : α . M. (An older notation, used by Church, is λxα . Mβ,
where β is the type of M.) In Church-style typing, λx : α . x (or, in Church’s
original notation λxα . xα) is an identity function whose domain and range are
the type α, and each type has its own identity function.
That a type α is assigned to a term M is denoted M : α. If there are any atomic
constants, types are assigned to them by axioms, but there may not be any atomic
constants. The type assignment system, TAChλ, is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 5. The system TAChλ is deﬁned as follows:
1. Types are deﬁned as in Deﬁnition 4.
2. Terms are like the terms of Λ, except that clause 1d of Deﬁnition 3 is replaced
by the following: if x is a variable, α is a type, and M is a term, then
λx : α . M is a term.
3. Typing judgements are all of the form M : α, where M is a term and α is a
type.
4. If c is an atomic (term) constant with a type γ, then
c : γ
is an axiom. (That this is an axiom is often written
c : γ,
to indicate a step of a deduction with no premises.)
5. Types are assigned to compound terms by the following two rules:

862
Jonathan P. Seldin
( →E)
M : α →β
N : α
MN : β
( →ICh)
[x : α]
M : β
λx : α . M : α →β
Condition:
x does
not
occur
free
in
any
undischarged
assumption.
In Curry-style typing, the types of the variables are not ﬁxed, but can be any
types for which the rules allow a term to be assigned a type. The terms are simply
the terms of Λ. In Curry-style typing, λx . x is an identity function on any type,
so λx . x : α →α for every type α.
The formal deﬁnition is as follows
Deﬁnition 6. The system TACuλ is deﬁned as in Deﬁnition 5 with the following
changes:
1. In Clause 2 of that deﬁnition, the terms are the terms of Λ.
2. In Clause 5 of that deﬁnition, rule ( →Ich) is replaced by
( →ICu)
[x : α]
M : β
λx . M : α →β
Condition:
x does
not
occur
free
in
any
undischarged
assumption.
Note that in both styles of typing, the deduction of a type assignment follows
the construction of the term.
These rules are for deductions from assumptions.
Assumptions are usually
assumed in the form of contexts, which assign variables to types, assigning distinct
variables to distinct types. Thus, a context would have the form
x1 : α1, x2 : α2, . . . , xn : αn.
Here, the variables x1, x2, . . . , xn are all required to be distinct (but the types
α1, α2, . . . , αn need not be distinct).
Some important results about this system are the following:
THEOREM 13 Subject-Reduction Theorem. If M  N and Γ ⊢M : α for any
context Γ and any type α, then Γ ⊢N : α.
THEOREM 14 Normal Form Theorem. If Γ ⊢M : α for any context Γ and any
type α, then M has a normal form.

The Logic of Church and Curry
863
C
PURE COMBINATORY LOGIC
The λ-calculus has two primitive operations for constructing terms: abstraction
and application. In combinatory logic, there is only one such operation, applica-
tion. Instead of abstraction, combinatory logic has some special constants, called
basic combinators, and from these basic combinators abstraction can be deﬁned.
Since the only primitive term-forming operation is application, there are no bound
variables to worry about, and variables will simply be atomic terms that we decide
to call variables and for which we are prepared to make substitutions.75 Further-
more, the substitution of a term Y for a variable x in another term X is simply
the replacement of all occurrences of x by Y .
In standard combinatory logic, the basic combinators are K and S. These two
constants have reduction rules deﬁned as follows:
(K) KXY  X,
(S) SXY Z  XZ(Y Z).
(Weak) reduction, or w is deﬁned as replacements using these two rules, and
the two kinds of redexes are of the form KXY and SXY Z. Its corresponding
conversion is =w . It is easy to see that if X  Y , then for any term Z, [Z/x]X 
[Z/x]Y .
Other important functions can be deﬁned in terms of these two, for example
the identity function I is deﬁned to be SKK, since
SKKX  KX(KX)  X.
Other deﬁnitions are for the composition operator B, which is deﬁned to be S(KS)K
and has the property that BXY Z  X(Y Z), the commutator C, which has the
property that CXY Z XZY and is deﬁned to be S(BBS)(KK), and the duplicator
W, which satisﬁes WXY  XY Y and is deﬁned to be SS(KI).
It turns out that the combinator S can be deﬁned in terms of B, C, and W as
B(B(BW)C)(BB); see [Curry and Feys, 1958, §5B1].
In his dissertation [1935a; 1935b], Rosser discovered that all the other combi-
nators can be deﬁned in terms of I and a combinator J with the reduction rule
JUXY Z  UX(UZY ).
Now, for a variable x, an abstraction term [x]X can be deﬁned by induction on
the structure of X as follows:
• If a is an atomic term, then [x]a is
– I if a is x,
75This is essentially the same procedure used in computer languages, where variables are simply
identiﬁers for which we are prepared to make substitutions and constants are simply identiﬁers
for which we are not prepared to make substitutions.

864
Jonathan P. Seldin
– Ka if a is not x.
• If X is Y Z, then assuming that [x]Y and [x]Z are already deﬁned, [x]XY is
S([x]Y )([x]Z).
Then it follows that [x]X is a term in which the variable x does not occur.
Furthermore, it can easily be proved by induction on the structure of the term X
that
([x]X)Y  [Y/x]X.
However, this is not the only way to deﬁne abstraction, and this deﬁnition results
in longer terms than some others. For example, the following deﬁnition is often
preferred:
(a) If x ̸∈FV(U), then [x]U is KU,
(b) [x]x is I, and
(f) If X is Y Z, x ∈FV(X), and [x]Y and [x]Z are already deﬁned, then [x]X
is S([x]Y )([x]Z).76
Still other deﬁnitions are possible, and some are signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient than
this one.
REMARK 15. The notation [x]X is Curry’s original notation, and it is still in use
by many computer scientists. The abstraction operator in combinatory logic is of-
ten called “bracket abstraction.” Another notation, proposed by Barendregt [Baren-
dregt, 1984] and used in [Hindley and Seldin, 1986] is λ∗x . X, but this notation
seems currently less common.
We can now formally deﬁne combinatory logic:
Deﬁnition 7. The formal system H of combinatory logic is deﬁned as follows:
1. Terms are deﬁned as follows:
(a) Variables. There is given an inﬁnite sequence of variables, x, y, z, x1,
etc.
(b) Constants. There are two special constants: K and S. There may be
more constants.
(c) Applications. If X and Y are terms, so is (XY ).
2. All occurrences of variables in terms are free. That x occurs in X will be
denoted x ∈FV(X).
3. The substitution of a term Y for a variable x in another term X, [Y/x]X,
is deﬁned as in Deﬁnition 3, Clause 3, subclauses (a)-(c).
76On the names of these clauses, see [Curry and Feys, 1958, §6A3, page 190] and [Curry et al.,
1972, §11C1, page 43].

The Logic of Church and Curry
865
4. Abstraction is deﬁned by the second deﬁnition given above just before Re-
mark 15.
5. (Weak) reduction, w, is deﬁned by the following axioms and rules:
(K) KXY  X.
(S) SXY Z  XZ(Y Z).
(ρ) X  X.
(μ) If X  Y , then ZX  ZY .
(ν) If X  Y , then XZ  Y Z.
(τ) If X  Y and Y  Z, then X  Z.
This is equivalent to deﬁning weak reductions as replacements of redexes by
contracta, where there are two kinds of redexes: 1) K redexes (KXY ), whose
contractum is X, and 2) S redexes (SXY Z), whose contractum is XZ(Y Z).
6. (Weak) conversion, =w , is deﬁned by changing  to =w in the deﬁnition
of weak reduction and adding the rule
(σ) If X =w Y , then Y =w X.
Weak reduction can also be deﬁned as a sequence of contractions and reverse
contractions.
REMARK 16. Weak reduction and conversion satisfy the Church-Rosser Theo-
rem, i.e., Theorem 11 and Corollary 1.
Combinatory terms can be translated to λ-terms by the following transla-
tion:
Deﬁnition 8. The translation −L from terms in H to terms in Λ is deﬁned as
follows:
1. If a is any atomic term except K or S, then aL ≡a.
2. KL ≡λxy . x.
3. SL ≡λxyz . xz(yz).
4. (XY )L ≡(XLYL).
With this deﬁnition, it is easy to prove the following:
THEOREM 17. If X w Y in H, then XL β YL in Λ. If X =w Y in H, then
XL =β YL.
The converse translation depends on the abstraction algorithm used in H:
Deﬁnition 9. The translation −H from Λ to H is deﬁned as follows:

866
Jonathan P. Seldin
1. If a is an atomic term, then aH ≡a.
2. (MN)H ≡(MHNH).
3. (λx . M)H ≡([x]MH).
REMARK 18. Note that for any abstraction algorithm, if y ̸∈FV(M), then
([x]M)H ≡([y][y/x]MH). Thus, rule (α) is mapped to an identity between terms
by the mapping −H. This is another reason for identifying α-convertible terms in
λ-calculus.
REMARK 19. There is no theorem for the translation −H corresponding to The-
orem 17. The reason for this is that rule (ξ) does not hold for w. This can be
seen from the following example: Ix w x, but
[x](Ix) ≡S(KI)I ̸w I ≡[x]x.
A form of w and =w can be deﬁned for λ-terms: drop rule (ξ) or, which is
equivalent, forbid replacements within the scope of a λ-abstract. For this reduction,
we do have that if M w N (respectively M =w N), then MH w NH (respectively
MH =w NH).
D
COMBINATORS WITH TYPES
To have a Church-style typing, we would need a combinator Kαβ of type α →β →α
for each pair of types α and β, and similarly for S, so that there would be a
combinator Iα of type α →α for each type α.
This would lead to an inﬁnite
number of atomic combinators, and so is not usually considered. Instead, type
assignment for combinators is usually taken in the Curry style.
In assigning types to terms of combinatory logic, deductions that terms have
types will follow the construction of the terms. For this reason, the deﬁnition of
the system is as follows:
Deﬁnition 10. The system TACu is deﬁned as follows:
1. The types are those deﬁned in Deﬁnition 4 above.
2. The terms are the terms of the system H of Deﬁnition 7 above.
3. Typing judgements are of the form X : α, where X is a term and α is a type.
4. If c is an atomic constant diﬀerent from K and S, and if c is assigned type
γ, then c : γ is an axiom. There are two additional axiom schemes:
(FK) For all types α and β, K : (α →β →α).
(FS) For all types α, β, and γ, S : (α →β →γ) →(α →β) →(α →γ).
5. The rule of the system is the rule ( →E) of Deﬁnition 5, clause 5.
The Subject-Reduction Theorem, Theorem 13 above, and the Normal Form
Theorem, Theorem 14 above, both hold for system TACu.

The Logic of Church and Curry
867
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Andrews, 1965] P. B. Andrews. A Transﬁnite Type Theory with Type Variables. North-Holland
Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1965.
[Andrews, 1986] P. B. Andrews. An Introduction to Mathematical Logic and Type Theory: to
Truth thorugh Proof. Academic Press, 1986.
[Barendregt et al., 1993] H. P. Barendregt, M. W. Bunder, and W. J. W. Dekkers. Systems
of illative combiantory logic complete for ﬁrst-order propositional and predicate calculus.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 58(3):769–788, September 1993.
[Barendregt, 1984] H. P. Barendregt. The Lambda Calculus: Its Syntax and Semantics. North-
Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, New York, and Oxford, 1984.
[Bernays, 1953] P. Bernays. Review of H. B. Curry, “The system LD,” J. Symbolic Logic 17:35–
42, 1952 and “On the deﬁnition of negation by a ﬁxed proposition in the inferential calculus,”
Ibid., pp. 98–104. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 18:266–268, 1953.
[Bunder and Meyer, 1978] M. W. Bunder and R. K. Meyer. On the inconsistency of systems
similar to F∗
21. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 43(1):1–2, March 1978.
[Bunder, 1969] M. W. Bunder. Set Theory Based on Combinatory Logic. PhD thesis, University
of Amsterdam, 1969.
[Bunder, 1974] M. W. Bunder. Some inconsistencies in illative combinatory logic. Zeitschrift
f¨ur mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 20:199–201, 1974.
[Bunder, 1976] M. W. Bunder. The inconsistency of F∗
21. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 41(2):467–
468, June 1976.
[Cardone and Hindley, 2008] F. Cardone and J. R. Hindley.
History of lambda-calculus and
combinatory logic. In this Volume, pp. 535–630.
[Church and Kleene, 1936] A. Church and S. C. Kleene.
Formal deﬁnitions in the theory of
ordinal numbers. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 28:11–31, 1936.
[Church and Rosser, 1936] A. Church and J. B. Rosser. Some properties of conversion. Trans-
actions of the American Mathematical Society, 39:472–482, 1936.
[Church, 1924] A. Church. Uniqueness of the Lorentz transformation. American Mathematical
Monthly, 31:376–382, 1924.
[Church, 1925] A. Church. On irredundant sets of postulates. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 27:318–328, 1925.
[Church, 1927] A. Church. Alternatives to Zermelo’s assumption. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 29:178–208, January 1927.
[Church, 1928] A. Church. On the law of the excluded middle. Bulletin of the American Math-
ematical Society, 34:75–78, January–February 1928.
[Church, 1932] A. Church. A set of postulates for the foundation of logic. Annals of Mathemat-
ics, 33:346–366, 1932.
[Church, 1933] A. Church. A set of postulates for the foundation of logic (second paper). Annals
of Mathematics, 34:839–864, 1933.
[Church, 1935] A. Church. A proof of freedom from contradiction. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 21:275–281, 1935.
[Church, 1936a] A. Church. Correction to A note on the Entscheidungsproblem. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 1(3):101–102, September 1936.
[Church, 1936b] A. Church. A note on the Entscheidungsproblem. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
1(1):40–41, March 1936.
[Church, 1936c] A. Church. An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory. American
Journal of Mathematics, 58:345–363, 1936.
[Church, 1938] A. Church. The constructive second number class. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 44:224–232, April 1938.
[Church, 1940] A. Church. A formulation of the simple theory of types. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 5:56–68, 1940.
[Church, 1941] A. Church.
The Calculi of Lambda Conversion.
Princeton University Press,
1941.
[Church, 1951] A. Church. A formulation of the logic of sense and denotation. In P. Henley,
editor, Sturcture, Method and Meaning: Essays in Honor of Henry M. Sheﬀer, pages 3–24.
Liberal Arts Press, New York, 1951.

868
Jonathan P. Seldin
[Church, 1973] A. Church. Outline of a revised formulation of the logic of sense and denotation
(Part I). Noˆus, 7(1):24–33, March 1973.
[Church, 1974] A. Church. Outline of a revised formulation of the logic of sense and denotation
(Part II). Noˆus, 8(2):135–156, May 1974.
[Church, 1989] A. Church. Intensionality and the paradox of the name relation. In J. Almog,
J. Perry, and H. Wettstein, editors, Themes from Kaplan, pages 151–165. Oxford University
Press, New York, 1989.
[Church, 1993] A. Church. A revised formulation of the logic of sense and denotation. Alternative
(1). Noˆus, 27(2):141–157, June 1993.
[Cogan, 1955] E. J. Cogan.
A formalization of the theory of sets from the point of view of
combinatory logic.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik,
1:198–240, 1955. PhD thesis, The Pennsylvania State University, 1955.
[Constable and others, 1986] R. Constable et al.
Implementing Mathematics with the Nuprl
Proof Development System. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ, 1986.
[Coquand and Huet, 1988] Thierry Coquand and G´erard Huet. The calculus of constructions.
Information and Computation, 76:95–120, 1988.
[Curry and Feys, 1958] H. B. Curry and R. Feys. Combinatory Logic, volume 1. North-Holland
Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1958. Reprinted 1968 and 1974.
[Curry and Schoenberg, 1947] H. B. Curry and I. J. Schoenberg. On spline distributions and
their limits: The P´olya distribution functions (Absract). Bulletin of the American Mathe-
matical Society, 53:1114, 1947.
[Curry and Schoenberg, 1966] H. B. Curry and I. J. Schoenberg. On P´olya frequency functions
IV: the fundamental spline functions and their limits.
Journal D’Analyse Math´ematique,
17:71–107, 1966.
[Curry et al., 1972] H. B. Curry, J. R. Hindley, and J. P. Seldin. Combinatory Logic, volume 2.
North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam and London, 1972.
[Curry, 1929] H. B. Curry. An analysis of logical substitution. American Journal of Mathemat-
ics, 51:363–384, 1929.
[Curry, 1930] H. B. Curry.
Grundlagen der kombinatorischen Logik.
American Journal of
Mathematics, 52:509–536, 789–834, 1930. Inauguraldissertation.
[Curry, 1931] H. B. Curry. The universal quantiﬁer in combinatory logic. Annals of Mathemat-
ics, 32:154–180, 1931.
[Curry, 1932] H. B. Curry. Some additions to the theory of combinators. American Journal of
Mathematics, 54:551–558, 1932.
[Curry, 1933] H. B. Curry. Apparent variables from the standpoint of combinatory logic. Annals
of Mathematics, 34:381–404, 1933.
[Curry, 1934a] H. B. Curry. Functionality in combinatory logic. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 20:584–590, 1934.
[Curry, 1934b] H. B. Curry. Some properties of equality and implication in combinatory logic.
Annals of Mathematics, 35:849–850, 1934.
[Curry, 1935] H. B. Curry. Foundations of the theory of abstract sets from the standpoint of
combinatory logic (abstract). Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 40:654, 1935.
[Curry, 1936] H. B. Curry. First properties of functionality in combinatory logic. Tˆohoku Math-
ematical Journal, 41:371–401, 1936.
[Curry, 1937] H. B. Curry. Some properties of formal deducibility (Abstract). Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 43:615, 1937.
[Curry, 1939a] H. B. Curry. A note on the reduction of Gentzen’s calculus LJ. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 45:288–293, 1939.
[Curry, 1939b] H. B. Curry. Remarks on the deﬁnition and nature of mathematics. Journal
of Uniﬁed Science, 9:164–169, 1939.
All copies of this issue were destroyed during World
War II, but some copies were distributed at the International Congress for the Unity of
Science in Cambridge, MA, in September, 1939. Reprinted with minor corrections in Dialectica
8:228–333, 1954. Reprinted again in Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam (eds) Philosophy of
Mathematics: Selected Readings, pages 152–156, Prentice Hall, Englewood-Cliﬀs, New Jersey,
1964.
[Curry, 1941a] H. B. Curry. The consistency and completeness of the theory of combinators.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 6:54–61, 1941.
[Curry, 1941b] H. B. Curry. The paradox of Kleene and Rosser. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 50:454–516, 1941.

The Logic of Church and Curry
869
[Curry, 1941c] H. B. Curry. A revision of the fundamental rules of combinatory logic. Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 6:41–53, 1941.
[Curry, 1941d] H. B. Curry. Some aspects of the problem of mathematical rigor. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 47:221–241, 1941.
[Curry, 1942a] H. B. Curry. The combinatory foundations of mathematical logic. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 7:49–64, 1942.
[Curry, 1942b] H. B. Curry. The inconsistency of certain formal logics. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 7:115–117, 1942.
[Curry, 1942c] H. B. Curry. Some advances in the combinatory theory of quantiﬁcation. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 28:564–569,
1942.
[Curry, 1949] H. B. Curry. A simpliﬁcation of the theory of combinators. Synthese, 7:391–399,
1949.
[Curry, 1950] H. B. Curry. A Theory of Formal Deducibility. Notre Dame Mathematical Lec-
tures Number 6. University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, 1950.
Second edition,
1957.
[Curry, 1951] H. B. Curry. Outlines of a Formalist Philosophy of Mathematics. North-Holland
Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1951.
[Curry, 1952a] H. B. Curry.
The elimination theorem when modality is present.
Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 17(4):249–265, December 1952.
[Curry, 1952b] H. B. Curry. Le¸cons de Logique Alg´ebrique. Gauthier-Villars and Nauwelaerts,
Paris and Louvain, 1952.
[Curry, 1952c] H. B. Curry. A new proof of the Church-Rosser Theorem. Indagationes Mathe-
maticae, 14:16–23, 1952.
[Curry, 1952d] H. B. Curry. On the deﬁnition of negation by a ﬁxed proposition in inferential
calculus. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 17(2):98–104, June 1952.
[Curry, 1952e] H. B. Curry.
The permutability of rules in the classical inferential calculus.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 17(4):245–248, December 1952.
[Curry, 1952f] H. B. Curry. The system LD. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 17(1):35–42, March
1952.
[Curry, 1954] H. B. Curry.
The logic of program composition.
In Applications Scientiﬁques
de la Lagique Math´ematique, Actes du 2e Colloque International de Logique Math´ematique,
Paris—25–30 Aoˆut 1952, Institut Henri Poincar´e, pages 97–102. Gauthier-Villars, Paris,
1954.
[Curry, 1955] H. B. Curry. The inconsistency of the full theory of combinatory functionality
(abstract). Journal of Symbolic Logic, 20:91, 1955.
[Curry, 1956] H. B. Curry. Consistency of the theory of functionality (abstract). Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 21:110, 1956.
[Curry, 1960] H. B. Curry.
The deduction theorem in the combinatory theory of restricted
generality. Logique et Analyse, 3:15–39, 1960.
[Curry, 1961] H. B. Curry. Basic veriﬁability in the combinatory theory of restricted general-
ity. In Essays on the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 165–189. Magnes Press, Hebrew
University, Jerusalem, 1961.
[Curry, 1963] H. B. Curry. Foundations of Mathematical Logic. McGraw-Hill Book Company,
Inc., New York, San Francisco, Toronto, and London, 1963. Reprinted by Dover, 1977 and
1984.
[Curry, 1965] H. B. Curry. Remarks on inferential deduction. In A.-T. Tymieniecka, editor,
Contributions to logic and Methodology in Honor of J. M. Boche´nski, pages 45–72. North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
[Curry, 1968a] H. B. Curry. A deduction theorem for infrential predicate calculus. In K. Sch¨utte,
editor, Contributions to Mathematical Logic, pages 91–108. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1968.
[Curry, 1968b] H. B. Curry. The equivalence of two deﬁnitions of elementary formal system.
Compositio Mathematica, 20:13–20, 1968. Festschrift in honor of A. Heyting, edited by D.
van Dalen, S. C. Kleene, and A. S. Troelstra, Wolters-Noordhoﬀ, Groningen.
[Curry, 1969a] H. B. Curry. Modiﬁed basic functionality in combinatory logic. Dialectica, 23:83–
92, 1969.
[Curry, 1969b] H. B. Curry. The undecidability of λK-conversion. In J. J. Bulloﬀ, T. C. Holyoke,
and S. W. Hahn, editors, Foundations of Mathematics: Symposium Papers Commemorating
the Sixtieth birthday of Kurt G¨odel, pages 10–14. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1969.

870
Jonathan P. Seldin
[Curry, 1973] H. B. Curry. The consistency of a system of combinatory restricted generality.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 38:83–92, 1973.
[Curry, 1975a] H. B. Curry. Representation of Markov algorithms by combinators. In A. R.
Anderson, R. B. Marcus, and R. A. Martin, editors, The Logical Enterprise, pages 109–119.
Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut, 1975. Festschrift in honor of F. B. Fitch.
[Curry, 1975b] H. B. Curry. A study of generalized standardization in combinatory logic. In J.
Diller and G. H. M¨uller, editors, ISLIC Proof Theory Symposium. Dedicated to Kurt Sch¨utte
on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday. Proceedings of the International Summer Institute and
Logic Colloquium, Kiel, 1974, pages 44–55. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1975. Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, volume 500.
[Curry, 1979] H. B. Curry. On a polynomial representation of λβ-normal forms. In K. Lorenz,
editor, Konstruktionen versus Positionen: Beitr¨age zur Diskussion um die Konstruktive Wis-
senschaftstheorie, pages 94–98. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin and New York, 1979.
[Curry, 1980] H. B. Curry. Some philosophical aspects of combinatory logic. In John Barwise,
H. Jerome Keisler, and Kenneth Kunen, editors, The Kleene Symposium: A Collection of
Papers on Recursion Theory and Intuitionism, pages 85–101. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1980.
[Dekkers et al., 1998a] W. J. M. Dekkers, M. W. Bunder, and H. P. Barendregt. Completeness
of the propositions-as-types interpretation of intuitionistic logic into illative combinatory logic.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 63(3):869–890, September 1998.
[Dekkers et al., 1998b] W. J. M. Dekkers, M. W. Bunder, and H. P. Barendregt. Completeness
of two systems of illative combinatory logic for ﬁrst-order propositional and predicate calculus.
Archive for Mathematical Logic, 37(5–6):327–341, 1998.
[Enderton, 1995] H. B. Enderton. In memoriam: Alonzo Church. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic,
1(4):486–488, December 1995.
[Fitch, 1952] Fredric Brenton Fitch. Symbolic Logic. The Ronald Press Company, New York,
1952.
[Gandy, 1980] R. O. Gandy. An Early Proof of Normalization by A.M. Turing. In J. P. Seldin
and J. R. Hindley. editors, To H. B. Curry: Essays on Combinatory Logic, Lambda Calculus
and Formalism, pages 453–455. Academic Press, 1980.
[Gentzen, 1934] Gerhard Gentzen. Untersuchungen ¨uber das logische Schliessen. Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 39:176–210, 405–431, 1934. Translated in Szabo (ed.), The Collected Papers of
Gerhard Gentzen as “Investigations into Logical Deduction,” pages 68–131, North-Holland,
Amsterdam and London, 1969.
[Girard, 1971] J.-Y. Girard.
Une extension de l’interpr´etation de G¨odel `a l’analyse, et son
application `a l’´elimination des coupures dans l’analyse et la th´eorie des types. In J. E. Fenstad,
editor, Proceedings of the Second Scandinavian Logic Symposium, pages 63–92, Amsterdam,
1971. North-Holland.
[Girard, 1972] J.-Y. Girard.
Interpr´etation Fonctionnelle et ´Elimination des Coupures de
L’Arithm´etique d’Orde Sup´erieur. PhD thesis, University of Paris VII, 1972.
[G¨odel, 1940] Kurt G¨odel. The Consistency of the Continuum Hypothesis. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, New Jersey, USA, 1940.
[Goldstine, 1946] A. Goldstine. Report on the ENIAC (Electronic Numeric Integrator and Com-
puter). Technical report, Moore School of Electrical Engineering, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, 1946.
[Henkin, 1950] L. Henkin.
Completeness in the theory of types.
Journal of Symbolic Logic,
15(2):81–91, June 1950.
[Henkin, 1963] L. Henkin. A theory of propositional types. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 52:323–
344, 1963.
[Hindley and Seldin, 1986] J. R. Hindley and J. P. Seldin. Introduction to Combinators and
λ-Calculus. Cambridge University Press, 1986.
[Hindley, 1964] J. R. Hindley. The Church-Rosser Property and a Result in Combinatory Logic.
PhD thesis, Newcastle upon Tyne, 1964.
[Hindley, 1969] J. R. Hindley. The principal type scheme of an object in combinatory logic.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 146:29–60, 1969.
[Howard, 1980] W. A. Howard.
The formulae-as-types notion of construction.
In J. Roger
Hindley and Jonathan P. Seldin, editors, To H. B. Curry: Essays on Combinatory Logic,
Lambda Calculus and Formalism, pages 479–490. Academic Press, New York, 1980. A version
of this paper was privately circulated in 1969.

The Logic of Church and Curry
871
[Ja´skowski, 1934] Stanislaw Ja´skowski.
On the rules of supposition in formal logic.
Studia
Logica, 1:5–32, 1934.
[Kamareddine et al., 2004] F. Kamareddine, T. Laan, and R. Nederpelt. A Modern Perspective
on Type Theory. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Boston, London, 2004.
[Kanger, 1955] S. Kanger.
A note on partial postulate sets for propositional logic.
Theoria
(Sweden), 21:99–104, 1955.
[Kleene and Rosser, 1935] S. C. Kleene and J. B. Rosser. The inconsistency of certain formal
logics. Annals of Mathematics, 36:630–636, 1935.
[Kleene, 1934] S. C. Kleene. Proof by cases in formal logic. Annals of Mathematics, 35(3):529–
544, July 1934.
[Kleene, 1935] S. C. Kleene. A theory of positive integers in formal logic. American Journal of
Mathematics, 57:153–173, 219–244, 1935.
[Kleene, 1936a] S. C. Kleene. General recursive functions of natural numbers. Mathematische
Annalen, 112:727–742, 1936.
[Kleene, 1936b] S. C. Kleene.
λ-deﬁnability and recursiveness.
Duke Mathematical Journal,
2:340–353, 1936.
[Kleene, 1938] S. C. Kleene.
On notation for ordinal numbers.
Journal of Symbolic Logic,
3(4):150–155, December 1938.
[Kleene, 1944] S. C. Kleene. On the forms of predicates in the theory of constructive ordinals.
American Journal of Mathematics, 66:41–58, 1944.
[Kleene, 1955] S. C. Kleene. On the forms of predicates in the theory of constructive ordinals
(second paper). American Journal of Mathematics, 77:405–428, 1955.
[Kleene, 1962] S. C. Kleene. Lambda-deﬁnable functionals of ﬁnite type. Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, 50:281–303, 1962.
[Kleene, 1981] S. C. Kleene.
Origins of recursive function theory.
Annals of the History of
Computing, 3:52–67, 1981.
[Kripke, 1958] S. A. Kripke. The system LE. Submitted to Westinghouse Science Talent Search,
February, 1958; not published, 1958.
[Lercher, 1963] B. Lercher. Strong reduction and recursion in combinatory logic. PhD thesis,
The Pennsylvania State University, 1963.
[Loewen, 1962] K. Loewen. A study of strong reduction in combinatory logic. PhD thesis, the
Pennsylvania State University, 1962.
[Lorenz, 1961] K. Lorenz. Arithmetik und Logik als Spiele. PhD thesis, Universit¨at Kiel, 1961.
[Lorenzen and Lorenz, 1978] P. Lorenzen and K. Lorenz. Dialogische Logik. Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, 1978.
[Lorenzen, 1961] P. Lorenzen. Ein dialogisches Konstruktivit¨atskriterium. In Inﬁnitistic Meth-
ods: Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Mathematics, Warsaw, 2–9 September
1959, pages 193–200. Pergamon Press and Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 1961.
[Martin-L¨of, 1975] P. Martin-L¨of. An intuitionistic theory of types: Predicative part. In H. E.
Rose and J. C. Shepherdson, editors, Logic Colloquium ’73, pages 73–118. North-Holland
Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Martin-L¨of, 1984] P. Martin-L¨of. Intuitionistic type theory. Bibliopolis, Naples, 1984. Notes
by Giovanni Sambin of a series of lectures given in Padua, June 1980.
[Mezghiche, 1984] Mohamed Mezghiche. Une nouvelle Cβ-r´eduction dans la logique combina-
toire. Theoretical Computer Science, 31:151–165, 1984.
[Mezghiche, 1989] Mohamed Mezghiche. On pseudo-cβ normal form in combinatory logic. The-
oretical Computer Science, 66:323–331, 1989.
[Mezghiche, 1997] Mohamed Mezghiche. cβ-machine with λβ-reduction. Theoretical Computer
Science, 189:221–228, 1997.
[Newman, 1942] M. H. A. Newman. On theories with a combinatorial deﬁnition of “equiva-
lence”. Annals of Mathematics, 43(2):223–243, 1942.
[Popper, 1968] K. R. Popper. Epistemology without a knowing subject. In Logic, Methodology
and Philosophy of Science III: Proceedings of the Third International Congress for Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science, Amsterdam 1967, pages 333–373, Amsterdam, 1968.
North-Holland.
[Prawitz, 1965] D. Prawitz. Natural Deduction. Almqvist & Wiksell, Stockholm, G¨oteborg, and
Uppsala, 1965. Reprinted by Dover, 2006.
[Rosser, 1935a] J. B. Rosser. A mathematical logic without variables, Part I. Annals of Math-
ematics, 36:127–150, 1935.

872
Jonathan P. Seldin
[Rosser, 1935b] J. B. Rosser. A mathematical logic without variables, Part II. Duke Mathemat-
ical Journal, 1:328–355, 1935.
[Rosser, 1936] J. B. Rosser. Extensions of some theorems of G¨odel and Church. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 1(3):87–91, September 1936.
[Rosser, 1942] J. B. Rosser. New sets of postulates for combinatory logics. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 7:18–27, 1942.
[Rosser, 1984] J. B. Rosser. Highlights of the history of the lambda-calculus. Annals of the
History of Computing, 6:337–339, 1984.
[Sanchis, 1963] L. E. Sanchis. Normal combinations and the theory of types. PhD thesis, The
Pennsylvania State University, 1963.
[Sanchis, 1964] L. E. Sanchis.
Types in combinatory logic.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic, 5:161–180, 1964.
[Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1924] M. Sch¨onﬁnkel. ¨Uber die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik. Mathematis-
che Annalen, 92:305–316, 1924. English translation, “On the building blocks of mathematical
logic,” in Jean van Heijenoort, editor, From Frege to G¨odel: A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic, 1879–1931, pages 355–366, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA and London,
1967.
[Seldin, 1968] J. P. Seldin. Studies in Illative Combinatory Logic. PhD thesis, University of
Amsterdam, 1968.
[Seldin, 1975a] J. P. Seldin. Arithmetic as a study of formal systems. Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic, 16:449–464, 1975.
[Seldin, 1975b] J. P. Seldin. Equality in F22. In H. E. Rose and J. C. Shepherdson, editors,
Logic Colloquium ’73, pages 433–444. North-Holland, 1975.
[Seldin, 1977] J. P. Seldin. The Q-consistency of F22. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
18:117–127, 1977.
[Seldin, 1980] J. P. Seldin. Curry’s program. In J. R. Hindley and J. P. Seldin, editors, To
H. B. Curry: Essays on Combinatory Logic, Lambda Calculus and Formalism, pages 3–33.
Academic Press, London, 1980.
[Seldin, 2000] J. P. Seldin. On the role of implication in formal logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
65(3):1076–1114, 2000.
[Seldin, 2003] J. P. Seldin. Curry’s anticipation of the types used in programming languages. In
Proceedings of the Canadian Society for the History and Philosophy of Mathematics, Volume
15, Twenty-Eighth Annual Meeting, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 24–26 May
2002, pages 148–163. Canadian Society for the History and Philosophy of Mathematics, 2003.
[Shapiro, 2000] Stewart Shapiro. Thinking About Mathematics. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford, England, 2000.
[Smullyan, 1961] R. Smullyan. Theory of Formal Systems. Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton, New Jersey, 1961.
[Stegm¨uller, 1964] W. Stegm¨uller. Remarks on the completeness of logical systems relative to
the validity-concepts of P. Lorenzen and K. Lorenz. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
5:81–112, 1964.
[Titgemeyer, 1961] R. Titgemeyer.
¨Uber einen Widerspruch in Cogans Darstellung der Men-
genlehre. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 7:161–163,
1961.
[Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988] A. S. Troelstra and D. van Dalen. Constructivism in mathe-
matics: An introduction, volume I. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1988.
[Turing, 1936–1937] A. M. Turing. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entschei-
dungsproblem.
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 42:230–265, 1936–1937.
Correction, Ibid. 43:544–546, 1937.
[Turing, 1937a] A. M. Turing. Computability and λ-deﬁnability. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
2(4):153–163, December 1937.
[Turing, 1937b] A. M. Turing. The p-function in λ-K-conversion. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
2(4):164, December 1937.
[von Neumann, 1925] J. von Neumann. Eine Axiomatizierung der Mengenlehre. Journal f¨ur
die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik, 154:219–240, 1925. Correction, ibid. 155:128. English
translation: An axiomatization of set theory, in J. van Heijenoort, editor, From Frege to G¨odel:
A Source Book in Mathematical Logic 1879–1931, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Mass., USA, 1967, pp. 393–413.

The Logic of Church and Curry
873
[von Neumann, 1928] J. von Neumann. Die Axiomatizierung der Mengenlehre. Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 27:669–752, 1928.
Based on the author’s doctoral dissertation in Hungarian,
University of Budapest, September 1925 (author’s footnote, p. 669). Reprinted in A. H. Taub,
editor, The Collected Works of J. von Neumann, volume 1, Pergamon Press, Oxford, England,
1961, pp. 339–422.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910–1913] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1910–1913. Second edition, 1925–1927.


PARADOXES, SELF-REFERENCE AND
TRUTH IN THE 20TH CENTURY
Andrea Cantini
This is the reason why the notion of truth is so precious to us: it
is one of the means by which ﬁnite minds are able to apprehend the
inﬁnite.
(W. O. Quine, Philosophy of Logic)
Here is a crude list, possibly summarizing the role of paradoxes within the frame-
work of mathematical logic:
1. directly motivating important theories (e.g. type theory, axiomatic set the-
ory, combinatory logic);
2. suggesting methods of proving fundamental metamathematical results (ﬁxed
point theorems, incompleteness, undecidability, undeﬁnability);
3. applying inductive deﬁnability and generalized recursion;
4. introducing new semantical methods (e.g. revision theory, semi-inductive
deﬁnitions, which require non-trivial set theoretic results);
5. (partly) enhancing new axioms in set theory: the case of anti-foundation
AFA and the mathematics of circular phenomena;
6. suggesting the investigation of non-classical logical systems, from contraction-
free and many-valued logics to systems with generalized quantiﬁers;
7. suggesting frameworks with ﬂexible typing for the foundations of Mathemat-
ics and Computer Science;
8. applying forms of self-referential truth and type-free comprehension in Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence, Theoretical Linguistics, etc.
Below we attempt to shed some light on the genesis of the issues 1–8 through
the history of the paradoxes in the twentieth century, with a special emphasis on
semantical aspects.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 5. Logic from Russell to Church
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

876
Andrea Cantini
1
INTRODUCTION
The general aim of the chapter is to describe the emergence of non-trivial logical
themes from the discussion on paradoxes, with a special emphasis on the semantical
paradoxes and in connection with the foundations of property theory and set
theory.
The present historical analysis mainly deals with logical works, which focus on
three interacting key-notions: truth, self-reference, type free comprehension. The
basic questions we try to answer are:
1. how does the question of paradoxes relate to the main stream of mathemat-
ical logic (at diﬀerent stages of development)?
2. Which relevant logical tools emerge and/or are reﬁned, in strict connection
with the discussion of paradoxes about truth and predicate application?
As a ﬁnal outcome, we would like to reach a reasonably complete catalogue
of ideas, methods and logical tools, involved in the investigation of paradoxes
which took place in the past century. It should also come into view that the role
of semantical paradoxes for a modern mathematical development of deﬁnability
theory (in its various form: recursion theory, descriptive set theory) is certainly not
negligible and it arises in close correlation with set theory, model theory, recursion
theory.
Since the literature on (property theoretic and semantical) paradoxes, even
if restricted to the past century, is overwhelming, we have to make a twofold
choice: 1) we concentrate upon contributions, which have a prominent technical,
systematic vein; 2) we mainly consider works which lie the range of Mathematical
Logic, in the standard sense, thus including Set Theory, Proof Theory, Recursion
Theory and Model Theory. This restriction has to be made explicit because of a
considerable shift of emphasis in the 20th century logical research. While the issue
of paradoxes comes to the scene mainly in the course of the foundational debate at
the beginning of the 20th century, the problem has been considerably transmuted,
especially during the ﬁnal quarter 1975-2000, by the interaction with Computer
Science, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and related disciplines
A further methodological remark is in order. When dealing with paradoxes,
there is an obvious danger: one can emphasize the dramatic consequences and
hence overestimate their role in the development of mathematical logic, or else
assign them a place in the corner of logical games and puzzles, at best an heuristic
role. The truth, as is often the case, lies in the middle, and historical analysis is
of invaluable help to decouple the two diﬀerent attitudes.
Another preliminary observation concerns the problem of forerunners. If we
look at the history of Logic, we may soon arrive at the conclusion that all the
basic solutions of, say, the Liar paradox, are there (i.e. there is hardly anything
new to say, after a(n about) 2500 years long logical debate); hence we might
be deceived by a continuity feeling in the traditional analysis of paradoxes. But
an essentially new point is that Mathematical Logic has produced mathematical

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
877
models thereof, and not simply a logico-linguistic or conceptual analysis. Models
introduce artifacts, and, as usual in formal modelling, there will be a question
of adequacy; on the other hand, models act as microscopes: novel distinctions
and problems arise. Above all, precise statements and results are born out: the
characteristic shift from antinomies to theorems of negative nature (impossibility
results).
With this in mind, we conclude by anticipating that there is a fundamental
diﬀerence between the role of paradoxes before, say, 1897-1903 (dates of the ﬁrst
published paradoxes, the Burali-Forti paradox, and of Russell’s paradox) and the
subsequent discussion: for the ﬁrst time the analysis of simple paradoxes, usually
regarded as idle or scholastic, touches the living ﬂesh of a mathematical theory
in ﬁeri and, soon, Russell will oﬃcially introduce the issue of “contradictions”
([Russell, 1908]), as a challenge for the foundations of mathematics and logic.
Moreover, it happens that paradox-like arguments will later ﬁnd their own place
as (tricky) proof methods in concrete areas of mathematical logic, in particular in
recursion theory.
WARNING 1. No claim of completeness is made.
In particular, the following
items, though obviously linked to the keywords of this chapter, have been omitted:
• recent developments of (illative and non-illative) combinatory logic;
• the treatment of self-reference and provability, and hence of provability logic
in its algebraic and modal versions;
• paradoxes of vagueness (Sorites, Heap) as well as paradoxes of decision and
choice (the prisoner’s dilemma, Newcomb’s paradox; cf. [Sainsbury, 1988]);
• nothing is said about set theoretic paradoxes in the sense of standard set the-
ory and its extensions; the same holds also of classical positive consequences
of ZFC, usually termed as paradoxes, e.g. the Banach-Tarski paradox (cf.
[Wagon, 1985]);
WARNING 2. During the last ﬁfteen years, substantial work is being carried out
in connection with the history of logic in the ﬁrst half of last century (especially on
Hilbert’s school, G¨odel, Tarski, etc.) on the basis of unpublished material. Since
this kind of research is ongoing and a large part of the present work has been
written before 1995, we have mostly limited our analysis to published sources,
giving however references, whenever possible, to recent research papers based on
unpublished material.
2
EARLY DEVELOPMENTS (1897-1930)
Traditionally, paradoxes can be classiﬁed according to the so-called Peano-Ramsey
distinction [Peano, 1902-1906; Ramsey, 1926])
between semantical paradoxes,

878
Andrea Cantini
which ought to belong to linguistics/epistemology, and logical (set-theoretic) para-
doxes, which ought to belong to mathematics in the proper sense. However, from
an historical perspective, it is much more appropriate to partition them according
to the motivating problems; furthermore, it will appear that, contrary to what is
generally stressed, also semantical paradoxes are linked with vital mathematical
notions (the continuum above all).
We anticipate that this period is characterized by the fact that local math-
ematical diﬃculties (concerning the notion of order type, cardinal number, the
arithmetized continuum) quickly merge into antinomies of a general logical im-
port. It is not exaggerated to ascribe to Russell the responsibility of this change.
The historical analysis shows that the antinomies ﬁrst appear in the context of re-
ﬁning Cantorian set theory and induced speciﬁc technical problems. Then almost
immediately, the unintended by-product is that Frege’s theory is deathly wounded,
Cantorian set theory shows an intrinsic mathematical richness to survive on and
to be axiomatized, while, at the same time, fairly innovative logical issues, like
self-application and deﬁnability, emerge as crucial for the research to come.
After the ﬁrst, say, eight years of the century, paradoxes stably become a kind of
standard tool, that leads to distinguish between consistent vs. inconsistent totali-
ties and to the enucleation of suitable disciplines for the comprehension principles
(limitation-of-size, no-classes solution, type theories). Roughly speaking we shall
discuss paradoxes pertaining to the following notions:
1. ordinal and cardinal numbers (Burali-Forti [1897b], Cantor 1895/6, 1899, see
[1932;1962], pp. 443-447, 451);
2. deﬁnability and the arithmetic (or atomistic) continuum (Richard [1905],
K¨onig [1905b], [1905a], [1906], Bernstein [1905c], Berry [1906b], Grelling
and Nelson [1908]);
3. the logical notions of property, set, class (Russell 1901 [1993], Zermelo [1902];
Husserl [1979, p. 399]; [Frege, 19842, p. 80]);
4. the notions of proposition and truth (Russell [1903], [1906b], [1908])
2.1
1897-1903: the emergence of the contradictions
The ﬁrst published set theoretic antinomy concerns the class of the ordinal numbers
and is due to Cesare Burali-Forti,1 a mathematician and logician of the Peano
school. The background is the ongoing project of formalization of (even advanced)
mathematical practice in Peano’s logical symbolism (in the special case, a logical
analysis of the notion of order types and ordinal). Curiously enough, Burali-Forti
was not explicitly aiming at a paradox; instead, he intended to prove that there are
ordinal numbers which are incomparable with respect to their natural ordering:
so that the class of all ordinal numbers (and in general the class of all ordered
1C.f. [Moore and Garciadiego, 1981].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
879
types) could not be linearly ordered. His argument runs by contradiction and, in
standard terminology, is readily rephrased as follows: assuming that the class ON
of all ordinals could be linearly ordered, ON itself would be well-ordered and it
would possess an ordinal Ω ∈ON. Thus ON would be similar (order-isomorphic)
to a proper initial segment of itself, the one determined by Ω, contradicting a
well-known theorem about well-ordered sets.
Two remarks2 are in order here. First of all, the notion of “well-ordered set”
(and “ordinal number”) was not correctly deﬁned by Burali-Forti: he just missed
a crucial second order condition, implying that in a well-ordering (W, <) every
non-empty X ⊆W has a ﬁrst element (in the sense of <).3 On the other hand,
Burali-Forti quite soon acknowledged his omission (in a subsequent note of the
same year [1897a]), and stated without proof that his results were still sound for
properly well-ordered sets.
The second observation is that Burali-Forti’s argument raised a genuine diﬃ-
culty for the notion of transﬁnite number and for Cantorian set theory in general,
even if, as a matter of fact, the proof was ill-based. This is perhaps due to the
fact that Burali-Forti’s antinomy has a speciﬁc mathematical nature: it is not only
grounded upon the logical mechanism underlying set theory, but it makes an es-
sential use of basic properties of well-orderings and is concerned with a collection
(category) of structures with their own structure preserving maps (morphisms).
Also, looking at the history of the foundational and logical ideas of the period,
it is clear that Burali-Forti’s paper was not an isolated intuition. Times were ripe
for the open discussion of riddles about the foundations of set theory; Cantor’s cor-
respondence [1932;1962] (published in 1932 by Zermelo) yields evidence that the
diﬃculty was seriously and independently considered by the father of set theory,
as witnessed by his letters to Dedekind (1899). According to [Bernstein, 1905b,
p. 187], Cantor had the antinomy as early as 1895, and he would have informed
Hilbert in 1896. This is actually witnessed by the correspondence of Cantor ([Can-
tor, 1991]), where he sketches the argument (letter to Hilbert of 26.9.1897) that
the totality of all alephs cannot be at the same time well-deﬁned and conceivable
as a completed set (fertige Menge).
In a letter to Dedekind of July 28, 1899, Cantor [1932;1962], on the basis of the
theorem that ordinal numbers are linearly ordered, stated that the multiplicity of
ordinal numbers is itself well-ordered, but he drew the consequence that ON is
not a set: hence that no ordinal can be assigned to it.
In a second letter to Dedekind of August 31, 1899 Cantor went further to
discuss another set theoretical diﬃculty, which directly involved the notion of the
cardinal number and implied that one cannot consistently think of the “the set of
all conceivable sets”.
2[van Heijenoort, 1967], p. 104.
3See Cantor’s Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannigfaltigkeitslehre of 1883, the 1897 paper
on order types, that was to appear a bit later than Burali-Forti’s work in Mathematische Annalen,
46, 481-512, Beitr¨age zur Begr¨undung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre and also Cantor’s letter to
Young, cited by van Dalen-Monna [1972], p. 23, with a severe judgement on Burali–Forti’s work.

880
Andrea Cantini
If the collection S of all cardinals were a set, we could form the set T =
{Ma|a ∈S} (Ma being a set of cardinal a). Then T would be the set of all
sets and would possess a cardinal a0. But by Cantor’s theorem there is a cardinal
b > a0. This implies that T would contain a subset Mb of cardinality strictly
greater than T’s cardinality: contradiction!4
As is well-known, Cantor made a general point out of his paradoxes, namely
that it is necessary to distinguish two kinds of multiplicities (‘Vielheiten’): the
consistent ones, i.e. sets in the proper sense, and the inconsistent ones. The in-
consistent multiplicities are characterized by the fact that they cannot be regarded
as one thing (‘Einheit’), without falling into contradiction, as in the case of the
totality of ordinal numbers, or the totality of all alephs.5
Of course, Cantor’s
ideas adumbrate the set/class distinction and are, in a sense, a ﬁrst attempt to
deal with the set theoretic paradoxes and are explicitly mentioned by Hilbert in
his 1904 Heidelberg lecture, ([van Heijenoort, 1967], p. 131) at the International
Congress of Mathematicians. Hilbert brieﬂy exposes Cantor’s proposal, but he
criticizes it as largely subjective, since no criterion for the distinction is given (he
has in mind an axiomatic treatment, cf. below).
With the second published antinomy (Russell [1903], paragraphs 78, 101–107;
Frege [1962], Appendix, dated October 1902) we are driven from Cantor’s paradise
into the realm of the foundations of logic and the philosophy of mathematics. On
June 16, 1902 Russell presented the contradiction in a letter to Frege:
“Let w be the predicate: to be a predicate that cannot be predicated of
itself. Can w be predicated of itself? From each answer, the opposite
follows. Likewise, there is no class (as a totality) of those classes which,
each taken as a totality, do not belong to themselves.
From this I
conclude that under certain circumstances a deﬁnable collection does
not form a totality. ” ([van Heijenoort, 1967], p. 124–125)
There are fundamental features in Russell’s arguments that are new with respect
to Burali-Forti and Cantor, and bring out quite clearly the main ingredients of
the contradiction: its relation to the basic mechanism of predicate application
and its explicit self-referential (reﬂexive, in Russell’s future own terms) character.
Moreover, Russell’s argument is striking, because it is general and simple, and it
apparently does not refer to the sophisticated mathematical universe of Cantor
and Burali-Forti; so how did Russell get there?
The problem of the origins of the paradox sheds light on the context of a discus-
sion, which initially focussed on the problem of the foundations of set theory, but
was soon to shift, under Russell’s impulse, towards general fundamental logical
themes. Though a detailed reconstruction is beyond the scope of this section (cf.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1978], [Moore, 1995] and the most recent [Griﬃn, 2004]), it is
worth summarizing it.
4This antinomy is independently rediscovered by Russell in The Principles of Mathematics
[1903], paragraphs 344-349.
5The distinction is also in Schr¨oder [1890], p. 213; but it not quite clear to the present author
whether the two notions indeed coincide.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
881
Russell himself states that he got his contradiction by considering the antinomy
arising with Cantor’s theorem (see [Russell, 1903], footnote 7, par.344; par.100,
p. 101). Indeed, it turned out that he was at ﬁrst entangled in the study of “the
contradictions in the relation of continuous quantity to number and the contin-
uum”,6 when he was asked by the French philosopher Louis Couturat to review
the dissertation on atomism by the French neo-kantian philosopher Hannequin.
At that time Russell learned of Cantor’s work, and for a while he rejected the
very idea of a mathematical (atomistic) continuum and of transﬁnite number as
self-contradictory. In particular, he was concerned with “the antinomy of inﬁnite
number”, which follows if one applies the notion of totality to numbers.
This
antinomy bears a clear resemblance to Cantor’s paradox, though7 Russell does
not adopt the notion of cardinal number, nor does he hinge upon Cantor’s the-
orem (using a vague successor notion, instead of cardinal exponentiation): if we
could conceive the totality of all numbers and if this totality had a number, such
a number ought to be the greatest, say N; but then N + 1 is greater than N, con-
tradiction.8 Between November 1900 and January 1901, after the Paris Congress
and under the inﬂuence of Peano, Russell changes his attitude towards the idea of
inﬁnite number and he obtains the paradox of the largest cardinal (see paragraphs
346-349); but he still holds for a while that the class CL of all classes and Cantor’s
theorem can live together: CL exists and it has a number, but one cannot prove
that the number of CL is less than the number of its subclasses, i.e. the theorem
does not hold for CL. The ﬁnal step is accomplished, during the writing of the
ﬁnal draft of The Principles of Mathematics (May 1901): here one ﬁnds the ﬁrst
version of the paradox.9
Yet, as the reader will observe, Russell’s contradiction lies dormant for one year.
There is evidence in Russell’s correspondence that he did not realize the impor-
tance of the discovery, until he got the answer from Frege; there Frege stressed
the dramatic eﬀects of Russell’s observation and he promised an appendix where
Russell’s discovery is taken into account. Indeed, Frege’s second volume of the
Grundgesetze contains in the celebrated Nachwort another presentation of the
antinomy and the ﬁrst attempt towards a solution: he proposes to replace the cru-
cial postulate V with a variant that should be capable of blocking self-application
and in the end the contradiction. Frege’s idea is that, if two classes deﬁned by
the concepts F and G are equal, then F(a) ↔G(a), for every object a which is
distinct from {x|Fx)} and {x|G(x)}. As shown by Lesniewski in 1938, Frege’s
variant was doomed to inconsistency (cf. Sobocinski [1949]).
Russell’s antinomy, like Burali-Forti’s, was independently known in G¨ottingen
6From an unpublished paper, cited in [Moore, 1995], p. 219.
7This is already remarked by [Moore, 1995].
8[Moore, 1995, p. 226] citing from unpublished Russell’s work
9Anellis [1991] argues that a ﬁrst version of the Russell paradox is already in a letter to
Couturat, dated 8.12.1900, where Russell mentions to have found a mistake in Cantor and he
holds against Cantor: there is a largest cardinal number. Russell notes that Cantor’s theorem
does not apply if we consider the class of all classes ([Anellis, 1991], p. 39).

882
Andrea Cantini
since 1902. Hilbert states in a letter to Frege of 7.11.1903 10 that Zermelo, under his
suggestion, had already discovered the same contradiction and a similar remark
was made by Zermelo in a footnote contained in his second paper on the well-
ordering theorem [1908a].
Most convincingly, there is an indirect conﬁrmation
of this fact in a note of Husserl [1979], of 16.4.1902, where Husserl registers the
following result of Zermelo (in the context of the discussion of Schr¨oder’s work):
a set M that comprises as elements all of his subsets is inconsistent. The proof
is standard; consider the set M0 of all elements of M which are not elements of
themselves (e.g. the empty set is in M0). This set is a subset of M and hence
by assumption on M, M0 ∈M. If M0 ∈M0, then M0 is not a member of itself.
Hence M0 is not in M0 and since M0 ∈M, M0 ∈M0: contradiction.
Furthermore, as it can be seen from unpublished work of Hilbert (now published
and translated in [Peckhaus and Kahle, 2002]).
Hilbert not only outlines Zer-
melo’s version of the Russell paradox in the Vorlesung of the summer term 1905,
but he also presents a new contradiction of his own, together with a remarkable
version of the functional version of the Russell’s paradox, later to become popular
in the context of combinatory logic, lambda calculus and recursion theory.11
Let us only sketch Hilbert’s paradox in modern terms.
Let C be the least
collection which satisﬁes the following closure conditions: (i) the set N of natural
numbers is an element of C; (ii) XX ∈C, whenever X ∈C (XX being the set of
all functions from X to X); (iii)  X ∈C, whenever X ⊆C. Then trivially C ⊆C,
whence by (ii),  C = U ∈C and ﬁnally F = UU ∈C. But by deﬁnition of union,
F ⊆U; hence there would exist a map of U onto F and a contradiction could be
easily derived by diagonalization `a la Cantor.
According to Hilbert, the paradox is more signiﬁcant and convincing than other
contradictions, just because it is purely mathematical, i.e. it involves only math-
ematical objects and mathematical operations. He also adds that, after believing
that it would constitute a stumbling block for set theory, he is conﬁdent in a
solution after a revision of the foundations. Today, in the light of Zermelo’s ax-
iomatization, we can readily locate the source of the paradox in the step where
the union operation is applied to the collection U, which has to be a set: hence
10There he thanks Frege for the second volume of the Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, see [Frege,
1976, p. 80].
11The text of the paradox is published in [Peckhaus and Kahle, 2002]; but see also [Peckhaus,
2004]. A detailed discussion of Hilbert’s view on paradoxes, also in the light of Hilbert’s course
lectures between 1905 and 1920, is given by [Kahle, 2004]. For a reformulation of the paradox
using power set operation instead of exponentiation, see [Kanamori, 2004]. As far as we know,
Kahle is the ﬁrst to observe the interesting occurrence of the functional paradox in the version
of the 1905 Vorlesung, due to E. Hellinger. The functional paradox is obtained by ﬁrst assuming
that the universe includes everything, i.e.
variables range on the same par over objects and
functions. Then one introduces a new operation (universal application in our sense): xy stands
for the object consisting of the combination of x and y. Having ﬁxed two distinct objects 0 and
1, one makes the crucial assumption that the universe is closed under arbitrary deﬁnition by
cases and hence there exists an object f such that fx = 0 if xx ̸= 0, and fx = 1 if xx = 0. Then
one chooses x = f (as x ranges everywhere) and easily derives a contradiction. The argument is
regarded by Hilbert as a model for clarifying the source of all contradictions; it is worth stressing
that it is based on functional self-application and hence direct self-reference.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
883
the argument shows that this is not a set.
So why did people in G¨ottingen refrain from publishing the contradiction? A
ﬁrst ground was probably Hilbert’s attitude that contradictions and paradoxes are
natural phenomena for a newly born and growing discipline, nothing dramatic in
a sense ([Peckhaus, 1990], p. 51). Paradoxes are symptoms of growth, more than
a deep malaise; they are thought of as minor, temporary facts, that might only
obscure what Hilbert considered to be Cantor’s paradise.
More deeply, Hilbert’s diagnosis is that the contradictions mainly arise because
traditional logic is insuﬃcient and the theory of concept-formation needs to be
sharpened. Traditionally, a concept C is given insofar as it is determined of an
arbitrary object whether it falls under C or it does not; but according to Hilbert,
this is methodologically wrong: a concept is really ﬁxed in a net with other concepts
(letter of 7.11.1903, in [Frege, 1976], pp. 79-80), and this net is speciﬁed by the
axioms; so only the consistency of the axioms that deﬁne the concept grants the
legitimacy of C.
The fault is logical, not mathematical.
But eventually this
requires the development of a grand new research program, his Beweistheorie.
Be that as it may, the Russellian contribution of [Russell, 1903] should not
be underestimated. The new antinomy - as well as Burali-Forti - is repeatedly
discussed in various forms in the Principles (sec.78, sec.84-85, sec.101). In sec.85,
the contradiction is adapted to show that a propositional function φ cannot be
regarded by itself as a logical subject (i.e. as separated from its argument; it is
not saturated in Frege’s terms); otherwise, φ would apply to itself, ¬φ(φ) would be
a propositional function and it would be possible to reproduce the inconsistency.
It is also interesting to recall that, in the previous section 84, incidentally, Russell
observes that, when we speak of the x′s such that ϕ(x), we are introducing in the
calculus of propositions the notion of truth; so in present-day terms, the roots of
the diﬃculties are perceived as semantical as well. In ch.X, section 102, Russell
spells out a purely logical form of Cantor’s theorem, which captures the logical
essence of diagonalization: no binary relation can parameterize all unary predicates
(i.e. no binary relation R exists such that for all unary predicates P, there is an
object a for which one has: for all x, R(a, x) ↔P(x)). For then we might argue by
diagonalization and construct via R a new unary predicate D(x) := ¬R(x, x) which
is not parameterized by R. A variant of this result (also in par.102) immediately
applies to propositional functions: “any method by which we attempt to establish
a one-to-one or many-one correlation of all terms and all propositional functions
must omit at least one propositional function” (ibid. p. 103).
Russell’s conclusion points to the critical role of apparently safe logical princi-
ples: either one has to give up “the assumption that any propositional function
containing only one variable is equivalent to asserting membership for a class de-
ﬁned by the propositional function (i.e. the comprehension principle, that was
explicitly stated by Peano); or one has to reject the idea that every class can be
taken as one term ” (pp. 102-103).
Also, it is utterly clear that in Russell’s hands the paradox spreads out and

884
Andrea Cantini
becomes extremely ﬂexible: it applies to predicates, classes, propositional functions
and it forces to delineate a new structure for the logical-mathematical universe,
which is outlined in a ﬁrst exposition of the doctrine of types, as a means to solve
the contradiction: “it is necessary to distinguish various types of objects, namely
terms, classes of terms, classes of classes, classes of couple of terms, and so on; and
that a propositional function φx in general requires, if it has to have any meaning,
that x should belong to some one type. Thus x ∈x was held to be meaningless,
because ∈requires that the relatum should be a class composed of objects which
are of the type of the referent” (p. 107, par.106).
The doctrine of types is put forward tentatively in the second appendix of
the Principles (par.500). It is assumed that to each propositional function φ is
associated a range of signiﬁcance, i.e. a class of objects to which the given φ applies
in order to produce a proposition; moreover, precisely the ranges of signiﬁcance
form types. However there are objects that are not ranges of signiﬁcance; these
are just the individuals and they form the lowest type. The next type consists of
classes or ranges of individuals; then one has classes of classes of objects of the
lowest type, and so on.
Once the hierarchy is accepted, new diﬃculties still arise; in particular, if one
accepts that propositions form a type (as they are the only objects of which it can
be meaningfully asserted that they are true or false). This is a crucial point and
leads Russell to another contradiction, this time explicitly dealing with semantical
notions. First of all, there are apparently as many propositions as objects (just
consider the map x →(x = x); p. 527). On the other hand, if it is possible to form
types of propositions, as it seems the case, there are more types of propositions
than propositions, by Cantor’s argument. But we can inject types of propositions
into propositions by appealing to the notion of logical product and this leads to
troubles. Indeed, let m be a class 12 of propositions and let Πm be the proposition
“every proposition of m is true” (which has to be thought of as a possibly inﬁnitary
conjunction or logical product).
Clearly, if m and n are diﬀerent classes, the
propositions Πm and Πn are diﬀerent, i.e. the map m →Πm is injective. Then,
if we consider the class {p|∃m(Πm = p ∧p /∈m)} = R, we have, by injectivity:
ΠR ∈R ⇔ΠR /∈R,
whence a contradiction.
In order to avoid it, Russell questions the identity of equivalent propositional
functions and the nature of the logical product of two propositions. He notices
that, if we consider the new class of propositions m′ = m ∪{Πm}, then
Πm′ ⇔Πm ∧Πm ⇔Πm.
So, if one were to adopt the extensional point of view, and hence equivalent propo-
sitions should be identiﬁed, then Πm = Πm′. As m ̸= m′, m →Πm would not be
injective and the contradiction above could not derived. However, Russell sticks
12’Class’ is here the same as ’range’ or ’type’.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
885
to an intensional point of view, stressing that equivalent propositions can be of-
ten quite diﬀerent. So it seems that one is forced to reject the assumption that
propositions form one type, and hence that they ought to have various types, while
logical products ought to have propositions of only one type as factors.
This will be eventually the base of the 1908 solution, but here Russell reputes
the suggestion as harsh and artiﬁcial; as the footnote of p.527 shows, he still
believes that the set of all propositions is a counterexample to Cantor’s theorem!
It is thus fair to say that the Principles of Mathematics, as its coeval Fregean
second volume of the Grundgesetze end up with an unsolved antinomy: Russell
concludes by declaring that “what the complete solution of the diﬃculty may
be, I have not succeeded in discovering; but as it aﬀects the very foundations of
reasoning , I earnestly commend the study of it to the attention of all students of
logic.” (p.528)
2.2
1903-1905: deﬁnability and the continuum
What is the reaction of the mathematical world to the contradictions?
At the Heidelberg International Congress of Mathematicians, Hilbert pleads the
axiomatic method as a privileged tool to face the problem of a simultaneous con-
sistent foundation of logical and mathematical notions, and he critically surveys
the point of view of several leading scholars, among them Frege, Dedekind and
Cantor as directly concerned with the set-theoretic paradoxes. But he does not
explicitly mention Burali-Forti nor Russell. He limits himself to note that Frege’s
work is based on the dangerous idea that “a concept (set) is deﬁned and usable
if and only if it is determined whether the object is subsumed under the concept
or not, and here he imposes no restriction to ‘every’ . . . ” ([Hilbert, 1905], [van
Heijenoort, 1967], p.130). Thus Frege must assume the existence of the set of all
sets, and he entangles himself with the set-theoretic paradoxes. Hilbert’s conclu-
sion is that “a major goal of the investigations into the notion of number should
be to avoid such contradictions and to clarify these paradoxes”( ibid., p.130). He
then proceeds by pointing out that Dedekind relies upon insecure grounds, as he
employs the notion of the totality of all objects, while Cantor sensed the con-
tradictions (as we have already recalled), but he proposed a distinctions between
consistent and inconsistent totalities, which is not mathematically acceptable yet.
On his side, Hilbert then sketches the idea of combinatory consistency proofs as
means to justify axiomatized theory and hence mathematical existence (see also
[Sieg, 1999]).
The involvement with foundational puzzles was destined to increase during the
Congress and in its immediate temporal neighborhoods; furthermore, if the new
contradictions touched the notions of ordinal and cardinal number, and they em-
brace the very conception of set and genuinely logical concepts, the diﬃculties
soon propagated, up to include the notion of deﬁnability, and its relation with
a fundamental issue: the structure of the mathematical continuum and Cantor’s
continuum hypothesis.

886
Andrea Cantini
At the Heidelberg Congress Julius K¨onig claimed to have disproved the existence
of a well-ordering of the continuum, thus refuting Cantor’s hypothesis. Due to a
mistake discovered by Zermelo, his paper was immediately withdrawn, but the
subsequent year, K¨onig [1905a] produced a new proof, that was presented in June
20, 1905 to the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.
His argument essentially goes as follows. Consider the reals which are deﬁn-
able in ﬁnitely many words.
They clearly form a countable set and they can
be enumerated in a sequence: E0, . . . , En, . . .. Since the continuum is uncount-
able, there exist reals not occurring in the given enumeration.
Assuming that
the continuum is well-ordered, there exists “the least real E which is not in the
sequence{En}n∈ω”; but the very expression “the least real E which is not in the
sequence{En}n∈ω” deﬁnes E with ﬁnitely many words; so E occurs somewhere in
the sequence: contradiction !
On the other hand, K¨onig observes that the argument extends to the second
number class (or, in general, to any uncountable well-ordered set). The collec-
tion FOD of ﬁnitely deﬁnable countable ordinals is certainly denumerable; hence
there would exist the least ordinal α such that α /∈FOD. But then α would
be ﬁnitely deﬁnable and an element of FOD: contradiction! In this case, tak-
ing inspiration from Cantor, K¨onig’s diagnosis is that one ought to distinguish
between totalities that can be conceived as completed and those that are never
understood as ﬁnished. But he is apparently suggesting something more ([K¨onig,
1905a], p. 148): a completed totality or set in the proper sense should provide not
only a rule for deﬁning its elements, but also a means for distinguishing them.13
According to him, Cantor’s second number class is probably not a set, because we
only have a “collective notion”, which allows to distinguish between elements and
non-elements of the class.
Less than two months later Zermelo had conceived his (ﬁrst) proof of the well-
ordering theorem from the axiom of choice.14 So there was an evident conﬂict !
Clearly, since the well-ordering theorem is correct, the conclusion of the Hungarian
mathematician must be false; yet, it still remains a contradiction in which the
notion of deﬁnability with ﬁnitely many words plays a major role.
A contradiction, which is strictly related to K¨onig’s had been published a bit
earlier by Jules Richard, a mathematics teacher at the Lyc`ee of Dijon.15
He
observes – using an enumeration of all permutations with repetitions of the twenty-
six letters of the French alphabet – that the set E of reals that can be deﬁned by
ﬁnitely many French words is denumerable and hence we can assume to have an
enumeration u1, u2, . . . of all those numbers.
But now a contradiction easily arises by forming the following real N: the
integer part of N is 0, while its n-th decimal digit of N is p + 1 if un has the
nth decimal digit p diﬀerent from 8, 9; else, the nth-decimal digit of N is 1. By
13This idea is also shared by Poincar´e.
14Not yet stated as such; cf. [Levi, 1902] and four years later [Zermelo, 1908a].
15[Richard, 1905] was communicated in the form of a letter to the Revue G´en´erale des Sciences
Pures et Appliqu´ees, dated March 30, 1905.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
887
construction, N will not occur in u1, u2, . . .. On the other hand, if we consider that
N is deﬁned by means of a ﬁnite collection of letters, this must occur in u1, u2, . . .
It is to be stressed that Richard does not rely upon the well-ordering of the
continuum; and the solution he proposes is interesting for the foundational debate
to come. He points out that the deﬁnition of N mentions the very collection E, to
which E must belong; but E is yet to be deﬁned; and the deﬁnition of N makes
sense, only if the set E is completely deﬁned. This cannot be done except by
means of inﬁnitely many words. In conclusion, the contradiction disappears, since
the deﬁnition of N has no deﬁnite meaning.
To make the picture of the foundational debate in the neighborhood of Heidel-
berg Congress more intricate and complete, one should not forget that, at a given
time in 1905, there was not only the contrast between Zermelo and K¨onig; indeed,
Felix Bernstein published in 1905 a short note [1905a] Die Theorie der reellen
Zahlen, where Cantor’s continuum hypothesis was claimed to be settled in the
positive!16 Again, Bernstein’s argument crucially relies upon the notion of deﬁn-
ability. First of all, he identiﬁes the continuum with the space N N of all numbers
theoretic functions; but he criticizes the so called Dirichlet’s notion of arbitrary
function and he believes that it is possible to give a foundation to the continuum
using only computable reals, i.e. reals possessing an explicit Bildungsgesetz. Ac-
cording to him, this is not restrictive since – he claims – there are non-denumerably
many computable reals in his sense. Then he also states that it is possible to dis-
play the new computable continuum in a hierarchy (i.e. a ⊂-increasing sequence)
{Bα}α<ω1 of subsets of N N, which is deﬁned in such a way that each Bα is at
most of cardinality ℵ1 and hence that the cardinality of the union of the sequence
is at most ℵ1. The idea is to start with a basic domain B0 of simple functions
⊆N N (e.g. those having ﬁnitely many values), then to deﬁne a new domain B1
by closing oﬀunder the operations of B0, together with operations, which are re-
cursively deﬁned from elements of B0, and so on. Of course, Bernstein’s claims are
hardly justiﬁed, as the notion of deﬁnability involved is essentially vague; and his
note is after all only a sketch of a proof. A posteriori, one might observe that he
got at least in nuce a sound intuition: it is possible to settle the continuum prob-
lem, if one has an appropriately general notion of deﬁnability (or computability,
constructibility). Other works dealing with the problem of deﬁnability are those
of [Hobson, 1905], [Dixon, 1907], that prompted Russell[1906b].
Why deﬁnability? On one hand, this is ultimately connected to the issue of a
better understanding of the atomistic continuum; the arithmetized conception nec-
essarily shifts the attention towards arbitrary inﬁnite sequences of natural numbers
(or arbitrary countable sets of natural numbers) as main individual mathemati-
cal constituents, underlying the mathematical practice (not simply the Cantorian
transﬁnite).
But this is not so easy to swallow; there remains the idea that an inﬁnite
16In [1905b] Bernstein proposes a solution of Burali-Forti’s antinomy which resorts to assuming
that the ordinal β of the set ON of all ordinals cannot be increased, i.e. β = β + 1; then he tries
to argue that the set of all subsets of ON cannot well-ordered.

888
Andrea Cantini
sequence (or an inﬁnite set) has to have a forming rule. But what is a rule? Since
one must be extremely liberal (in order not to have special classes of reals, if one
is too restrictive), one is naturally driven to think of arbitrary ﬁnitely described
laws, shifting the attention towards the syntax of the rules. But no syntax, unless
you consider the ordinary language, is available and this engenders indeterminacy
(this is Peano’s diagnosis [1902-1906]).
On the other hand, the need of a speciﬁcation of inﬁnite sets appears crucial
in the discussion of the related well-ordering problem, nor one should forget the
problem of the classiﬁcation of discontinuous functions and analytically repre-
sentable functions of real variables, tackled by Baire and Lebesgue in the same
years, so deeply intertwined with the question of mathematical existence in gen-
eral.17 As Lebesgue remarks (p. 153, [Borel, 1914]), if you only know the deﬁning
property of a set, you know nothing of the elements, except what is needed to
distinguish them from elements outside the set. Moreover, the question is: “peut
on demontrer l’existence d’un ˆetre math´ematique sans le d´eﬁnir?” After Zermelo’s
proof, Borel noticed in [1904] that Zermelo only proved the equivalence of the well-
ordering problem with the axiom of choice (the possibility of arbitrary choices);
he also quoted a letter of Baire, manifesting a skeptical attitude towards Cantor
continuum hypothesis: why virtual totalities, determined by completely diﬀerent
notions, ought to have “a common measure”? (p. 516).
2.3
1905-1908: between conceptual analysis and technical tools for
solving paradoxes
In the light of the foundational debate, the three years to come are rich of seminal
work: new paradoxes arise (Berry, Grelling-Nelson), a uniﬁed view of the contra-
dictions of logic and mathematics is masterfully outlined in the opening section of
Russell’s 1908 paper (see [Russell, 1908] and the preceding [Russell, 1906a]), while
a ﬁrst conceptual distinction between two kinds of paradoxes is set forth in Peano’s
paper of 1906. Also, the basic ideas of predicativity emerge in the discussion be-
tween Poincar´e, the leading mathematician of the time, and Russell. Even more
important for the history of mathematical logic, there appear fundamental tech-
nical contributions for solving paradoxes and shaping the foundations of logic and
mathematics: Russell’s theory of (ramiﬁed) types and Zermelo’s axiomatization of
set theory. This is not the full picture; reﬁnements and variations of foundational
and logical interests are to be found in the works of Borel, Bernstein, Sch¨onﬂies,
Korselt, Levi, Hessenberg, Brouwer and others.
Since we cannot go into a detailed analysis of each single contribution and we
deal mainly with paradoxes, we only concentrate on some crucial papers.
17See the celebrated letters of 1905 among Baire, Borel, Lebesgue, Hadamard, [Borel et al.,
1905] and [Borel, 1914]; Hadamard holds that the existence of mathematical objects is indepen-
dent upon the means we use to deﬁne them; also, according to him, ON is not a set, following
Cantor, cf.p.158 [Borel, 1914], contra Bernstein. For a historical analysis of the relevant mathe-
matical notions involved, measure and integration, see [van Dalen and Monna, 1972].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
889
Russell and Poincar´e on contradictions
The backbone of the discussion is the Poincar´e-Russell debate in the Revue de
M´etaphysique et Morale; roughly, it comprises:
1. the long essay Les math´ematiques et la loqique in the Revue of 1905-1906
([Poincar´e, 1905], [Poincar´e, 1906a]), where Poincar´e strongly criticizes the
axiomatic and logicistic foundations (Hilbert, Peano, Couturat, Russell being
the major opponents) and vindicates the Kantian point of view about the
foundations of mathematics;
2. Russell 1906’s paper [1906b] On some diﬃculties in the theory of transﬁnite
numbers and aggregates;18
3. the counterattack of Poincar´e [1906b], with the subsequent Russellian papers
in the Revue of 1906, on the American Journal of Mathematics (1908), and
Poincar´e [1910], [1909a], [1912].
While mathematicians mainly focus on the problem of the contradictions, insofar
as it touches the foundations of set theory, Russell (1906) proposes a thorough
re-examination of the paradoxes, holding the view that his own contradiction “is
a special case of a general type of contradictions which result from supposing that
certain propositional functions determine a class, when, in fact, they do not do
so” ([Russell, 1906b], p. 33). A propositional function may be well-deﬁned for
every argument, and yet the collection of the values for which it is deﬁned need
not be a class. So the real problem becomes logical: to give a consistent theory of
admissible propositional functions.
In this framework, Russell speaks for the ﬁrst time of the notion of ‘predicative
norm’ (‘norm’ being the term used by Hobson [1905]) or predicative propositional
function, as the one which deﬁnes a class (hence its negation is also predicative);
then the contradictions, like Burali-Forti and his own antinomy, show exactly that
certain functions are not predicative.19
Russell’s diagnosis in [1906b] points to diagonalization and self-reference as ma-
jor sources of impredicativity: “there are self-reproductive processes and classes;
there are properties, such that, given any class of terms all having such a property,
we can always deﬁne a new term having the property in question. Hence we can
18The paper is apparently triggered by a kind of review of Hobson’s paper On the arithmetic
continuum [1905], which is, in turn, motivated by K¨onig’s 1905 paper [1905a]; cf. also Dixon
[1907]
19A common generalization of Burali-Forti and his own antinomy is oﬀered: “given a property
φ and a function f, such that if φ belongs to all the members of u, f‘u always exists, has the
property φ and is not a member of u; then the supposition that there is a class w of all terms
having the property φ and that f‘w exist leads to the conclusion that f‘w both has and has not
the property φ ” [Russell, 1906b], p. 35 (e.g. choose f =‘identity’, φ=‘ x is not a member of
x’, and, also f‘u =the ordinal of u, φ = x is an ordinal”, ([Russell, 1906b], p. 35). This is not
especially illuminating except for pointing to the essential role played by the existence of the
class {x|ϕ(x)}.

890
Andrea Cantini
never collect all terms having the said property into a whole ”(p. 36). He also ob-
serves that, even if a propositional function φ is provably impredicative, it might
happen that the terms satisfying φ could be arranged in a series ordinally similar to
a segment of the series of all ordinals and hence that it could be non-contradictory
to assume that φ is in fact predicative. Therefore, even if a propositional function
is provably impredicative, it cannot be excluded that extensionally, it determines
a predicative function. It is clear that if we replace ‘it cannot be excluded’ by ‘it
must be the case that’ this rather obscure remark could be regarded as a way of
postulating a form of the reducibility axiom.20
Given that paradoxes are not essentially arithmetical, but logical, Russell tenta-
tively advances three diﬀerent proposals: the zigzag theory, the theory of limitation
of size and the no-classes theory, eventually his own ﬁnal choice. But the paper
does not yield clear cut characterizations. While zigzagness fosters the idea that
the right functions ought to be “simple”,21 according to the second view, ‘predica-
tive’ would be characterized by a certain limitation of size (e.g. the collection of
all ordinals ON is too large). In the no-classes theory, classes are not independent
entities and anything said about propositional functions is to be regarded as an
abbreviation for a statement about its values.
Poincar´e [1906b] strongly reacts against Russell, but he proposes a reinterpreta-
tion of predicativity (as introduced rather neutrally in zigzag theory) as absence of
vicious circles, thus somewhat extending Richard’s diagnosis (cf. above [Richard,
1905]). In essence, he advances a bold generalization, arguing that all the contra-
dictions rely upon impredicative (circular) deﬁnitions and that the problem with
impredicative classes is not that they are empty, but that they have an undecided
frontier ([Poincar´e, 1906b], p. 310).
The intuition is not supported by logical
analysis, since Poincar´e is a strong opponent of formal methods and primarily
interested in a philosophical debate. Thus the contradictions oﬀer to Poincar´e a
means to defend an intuitionistic, Kantian point of view, arguing that the logi-
cal deﬁnition of natural numbers, as those numbers which belong to all recurrent
classes, is impredicative (p. 309), and that number theoretic induction as well the
axiom of choice (see. p. 315) constitute independent intuitions, truly synthetic a
priori judgements.
It is worth mentioning that at page 305, [1906b], Poincar´e assimilates the form
given by Russell to the paradoxes (including Russell’s, Burali-Forti, K¨onig) to that
of the Epimenides, i.e. to a semantical traditional puzzle.22 Thus the challenge
of paradoxes tacitly propagates back to the realm of pure, traditional logic, and
Poincar´e’s observations are highly inﬂuential, as witnessed by Russell’s reply of
1906 (about Les paradoxes de la Logique, [Russell, 1906a]).
20See below, 2.4.
21G¨odel (1944) (see [G¨odel, 1944]) suggests that this theory ought to be qualiﬁed as ‘intensional’
and regards Quine’s system NF of [Quine, 1937] as a candidate for making the idea of zigzagness
precise.
22Quoting from Russell [1908]: “Epimenides the Cretan said that all Cretans were liars, and
all the other statements made by Cretans were certainly lies. Was this a lie?”.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
891
Russell [1906a] not only sticks to the view (p. 635) that paradoxes are more
on the side of logic than of mathematics, but, typically, rephrases Poincar´e’s ideas
and criticism within the language of formal logic; for instance, the problem of
admitting the actual inﬁnity resorts to accept that the word ‘all’ applies to all or
some terms having a certain property, therefore posing the question of a proper
understanding of higher order quantiﬁcation. Moreover, the vicious circle principle
(“whatever concerns every or some or any member of a class cannot be a member
of the class”, p. 634) is stated by explicitly referring to Poincar´e, but, at the same
time, to the terminology and notions of formal logic in the Peano’s sense:
whatever comprises an apparent variable should not be one among the
possible values of that variable.
In contrast to the previous paper, Russell deﬁnitely adheres to the no-classes
theory. He interprets ordinary statements about classes without assuming that
classes are independent entities; meaningful propositions concerning classes are
regarded as propositions concerning their elements (all of them, some of them).
This means that classes are to be eliminated by the corresponding deﬁnitions,
using as technical tool the ‘substitution method’ (p.
636), and the contextual
elimination of deﬁnite descriptions (he cites on p. 637 his paper On Denoting,
[1905a]). Roughly, if we have a proposition p and a constituent a, Russell (p.637)
calls p/a substitution matrix and assimilates it to the class, whose members are
exactly the values b which, when substituted to a in p, make p true.23 Nonetheless,
class theoretic paradoxes are then solved, insofar as, according to the vicious circle
principle, the values must be of a type diﬀerent from that of the corresponding
matrix (class) and classes cannot be members of themselves.
Although Russell endorses Poincar´e’s view of paradoxes as Insolubilia, and he
even credits the idea of vicious circularity as a ground for contradiction to Ock-
ham,24 he does not share the idea that actual inﬁnite is an essential ingredient
of the foundational malaise; contradictions arise also if the inﬁnite is not involved
and this is clearly shown by the Liar paradox in the form “I lie” (p.632). As far
as we know, it is exactly at this place that the most cited semantical puzzle in
the history of logic regains a conspicuous position in the logical analysis of the
twentieth century.
Here is Russell’s analysis of the Liar (p. 642).25 First of all, he assumes that
there exist certain entities that are claimed by genuine statements (e.g. when I say
that Socrates is mortal, there is a fact corresponding to my assertion and it is this
fact that the proposition claims). He also concedes this, even if the assertion is
23This is actually a published trace of the substitutional theory of classes and relations that
was developed by Russell in unpublished work (see [1905b]) and then dismissed as a perilous
route, as it ended up in a new contradiction by a suitable self-referential trick. For details and
references, see [Pelham and Urquhart, 1994], [Landini, 2004], [Rouilhan, 2004].
24His source is Baldwin’s Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology [Baldwin, 1905].
25For the sake of historical information, we recall that there is a Russellian manuscript with
the appealing title The Paradox of the Liar, which the present author has not been able to see,
but it is announced as forthcoming in volume V of Russell’s Collected Papers.

892
Andrea Cantini
negative; but not if we deal with existential or universal statements, which contain
‘apparent variable’. In our terminology, propositions are not closed under quan-
tiﬁcation: we must be sure that the collection we quantify upon, is a well-deﬁned
totality, as a class. This is not the case when we consider the collection of proposi-
tions. Indeed, the Liar can be rendered as ‘there is a proposition that I state and
that it is false’ (p.643). But this contains a quantiﬁcation (an apparent variable)
over the collection of all propositions and, according to the vicious circle principle,
we have no right to make such a claim. In other words, the Liar proposition can be
false (true) if I make a true (false) statement, or else if I fail in making a statement
at all. In the ﬁrst case, we get a contradiction. It is the second case that Russell
accepts: the Liar is false because the statement does not yield a proposition (it
fails to be a true claim about the world), as it implicitly contains a quantiﬁcation
over an impredicative collection.
As to Richard’s paradox, Russell points out that the class E is not well-deﬁned:
the reason is that in the deﬁnition of E one employs the very notion of deﬁnition,
and this is not a well-deﬁned notion (p. 645). Similar considerations apply to the
paradox suggested by Berry, which is here stated for the ﬁrst time in published
form, and has the merit not to overcome the domain of ﬁnite numbers. Consider
the natural numbers that are deﬁned by means of less than 18 syllables; this set is
non-empty and ﬁnite. So there exists numbers which are not deﬁnable using less
than 18 syllables. Consider the least such number: clearly, by deﬁnition, it is not
deﬁnable with less than 18 syllables. On the other hand such a number is deﬁnable
with less than 18 syllables, since it is uniquely determined by the expression “the
least number not deﬁnable with less than 18 syllables”, which has itself less than
18 syllables.
Variations I: Peano, Sch¨onﬂies, Brouwer, Borel
While Russell and Poincar´e analyse contradictions as deeply intertwined with
philosophical and foundational ideas (the role of actual inﬁnity, the nature of
classes), Peano’s analysis of Richard (cf.
[Peano, 1902-1906] Additione a Su-
per Theorema de Cantor-Bernstein) is an attempt of concretely applying formal
methods and in particular the rules of the theory of deﬁnitions.
According to
him, Richard’s solution of the contradiction is not satisfactory. Since the diago-
nal Richard number N is deﬁned in the natural language, plus the name for the
set E of ﬁnitely deﬁnable reals in (0, 1), Peano tries to get rid of circularity and
reference to E, by ﬁxing a kind of explicit “g¨odel-numbering”: given a natural
number n, write n in base B, for B suﬃciently big (so to include the number of
alphabet letters plus punctuation marks). So each number determines a suitable
ﬁnite string of symbols in the natural language, and, in certain cases, this string
will deﬁne a number. Let V al(n) =“the decimal number which is deﬁned by the
expression encoded by n and interpreted according to the rules of the natural
language”; then Richard’s number N is deﬁned as the unique real R in (0, 1), sat-
isfying a suitable condition ϕ(R), depending on V al. In order to get the paradox,

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
893
one has to show that there exists at least a real satisfying ϕ and that R is unique.
But no such a real can exist: if N were well-deﬁned, and, say, V al(m) = N, for
some m, the mth-digit c of N would have to be the anti-digit of c itself, i.e. it
ought to satisfy the inconsistent c ̸= c. Hence, Richard’s deﬁnition is defective in
the same sense as “the greatest prime number” is; for N we fail to produce an
existence proof. According to Peano, the weak point with Richard’s deﬁnition is
that it is partly formal, partly non-mathematical, hence ambiguous, 26 because it
relies on our understanding of natural language: in this sense, one ought to say
that Richard’s example pertains to Linguistics, not to Mathematics (this view is
usually mentioned as inaugurating the distinction between set theoretic or math-
ematical antinomies, like those of Russell, Cantor, Burali-Forti, and semantical
ones, e.g. Richard’s, the Liar).
On the general foundational level, Peano adds a criticism to Poincar´e’s “vrai
solution” according to which the problem with the contradiction would lie in the
presence of impredicative notion; in fact, he notices that many usual deﬁnitions
in mathematical texts are impredicative in Poincar´e sense (e.g. when I deﬁne the
least common multiple of two natural numbers a and b as the least number k such
a divides k and b divides k, then I refer to the set of all the multiples of a and
b to which k belongs). In conclusion, Poincar´e’s criterion is both too loose (it
does not forbid circularity) and too strict (it forbids standard deﬁnitions in the
mathematical practice).27
Schoenﬂies [1906] moves from the idea that the solution of contradictions must
be possible without the axiomatic method. He states that the root of paradoxes
lies in the application of logic to contradictory concepts. The main thesis is that
it is impossible that there are sets which are members of themselves. When a set
is formed, it is ‘begriﬄich invariant’; it forms a new concept, which adds to those
used in forming it. The claim is rather obscure, but it sounds suggestive of an
iterative conception of set. Of course, once this is accepted, the Russell set of those
sets which are not members of themselves is the universal set V . But then V ∈V
belongs to himself: this is impossible and solves Russell’s antinomy.
In a subsequent paper Sch¨onﬂies [1911] strongly criticizes the “philosophical
set theorists” (p. 244) Peano and Russell, and Zermelo himself, insofar as he is
under their inﬂuence. Nevertheless, [Sch¨onﬂies, 1911], p. 245 proposes a kind of
rudimentary axiomatization for set theory, where a ∈a is excluded. But he rebuts
Russell’s views because of their scholastic and unhealthy inﬂuence (“unheilvollen
Einﬂuss”) on mathematics: the paradoxes do not involve mathematics at all; they
derive from an unduly and improper application of the Algebra of Logic. The
notion of ﬁnite deﬁnability is also rejected as a mathematical notion, just because
it uses natural language. “F¨ur den Cantorismus, aber gegen den Russellismus” is
26Exactly as the Liar, for which Peano refers to Russell’s Principles [1903], but we haven’t
been able to locate the exact place; note that Russell’s paper [1906a] is of May 1906; Peano’s is
dated August 23, 1906.
27That predicative deﬁnitions might be dangerous for mathematical practice is also held by
Zermelo [1908a].

894
Andrea Cantini
the ﬁnal motto of [Sch¨onﬂies, 1911], p. 255.
Sch¨onﬂies anti-axiomatic and anti-formalistic inclinations naturally lead to con-
sider Brouwer’s early work. Brouwer’s approach to paradoxes is to be found in
the dissertation of 1907, chapter III ([Brouwer, 1907], cf. also van Dalen [1999],
pp. 105). From a general perspective, we can summarize his position by saying
that it is a straight consequence of his philosophy. Concerning Russell’s contradic-
tion, Brouwer (p. 162) notices that the usual logical principles only hold for words
with mathematical content, not for linguistic systems, like those of Peano or Rus-
sell; for instance, in order to decide whether a class falls under a propositional
function, the class ought to be completed. The contradictions show that there
are propositional functions which deﬁne complementary (disjoint) classes and yet
do not satisfy tertium non datur. Similar ideas can be found in the philosophical
paper of 1908 On the unreliability of Tertium non Datur (see [van Dalen, 1999]).
There is an interesting idea that can be seen as a positive outcome of Richard’s
paradox in Brouwer’s work.28 Indeed, Brouwer [1907], p. 149 introduces the notion
of denumerably unﬁnished set, i.e. a set in which we can determine only denumer-
able subsets of elements, but where these denumerable subsets do not exhaust the
given set, so that we can immediately produce new elements of the set from any
given denumerable such subset. Typical examples of denumerably unﬁnished sets
are the totality of countable ordinals, the points of the continuum, and in partic-
ular, the set of all deﬁnable points of the continuum (ibid. p. 150), as it could be
shown using Richard’s paradox.
As to Burali-Forti, it is not a contradiction of mathematics, but it invests a
logical structure (the collection Ω of all ordinals) with no proper mathematical
content, since Ω is not considered by Brouwer a well-deﬁned mathematical object,
and, as such, it might be contradictory as well as consistent.
Mathematically
speaking, he suggests that the contradiction might be avoided by denying that the
largest well-ordered type has a successor order type (p. 153; this is analogue to
Bernstein [1905b]).
Among the French mathematicians, the semi-intuitionist Borel developed his
own diagnosis concerning the Richard paradox. He has a paper on the paradoxes
([Borel, 1908]), where he ‘solves’ Richard’s contradiction by introducing the dis-
tinction between eﬀectively enumerable sets and denumerable ones. The set E of
Richard is denumerable; this is because by ﬁnite means you can only determine
at most a denumerable set of reals. Yet E is not eﬀectively enumerable; i.e. you
cannot deﬁne with ﬁnitely many words a procedure for assigning unambiguously a
rank (i.e. a place) to each element of the set; you might eliminate the uncertainty
only with “inﬁnitely many words”, but a deﬁnition requiring such means would
be “en dehors des Math´ematiques” (ibid. pp. 165). In order to make sense of the
enumeration E as eﬀective, one ought to have solved all the mathematical prob-
lems which one could possibly state, because there are expressions which become
deﬁnitions of a real only modulo a proof or the solution of a certain problem.
28But Richard is not mentioned; by contrast, see On the foundations of mathematics, reply to
a review by Mannoury; he credits Richard’s paradox to Mannoury.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
895
So Borel, like Poincar´e adopts a point of view – deﬁnability in ﬁnitely many
words – which is an extension of the algebraic Kroneckerian point of view: only
objects constructible in ﬁnitely many steps are properly mathematical objects.
However, unlike Poincar´e, he does not even consider the problem of predicativity.
According to Borel, all paradoxes of set theory derive from regarding as evident the
following proposition:“ Tout ensemble d´enombrable est eﬀectivement ´enum´erable”,
which is false.
To conclude, we mention that at about the same time, there appears a rather
long essay (in Italian) by Bebbo Levi Antinomie logiche? ([Levi, 1908]),29 which
deals with the antinomies of Richard, Burali-Forti, Russell and Cantor. While
discussing the Richard paradox, Levi outlines an antinomy which is essentially
a variant of Berry’s paradox (though he does not mention Berry): let B be the
number of symbols of our alphabet inclusive of exponentiation ⌈and let B be
written in decimal notation (say, with length β). Then the expression
“the number placed at position B⌈B in R”
has 36 + 2β symbols (R being a ﬁxed ordering of the set of all expression of the
language). Hence its place in the ordering is < B36+2β < B⌈B: contradiction.
Variations II: Hessenberg, Zermelo and the Grelling-Nelson paper
In this subsection we brieﬂy report on further discussions which arise among set
theorists on the subject of paradoxes; we also touch upon the philosophical pa-
per of Grelling and Nelson.30 This work (according to Bernays one of the best
introductions to the subject) introduces a new paradox and gives an idea of the
foundational debate in G¨ottingen; Grelling wrote his dissertation on a problem
suggested by Zermelo and accepted by Hilbert, who also strongly supported Nel-
son and favoured his “kritische Mathematik”, cf. Peckhaus [1990].
On the side of mathematical foundations, Gerhard Hessenberg’s Bericht on the
fundamentals of set theory ([Hessenberg, 1906]) devotes three chapters (ch.XXII:
Logical Completeness and decidability; ch.XXIII: The paradox of ﬁnite denota-
tion: ch.XXIV: “Ultraﬁnite” paradoxes) to a thorough analysis of foundational
questions and contains interesting ideas about the philosophy of mathematics.
For instance, he clearly stresses the distinction (p. 610) between those set theo-
retic deﬁnitions which give criteria to decide eﬀectively the membership to a given
set, and deﬁnitions which do not yield such methods (is there a general criterion
to decide whether a given irrational number, like 2
√
2, is transcendental?)31 He
29Of the same author, recall the 1902 paper Intorno alla teoria degli aggregati [Levi, 1902]
where the axiom of choice is stated.
30Apart from the witness above, there is indirect evidence that, for some years, Husserl himself
shared a certain interest in paradoxes; e.g. a dissertation by A. Koyr´e attempting a solution of the
Liar, was rejected by Husserl [Zambelli, 1999]; Prof.Paola Zambelli (Florence) has kindly shown
us some unpublished notes (Husserl Archiv, AI 35/4a-35/24a) of 1912, dealing with the founda-
tions of set theory, where Husserl is apparently aware of the work done by Russell, Sch¨onﬂies
Zermelo, Weyl.
31Probably an implicit reference to Hilbert’s seventh problem.

896
Andrea Cantini
seriously consider Kronecker’s constructive point against the arithmetized contin-
uum;32 but he holds that, although each irrational determines an inﬁnite fraction
and each inﬁnite fraction possesses a formation rule (“Bildungsgesetz”), it is not
true that such a rule is available through explicit ﬁnite means. Else, we should
be forced to (a form of) the paradox of ﬁnite denotation, i.e. were formation laws
to coincide with deﬁnable ones, the reals would be denumerable, against Cantor’s
theorem.
In dealing with set theoretic contradictions, Hessenberg speaks of ‘ultraﬁnite
Paradoxieen’ (parr.96-99).
‘Ultraﬁnite’ is distinct from ‘transﬁnite’: this term
must be properly predicated only of sets, to which the theory of transﬁnite numbers
applies. This is not the case when you consider the Russell set or the set of all
sets, or of all things, or of all ordinal numbers: they are ultraﬁnite as they go
beyond the cardinality of every aleph. As to the proposed solutions, he notices
that some contradictions, e.g. Russell’s, are not dangerous for mathematics. On
the other hand (p. 630), Burali-Forti’s paradox and the set ON of all ordinals are
mathematically well-deﬁned. In the special case of the ﬁrst antinomy, he rejects
the solutions that ON is not a well-ordering (though each segment of ON is), or
that ON is a well-ordering, but it doesn’t have an order type. The point is rather
that we can’t add to ON an element m (so the successor is not deﬁned on ON),
i.e. union is not deﬁned on the pair ON and m.
From a general philosophical perspective, Hessenberg tries to use a Kantian
idea;33 as in natural sciences the antinomies arise if Nature is conceived as a closed
whole, similarly the collection ON and the set of all sets cannot be conceived
as a completed totality.
Thus the notion of ‘ultraﬁnite’ apparently suggests a
theoretical approach, which is quite close to the limitation of size.
In spite of some criticism to the axiomatic method as a via regia to solve para-
doxes,34 Zermelo’s axiomatization.35 yields a sensible tool for sterilizing the con-
tradictions, at least in set theory (the major foundational contributions being of
course [Zermelo, 1908a], [Zermelo, 1908b]). So Burali-Forti’s antinomy does not
go through, since the collection of all order types does not exist as a set, and
Russell’s paradox simply becomes the theorem that every set M possesses at least
one subset M0, which is not an element of M and hence an argument to show that
there cannot exist a universal set. Moreover, both the paradox of ﬁnite denota-
tion (mentioned by Hessenberg) and Richard’s are blocked in set theory, as the
postulates ought to yield clear cut criteria for deﬁning sets.36
When Zermelo elaborates the second well-ordering proof, he also attacks pred-
icative deﬁnitions as a ﬁrm ground for mathematical existence against Poincar´e,
with a kind of indispensability argument: if one rejects impredicative deﬁnitions,
32Hessenberg sketches a formal analysis of Kronecker’s idea that one ought to consider as mean-
ingful only decidable disjunctions; at pp. 88-92; he explicitly introduces two ‘modal operators’
Δ, ∇, in order to distinguish decidable from undecidable sets.
33He is a member of the Fries school, together with Bernays, Nelson, Grelling and others.
34Recall Sch¨onﬂies [1906] and 2.3.2 above.
35See Zermelo’s paper of 1908, e.g. in [van Heijenoort, 1967]
36This is not entirely correct, as we know, till later developments

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
897
then one must reject standard mathematics, e.g. the Cauchy-Weierstrass proof of
the fundamental theorem of algebra. Incidentally, the objection is not irrelevant:
in the paper [Poincar´e, 1909b] and in the 1910 lectures in G¨ottingen, Poincar´e feels
obliged to explicitly rebut Zermelo’s criticism, and to argue that the fundamental
theorem of algebra can be proven in a predicative way (ibid. p. 199).37
Grelling-Nelson’s 1908 essay aims at a conceptual analysis of the diﬀerent para-
doxes, trying to set apparent solutions thereof apart. According to the authors,
the paradoxes of Russell, Cantor, Burali-Forti have a common core, which can be
enclosed in a general form (P):38
“let M be the set of all sets and let M ′ be a subset of M; let φ : M ′ →Φ
be a bijection. Then deﬁne X = {φ(x)|φ(x) ∈x}, Y = {φ(x)|φ(x) /∈
x}. If Y ∈M ′, then φ(Y ) ∈Φ. Assume φ(Y ) ∈Y : then φ(Y ) ∈X
by deﬁnition; but also φ(Y ) /∈Y : contradiction. If φ(Y ) /∈Y , then it
would be an element of Y , by deﬁnition of Y : contradiction”.
As a special case of (P), Grelling and Nelson produce a new paradox (credited to
Grelling):
“to each word there corresponds a concept, that the very word desig-
nates, and which applies to it or does not apply; in the ﬁrst case, we
call the word autological, else heterological. Now the word ’heterolog-
ical’ itself is autological or heterological. Assuming that the word is
autological, the concept that it designates applies, hence ’heterologi-
cal’ is heterological. But if the word is heterological, the designated
concept does not apply, so ’heterological’ it is not heterological.”39
It is worth mentioning that the authors distinguish between general presupposi-
tions of the paradoxes (the principle of non-contradiction, Tertium non-datur and
the “Dictum de omni et nullo”) and special hypotheses, which involve φ (e.g φ is
one-to-one, etc.). According to [Grelling and Nelson, 1908], restricting one of the
general principles is not a viable route: one would reject the very basis for deduc-
tive reasoning (the analytical judgements). So the solution ought to conclude that
such φ can’t exist and to point out which special conditions (i.e. about φ) in the
general form of the paradoxes are not met.
From a constructive point of view, the paper is not conclusive. It rejects diﬀer-
ent proposals (among them Frege, Russell’s no-classes theory, Poincar´e’s predica-
tivism), a main criticism being that if one tries to single out the guiding principles
behind the solutions, one meets the very same diﬃculties one wishes to avoid. For
instance, Poincar´e’s principle ([Poincar´e, 1906b], p. 295) that all statements about
inﬁnite sets are not admissible is self-refuting: this very sentence is about inﬁnite
37Intuitionistic proofs were soon given by Weyl and others. In present-day foundational terms,
it is known that recursive analysis proves the theorem.
38The following formulation of (P) is a paraphrase from the German text. Let us recall that
Bernays noticed that the reduction of Burali-Forti to (P) is defective.
39This is an almost literal translation from the German text.

898
Andrea Cantini
sets, so is not acceptable. Similarly, if we restrict universal sentences to ﬁnite
universes, the logical principles would not be universal and we encounter Liar-like
diﬃculties in stating the underlying principles.
The remaining chance seems to state the principles with an exception clause:
“all propositions of the given form . . ., except this very proposition are not ad-
missible”. But in this case we have a proposition that refers to itself and we can
proceed to: “All propositions of the given form with the exception of the propo-
sition “all propositions of the given form with the exception of this proposition
are not admissible” are not admissible”. If you replace “this proposition” with its
meaning, you obtain an inﬁnite sequence of ‘exception’ propositions, so that to
the claim of the theory we cannot attach any precise sense ([Grelling and Nelson,
1908], p. 115). In conclusion, it seems that Grelling and Nelson implicitly pro-
pose the idea that paradoxes are essentially related a sort of inﬁnite regress (or
divergence in basic logical operations, like substitution of equivalents).40
2.4
Russell’s type theoretic approach, the late Poincar´e and Weyl
Russell [1908] is a fundamental contribution not only for the theory of types, but
also because it oﬀers what might be called the received view about paradoxes.
There we can ﬁnd a comprehensive description of the contradictions, which in-
cludes: (1) the Liar (Epimenides); (2) the Russell paradox, also in its relational
form (3); (4) Berry’s paradox; (5) the K¨onig paradox of the least undeﬁnable or-
dinal (see [K¨onig, 1905a], 2.2); (6) Richard’s paradox; (7) Burali-Forti’s antinomy.
Most signiﬁcantly, Russell develops a uniﬁed theoretical framework, which yields
both a solution and a foundational doctrine, the theory of types, that is still alive
nowadays and has descendants in logic and its applications. Since the Russellian
theory of types is widely well-known and well-investigated in the literature, we
only roughly summarize its basic features.
The basic observation is that universal quantiﬁcation – understood as full gen-
erality, i.e. with x ranging ‘over the whole universe’– does not make sense: when
we state that ∀xφ(x) is true, we only claim the function φ(x) has the value ‘true’,
for all arguments x for which it is meaningful. The essential point of the doctrine
of types is that each propositional function comes equipped with a range of sig-
niﬁcance, i.e. a type, and that quantiﬁcation is legitimate only over types. The
paradoxes (or reﬂexive fallacies) teach us that certain collections, like the totality
of all propositions, of all classes and so on, cannot be types. For instance, while we
can quantify over the collection of men, we cannot properly say ‘all propositions
of the form p ∨¬p are true’; ‘all’ ought to be replaced by ‘any’ (i.e. by a real
variable), and it should be understood as a schema, which produces a particular
proposition, for each speciﬁc substitution of ‘any proposition’. Moreover, when
we consider “p is true” , what is meant, is not a deﬁnite propositional function of
the propositional variable p, but diﬀerent propositional functions according to the
40See the paradox of the exception, in [Bernays, 1973], Nelson’s Ges. Schriften, bd.II pp. 207-8:
All universal sentences except this very sentence are unreliable.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
899
type of propositions that p has.
It follows that logical objects must be distributed in layers or types, which
reﬂect diﬀerent ontological complexity, (e.g. a propositional function must have
a higher type than its arguments), and things satisfying a given condition can
be collected into a type only if they form a collection of homogeneous objects.
Formally speaking, this means that we cannot deal with general variables, but
each variable must have a preassigned type.
This is not the whole story.
As we know, the main idea to solve the para-
doxes is the vicious circle principle: no totality can contain members deﬁned in
terms of itself. Concretely, the idea is implemented via a hierarchy of propositions
(and more generally, propositional functions). So each type is ramiﬁed in orders,
which ensure that an object is never deﬁned by quantifying over a totality which
counts the object itself as element. The lowest type consists of individuals (where
individuals are entities without logical structure), while the second logical type
embraces the ﬁrst order propositions, i.e. those, whose quantiﬁers (if any) range
over individuals. Then we can quantify over ﬁrst order propositions, and we give
rise to the third type, consisting exactly of second order propositions. In general,
the n + 1-type comprises propositions of order n, which contain quantiﬁcation
only up to n −1-order. Of course, since a propositional function can be obtained
from a proposition ϕ by treating one or more of its constituents as variables,41 the
hierarchy of types and orders is naturally transferred to propositional functions,
and it makes sense to speak of order of a function (its order being roughly the
order of the value, i.e. a proposition, the function assumes when it is applied to
an argument for which it makes sense).
Once the type theoretic structure is laid down, Russell proceeds to a solution
of the paradoxes. The general diagnosis is that all contradictions presuppose the
existence of a totality, which is not legitimate as a quantiﬁcation domain in the
theory of types. For instance, the Liar (1) refers to the totality of all propositions,
since it can be rendered as “ it is not true of all propositions p, that if I aﬃrm
p, p is true”.
But following the doctrine of types, we must replace in (1) ‘all
propositions’ by ‘all propositions of order n’ and hence the Liar sentence is not
asserting a proposition of order n, but of order n+1. Therefore the Liar is plainly
false, without implying its truth and hence a contradiction; and this solves the
paradox.42 Similar arguments guide the analysis of (2)-(7).
The importance of Russell’s paper of 1908 can be measured by its subsequent
work in the foundations of mathematics, and by its technical developments which
ﬁnd their systematic development in the monumental Principia Mathematica, writ-
ten in collaboration with A.N. Whitehead and published in 1910 (vol.1), 1912
(vol.2) and 1913 (vol.3). Russell [1906b] yields the ﬁrst logical technical apparatus
for handling predicativity. A crucial role is played by predicative functions of one
41Russell almost systematically confuses a propositional function with its deﬁning formal ex-
pression.
42Compare with [Russell, 1906a], or 2.3.1.

900
Andrea Cantini
argument,43 i.e. those having as order the successor of the order of their argument;
for instance, a predicative function of one individual variable must have order 1 (it
is elementary deﬁnable in our present-day-terminology and it contains quantiﬁca-
tion only on individuals); similarly, a predicative function ϕ(x) whose argument x
has order 2 must have order 3 (hence it comprises quantiﬁcation over order 2 at
most). Now the famous axiom of reducibility AR states that every propositional
function is equivalent, for all its values, to a predicative function of the same vari-
ables ; hence, in a sense, we can neglect the intensional aspects involved in the
deﬁnition of a propositional function, and concentrate over the extensional ones.
To this aim, predicative functions are enough: the rationale behind AR is that we
have many ways of stating and proving a universal statement (one for each order),
but all of them can be reduced to quantiﬁcations over predicative functions (and
predicative functions can play the role of classes, i.e. canonical representatives
of arbitrary complex concepts). Of course, AR is a basic tool for reconstructing
classical mathematics.
The latest Poincar´e’s contributions of 1909-1910 ([1909b], [1910], [1909a]) are
triggered by and can be partly seen as reviews of Russell [1908], Zermelo [1908b],
[1909], and Sch¨onﬂies [1909]. There are two main aspects that should be men-
tioned in connection to the paradoxes. First of all, in his contribution to Acta
Mathematica (where he criticizes Sch¨onﬂies supposed solution of Richard’s para-
dox) and in his G¨ottingen ﬁfth lecture, Poincar´e provides us with an interesting
restatement of Richard’s paradox.
He observes that, after all, what is proven by Richard is that it is impossible to
ﬁnd a formula ϕ involving deﬁnable reals and natural numbers in such a way that
every deﬁnable real corresponds to a natural number, according to the relation
deﬁned by ϕ: whatever formula we choose, we can always ﬁnd a deﬁnable real
which is not in correspondence to a natural number. Thus, for Poincar´e Richard’s
paradox is a sort of reﬁnement of Cantor’s theorem, that we might have stated in
the form: “there is no deﬁnable enumeration of deﬁnable reals”.
It is also worth mentioning that in these papers the great French mathematician
advances a new idea of predicativity, which, though informally sketched, is sug-
gestive of later developments in deﬁnability and proof theory (see Feferman [1964]
and [2005]). He no more insists on the vicious circularity of the deﬁnition involved
in the contradictions; instead, he holds the view that a predicative classiﬁcation is
characterized by invariance, i.e. it cannot be disordered by the introduction of new
elements; by contrast, impredicative notions are doomed to constant modiﬁcation
by the introduction of new elements. In a sense, Poincar´e is hinting at some form
of invariance under extension (that will be made precise by Kreisel [1960], via
model theory and recursion theory).
At about the same time, Weyl’s “Habilitation” lecture deals with the notion
of deﬁnition and deﬁnability in mathematics, and it is directly relevant to the
problems raised by Richard’s paradox. Weyl [1910] addresses a typical metamath-
ematical general question: when is a relation explicitly deﬁnable from a set of given
43The notion can be extended pointwise to functions of several variables.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
901
primitive concepts in mathematics?
The problem is ﬁrst tackled by investigating a concrete case, that of Euclidean
geometry. On the ground of Pieri’s axiomatization (1899), Weyl characterizes the
explicitly deﬁnable concepts of elementary plane geometry as those that can be in-
ductively generated by means of ﬁve basic deﬁnition principles from two primitive
concepts, the identity between points = and the ternary relation E(a, b, c) = ‘the
distance of point a from point b is the same as the distance of point a from point
c’. In present-day terminology, the deﬁnition principles correspond to closure un-
der (i) the logical operations of negation, conjunction (Koordination), existential
quantiﬁcation (Fortnahme); (ii) the combinatorial operations of permutation and
expansion (i.e. if we are given a relation R(a, b, c), we also allow a relation S(a, b, c)
which holds if and only if R(a, c, b) holds; if we are given a relation R(a, b), we
can also build a new relation S(a, b, c) which holds if and only if R(a, b)).
In
other words, they reﬂect a ﬁnite axiomatization of the elementary comprehension
principle, and they imply the existence of exactly those sets (relations), which
are deﬁnable by formulas in the elementary language comprising two predicate
symbols for =, E.
In the light of the geometric example, Weyl attacks the concept “durch endlich
viele W¨orter deﬁniert” as not precise and not easy to grasp, but he observes that
the very notion of ‘deﬁnable’ is built into the axioms of set theory, because of axiom
III (Aussonderung), where Zermelo refers to the notion of ‘deﬁnite Aussage’. Long
before Fraenkel and Skolem, this notion is regarded as unsatisfactorily vague and
Weyl’s proposal is to make Zermelo’s informal concept precise with the notion
of ‘relation explicitly deﬁnable from = (extensional equality), ∈(membership) by
means of the basic operations (or modiﬁcations thereof, more suited to the set
theoretic context).
According to Weyl, the lesson we learn from Richard lies in the following dis-
tinction: on one hand, it is true that we are able to characterize only denumerably
many subsets of a given set by means of explicit deﬁnition; but, on the other hand,
new objects and (possibly uncountable) sets can be introduced by applying the
remaining set theoretic operations, that are justiﬁed by the extant axioms, like
power set or union. And this makes sense of Cantor’s theorem and shows where
the mistake is in Richard’s argument.44
Weyl will come back to the same problem a few years later in Das Kontinuum
[Weyl, 1918] with a diﬀerent diagnosis.
As in 1910, the set of sets of natural
numbers that are available via admissible operations (to which now also a form
of recursion is added) is denumerable; but Cantor’s argument can be reinter-
preted as showing that in the given universe there cannot exist a relation yielding
a parametrization of all subsets of natural numbers (section 5)! So it seems that
Weyl follows a relativistic attitude, according to which the extension of the uni-
verse of sets and their properties depend on the operations which are accepted
44As to the relation with the foundational issue “Is mathematics the science of ∈and of all
relations that can be built up by means of the elementary principles above ?”, Weyl is sceptical
and holds that mathematics must keep its roots in intuition and physical application.

902
Andrea Cantini
to construct sets.45 It is to be mentioned that Weyl’s attitude towards Grelling’s
antinomy is utterly negative: he considers it pure scholasticism (see [Weyl, 1910],
section 1, p. 19): there is no way, according to him, of assigning a meaning to
‘heterological’.
Rather ironically, a few years before, it was the Polish philosopher and logician
S. Lesniewski, Tarski’s “doctor- father”, and a prominent member of the so-called
Lwow-Warsaw school,46 who presented in 1913 an eccentric formal analysis of the
Liar, bearing some resemblance with scholastic solutions. Certainly this route can
be considered peripheral with respect to the main stream of the period (namely
the foundational debate), but we wish to recall it, since it is not unrelated with the
fundamental contributions of Tarski, and with more recent contributions (Simmons
[1988], Epstein [1992]).
In his paper A Critique of the Logical Principle of the Excluded Middle [1913],
Lesniewski intends to show that the law of the excluded middle is not universally
valid, but that it can be replaced by a suitable restricted form, which claims that
if one of two mutually contradictory sentence (of the form ‘a is b’, ‘a is not b’) is
false, then the other is true if and only if its subject is denotative (i.e. refers to an
object) and its predicate is connotative (i.e. it means an attribute and refers to the
class of all things falling under that attribute). In the course of his arguments (see
[Betti, 1999]), he faces the problem of solving the Liar paradox, since it appears
that this antinomy in the form of the sentence E
‘The sentence stated by Epimenides at t1 is false’.
falsiﬁes its revised version of Tertium non datur, unless its subject is non-denotative
(as the predicates ‘false’ and ‘true’ are considered trivially connotative). It is ex-
actly at this point that Lesniewski hinges upon a semantical hypothesis, implying
that the subject of E is non-denotative. The idea is that the paradox does not in-
volve sentences (e.g. E), but speciﬁc occurrences of sentences, i.e sentence tokens:
so, for instance, E should be properly written, say, in the form Ee,t1, e being an
index for “Epimenides”. Once this is made clear, the point is whether the subject
of Ee,t1 is denoting. The answer of Lesniewski is negative on the ground of the
special assumption that a sentence token cannot denotes itself.47 Thus it follows
that the sentence which Epimenides utters at time t1 is false, since its subject is
non-denotative; but if I utter E at time t2, EI,t2 has a denotative subject (i.e.
Ee,t1 and is true).48
45See also Poincar´e [1909a]. This is implicit in a footnote of Weyl (1910), where he consider a
solution of the continuum problem impossible without an exact formulation of the acceptable set
construction principles; in the same place he also suggests a strengthening of Zermelo’s system
with a maximality principle, in the style of Hilbert’s completeness axiom of geometry: no proper
subuniverse will satisfy Zermelo’s axiom ([Weyl, 1910], p. 304). Similar arguments are repeated
in [Weyl, 1921].
46Today he is mostly known for his logical theories of parts and wholes (mereology) and for
his radical nominalism; for more information on Lesniewski, cf. [Surma et al., 1992].
47The assumption is more general and technical, but it amounts in our case to forbidding
self-referential tokens.
48See Gaifman [1988], Simmons [1988]); in medieval logic, similar arguments are given by

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
903
To sum up, Lesniewski’s solution can be classiﬁed as an indexical solution, where
truth is applied to sentences-in-context (i.e. to speciﬁc occurrences or tokens ) and
where the type/token distinction is essential. On the other hand, the hypothesis
rejecting self-reference for tokens is normative and makes clear that Lesniewski
is struggling for a regimentation of natural languages. According to Lesniewski,
paradoxes apparently teach us exactly this: natural language is at the same time
too rich and too vague, for a development of a scientiﬁc semantics.
2.5
Circularity, sets and simple types
A sensible axiomatization of set theory, a systematic development of various forms
of type theory, the introduction of important conceptual distinctions (like the
dichotomy predicative/impredicative or the vicious circle principle): all these can
be regarded as the most relevant by-products of the paradoxes in the ﬁrst ﬁfteen
years of the century.
In the subsequent years up to 1930, the logic papers, which more or less touch
upon the problem of paradoxes, contribute to give a deﬁnite shape to a strictly
formal and mathematical notion of logical calculus (its ﬁnal outcome being perhaps
in the Hilbert–Ackermann textbook of 1928), to the clariﬁcation of the theory of
types, with the deﬁnite appraisal of the notion of simple type versus the notion of
order, and to signiﬁcant enrichments of the notion of set.
An historical lesson to be learnt is how deep and wide is the inﬂuence of the Rus-
sellian approach for the ongoing and future foundational studies, and the concrete
development of “symbolic logic”;49 at the same time, though less spectacular, the
investigation of set theory as a proper mathematical theory attains a substantial
progress not only on the axiomatic side, but also with the extension of set theoretic
core notions towards unexpected realms.
To illustrate these points, we brieﬂy review ideas of Mirimanoﬀ,50 von Neumann,
Finsler, Hilbert, Chwistek, Ramsey, insofar as they are closely related to the issue
of paradoxes.
Mirimanoﬀ’s papers ([1917a], [1917b], [1920]) are very suggestive: in these works
the problem of self-membership for sets is neatly posed, and circularity becomes,
in a sense, an object of independent study in mathematical logic and set theory.
The main aim of Mirimanoﬀis to address the fundamental problem of set the-
ory: ﬁnd necessary and suﬃcient conditions for the existence of a set. In this
context, he introduces a strengthening of extensional equality by means of a suit-
able isomorphism relation, which is needed to deal with possibly circular sets and
essentially corresponds to the isomorphism of the trees picturing the given sets.51
Ockham and others.
49Chwistek [1933] in his contribution to the K¨onigsberg Conference of 1931 could write (p.368)
that the simple theory of types is today a fashion and is used by the majority of logicians.
50A very clear and concise note, also including a short biography, about Mirimanoﬀ’s contri-
bution is due to Specker [2001b].
51According to him [Mirimanoﬀ, 1917a, pp. 40-41], two arbitrary sets E and E′ are isomorphic
if and only if 1. there exists a bijection F : E →E′; 2. F is so deﬁned that: 2.1 to each atom

904
Andrea Cantini
He is then able to suitably rephrase Russell’s argument in such a way that it nat-
urally opens the route for non-well-founded sets. If we call a set of ﬁrst kind, if it
is not isomorphic with anyone of its elements, while a set is of second kind if and
only if it is isomorphic with at least one of its elements, Russell’s contradiction
just shows that the collection R of sets of ﬁrst kind does not exist as a set.52
A major achievement of [Mirimanoﬀ, 1917a, p.42] is the fundamental distinction
between ordinary (= well–founded) and extraordinary (= non–well–founded) sets:
a set X is ordinary if every ∈–descending chain in X is ﬁnite; it is extraordinary,
otherwise (there exist inﬁnite ∈-chains). Clearly all second kind sets are extraor-
dinary, but the viceversa is not true (for instance, consider the set E = {e1, E1},
where E1 = {e1, e2, E2}, E3 = {e1, e2, e3, E4}, etc.). At p. 43, [Mirimanoﬀ, 1917a],
Mirimanoﬀstates a generalization of Burali-Forti antinomy: the collection WF of
ordinary sets (on a given set of atoms) is not itself a set.53 He then introduces
the notion of ordinal rank for ordinary sets and notices that ordinary sets can be
arranged in a cumulative hierarchy, indexed by their ranks;54 thus ordinary sets
exist if and only if the collection of ordinal ranks of their elements is bounded.
Does the natural structure of ordinary sets weaken the ontological support for
extraordinary sets? On the base of intuitive grounds, the answer appears negative.
In [Mirimanoﬀ, 1917b], p.
212-213, the author explicitly points to the use of
extraordinary sets for modelling mirror-like situations: imagine a book whose
cover contains a picture J where two children a, b are looking at the very same
image J′ of J on a smaller scale, where corresponding children a′, b′ look at the
image J′′ of J′, and so on. . . . For instance, this could be represented by a set J
satisfying the following equations:
J
=
{a, b, J′};
J′
=
{a′, b′, J′′};
J′′
=
{a′′, b′′, J′′′};
. . .
But then J is isomorphic to J′ and hence J = {a, b, c, J}.55
Incidentally, it is worth mentioning that the distinction between ordinary and
extraordinary sets is also used by [Mirimanoﬀ, 1920], p. 33-34, in order to instan-
tiate Poincar`e’s distinction between predicative and impredicative deﬁnition: J
of E F assigns an atom of E′ and conversely; 2.2. F maps every set e ∈E onto a set e′ ∈E′,
in such a way that (i) e′ is the bijective image of e′ (via F); (ii) each atom of e is sent onto a
corresponding atom of e′, and so on.
52Indeed, a set of second kind always contains a set of second kind; hence a set of sets of ﬁrst
kind must be of ﬁrst kind. If R were a set, it should be of ﬁrst kind; but then it could not contain
all sets of ﬁrst kind...
53This is also known as the paradox of grounded sets in the literature and it runs as follows:
if WF is the set of grounded sets, then WF itself is grounded: were WF ∋x0 ∋x1 ∋. . ., then
x0 would be an ungrounded member of WF: absurd. Hence WF ∈WF, so WF is ungrounded,
contradiction. The same paradox is sometimes credited to Shen-Yuting [1953].
54Is this the ﬁrst published and explicit version of the cumulative hierarchy?
55This statements is understood on merely intuitive, motivational grounds.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
905
could be classiﬁed as impredicative, as it involves in its very deﬁnition a collection
(J itself), which it is a member of.
Mirimanoﬀ[1917a] also presents a sort of axiomatization, comprising, together
with union, power, subset and urelements, (i) an axiom of “Burali-Forti”, yielding
a suﬃcient condition for sethood in terms of size, i.e. if a set is in bijection with the
set of all ordinals, then it does not exist,56; (ii) a replacement axiom claiming that,
if a set E exists together with a bijection ϕ which associates to each member of E
a well-founded set, then the then {ϕ(a)|a ∈E} is a set. Mirimanoﬀ’s postulates
do not include an explicit form of the axiom of foundation, nor any form of anti-
foundation in our sense (Aczel [1988]). As far as the above axiom of Burali-Forti
is concerned, it would be enough to require an application onto the ordinals, as
a condition granting non-sethood; however, this axioms prepares the route to von
Neumann’s celebrated characterization of classes and to a beautiful application of
the Burali-Forti antinomy.
Without touching upon von Neumann’s system of 1925, let us brieﬂy recall
that his system assumes two sorts of objects: objects of type II (functions, cor-
responding to classes) and objects of type I (arguments), which are linked by the
application operation of a function to its arguments.
The two domains partly
overlap and there are objects of type I-II, which correspond to sets (being at the
same time functions which can also be arguments). The fundamental axiom IV-2
of von Neumann’s system states that an object a is a proper class (i.e. it is not
type I-II) if and only if the totality of its members can be mapped onto the totality
of all arguments i.e. onto the universe of sets.57 Then the Burali-Forti antinomy
becomes a lemma (the class ON of all ordinals is not a set), which implies with
axiom IV-2 that there is an application of ON onto the universe of all sets, and
hence that the universe of sets is well-ordered. Thus von Neumann characterizes
classes as distinct from sets by means of a mathematical property, and this settles
the problem of making ’s distinction between inconsistent and consistent precise
and applicable.
At the same time, it shows that global choice can be made a
theorem under a suitable view of sets.
Let’s go back to circular sets, which are dismissed by von Neumann as su-
perﬂuous (he is aiming at a hierarchical model of set theory). Like Mirimanoﬀ,
Finsler’s paper [1925] Gibt es Widerspr¨uche in der Mathematik? properly belongs
to the foundations of set theory (so we won’t go into details),58 but it deserves
to be mentioned, since non-well founded sets are again directly and explicitly mo-
tivated by the attempt of understanding the roots of the antinomies. According
to Finsler, the point is that paradoxes hinge upon circular notions. However, not
every circular deﬁnition leads to a contradiction; there are circular deﬁnitions that
are not satisﬁable, but some of them are admissible, in the sense that they ensure
the existence of the deﬁned object.59 In particular, Cantor’s general notion of set
56In Mirimanoﬀ[1917a, pp. 45–46],[1917b, pp. 213-15] we can ﬁnd in nuce the idea of von
Neumann ordinals cf. von Neumann [1923], [1925].
57All this can be properly rephrased in the language of functions and arguments.
58For a short biography and summary of Finsler’s work, see Specker [2001a].
59He mentions that x = a −x and x = a + x are both circular, but the ﬁrst, if a is a ﬁxed real

906
Andrea Cantini
is regarded as intrinsically “zirkelhaft”: one allows sets that depend on sets or
on general things depending also on sets (p. 151), and nothing ensures that this
dependence chain again drives us back in a circle.
From a technical point of view, an original intuition of [Finsler, 1926b] is the use
graph theory for representing circular structures. So he suggests to use arrows for
interpreting membership, and it is easy to ﬁgure out a set that has itself as unique
element (p. 692) and more complicated circular situations. Interestingly enough,
a circular set H containing itself as element will correspond to an equation of the
form H = {A, . . . , H} (p. 693).
Like Mirimanoﬀ, he also realizes that, once reﬂexive sets are present, e.g. auto-
singletons satisfying a = {a}, b = {b}, equiextensionality is not enough as identity
condition and one has to introduce an appropriate notion of isomorphism (that is,
a form of bisimulation, in our sense, see [Aczel, 1988]).60
We wish to conclude on Finsler by mentioning his 1926 paper Formale Beweise
und die Entscheidbarkeit: there he applies the machinery of Richard’s paradox,
in order to produce metamathematical results, in particular ‘formally undecidable
propositions’. Finsler’s arguments do not conclude to a proper anticipation of the
G¨odel incompleteness theorems61; but they show that an attentive reading of the
paradox might have unexpected applications.62 Finsler’s approach is informal and
rather vague; in particular, he holds the view that it makes sense to ﬁgure out an
absolute consistency proof against a formal one; he further opposes formal results
to conceptual results, where ‘conceptual’ is left unexplained and it corresponds to
his own understanding of ‘metamathematical’, which is apparently far away from
Hilbert’s sense.
Coming to the development of logic, Hilbert’s lecture notes for the Winter–
Semester course 1917-1918 Prinzipien der Mathematik [Hilbert, 1918b] open an
inward look into the foundational ideas of the great mathematician. Besides a
formulation of ﬁrst and second order logic (which in essence anticipates Hilbert-
Ackermann’s exposition of 1928), the text outlines a formal extended functional
calculus (p. 188) where functions and propositions occur also as arguments, and
unrestricted comprehension (in the form of substitution rules) is accepted, among
other formal rules. It is then shown how to develop set theory in this extended
logic, and how to formally derive in full details Russell’s predication paradox, and
̸= 0, uniquely ﬁxes a real number; the second has no solution.
60Finsler’s ideas are displayed into an axiomatic proposal, mainly based on a completeness
axiom ´a la Hilbert.
61On the limit of his ideas, see the discussion in [van Heijenoort, 1967], 438-440.
62For further discussion on paradoxes, see Finsler and H.Lipps 1927, Phil.Anzeiger II, Jg.1927.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
907
a suitable formulation of the Liar 63 and a variant of the Berry’s antinomy.64
Hilbert’s diagnosis is deeply inﬂuenced by Russell: the problematic assumption is
located in the admissibility of predicates and propositions as objects, i.e. formally
in the expressions X(Y ), P(P), and ﬁnally in circularity and impredicativity.
Thereafter, Hilbert describes the ramiﬁed theory of types with the reducibility
axioms, showing how certain non-trivial parts of mathematics can be developed by
means of it. Note that is not Zermelo’s theory that is lectured upon, but Russell’s.
Historically, it is interesting that in the discussion of paradoxes given ten years later
in [Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928], Hilbert, in cooperation with Ackermann, sticks
to the Principia Mathematica, in order to formalize the paradoxes; the discussion
of the Liar given in Hilbert-Ackermann [1928] (pp. 157-163) is essentially the same
described in the 1917/18 lecture notes.
Of course, Hilbert is appreciative of Zermelo’s theory as well: in his paper of
1918 Axiomatisches Denken ([1918a]) Zermelo’s axiomatization is mentioned as
a contribution, vindicating set theory from contradiction. His positive attitude
towards Zermelo is even more transparent in the Bologna lecture of 1928 Prob-
leme der Grundlegung der Mathematik , where he criticizes the ideology behind
Russell’s theory (as supporting the prohibition of impredicative propositions), and
regrets that Zermelo’s path is abandoned under the pressure of ‘inﬂuential circles’
(the constructivistic school). However, it is signiﬁcant that proof theory begins
as a work on (a fragment of) Russell’s theory of types, a fundamental metamath-
ematical theorem concerns Principia Mathematica (G¨odel [1931]), and Zermelo’s
theory is not directly considered in the 1928 textbook in Mathematical Logic.65
That the discussion on paradoxes has still a role to play in the proper evaluation
of type theory and in disentangling its speciﬁc technical potentialities, can be
ascertained from the work of Chwistek and Ramsey.
Chwistek [1921] deals with the antinomies of formal logic, and he intends to
criticize Principia Mathematica in two directions. First of all, he holds the view
that Russell’s theory is not suﬃcient to avoid Richard’s classical antinomy. The
speciﬁc analysis of paradoxes, given by the author, appears unconvincing, though
dressed in the type theoretic formalism. For instance, he claims that, since there
exists an enumeration {ϕn(x)}n∈ω of all deﬁnable66 propositional functions, where
x has, say, the type of the natural numbers, and the functions can be assumed
63It is a new variant of the traditional Liar: Hilbert introduces a predicate Beh(X) for “ X
is asserted by K in the time interval t”, A stands for “whatever K asserts in t, is false”. Then,
assuming
1. Beh(A);
2. ∀X(Beh(X) →A ≡X),
a contradiction is derived as usual.
64In a ﬁnite amount of time, e.g.
in the 20th century, only ﬁnitely many numbers can be
deﬁned in the formal language Hilbert has outlined; then consider “the ﬁrst number not deﬁned
in the 20th century”; this leads to a contradiction.
65The inﬂuence of Russell’s ideas on Hilbert’s school is further analyzed by [Mancosu, 2003].
66In the type theoretic language.

908
Andrea Cantini
predicative by the axiom of reducibility,67 then we can construct (= deﬁne) a
naming relation R such that R(n, y) holds if and only if y is the class of all objects
satisfying ϕn(x). But if this were the case, of course, by diagonalization we might
easily obtain a contradiction.
As to the Liar paradox, Chwistek shows that a version thereof can be recon-
structed in the simple theory of types without the axiom of reducibility, once we
assume the existence of a proposition A and of a predicate M of propositions such
that68
∀p(M(p) ↔(p ↔A))
A ↔∃q(M(q) ∧¬q)).
The solution proposed by Chwistek is prompted by a constructive/predicativistic
conception: A involves quantiﬁcation over all propositions, it is not a proposition
stating a directly given fact and hence there is no reason to assume its existence.
Or else, we might consider the above formula as an axiom, but then we have to
show its consistency and the contradiction shows exactly this is not the case.
What is more interesting, is that, according to Chwistek, Russell’s theory is
not necessary, at least if one sticks to the consideration of set theoretic (logical)
paradoxes. The simple theory of types is suﬃcient: for him, as a few years later for
Ramsey, the introduction of predicative functions and of the axiom of reducibility
are simply complications. Similar arguments are contained in [Chwistek, 1922]
( ¨Uber die Antinomien der Prinzipien der Mathematik): if Richard’s antinomy
belongs to logic and not to semantics, Russell’s type theory is not enough to save
us from contradiction; if it belongs to semantics, then the theory is superﬂuous:
solving Russell’s paradox calls for the simple theory of types. On his side, Chwistek
adheres to a kind of nominalistic position, and he tries to develop a theory of
constructive types where it should be possible to develop to a certain extent the
foundations of analysis (e.g. to deﬁne Lebesgue measure) without assuming the
existence of the set of real numbers (in coherence with Poincar`e’s inspiration).69
Ramsey ([1926]) develops the celebrated distinction between logical and epis-
temological contradictions (Group A vs. Group B). Logical contradictions only
involve mathematical or logical terms, like class, number, and hence show that
our logic or mathematics is wrong. Semantical contradictions cannot be stated
in purely logical terms and involve notions like ‘thought’, ‘language’, ‘symbolism’,
which, according to Ramsey, are empirical (not formal) terms. Hence they are due
to faulty ideas concerning thought or language; they pertain to “epistemology”.
67See the criticism of Ramsey [1926], footnote 27, to this step.
According to Ramsey, the
deﬁnability of a function by means of a ﬁxed set of notions, does not imply that there exists an
equivalent predicative function.
68Informally, M(p) is to be read as meaning “I consider the elementary proposition p as interest-
ing”, so that the ﬁrst statement claims that “I consider as interesting exactly those propositions
equivalent to the proposition: I consider as interesting a proposition and this proposition is
false”.
69Chwistek’s attempt of founding mathematics without the axiom of reducibility is termed
“heroic” in the introduction to the second edition of the Principia Mathematica, 1925.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
909
For the solution of the antinomies of the ﬁrst group, Ramsey relies upon a uni-
verse of mathematical objects which is structured in types: individuals, functions
of individuals, functions of functions of individuals, etc. Quantiﬁcation on arbi-
trary types makes sense and hence types are closed under impredicative compre-
hension, which is necessary for mathematics and quite legitimate (see, by contrast,
the position of Chwistek). Types reﬂect an intrinsic characteristic of the logical
and mathematical objects (the ontological complexity, see p. 372) and the logi-
cal paradoxes are exactly those which require type distinctions to be solved (e.g.
self-membership is blocked for objects in the type theoretic hierarchy).
Of course, Ramsey is left with the problem of solving the semantical antinomies.
In accord with his mathematical realism and against to Russell’s ramiﬁed ap-
proach, he rejects the axiom of reducibility and accepts a liberalized notion of
predicative function (pp. 367–368). The class of predicative functions is, in his
view, closed under quantiﬁcation, in the sense that a predicative function of indi-
viduals allows for quantiﬁcation on individuals, a function of functions of individ-
uals may also contain quantiﬁcation on functions of individuals, and so on. But
then he has the problem of avoiding e. g. Grelling’s paradox (p. 358) without using
the order distinction. Indeed, if we deﬁne the notion of “heterological”, Het(x), as
∃ϕ(xRϕ ∧¬ϕ(x)), where we apply a given notion R of meaning and the quantiﬁer
range over predicative functions (in extended Ramsey’s sense), we have that Het
is again a predicative function. Hence, if we proceed to apply R to Het, we do
regain the paradox.
Ramsey’s solution is rather obscure and sketchy. First of all, he proposes to
distinguish several notions of meaning. In the light of later developments, it is
interesting to read that for him semantics has no viable universal notion: in par-
ticular, “it is impossible to obtain an all-inclusive relation of meaning for propo-
sitional functions. Whatever one we take there is still a way of constructing a
symbol to mean in a way not included in our relation. The meanings of meaning
form an illegitimate totality” ([Ramsey, 1926], p. 372). So, in the speciﬁc case of
deﬁning the notion of “heterological”, he argues that the starting meaning relation
R cannot be used, and one needs a new meaning relation depending on the given
ﬁxed R.
Even if these ideas are reminiscent of the soon–to–come Tarskian ideas, Ramsey
is very far from the neat distinctions which are preliminary to Tarskian semantical
investigations and he is still entangled in a confusion between functions and their
symbols. In the end, he resolves the semantical antinomies by restoring the order
distinction (p. 373), even if in his logic the hierarchy of orders is no more in accord
with Russellian predicativistic views.70
70For an analysis of semantical antinomies in ramiﬁed context, compare also the later contri-
bution of Church [1976].

910
Andrea Cantini
3
BETWEEN METAMATHEMATICS AND TYPE FREE FOUNDATIONS:
FROM 1930 TO 1945
In this section we are concerned with the inﬂuence of paradoxes in two distinct
directions, involving (i) proper metamathematical investigations, but also (ii) ide-
ological foundational aims.
3.1
A machine for paradoxical constructions
Let us ﬁrst consider (i): its main by–product is a ﬂexible arithmetically grounded
technique for taming self-reference and the foundations of scientiﬁc semantics. In
the metamathematical investigations of the thirties paradoxical arguments trans-
ﬁgure into speciﬁc results, which grow out of the strict formalization of the syntax
and the semantics: ﬁrm grounds are reached for simulating (indirect) self-reference.
Indeed, while G¨odel intuitively and explicitly relates his construction of for-
mally undecidable sentences to epistemological paradoxes (“the analogy with the
Richard antinomy leaps to the eye”, [G¨odel, 1931], [van Heijenoort, 1967], p. 599),
the core of his work lies elsewhere,71 i.e. in the technical exploitation of number
theoretic techniques (e.g. the “Chinese remainder theorem”) for the analysis of
syntactical substitution.72 The legitimacy of self-reference is reduced to the fact
that there exist natural languages and theories (e.g. fragments of Principia Mathe-
matica, number theory, etc.), which can construct a mathematical interpretation of
their own syntactical apparatus, and, in particular, of the concepts of provability,
(partial) truth, etc. One can ﬁgure out plenty of self-referential statements, but
self-reference is to be understood in the indirect sense: we may well have formulas
ϕ(x), which express properties of their own “name” ⌈ϕ⌉; but no vicious circularity
arises.
It was soon realized that G¨odel’s construction could be given a general form,
i.e.
paradoxes and limitations of formal systems follow from a general simple
lemma, which did not quite refer to provability or truth, but to arbitrary deﬁnable
properties. This is to be found already in Carnap’s Logische Syntax der Sprache,
p. 91 ([1934b]; also [1934a], p. 270), and a few years later in Rosser’s paper of
1939:73
for every formula ψ(v) with only v free, there exists a sentence ϕ such
that ϕ ↔ψ(⌈ϕ⌉) is provable.
The lemma yields a kind of machine for producing self-referential statements as it
can easily be applied to arbitrary concepts, which are expressible in a suﬃciently
rich language. For instance, Carnap [1934a] consciously applies the diagonaliza-
tion property, as a uniform tool for transforming the semantical paradoxes into
71Contrast this with Finsler’s argument [1926a].
72That substitution could be applied in order to produce a contradiction, was already known:
see [Pelham and Urquhart, 1994] and the Russellian paradox killing the substitutional theory.
73See [Rosser, 1939], p. 57, Lemma 1. For a survey, see Smorinski [1981]

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
911
undeﬁnability and (formal) undecidability results.74
The range of its applications and the recondite algebra underlying the G¨odelian
construction will be grasped only much later during the 1970’s. A few years later
a suitable analog of the diagonalization lemma (the so-called second recursion
theorem) was discovered by Kleene, and was soon to become a basic tool in the
foundations of recursion theory and computability theory.
3.2
Tarski’s approach to semantical paradoxes
As we have seen, the direct impact of logical paradoxes for the foundations of math-
ematics was largely sterilized towards the end of the ﬁrst decade of the century:
mathematical arguments were discovered, that solved or explained the contradic-
tions away.
By contrast, it is evident from most signiﬁcant papers of the twenties, that the
question of ﬁnding a formal solution to the semantical contradictions remained
open. At best, one could propose Russell’s theory of ramiﬁed types as a means
of solving the Liar; but the route had become much involved, due the Richard
paradox, and (even in Ramsey, Hilbert, Chwistek) it had not been pursued beyond
the level of an informal hint or a short formal sketch. No detailed formal analysis
of semantical notions (like truth or deﬁnability) was ever explicitly undertaken,
which could be legitimately regarded as a proper mathematical solution to the
semantical side of paradoxes. Of course, the reader might ask why this would
be worth studying from a logical-mathematical point of view, why semantical
investigations could possibly have applications other than purely methodological
or philosophical.
The answer is not clear-cut or simple, but it should not be underestimated
that semantical notions — in particular the notion of deﬁnability — were more or
less explicitly used in certain parts of set theory (descriptive set theory), or “set
theoretically inclined” parts of function theory (e.g. classiﬁcation of measurable
sets and functions). After all, it should not be forgotten that Richard’s antinomy
and its variants emerged along with the debate on the arithmetized continuum
and the related well-ordering problem (recall 2.2).
In addition, certain foundational views (especially those arising from French
semi-intuitionism or from Poincar´e’s reﬂections) apparently required a precise no-
tion of deﬁnability; and deﬁnability (in a ﬁxed language) might possibly be re-
garded as a kind of generalized constructivity.
Polish mathematics was in the twenties highly advanced in set theory, topology
and function theory;75 at the same time, the idea of a formal methodology and in
particular of a scientiﬁc semantics, was intensely developed by prominent Polish
philosophers and logicians working in Lwow and Warsaw ([Wolenski, 1995]), among
them Lesniewski, Lukasiewicz, Chwistek, who did not disdain cooperation with
74Was Carnap aware of Tarski’s undeﬁnability theorem of [Tarski, 1936]?
75Just remind the names of Sierpinski, Kuratowski, Banach, etc.

912
Andrea Cantini
mathematical colleagues; after all, the journal Fundamenta Mathematicae had
Lesniewski among its founders.
It is this unusual and stimulating environment, that forms the background to
Tarski’s analysis of semantical paradoxes.76 As evidence for this, one should not
forget that Tarski worked on the mathematical side of the problem : the semantical
investigation is preceded by the note ([Tarski, 1931], Sur les ensembles deﬁniss-
ables des nombres r´eels I, and, jointly with Kuratowski, Les op´erations logiques
et les ensemples projectifs, [Kuratowski and Tarski, 1931]), where logical notions
are explicitly used to deﬁne certain collections of mathematical objects (e.g. to
characterize sets of sequences of reals which can be represented as ﬁnite sums of
elementary linear sets) and to establish closure properties of Lusin’s projective
sets. In the introduction to the ﬁrst note, he explicitly mentions that he wishes to
avoid the distrust of mathematicians towards deﬁnability, obviously ascribed to the
arising of antinomies (Richard’s is mentioned). Consequently, he sticks to a strict
mathematical style, ﬁxing the logical system of simple type theory with exten-
sionality as the main tool for characterizing deﬁnability in unambiguous manner
(Chwistek, Carnap are his references).
Coming closer to Tarski’s monograph, its ﬁrst basic achievement is that it clearly
speciﬁes a precise formal requirement to be met in the semantical investigation of
truth. Its main goal is to provide “a materially adequate (sachlich zutreﬀende) and
formally correct deﬁnition of the term “true sentence” (wahre Aussage)”. What
this properly means, is carefully discussed in the ﬁrst section and explained by
means of the celebrated schema (T):
x is a true sentence if and only if p
where p stands for a sentence and x is a name of p. The naive idea is that, if
we have a deﬁnition of truth according to the classical correspondence intuition,77
then we must be able to justify that every instance of the schema (T) holds.
Then Tarski observes that, though quite natural, we cannot rely upon (T) as
a deﬁnition of truth, since the Liar paradox (Tarski adopts a version credited to
76We won’t touch the detailed content of Tarski’s monograph [1936], which properly pertains
to the history of model theory; nor we touch the inﬂuence of Tarskian ideas upon philosophy.
Concerning his direct debts, Tarski owes inspiration to his teacher Lesniewski for semantical ideas.
Also Chwistek attempted an elementare Semantik in the years 1926–1933 ([1926], [1929], [1932])
on the ground of a nominalistic foundational program. He aimed at a reduction of Logic and
Mathematics to a kind of “rational semantics”, which he believed to be quite close to Poincar`e’s
ideas [Chwistek, 1932]. Chwistek’s semantical approach is extremely formalistic and far from the
Tarskian ideas; according to his view, the fundamental notion of semantics is the substitution
relation “H is the result of the substitution of G for F in E” ([1933], p. 374).
As to the dates, Tarski speciﬁes that his work was presented by Lukasiewicz to the Polish
Society of Sciences in Warsaw already in March 1931, but the results originated in 1929 and were
reported in two communications of October and December 1930.
77A true statement is a statement making a certain claim about the world, and the claim
actually holds; this conception is to be found already in Plato, Soph.263a, Aristoteles, Met. Γ,
1011b, 25-30.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
913
Lukasiewicz) immediately arises.78 Of course, it’s easy to ascribe the source of the
contradiction to the fact that the sentence substituted for p in the schema (T), in
order to get the antinomy, contains the term “true”. But, as Tarski remarks, it is
not clear why we should restrict (T) to sentences not containing “true”.
From a technical point of view, leaving the problem of contradictions aside
for a moment, one is naturally driven to characterize the true sentences by a
single axiom which implies all instances of the schema (T); but this, as Tarski
observes, leads to accept quantiﬁcation over sentences79 and a quotation functor
(Anf¨uhrungsfunktion) p →⌈p⌉, which sends sentences into sentence names. Then
(T) could be rephrased as
∀x(x is true ↔∃p(x = ⌈p⌉∧p)).
Already the quotation functor is dangerous: Tarski observes that we can recon-
struct the Liar paradox without even mentioning the term “true’. Simply stipulate
that
c = ⌈∀p(c = ⌈p⌉→¬p)⌉
and accept the obvious law
∀p∀q(⌈p⌉= ⌈q⌉→(p ↔q));
standard logic readily leads to a contradiction.
Given these obstacles, Tarski proceeds to consider a structural deﬁnition, i.e.
a deﬁnition which essentially exploits the logical form of an expression and the
fact that expressions are recursively deﬁned: for then we can specify that a true
sentence is (i) a sentence which possesses certain structural properties (i.e. proper-
ties concerning the form and the disposition of the single parts of the expression),
or (ii) a sentence obtained from structurally described expressions by means of
structural rules (e.g. if an expression γ has the form α ∧β and α, β are true, so
is γ).
But this route is only viable for a language which is structurally described and
completely described, i.e.
a formalized language.
So it is not the case of the
natural language with its universalism. Paradoxes deﬁnitely show, according to
Tarski, that semantical investigations must concentrate on formal languages.
The informal conclusion that Tarski draws from the Liar is that there is no
interpreted language which is free from contradictions, obeys to the classical laws
of logic and satisﬁes the requirements (I)-(III), where
1. (I): the language has names available for all its sentences:
78Let c be a typographical abbreviation for the sentence: “ c is not a true sentence”. So by
stipulation, c must be identical with “c is not a true sentence”, and the schema (T) yields:
“ c is not a true sentence” is true if and only if c is not a true sentence, whence by substitution
of identicals, we get the contradiction: c is a true sentence if and only if c is not a true sentence.
79Remind that Lesniewski had investigated a system of second order propositional logic, the
so-called protothetic.

914
Andrea Cantini
2. (II): any expression obtained from (T) by substituting p with an arbitrary
sentence of the language and x with a corresponding name of p is accepted
as true in the language;
3. (III) there exist self-referential sentences, i.e. it is legitimate that a sentence
comprises its own name as constituent (so that we can legitimately stipulate
that the name c denotes a sentence of the form α(. . . c . . .).80)
This is only a rough summary of the ﬁrst section of Tarski [1936]. The subse-
quent sections lay down the mathematical foundations of formal semantics and we
only touch brieﬂy upon a few points, which are explicitly related to the question of
paradoxes. Conceptually, the Tarskian achievements can be split into a sequence
of main steps.
A. Tarski introduces the distinction between the formal language itself whose se-
mantics we are after, and the language used to talk about it, the so called meta-
language. In the metalanguage we typically have names of all expressions (terms,
formulas,...) of the object language, but we also talk about the meaning of the
expressions of the language L. In particular, to every sentence ϕ of the object
language L there are associated (i) a sentence ϕL translating ϕ in the metalan-
guage; (ii) a name ⌈ϕ⌉in the metalanguage of ϕ. This leads to a more accurate
formulation of the (T)-schema: a formally correct deﬁnition of the symbol “Wr”
(true) for the language L in a given metalanguage for L is an adequate deﬁnition
of truth if and only if it implies
1.
every sentence we obtain from“ x ∈Wr if and only if p”, by replacing x
with a name (in the metalanguage) of a sentence ϕ of L and p with ϕL, i.e. the
meta-linguistic translation of ϕ
2. the sentence “for all x, if x ∈Wr, x is the name of a sentence”.
B. In parallel with a mathematical development of the theory of formal languages,
Tarski establishes the foundations of a “methodology of deductive sciences”, in-
troducing deductive systems, their provability relation, and their basic properties,
like completeness, consistency, etc. Formal languages, deductive systems and their
basic notions can be interpreted in number theory (via the technique of arithme-
tization, p. 301, sec.2 81) and their study necessarily leads to consider inﬁnite
collections. Therefore the use of inductive deﬁnitions and consequently of induc-
tive proofs has a prominent, essential role in metamathematics.
C. Since there are inﬁnitely many sentences, one is forced to a recursive deﬁnition
of truth; however, since induction would break down when deﬁning the truth
of quantiﬁed sentences, the central notion of semantics eventually becomes the
satisfaction relation “the sequence f of objects satisﬁes the formula ϕ ” By means
of satisfaction, one can easily deﬁne the notions of deﬁnability, denotation, truth,
logical consequence (relative to a given object language).
80Tarski observes that (III) is superﬂuous if one looks at the Grelling antinomy.
81Tarski does not refer here explicitly to G¨odel.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
915
Concretely, the project is implemented by Tarski with the deﬁnition of satisfac-
tion for a special ﬁrst order language (the language of the calculus of classes, where
one has the predicate of inclusion, the constant 1 for the universal class, and the
operations of complement and union), and it is then shown (this is a metatheorem)
that (i) the deﬁnition of truth via satisfaction is materially adequate; (ii) it has
the expected properties of classical truth (principles of non-contradiction, tertium
non datur); (iii) the true sentences of the language of class theory are exactly the
theorems of class theory (Completeness Theorem for the calculus of classes).
D. Once we have the new semantical machinery, the problem arises whether we
can ﬁnd a formal counterpart of a universal language, where it would be possi-
ble to deﬁne an adequate notion of truth for the same language. The theory of
simple types,82 which comprises the axioms of inﬁnity and extensionality, looks
a promising candidate as general metatheory: it works as a general morphology
for formalized languages, and it deals with arbitrary complex semantical cate-
gories (as we have means to talk of arbitrary higher types). However one has the
fundamental negative result (see p. 370):
“ whichever deﬁnition we choose in the theory of types for the term
“Wr”(= true), then it is possible to deduce in the same theory the
negation of some instance of the adequacy schema (T).
In the proof of this theorem, Tarski (cf.footnote 88) exploits the technique of arith-
metization and diagonalization, closely following the G¨odelian pattern (assuming
that we have in the metatheory an arithmetical deﬁnition Wr of truth, we can
construct an arithmetical sentence ψ such that ¬Wr(⌈ψ⌉) ↔ψ; if Wr satisﬁes the
(T)-schema, we have a contradiction).
On the positive side (theorem II, p. 379), if we ﬁx k, it is possible to construct in
the theory of types an adequate deﬁnition of truth for all sentences of the theory
of types which contain variables of type at most k.
More generally, the concept of truth can be adequately deﬁned for any formal-
ized language L, under the condition that our metalanguage is of higher order than
L (so if L is the theory of simple (ﬁnite) types, we should need at least a theory
with a transﬁnite type); and that the hypothesis is necessary, follows from the
fact that we cannot deﬁne an adequate concept of truth for L in a metalanguage
having order at most the order of L itself.
In the ﬁnal section Tarski envisages the possibility of developing an axiomatic
theory of truth (p. 380, theorem III); indeed, the semantical constructions show
that, if the theory of types is consistent, it is also consistent to extend type theory
with a primitive truth predicate V satisfying the adequacy conditions for the type
theoretic language (without V ). The resulting theory is not entirely satisfactory
(e.g. how to derive the principle of non-contradiction for V in its full generality?);
so the theory could be supplied with axioms expressing – besides non-contradiction
– the closure conditions of truth. But Tarski criticizes this approach (one ought
82The type 0 is the type of individuals; the type n+1 is the collection of all classes of type n
objects.

916
Andrea Cantini
to have an argument ensuring the axioms uniquely characterize truth, but this
would require some strengthening), and he even considers an extension of the
formalism with the so-called ω-rule. We can’t go into further details, but it is
worth remembering that just the investigation of axiomatic theories of truth is far
from trivial and rich of results (see §6).
The importance of Tarski’s work is diﬃcult to overestimate. He immediately
realizes that (p. 401) his own semantical methods prompt him a way to show that
G¨odel sentences are true and yet formally undecidable. Also, he can make sense
of G¨odel (1931, footnote 48): “the true reason of the incompleteness is that the
formation of ever higher types can be continued into the transﬁnite[...], while in
any formal system at most denumerably many of them are available”. Tarskian
semantical notions play exactly the role of the higher types hinted at by G¨odel.
The argument (presented in the postscript) is quite simple. Choose γ such that
γ ↔¬Bw(⌈γ⌉); then in a metatheory which is strong enough to develop semantics,
we have:
Wr(⌈γ⌉) ↔γ
Hence Wr(⌈γ⌉) ↔¬Bw(γ). If the theory is correct, we also prove in the metathe-
ory
Bw(⌈γ⌉) →Wr(⌈γ⌉)
which immediately implies ¬Bw(⌈γ⌉) and Wr(⌈γ⌉, i.e.
the G¨odel sentence is
unprovable, but true.
Also, since Wr(⌈γ⌉) →¬Wr(⌈¬γ⌉, and Bw(⌈¬γ⌉) →
Wr(⌈¬γ⌉), we have ¬Bw(⌈¬γ⌉). So, even if Tarski tends to emphasize the distance
between his own investigation and G¨odel’s, his conclusive observation achieves a
uniﬁed view, showing the interplay of the semantical notions with the syntactical
ones. The incompleteness phenomenon is better understood with the help of se-
mantics. To sum up, Tarski’s work eliminates the semantical notions, in favor of
the (extensional) notions of type or set, and a theoretical explanation of semantical
paradoxes, like the ancient Liar or Richard’s, is ﬁnally achieved as a by–product
of a systematic theory.
3.3
Type free foundations ?
One might say that in the twenties and in the early thirties the orthodox view
among mathematical logicians was becoming more or less type-theoretic or set
theoretic.
Nevertheless, unorthodox theories were devised and investigated at
length, that could be characterized as non-extensional and operation-based. In
particular, there is an eﬀort to elaborate grand logics, as a reaction to the logic of
Principia Mathematica (both on philosophical and technical grounds).
This is partly motivated by the attempt to recover the original simplicity and
the ﬂexibility of the type free approach, as derived from the so-called naive compre-
hension principle (both on the extensional and intensional interpretation), but also
by metamathematical needs, e.g. the demand for a clariﬁcation of fundamental
concepts underlying the notions of ‘formal system’, ‘formalism’, ‘rule’, etc.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
917
The idea that a type–free approach could be viable, is still alive and experi-
ments are done assuming as primitive the notions of (self-applicable) function-in-
intension (operation) and property (or predicate). Also, the very mechanism of
deﬁnition/combination of concepts is stressed (logic of terms vs. logic of asser-
tions). In these tentative theories, paradoxes play the role of experimenta crucis.
This line of thought gives impulse to the elaboration of syntactical methods within
combinatory logic, and to the rise of Recursion Theory.
“The inconsistency of certain formal logics”: Kleene, Rosser and Curry
We consider two attempts: Church’s approach, which substantially fails with un-
expected positive consequences; Curry’s, which gives birth to a long–running re-
search program, eventually merging with the precious leftover (lambda calculus)
of Church’s system. Both systems of Curry and Church share a common destiny,
that of being shown inconsistent by means of a non-trivial version of Richard’s
paradox. It was then Curry himself which discovered a simple, streamlined logical
paradox pointing out a fundamental obstacle to the realization of the functional
approach.
Since our main concern is not Curry’s foundation of combinatory logic,83 we
only mention those points, which are relevant to the issue of paradoxes. Develop-
ing ideas of Sch¨onﬁnkel [1924], and aiming at a mathematical clariﬁcation of the
substitution process, Curry’s 1930 thesis introduces a formal language based on
basic combinators B (composition), C (permutation), W (duplication), K (cancel-
lation),84 Q (equality), and logical constants like universal quantiﬁer, implication.
Terms are then inductively generated by application from constants; intuitively, a
term M stands for a function, and the application term MN denotes the value of
the term obtained by replacing the ﬁrst variable of M with N. Note that MM is
admissible; so direct self-reference is not excluded from the system.85 This feature
tells us that the objects of combinatory logic cannot be simply interpreted as set-
theoretic functions. Sometimes MN can be read as N ∈M and this is important
for interpreting class theory and higher order logic.
The formal system comprises standard equations on combinators, rules for
equality and the logical constants; its main goal is to derive equalities X = Y and
to make assertions of the form ⊢X. The idea is that combinatory logic has to be
an “Urlogik’, a theory which analyzes the modes of combinations of formal objects,
substitution and the notions of proposition and propositional function: in a nut-
shell, it must give a foundation of all possible formal systems (of mathematics and
logic). Among its speciﬁc subgoals, combinatory logic must eliminate paradoxes;
this is achieved by turning paradoxes into theorems of pre-logic, which should be
mathematically rendered by combinatory logic. For instance, Russell’s contradic-
83For a good survey, see Seldin [1976], [1980].
84These constants satisfy: Bxyz = x(yz), Cxyz = xzy, Wxy = xyy, Kxy = x.
85As already noticed, a much earlier instance of direct self-application, can be found in Hilbert’s
lectures of 1905, see [Kahle, 2004], cit.

918
Andrea Cantini
tion amounts to the proof that a certain function F, deﬁned by F(ϕ) = ¬ϕ(ϕ),
cannot be either true or false (see Behmann’s paper [1931], p. 40).
Contrasting Russell’s solution, Curry advances the idea that the root of para-
doxes is not in admitting certain “combinations of concepts”, but in admitting that
these combinations are always propositions. So the notion of proposition becomes
a theoretical concept, that is decided by the theory and not simply stipulated in
the metatheory. Types – as ranges of signiﬁcance – are not assigned a priori to
the expressions of the calculus; instead, they are inferred by the calculus, which
assigns them – whenever it is possible – to its terms. These ideas contain in nuce
fundamental developments (e.g. the formulas-as-types interpretation, see [Howard,
1980]).
For Curry – against Russell’s prohibition, but also against Poincar`e’s views
– it is legitimate to quantify over all propositions or all objects.
The idea is
that we understand a universal judgement in intension (i.e. relying upon general
features pertaining to all possible objects of a given totality); we can make a general
statement about all oranges, even if there is no deﬁnite collection of such fruits
([Curry, 1930]).86 It is false to assume that a universal statement presupposes a
deﬁnite, completed collection.
Unfortunately, appealing as they are, the ideas of a combinatory logic, as out-
lined in [Curry, 1930], [Curry, 1934b] had to be thoroughly revised. As we’ll see,
rejecting Russell’s discipline was not without price.
A similar pattern is followed by Church in a diﬀerent, independent style.87
Church’s logics ([1933], [1941]) are motivated by technical problems related to an
attempt of avoiding free variables in formal logic and at the same time by dissat-
isfaction with Russell’s and Zermelo’s solutions that Church considers somewhat
artiﬁcial. This leads him to conceive the formalism88 of his theories as a general
notation system for functions; Church’s language is an applicative language, where
there is only one basic category of terms (well-formed formulas in his terminology).
Some terms are formally provable (or assertible) and are classiﬁed as true.
Terms are inductively deﬁned from a set of basic constants and variables by
means of application (denoted by {F}(A), the result of applying F to A) and the
characteristic lambda abstraction operator: if M is a term where the variable x oc-
curs, λx.M is a term, naming the function deﬁned by M.89 Following Sch¨onﬁnkel
[1924], Church reduces functions of several variables to iterated application of
functions of one variable; so F(x, y) stands for {{F}(x)}(y).
86For a related defense of impredicative deﬁnitions, see also Carnap [1932-33].
87Church does not cite Curry.
88Concerning Church’s view, he has at this stage a conventionalist attitude, holding that there
might be several possible systems, more or less convenient. He also strongly advocates an abstract
axiomatic point of view: “the initial set of postulates must of themselves deﬁne the system as a
formal structure, and in developing this formal structure reference to the proposed application
must be irrelevant”. Certain statements are reminiscent of Hilbert: In order to carry out the
abstract treatment of logic, one must have an intuitive logic used for working with symbols
(identiﬁcationy/distinction of discrete entities; Hilbert ﬁnitary mathematics).
89Note the restriction; so λx.c is not a term if c is a variable or a constant diﬀering from x.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
919
The basic constants designate logical operations: Π (a kind of restricted formal
implication); Σ (existential quantiﬁer), ∧(conjunction), ¬ (negation), ι (descrip-
tion operation) and A (generalized abstraction).90 Without giving formal details,
we recall that Church’s system consists of (i) conversion (= computational) rules,
which allow to replace terms with intensionally equivalent ones; (ii) rules for as-
serting certain terms as ‘true’. In particular, there are:
1. “rules of procedures” (among them, the by-now standard rules of α– and
β–conversion for λ–terms; Σ–introduction and Π– elimination;
2. several axioms (thirty seven in the ﬁrst theory) ruling the remaining con-
stants.
The new logic looks quite strong, since it can interpret naive class theory; for in-
stance, A works like Frege’s Wertverlauf operation and Church can deﬁne a class
forming operation K(M) = {x|Mx}, deriving in [Church, 1933] naive comprehen-
sion (29-30, p. 856) and theorems 25-26, expressing the properties of the ϵ–operator
in Frege’s Grundgesetze.
Clearly the system is suspiciously strong and expressive. But Church’s hope
(or conjecture) is that contradictions be avoided by supplying logical axioms with
formal restrictions ensuring the possibility that a propositional function be unde-
ﬁned for some arguments. Partiality is formally implemented by assuming that
the functions involved in the logical axioms are non-empty (i.e. they truly ap-
ply at least to one object). So axiom 1 (reﬂexivity of Π) is stated in the form
Σ(F) →Π(F, F).
Unfortunately, the project turned out to be unfeasible for unexpected reasons.
After correcting the ﬁrst version ([Church, 1932]),91 a contradiction sprang out of
an ingenious combination of lambda calculus with a form of the deduction theorem
(see theorem I, p. 358, [Church, 1932]), which does not require the axioms on A
and class abstraction:
assume that M contains x free, Σ(λx.M) is provable and M is provable
as a consequence of N, and x is free in N. Then Π(λx.M, λx.N) is
provable. If N does not contain x free, then N itself is provable.
Church was aware of the problematic aspects of his work and he actually set the
agenda for his outstanding students in his address [Church, 1934] on the Richard
90Σ(F) means that there is at least a value of x for which F(x) is true; ι(F) means the object
x such that {F}(x) is true . As to Π(M, N), it says that N(x) is true for all values of x for which
M(x) is true; once we know that M(C) and Π(M, N) are true, then N(C) is true (but we are
not allowed to infer the truth of the implication M(C) →N(C)). As to A, if F is an equivalence
relation, A(F, M) is “what M has in common with any N F–equivalent to M”; e.g. it satisﬁes
in our language if F is formal logical equivalence:
∀x(Mx ↔Nx) →A(F, M) = A(F, N)
91Inconsistent by a form of Russell’s contradiction found by Church himself.

920
Andrea Cantini
paradox, 92 where he discussed the adequacy problem of formal systems.
For him, a formal system could be termed adequate only if every intuitively
deﬁnable number theoretic function F could be deﬁned by a formula of the formal
system itself; and he believed that such systems could exist ([Church, 1934, p. 358]),
a kind of “Church’s thesis” for deﬁnability. He even considered a more stringent
requirement: a truly adequate system must prove the formal theorem F : N →N,
i.e. F should be provably total (or well-deﬁned).
Then – he noticed – a supposedly adequate system falls prey of unpleasant
consequences. Indeed, by exploiting G¨odelian techniques (enumeration of formal
theorems in the system itself) and its deﬁnitional power, we can eﬀectively enumer-
ate the provably deﬁnable functions of the system. But the enumeration function
is intuitively deﬁnable; so, if it is provably deﬁnable, we apparently obtain a form
of Richard’s paradox. From this argument Church informally derives a Π0
2-version
of the incompleteness theorem: for every formal system, either the system is inad-
equate, as a tool for proving intuitively true statements of the form F : N →N,
or else the system proves theorems which are intuitively false. Roughly, an ade-
quate system must be unsound. If this is the case, the verdict is highly negative;
“it plainly implies that the whole program of the mathematical logician is futile”
([Church, 1934], p. 359).
The conclusions of the paper are rather obscure and speculative: according
to him, “a way out of this condition of nihilism” (p. 360) is the search for a
system of symbolic logic, where the notion of implication is obtained by deﬁnition
and there are a variety of implications obtained by diﬀerent deﬁnitions.93 So, at
this stage Church still believes that it is possible to escape the consequences of
Richard’s paradox and G¨odel by a radical rephrasement of the logical theory of
implication, insofar as it forbids an eﬀective enumeration of the theorems of the
form F : N →N within the system itself.
Be that as it may, less than one year later 94 Kleene and Rosser proved that
Church’s and Curry’s systems can provably enumerate their own provably total
deﬁnable number theoretic functions. Since the underlying theory of implication
is standard in either formal system, they must be both unsound, as Church’s
version of incompleteness forecasts.
The result essentially requires (i) λ-calculus (rules I-V of Church) (ii) the logical
axioms required to prove the deduction theorem I (cf. above). The non-trivial
technical tools were already available in Kleene’s development of number theory
by means of λI-calculus (Kleene [1934], [1935]).
[Kleene and Rosser, 1935] is not self-contained and somewhat entangled, and it
92Delivered at a meeting of the Mathematical Association, Dec.30, 1934. According to him,
the Richard paradox can be said to consist in the following problem. “How is it possible that
a system of symbolic logic, in which the set of all formulas is enumerable should be adequate
of any branch of mathematics which deals with the members of a non-enumerable set (...) ?”,
p. 357
93See Church [1941]; also Curry[1942b] and, for a recent implementation of these ideas, Myhill
[1984].
94The paper [Kleene and Rosser, 1935] is received on November 13, 1934.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
921
is diﬃcult to appreciate its general import, which was neatly discussed in Curry’s
1941 essay ([Curry, 1941]).
On the conceptual side, Curry distinguishes two completeness notions a for-
mal system can enjoy. A system is deductively complete, if, whenever it derives a
proposition B from the hypothesis A, then it also derives the implication A →B
(deduction theorem or introduction rule for implication). A system is combinato-
rially complete95 if, whenever M is a term of the system possibly containing an
indeterminate x, there exists a term (Church’s λx.M) naming the function of x
deﬁned by M.
Curry’s diagnosis is that the paradox of Kleene-Rosser arises because Church’s
and Curry’s systems enjoy both kinds of completeness; hence it shows that the two
properties are incompatible. On the technical side, Curry’s system S axiomatizes
the main ingredients exploited by Kleene and Rosser (with simpliﬁcations due to
the fact that he works with λK-calculus).
Besides the combinatory constants,
he assumes only two terms N and F, representing the notions of being a natural
number and the function space constructor. Actually, N can be dispensed with (cf.
footnote 34, [Curry, 1941], p. 468) and F ensures that one can deﬁne a standard
notion of implication; an induction rule on N is available for arbitrary terms of
the system.
He then shows that (i) S can develop recursive arithmetic; (ii) there exists an
enumerator, i.e. a term T such that, if a is the g¨odel-number of a closed term M
and Za is the term formally representing a, then TZa = M is provable in S; (ii)
there is a term Θ representing a primitive recursive enumeration of the S-theorem
such that
S ⊢x ∈N →T(Θ(x)).
So one can diagonalize out ﬁnally reaching a contradiction.
If one looks closely to Curry’s proof, there is something unsatisfactory: while
deductive and combinatorial completeness do not mention number theoretic no-
tions, the inconsistency proof heavily hinges upon number theoretic construction.
But, in a sense, number theoretic notions should be dispensable (they serve sim-
ply as an outcome of the underlying lambda calculus with the inferential power of
standard implication).
That the detour through number theory and g¨odelization, is unnecessary was
discovered by Curry himself, when [Curry, 1941] was to appear. Curry presented
a new and simple paradox in a paper with the same title of [Kleene and Rosser,
1935], “in deference to the original discoverers of the contradiction”.96 The main
result is the following theorem:
(1) assume that we have a combinatorially complete system, i.e. es-
sentially a system of combinatory logic which comprises the standard
property of equality and the basic axioms ensuring the deﬁnability of
95See p. 455, [Curry, 1941].
96Curry refers to Carnap [1934a]) for the central idea; see also [Hilbert and Bernays, 1939],
vol.2, 254 and Curry’s paper [Curry, 1934a].

922
Andrea Cantini
Church’s lambda with the corresponding beta conversion (B, C, I, W
suﬃce);
(2) assume also that the system contains an implication operator ⊃
satisfying, for arbitrary terms M, N
⊢
M ⊃M
⊢
M ⊃(M ⊃N) ⇒
⊢M ⊃N
⊢
M
and
⊢M ⊃N ⇒
⊢N.
Then S ⊢M, for every term M.
The proof is immediate with the assumptions of (2), as soon as we can construct,
for any given term B a term A such that A = A ⊃B.
It is at this stage that combinatorial completeness is essential. Two construc-
tions are given. The ﬁrst one is by direct self-reference and is regarded by Curry
as a version of Russell’s paradox (it is a special application of the ﬁrst ﬁxed point
theorem of combinatory logic). Choose: A = HH, where H = λY (N(Y Y )) and
N = λX(X ⊃B).
The second construction is by indirect self-reference and it exploits the machin-
ery of [Curry, 1941] and Kleene-Rosser. Informally, Curry relates it to Epimenides
(it is an application of the second ﬁxed point theorem of combinatory logic). If
T is the enumerator, one sets: U = λX(TXX ⊃B) and A = UZu, being u the
G¨odel-number of U.
It would be interesting to follow Curry’s in his analysis of the solutions to
the paradox, but this would lead into the realm of the theory of functionality, the
history of combinatory logic and proof theory. It is enough to recall that according
to Curry, a remedy would be to formulate within the system the very notion of
proposition. This is a thorny route, and a way out typically leads to a hierarchy of
canonical propositions (in some sense analogous to Church’s levels of implication).
As we’ll see, this idea will have some revival in recent years, but Curry doubts
that it is a natural style of doing mathematics and logic.
Criticizing contraction and negation
To the tradition of combinatory logic we owe two ways of solving paradoxes, which
will be pursued at some length in the 1970’s and the 1980’s with quite diﬀerent
(and even diverging) motivations (think of [Gri˘sin, 1974], [Gri˘sin, 1981], [Gilmore,
1974], [Gilmore, 1980], [Scott, 1975], [Feferman, 1974a], [Feferman, 1975], [Aczel,
1977], [Aczel, 1980], [Myhill, 1984], [Flagg and Myhill, 1987b]).
In Curry’s analysis there is a clear perception that the contraction combina-
tor W, satisfying Wfx = fxx, is at the root of paradoxes. W allows to deﬁne
paradoxical terms, like WWW; if N represents negation and Babc = a(bc), then
W(BN)(W(BN)) is a ﬁxed point of negation, and it is a functional correspondent
of Russell class. On the logical side, the functional character of W 97 justiﬁes the
97W is already introduced in 1930-35, [Curry, 1942a], p. 60

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
923
inference
A →(A →B) ⇒A →B,
which is crucial for the derivation of Curry’s paradox.
The critical role of the contraction operator W is explicitly noted by Fitch
([Fitch, 1936]).98 In this paper one ﬁnds is a crystal clear diagnosis of Russell
paradox as tracing back to contraction: you need to consider a function of two
variables, diagonalize and regard such an object as a new unary propositional
function, which only works if W is accepted.
The proposed logic is explicitly called ”non-contractive”; it is in essence an
illative combinatory logic where B, C99 can be deﬁned, but not W. Fitch also
uses a universal quantiﬁer which is sensible to the number of occurrences of the
quantiﬁed variables (linear quantiﬁer), so that
∀xf(x),
∀xf(x, x, ) . . .
are rendered with G(f), G(f, f),...
However, the paper does not go beyond a
succinct development of a fragment of classical logic with predicates, and a series
of statements, e.g. a form of choice is provable in the system, but the system itself
apparently fails to develop a theory of integers and real numbers.
A few years later Fitch [1942] laid down the base for a new approach to the
problem of ﬁnding consistent combinatory logic systems, which was pursued in
a long series of articles, spanning till 1980.
[Fitch, 1942] and the subsequent
contributions are not easy to understand, due to the heavy formal machinery, but
Fitch’s work contains in nuce important ideas, which will be essentially taken over
and reﬁned by the investigations of the seventies.
In present–day terminology, Fitch’s contribution amounts to the inductive con-
struction of suitable term models, endowed with self-referential notions of class,
membership and truth. This means that the notion of truth and membership are
simultaneously and constructively assigned by means of positive clauses, so that
they give rise to monotone operators (mapping sets of expressions into sets of
expressions).
This has the pleasant consequence of ensuring the existence of non-trivial con-
sistent truth sets, either by a direct inductive argument or as a corollary of the
Tarski ﬁxed point theorem (about monotone operators in complete lattices).
As to the speciﬁc developments, at ﬁrst (see [Fitch, 1942]), Fitch explored a
purely positive combinatory system K100 with the explicit aim of deﬁning a sort
of universal formal system, where every system of logic could be represented.
More concretely, Fitch’s system K is presented by means of an inductively
deﬁned truth set, which is closed under natural clauses for introducing certain basic
98Partly an adaptation of his Ph.D. thesis at Yale in 1934, A system of symbolic logic that
avoids the paradoxes without a theory of types; in the paper Fitch thanks Church and Rosser.
99C satisﬁes the equation Cabc = acb.
100The choice of combinatory logic is supported by the observation that every logical system
can be built up using only one mode of construction, i.e. application.

924
Andrea Cantini
combinators (like B and W 101) logical combinators corresponding to existential
quantiﬁcation, disjunction and conjunction, literal equality and transitive closure.
For instance, if a →a∗is the transitive closure operation, K will satisfy the closure
condition
f ∗ab ∈K
if and only if
fab ∈K ∨∃c((f ∗ac) ∈K ∧(f ∗cb) ∈K)
It is also worth noticing that class abstraction {x|A} becomes deﬁnable in K and
it satisﬁes forms of untyped comprehension (p. 110, [Fitch, 1942]), e.g:
M ∈{x|A} ∈K
if and only if
A[x := M] ∈K.
The approach is radically intensional: classes are always classes of expressions M
in some language (say, of the basic logic) and they are identiﬁed with attributes,
while membership is essentially reduced to truth in the sense of K. Thus, that
M ∈T holds, essentially means that M truly falls under the property speciﬁed
(or expressed) by T, i.e. that we can prove TM ∈K. Accordingly, a set T of
K-expressions is represented in K if and only if, for some expression T,
M ∈T ⇔(TM) ∈K
The basic logic K – although negationless –is nevertheless non–trivial; it allows di-
rect self-reference102 and it can represent sets given by ﬁnitary inductive deﬁnitions
(see p. 112, theorem 5.16). Thus K works as a sort of universal metalanguage for
dealing with arbitrary ﬁnitary systems 103 and recursively enumerable sets, and it is
undecidable. For instance, K can represent ﬁrst order predicate logic, the ramiﬁed
version of type theory in Principia Mathematica, or even K itself. In [Fitch, 1944]
it was further established that the collection of classes of K-expressions which are
represented in K coincides with the collection of recursively enumerable classes of
K-expressions. A later simpliﬁcation of basic logic is due to Fitch [1954b].104 and
Myhill [1952]
Bochvar’s logical calculus: the interplay between internal and external logics
Bochvar [1937] bases his proposal on the introduction of a three valued logic:
besides the standard truth values T (truth) and F (false), he considers a third value
N, to be interpreted as ‘meaningless’. Not surprisingly, his logical analysis leads
to the conclusion that the paradoxes involve meaningless statements; however, the
101B is named o; the system also comprises additional combinators ϵ, ϵ′ for permutations and
a strengthened composition o′, satisfying: o′fgab ∈K if and only if f(ga)b ∈K. The constant
combinator is not included.
102I.e. diagonalization tricks are not grounded in the formalization of syntax, but are built in
the untyped applicative structure, which underlies any logical constructions.
103Curry’s inspiration is quite active here. In the ﬁrst footnote of [Fitch, 1942] the author also
acknowledges his own debt to the papers of Church, Rosser, Quine, Carnap and Tarski.
104It is shown that transitive closure is eliminable via a ﬁxed point construction.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
925
result is obtained by means of an axiomatic system, which is based on a non-
classical logical calculus, which is, nevertheless, able to interpret classical logic
(compare with later solutions, e.g. [Feferman, 1984]).
Indeed, a characteristic feature of Bochvar’s formalism is that it distinguishes
two types of connectives, roughly corresponding to two diﬀerent modes of assertion.
A statement A in itself assumes exactly one among the prescribed values (true,
false or meaningless); these are the internal truth values. But then the higher level
statement “A is true” is true or false; whatever value A assumes, e.g. even if the
truth value of A is N, “A is true” is false. Bochvar’s idea is to equip the internal
three-valued logical operations with external logical operations, which correspond
to statements on the metalevel and allow to use classical logic in dealing with
non-classical statements.
Formally, he describes by means of three valued truth tables the main propo-
sitional internal connectives ∩(and), ∼(negation), ∪(or), ⊃(implication), ⊃⊂
(logical equivalence). The truth values of ∼A, A ∩B, . . . coincide with their
classical values if A, B assume classical values; they become meaningless (assume
value N), as soon as one among A, B has value N (strictness). In particular, no
formula built up with the classical connectives can be valid (or a tautology, i.e.
true under all possible assignments), as A →A has value N, if A is meaningless.
So no formula is valid under this three valued semantics.
Then there are connectives allowing the formation of metatheorical statements
⊢A, ¬A, ↓A, ¯A, to be read as “A is true”, “A is false”, “A is meaningless”, and
“A is not true” (in the given order). The value of ⊢A (¬A) is true if A is true
(false), false (true) otherwise. As to ↓A, it is true exactly when A is meaningless;
and ¯A is false if and only if A is true. So one can deﬁne external versions →, ∨, ∧
of ⊃, ∪, ∩and an equivalence ≡, such that A ≡B means that A and B have the
same truth value. As to their relation, one has, for instance, the following valid
statements:
(A ⊃B) →(A →B)
(A ∪B) →(A ∨B)
A ↔(⊢A)
(A ≡∼A) ≡↓A
The ﬁrst two arrows cannot be reversed.
An immediate consequence is that in the new logic the notion of tautology
becomes non-empty, e.g.
trivially A →A is valid.
Furthermore, the external
logical operations make it feasible to project possibly meaningless statements,
which are built up using the ordinary connectives, onto meaningful statements by
means of the transformations:
(∼p)
→
¯p
(p ⊃q)
→
(p →q)
(p ∪q)
→
(p ∨q);

926
Andrea Cantini
and this yields an embedding of classical tautologies into tautologies with the
external language (see theorem VI, p. 95, [Bochvar, 1937]).
The next step is to introduce a statement calculus Σ where paradoxes can
be analyzed. Essentially, he describes a version of the extended type free func-
tional calculus of Hilbert-Ackermann (1928), where propositions and propositional
functions can also be substituted for individual variables with a basic limitation.
Bochvar’s restricted substitution rule amounts, in our terms, to a comprehension
schema of the form
∃ϕ∀x(φ(x) ≡α(x))
where α contains only internal logical operations.
As to the underlying logic, the propositional basis of Σ is formed by Bochvar’s
tautologies with the detachment rule for →and an introduction rule for ∩; the
quantiﬁer axioms are standard, but a strictness axiom ensures that a propositional
function is meaningless if and only if it is meaningless for at least one witness.
Bochvar’s formalism has some obscurities; he introduces an additional sort
of variables xc, yc . . ., where the c–label means that they range over classical
(i.e.internal) propositional functions and propositions and he requires that the
individual variables in the substitution rule can be replaced only by classical propo-
sitions or functions. But the formal details are not fully spelled out.
The paradoxes are readily disposed of in Σ. If we choose R(ϕ) :=∼ϕ(ϕ), we
are driven to
R(R) ≡∼R(R),
which yields only the provability in Σ of ↓R(R) and ↓∼R(R). Observe that
the restriction in the comprehension or substitution is actually essential: if we
replace ∼with the external negation in the Russell predicate R, we are led to an
inconsistency (as A ≡¯A becomes a two-valued function of A). Similar conclusion
can be drawn from the Grelling paradox.
It should be apparent that Bochvar’s solution cannot be simply classiﬁed as a
gap solution, where the logic is weakened, in order to get rid of paradoxes; instead,
his way out embodies the distinction between level and metalevel, which is basic
to the Tarskian solution or even to the type theoretic routes, in the logic itself and
this makes his framework quite expressive (e.g. it can handle the very notion of
‘non-sensical’,‘meaningless’). 105
Non-terminating processes and cycles
Behmann’s paper [1931]106 oﬀers a diagnosis of the paradoxes, which ascribes the
fault of the paradoxes to the deﬁnition machinery.
The paper (read in 1929)
begins with an analysis of Russell’s paradox in the form of predicate application.
105C.f. the historical notes of Feferman [1984] Bochvar anticipates Halld´en [1949]; related work
is due to Segerberg and Woodruﬀ.
106Behmann’s work and his role in G¨ottingen’s foundational debate – also on the basis of
his unpublished work including his dissertation of 1918 – has been thoroughly investigated in
[Mancosu, 1999] Here we only brieﬂy touch on his published essays.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
927
Behmann observes that, once we have introduced the Russell predicate F by the
deﬁnition F(ϕ) =df ¬ϕ(ϕ), it must be possible to eliminate F from any argument
involving it. But, if we try to replace F by its deﬁniens in F(F) ≡¬F(F), we
ﬁnd ourselves entangled in an inﬁnite regress, as there is no F–free expression
that could replace F(F). So the contradiction clearly shows an error in the theory
of deﬁnitions, namely to the use of deﬁnitions that give rise to an inﬁnite chain
of substitutions, without converging to a result; according to him, neither the
naive concept of set, nor the notion of inﬁnite is responsible for the contradictions.
For Behmann all problems involved in the axiom of reducibility, predicativity,
constructivity can be avoided in solving the paradoxes. His hint is to reform logic
without resorting to type theory, but by adding an operator !, which, when we are
given a predicate χ, singles out exactly those arguments x to which χ meaningfully
applies. ! controls universal quantiﬁcation; we can pass from a universal statement
∀xϕ to an instance ϕ[x := a] only if a makes sense. Behmann does not develop
a systematic theory and it is also unclear how to interpret his special operator
‘!’.
Only much later he will develop a formal theory in his [Behmann, 1959].
Nevertheless, his contribution is conceptually valuable and it has inspired recent
work [Aczel and Feferman, 1980], since, as alternative route to the Principia,
it underlines the intensional aspects (deﬁnitional equality, or equivalence) of the
paradoxical arguments, e.g.
the existence of possibly divergent computational
processes.107
In quite diﬀerent contexts, Lewis and Langford [1932] are driven to conclusions
which are not dissimilar from those of Behmann.108 Their diagnosis is that the
paradoxes show that certain conceptual complexes do not express propositions
(where, roughly, propositions corresponds to ‘possible facts’ which are susceptible
of being realized). They introduce the special notation p : α to mean that p is a
name, whose meaning is the proposition α (so p and “α” denote the same entity
and can replace each other); typically the Liar amounts to ‘p: p is false’, but we
can also imagine more complex self-referential situations:
p1
:
p2
is false;
p2
:
p1
is false;
or even
p1
:
p2
is false;
p2
:
p3
is false :
p3
:
p1
is false.
Consider the ﬁrst case. If we assume, say, that p1 is true, then p2 is false; hence by
replacing p2 with its meaning we get that “p1 is false” is false, i.e. p1 is true, i.e.
107See also the distinction between “Aufgabe” (task) of a substitution and “Ergebnis” (result).
108They devote chapter XIII to the discussion of logical paradoxes in their approach to logic,
which has the semantical notion of proposition at its core.

928
Andrea Cantini
we ﬁnd our initial assumption. Again this does not explicate the meaning of the
proposition; so we are entangled into a new replacement, and eventually “into an
inﬁnite sequence of expressions which are more and more complicated”. A similar
situation arises if we assume that p1 is false. It is clear that, unless the sequence
is broken somewhere, the expression remains meaningless. So we do not have a
contradiction, but a vicious regression (p. 440), hence no proposition.109
In general, the lesson is that one can create arbitrary complicated cycles and
check that they can lead either to contradictions (see the second case) or to inﬁnite
regressions. In either case, the conceptual complex fails to converge to a deﬁnite
proposition.
3.4
G¨odel on paradoxes
Why then does any attention to paradoxes survive at all ? Isn’t true that after
Russell Zermelo and Tarski had eventually invented substantial theoretical means
to get rid of the conceptual malaise embracing the notions of class, set, truth,
deﬁnability? The reason lies probably in a persistent interest for alternative formal
paradigms, due to the unsatisfactory outcomes of Principia Mathematica and in
the problematic place self-reference keeps playing in mathematical logic.
More essentially and deeply, as also witnessed by Wang in his book [2001,
ch. 8] and by Myhill’s report in [1984], G¨odel has a foremost, genuine interest
for concept-theoretic (or intensional or property-theoretic) paradoxes, which he
sharply distinguishes from semantical ones.110 and which he considers unresolved
by the standard Zermelian set theory
With this in mind, an illuminating analysis of the situation in the mid–forties
is oﬀered by the classical G¨odelian essay of 1944. According to [G¨odel, 1944], the
most signiﬁcant contribution of Russell to the analysis of the concepts of formal
logic concerns the logical paradoxes and their solutions (p. 131). In this respect, it
is especially urgent to settle the question of the vicious circle principle as a principal
tool for solving the paradoxes. G¨odel’s conceptual analysis is penetrating and gets
rid of many prejudices.
The vicious circle in the form “no totality can contain members deﬁnable in
terms of this totality, or members involving or presupposing the totality of its
values” is regarded as highly problematic by G¨odel; for him, it comprises three
diﬀerent principles. The ﬁrst one (mentioning deﬁnability) is only applicable if
mathematical entities are regarded as constructed via a deﬁnition: only if a con-
structivistic position is assumed, impredicative deﬁnitions are not allowed. On the
other hand, the remaining versions are not admissible. For instance, we can legit-
imately describe an object by referring to a totality to which the object belongs:
this is a feature of a description, not of the object. It is also conceivable that
there is a consistent notion of circular class (he here mentions classes involving
themselves `a la Mirimanoﬀ), and self-reference in itself is not a problem: consider
109The situation is reminiscent of the idea of semantical groundedness, see 5.1.
110E.g. the Liar is semantical, but the predicate version of Russell’s one is concept-theoretic.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
929
the sentence: “every sentence contains at least one relation word”. Clearly it is
true and it also belongs to the same totality to which it refers.
Of course, in agreement with the criticisms of Ramsey, Chwistek and the results
of Tarski, he praises the theory of simple types as a suﬃcient means for avoiding
the paradoxes (not only logical, but also epistemological, see p. 135).
However, his insights are not limited to the realm of set theoretic foundations
(or to the restricted type theoretic view), as one would expect from one of the
canonical texts of G¨odelian realism. Surprisingly, he supports ideas that go beyond
the border of his supposedly well-established philosophical point of view. So he
notices that the theory of types “brings in a new idea for the solution of paradoxes,
especially suited to their intensional form. It consists in blaming the paradoxes
not on the axiom that every propositional function deﬁnes a concept or a class, but
on the assumption that every concept gives a meaningful proposition if asserted
for any arbitrary or objects as arguments”([G¨odel, 1944], p. 150).
The problem with type theory is that it implements an additional principle, i.e.
the idea that objects belong to diﬀerent mutually exclusive categories,111 and this
makes the expressive power of type theory limited (e.g. we can’t meaningfully
state the fact that a certain object is not of a given type). So G¨odel suggests that
there might be possible “to assume every concept to be signiﬁcant everywhere
except for certain “singular points” or “limiting points”, so that the paradoxes
would appear as something analogous to dividing by zero.” The goal is to devise
a system showing that our logical intuitions are substantially correct (up to minor
corrections). So G¨odel inclines towards ideas which are apparently quite close to
those of Curry and Church.
This is a sort of research program in a nutshell, that it will be occasionally pur-
sued by several logicians, but most of the time, in isolation and, to a certain extent,
lying dormant. At this point G¨odel warns that the supposed partiality is in fact
essential: “it is not possible to extend a concept to all arguments by deﬁning an-
other one which yields a false proposition in case the original be meaningless”; for
instance, it is not possible to make the concept “meaningfully applicable” total.112
Here G¨odel explicitly observes that there have been attempts in this direction by
Church ([1932], [1933]), but we already know about their failure ([Kleene and
Rosser, 1935]).
G¨odel even considers a further alternative to the Russellian view: Quine’s work
([Quine, 1937]) is recalled twice, both as a “stepping stone” for a more satisfactory
type theory system and as a version of Russell’s zig-zagness.113 However, G¨odel
111The G¨odelian formulation is reminiscent of the principle leading to semantical categories in
the sense of the Polish tradition (Ajdukiewicz) and Husserl.
112By a form of Grelling’s paradox.
113Quine’s theory amounts to restricting the naive comprehension schema to those instances
which are stratiﬁed, i.e. that can be read as meaningful type-theoretically. More formally, a
formula ϕ is stratiﬁed if and only if it is possible to assign a natural number (type in short) to
each variable occurrence of ϕ in such a way that
1. if t ∈s is a subformula of ϕ, the type of s is one greater than the type of t;
2. if t = s, is a subformula of ϕ, then t, s, r receive the same type;

930
Andrea Cantini
does not mention that paradoxes were still quite close to NF. In 1942 Rosser 114
had published a form of Burali-Forti’s antinomy in a seemingly natural extension
(named ML) of the system NF, extended with “ultimate”classes.
ML was in-
tended to amend certain weaknesses of NF (e.g. with respect to number theoretic
induction).
Once more, the theorem brought about an unexpected output of a paradox on
set theory and the foundations of mathematical logic.
4
NON-SET THEORETIC FOUNDATIONS AFTER 1945
For the sake of historical analysis, it is helpful to partition the period under scrutiny
in two diﬀerent intervals: 1945-1975 and 1975 till the end of the century. The
reason is that they have marked diﬀerent features.
As to the investigations covering approximately thirty years between 1945 and
1975, the search for type-free non-set-theoretic foundations remains somewhat
marginal and still a matter of isolated research programs and traditions (Curry’s
school, Fitch), scarcely interacting with the mainstream of mathematical logic.
Nevertheless, there is a signiﬁcant renaissance of semantical investigations,
which crop up in connection with philosophical questions and the analysis of
natural languages (the notion of presupposition, denotation of singular terms,
paradoxes involving epistemic notions, reﬁnements of old ones).115
Semantical
and foundational investigations hardly meet together, even if logical problems are
essentially related.
In the second part, since (roughly) 1975, the ‘Leitmotiv’ is diﬀerent: work aris-
ing from paradoxes becomes technically much sophisticated and closer to main-
stream mathematical logic; there are interesting conceptual byproducts, e.g. in
the discussion of paradoxality, intensionality or the philosophical question about
“the bearer of the truth”. The investigation of semantical paradoxes produces
non-trivial ﬂexible “semantical machines”, which tend to overcome the borders of
isolated traditions and stand out for themselves as mathematical tools.
At the same time, the study of type free comprehension and property theory
receives a substantial impulse by parallel axiomatic and model theoretic investiga-
tions, and applications to foundational problems (constructive foundations above
all). We also underline that in this period the semantical and the foundational
traditions meet together (this is particularly evident in works due to Feferman and
Aczel).
3. all free occurrences of the same variable in any subformula of ϕ have the same type;
4. if x is free in ψ and ∀xψ is a subformula of ϕ, then the ‘x’ in ∀x and the free occurrences
of x in ψ receive the same type.
114Rosser notes that the same result was obtained independently by Roger Lyndon, then a
student of Quine.
115E.g.Geach [1955], Kaplan-Montague [1960].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
931
For convenience, we postpone the outline of the history of the proper semantical
investigations to §5; below we mainly deal with the uncertain paths of type-free
foundations, till their merging with constructive foundations (see §4.4).
4.1
Proof-theoretic work: Ackermann and Sch¨utte
In the line of Hilbert’s formal axiomatic method, there are contributions to be
mentioned, essentially due to W. Ackermann ([1941], [1950], [1952], [1958], [1961]),
who reviewed systematically Church’s attempts in the thirties, and Sch¨utte ([1953],
[1954], [1960]).
The basic idea underlying Ackermann’s and Sch¨utte’s approach stems from
Behmann and Church: if we like to maintain the full naive comprehension schema,
we have to assume that predicates are not in general everywhere deﬁned. This
causes troubles, as we cannot rely upon classical logic: we cannot accept tertium
non datur (insofar as it is not true in general that the application of a predicate
to an object provides us with a statement which is true or false), but we cannot
dwell upon a standard (positive) implication either, for a paradox will occur as
well, as noticed by Curry [1942b].
The original twist here is to deﬁne a logical calculus to which Gentzen’s cut
elimination techniques apply. Since we cannot go into a separate reconstruction
of the single contributions of Ackermann and Sch¨utte, we only outline the main
technical ideas with reference to [Ackermann, 1961], which is a sort of conclusive
survey (at least, of the research due to Hilbert’s school in the ﬁeld).
Formally, the language includes: (i) positive operations ∨, ∧, ∀, ∃and negation
¬, which is only allowed in front of atomic formulas and extended to the full
language via De Morgan’s laws; (ii) predicate symbols, corresponding to predicate
application {−}(−)(in each ﬁnite arity, also designated by simple juxtaposition),
equality116 and predicate abstraction; (iii) one sort of individual variables; (iv)
possibly, a list of primitive predicate symbols (depending on the applications one
has in mind).117
The powerful type-free character of the language is made apparent by two fea-
tures: ﬁrst of all, the abstraction constructor provides unrestricted generation of
new predicates, i.e. λx1 . . . xn.A(x1, . . . , xn) is a predicate, if A is an arbitrary
formula, with n free variables; furthermore, predicates do belong to the category of
individual terms, besides variables and individual constants.
The underlying logical calculus Σ1 includes: (i) standard introduction and elim-
ination rules for positive logical operations and quantiﬁers;118 (ii) introduction and
116So that atomic formulas will have the form a t1 . . . tn and t = s.
117They are qualiﬁed as ’special’ by Ackermann.
118Equivalently, the reader can ﬁgure out the corresponding standard rules for Gentzen’s LK
sequent calculus; a variant of these is indeed embodied in Sch¨utte’s version of the system in
[Sch¨utte, 1960].

932
Andrea Cantini
elimination rules for λ-abstraction119
M ∨A(⃗a)
M ∨(λ⃗x.A(⃗x))(⃗t);
M ∨(λ⃗x.A(⃗x))(⃗x)
M ∨A(⃗t)
Last but not least,120 Σ1 is an inﬁnitary (though constructive) calculus, as it is
enriched by a form of ω-rule, due to Lorenzen: if to each n-tuple ⃗t of closed term
we can eﬀectively assign a derivation of A(⃗t), then we can infer A(⃗x), with the free
variables ⃗x.
Crucial is then the choice of the axioms for Σ1. If p is a primitive predicate,
p must come equipped with an eﬀective method which partitions the universe.
So p is well-deﬁned everywhere and p⃗t (respectively ¬p⃗t) is an axiom, provided
p⃗t (¬p⃗t) holds true of ⃗t.121 Thus the primitive predicates constitute the building
blocks over which the abstraction process takes place, according to a(n implicitly)
predicativistic point of view.
The problem is that the “typenfreie Logik” meets severe obstacles. First of all,
it is unable to prove all propositional tautologies, e.g. Σ1 cannot prove A ∨¬A,
for arbitrary A. 122 This is because we cannot have axioms of the form r⃗t ∨¬r⃗t,
for arbitrary r, ⃗t. Moreover, the system is incapable of representing hypothetical
arguments: we cannot infer ¬A ∨C, once we have derived C from the assumption
A.
It should be mentioned that Ackermann’s and Sch¨utte’s investigations for im-
plementing eﬃcient consistent type-free logic were directly motivated by concrete
foundational interests, like the search for smooth formalizations of mathematics,
e.g. elementary analysis.123 So there were attempts to overcome the above limits.
Typically, Ackermann [1950] was led to study an extension of the logic Σ1 with a
new operator B,124 such that BA (roughly) means that A is derivable. The new
logic Σ2 is consistent and it tolerates a weak form of deduction theorem in the
form:
A ⊢C
¬BA ∨BC
An immediate consequence is that BA∨¬BA is a theorem of Σ2, since A is trivially
derivable from A; but, in general, there ought to be the crucial restriction that the
rules involved in justifying A ⊢C are those of the primitive system Σ1 and hence
do not involve B.
Clearly, B-logic cannot yield a deductively closed system; instead, the extension
procedure can be iterated by introducing a new operator B1, reﬂecting derivability
119Below ⃗x, ⃗t designate ﬁnite sequences of variables or terms.
120This contrasts with the type-free logic investigated in [Ackermann, 1952].
121Typically, if we interpret = as literal equality, we can count = as a special or ground predicate.
122This amounts to “Aussagenlogische Unvollst¨andigkeit”.
In sequent calculus terminology,
A ⇒A is not derivable in general.
123The interested reader ought to compare it with the work done earlier in [Hilbert, 1918b]
and in the IV Supplement of the Grundlagen der Mathematik [Hilbert and Bernays, 1939].
This aim also explains why extensions with the description operator and Hilbert’s ε-symbol are
investigated and proven consistent in [Sch¨utte, 1960].
124B for ”beweisbar”.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
933
with the rules of Σ2. Therefore, one simply obtains a hierarchy a logical systems,
corresponding to a hierarchy of deducibility relations, but none of them can be
deductively satisfactory, though it is possible to show that the formalism is ade-
quate to represent fragments of elementary and ramiﬁed analysis. Similar ideas
are being pursued at about the same time by Fitch and later by Myhill (see [Fitch,
1946], [Fitch, 1952] on hierarchy of negations, [Lorenzen and Myhill, 1959], [Myhill,
1975], [Myhill, 1984]).
From a modern standpoint, Ackermann’s and Sch¨utte’s idea can be better
rephrased in semantic terms: one begins with a term model T , endowed with
a basic structure (deﬁned via the basic predicates); the logical calculus just speci-
ﬁes an inductive construction, extending T to a higher order structure with classes
and a non-extensional membership relation (application).
That the inductive construction is non-trivial (and it actually yields a model)
is then granted by proof-theoretic investigations, based on ordinal analysis. In
1952 Ackermann produces a complex consistency proof in the style of Gentzen’s
second consistency proof of Peano Arithmetic for a ﬁnitary version of Σ1: ordinal
notations are assigned to derivations, and an ordinal lowering ”simpliﬁcation”
procedure is deﬁned, in such a way that consistency is granted by transﬁnite
induction.
Sch¨utte’s most mature presentation is to be found in the classical Beweistheorie
[Sch¨utte, 1960]: there the cut elimination procedure for inﬁnitary derivations is
rather neatly adapted to type-free logic and carried out by a triple transﬁnite
induction argument.125
4.2
From Fitch’s combinatory logic to inductive deﬁnitions
As we know from 3.3, Fitch [1942] had already proposed a consistent combinatory
system – the so-called basic logic K – which hinged upon the idea of partiality,
but was rather poor for foundational aims, as it missed universal quantiﬁcation
and negation.
In 1948 the basic logic approach was much improved by the extended basic
logic K′ of [Fitch, 1948]. There truth is also closed under universal quantiﬁcation,
and there is a critical reappraisal of negation. In particular, truth and falsehood
are deﬁned simultaneously and inductively: together with each single clause for
introducing a logical operator, one has also the dual condition for the same negated
logical operator.126 The initial clauses only involve atomic facts about the ground
structure; so one starts with basic atomic truths (true literal equalities) and basic
atomic falsehoods (false literal equalities).
125Cf. [Sch¨utte, 1960], pp. 232-236. This reﬂects the higher complexity of the logic; besides the
usual logical complexity of cut formulas and some measure involving the derivation of the cut
premises, one needs a parameter controlling the abstraction rules.
126E.g. K′ satisﬁes, together with the standard recursive clause that A ∧B is true in K′ if and
only if A and B are true in K′, also the dual condition: ¬(A ∧B) is true in K′ if and only if ¬A
is true in K′ or ¬B is true in K′.

934
Andrea Cantini
This extension is especially important, since it allows to speak of the comple-
ment of a class within the logic. However, one has to carefully distinguish the
internal complement C of a class C, i.e. the set of all t such that (¬(Ct)) ∈K′
from the external complement −C := {a | (Ct) /∈K′} of C. In general, the ﬁrst is
only an approximation of the second (in the sense that C ⊆−C). So it is natural
to select the collection of those classes which are completely represented in the
system K′, for which −C and C coincide. A class X of expressions is completely
represented in K′ if and only if, for some expression M, one has:
t ∈X
if and only if
Mt ∈K′
t /∈X
if and only if
(¬(Mt)) ∈K′.
The meaning of Russell’s paradox, or, on the same par, of the Liar paradox, is
that the above distinction is essential: while K′ itself is representable in K′ and
hence satisﬁes a kind of semantical closure, K′ can’t be completely represented
into itself.
Since K′ is also closed under untyped comprehension and universal quantiﬁca-
tion, K′ has a considerable expressive power, but it cannot be properly considered
constructive (in a ﬁnitary sense), as the clauses for introducing the universal quan-
tiﬁer and the negation of the existential obviously correspond to inﬁnitary rules.127
It is possible to show that natural numbers can be completely represented in K′,
and, to a certain extent, K′ allows the development of a theory of real numbers.128
Of course, due to the presence of inﬁnitary inferences, the consistency proof for
K′ (i.e. of the fact that, for no c, both c ∈K′ and ¬c ∈K′) is carried out by
means a generalized inductive argument (see theorem 3.2, p. 98), which goes far
beyond the methods of Hilbert metamathematics.
Fitch’s logic was further investigated and extended, mainly with foundational
motivations.129 Myhill [1952] proposed a kind of ﬁnitary metalanguage over K′,
in order to show that certain terms are theorems of K′, and to pursue a nomi-
nalistic foundation of mathematics,130 where only quantiﬁcation over expression
is admissible.
The most interesting results for mathematical logic involve the notion of repre-
sentability over K′ and its connection with the theory of inductive deﬁnitions and
hyperarithmetic sets, as they are developed in [Fitch, 1954a] and above all in the
subsequent note [Lorenzen and Myhill, 1959] .
[Fitch, 1954a] proves the inductive completeness of the language of extended
basic logic K′: all notions deﬁnable in the language of K′ by means of the same
127If A, E are the combinators representing the universal and existential quantiﬁers (respec-
tively), K′ satisﬁes the closure conditions: (i) Aa ∈K′ if and only if ac ∈K′ for every expression
c; (ii) (¬Ea) ∈K′ if and only if ¬(ac) ∈K′, for every expression c.
128Although the collection of reals is not completely representable in the system, the least upper
bound principle holds for completely representable classes.
129For instance, see the paper on the Heine-Borel theorem, [Fitch, 1949].
In the same vein
almost forty years later, see [Flagg and Myhill, 1987b].
130In the sense of Chwistek and Hepter [Chwistek, 1948].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
935
inductive procedure deﬁning K′ itself, are themselves representable in K′.
In
Fitch’s own terms, let T be a relation of classes of K′-expressions to K′-expressions,
which is represented in K′, i.e.
assume that there is a term t such that, if c
represents a class C in K′, then
T(C, a) holds ⇔tca ∈K′
for every expression a. Given T, we can then specify a production rule [T], such
that T(X, a) ⇒a ∈X. A class C (of expressions) is “deﬁnable by transﬁnite in-
duction by means of the rule [T]” (i.e. inductively deﬁnable by [T] in the standard
recursion theoretic sense, see Moschovakis [1974]), provided C is the least class
closed under [T]. The main theorem of p. 32 establishes, by means of a ﬁxed point
argument:
(*) the inductively deﬁnable sets of K′-expressions are exactly those representable
in K′.
[Fitch, 1954a] leaves open the problem of dual representability: if a class is repre-
sented in K′ together with its complement, is this very class completely represented
in K′?
In 1959 Lorenzen and Myhill give a positive answer, as a corollary of a thorough
investigation of the constructive nature of inductively deﬁned sets of numbers.
They deﬁne the notion of positive-inductive set (of natural numbers). A set α of
numbers is positive inductive, provided, for some list of parameters t1, . . . , tn,
α = {n | (n, t1, . . . , tn) ∈IσT(σ)}
where IσT(σ) is the least set X satisfying
{(n, t1, . . . tn) | A(X, n, t1, . . . tn)} ⊆X
and A(X, n, t1, . . . tn) is built up by means of ∧, ∨, ∀, ∃from atomic formulas of
the form t ∈X and r = s (r, s arithmetical terms; (m1, . . . , mk) is a primitive
recursive function encoding ﬁnite number sequences).
It is then shown by means of a classical bar-induction argument:
(**) every Π1
1 set is also positive inductive (Theorem 1) and hence a set α is
hyperarithmetical if and only if both α and its complement α′ are positive
inductive.131
131This result is proved by Kleene [1955] and also in Spector [1961].An earlier step, hinting
implicitly at the potential usefulness of recursion theory in semantic investigations, is due to the
short paper Myhill [1950]. There he directly addresses the question whether any system, even
without negation, can deﬁne its own truth. He gives a positive answer to the problem on the
basis of standard recursion theoretic facts (existence of a total recursive function U enumerating
the binary primitive recursive functions; representability of every r.e. set as image of a primitive
recursive function). A much later trace in the same direction is to be found in exercise 16-91,
p. 454 of Hartley Rogers’s inﬂuential textbook [Rogers, 1967], where hyperarithmetical theory is
applied as a means for producing a semantical characterization of HY P.

936
Andrea Cantini
The interesting point is that [Lorenzen and Myhill, 1959] proves: (1) a set of
U-expressions is represented in K′ if and only if the corresponding set of G¨odel-
numbers is positive inductively deﬁnable (theorem 2); (2) if the set γ of all G¨odel-
numbers of the U-expressions belonging to a set B is hyperarithmetical, then B is
completely represented in K′ (theorem 3).
As a corollary, [Lorenzen and Myhill, 1959] yields a uniform representability
theorem:
(***) there exists an expression L of K′ such that, if m, n represent the class C
and its complement in K′ (respectively), then Lmn completely represents C
in K′.
There are further original ideas in the paper: in particular, Lorenzen and Myhill
consider a version of the hyperjump hierarchy132 up to ω and they deﬁne a corre-
sponding hierarchy {K′
i | i ∈ω} of Fitch-like-systems. If one adds to the language
an inﬁnite sequence of new constants {Ui | i ∈ω}, it is possible to deﬁne
K′
0
=
K′;
Ki+1
=
K′
i + {Uit | t ∈K′
i} + {¬(Uit) | t /∈K′
i}
The hierarchy is suggestive of later formal developments (like iterated admissibility,
universes in predicative type theories and over Frege Structures, levels of truth
([Martin-L¨of, 1975], [J¨ager et al., 2001] [Kahle, 2002], [Cantini, 1995] ).
In a series of subsequent papers (from 1958 to 1980) Fitch’s systems are further
enriched, but, as a matter of fact, they remain somewhat marginal and unrelated
to other works. The main technical developments concern extensions with weak
forms of extensionality [Fitch, 1958], [Fitch, 1963], [Fitch, 1980] and with modal-
ities, needed for a formal clariﬁcation of the idea of `logical essence ´(see [Fitch,
1967a], [Fitch, 1967b]). For instance, [Fitch, 1963] adopts as combinatory basis
the standard combinators K and S and identity = is no more interpreted as literal
identity, but as denoting a form of generalized logical equivalence, which possibly
tolerates the existence of propositions equivalent to their denials (cf. [Fitch, 1964],
p. 399).
Modal logic opens up the route towards a consistent reﬁnement of the naive
comprehension principle in the form
(1)
∃y∀x(x ∈y ↔□ϕ(x))
(ϕ being arbitrary, y not in φ). The Russell paradox then implies that there exists
a set R such that ¬R ∈R and ¬□¬R ∈R, i.e. R is not a member of itself, but,
possibly, it is a member of itself. Of course, Fitch is aware that inconsistencies
can arise as well, if the properties of □are not carefully chosen; indeed, the modal
132See for the main deﬁnitions, [Rogers, 1967], [Odifreddi, 1989].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
937
logic he proposes cannot be normal (i.e. not closed outright under the box-rule:
from ϕ, infer □ϕ; see [Fitch, 1967b], p. 107).133
Let us now try to assess the main contributions of Fitch’s work. It is fair to say
that he systematically exploits the methods of the theory of inductive deﬁnitions
and transﬁnite induction arguments in order to prove consistency.134; in connection
with his work, it ﬁrst occurs that there is a link between semantically closed
languages and (generalized) recursion theory
On the other hand, Fitch struggles to outline a uniﬁed treatment of seman-
tics and abstraction, which to a certain extent stretches the boundaries of formal
methods beyond the limits set out by Tarski’s theorem. Paradoxes are ascribed to
a vicious dependence of a sentence upon its denial: “The Russell paradox is the
Epimenides paradox in its purest form, since we are provided with a statement
which, on purely logical grounds, is equivalent to its own denial” ([Fitch, 1980],
p. 32).
In particular, he shows (and he is aware of) that, once bivalence is weakened,
there exist semantically closed systems, like his extended basic logic or the systems
of [Fitch, 1963], where the identity combinator I provides for free a representation
of the class of true propositions (cf. [Fitch, 1964], p. 400).
In a sense, the gap solution (see §5 below) is already in his papers with the
main techniques (ﬁxed points). But, surprisingly, papers in the same ﬁeld hardly
mention Fitch. This is probably due to the fact that his contributions were per-
ceived as relevant only to a formalistic foundational program135 and to illative
combinatory logic. Especially this last point made (and still makes) a comparison
with standard axiomatic systems, based on elementary languages and recursively
deﬁned categories of ‘term’ and ‘formula’, rather uncomfortable in general.
4.3
Combinators, classes and truth
The combinatory logic approach receives a new twist after the discovery of models
for lambda calculus and combinatory logic, due to Scott and Plotkin.
This is
especially clear from the paper [Scott, 1975], which is an attempt to close up the
gap between (standard predicate) logic and combinatory logic, in the light of the
novel model-theoretic results. The work, motivated by the opening question
(⋄) what is the relation between class abstraction and λ-abstraction in models of
the λ-calculus?
133Were it normal, we could infer □¬R ∈R since ¬R ∈R is provable, whence a contradiction.
It is also worth mentioning that the semantical investigation of these modal systems implicitly
contains the idea of supervaluation (see the deﬁnition of supplement of a class in [Fitch, 1967a],
p. 99).
134Some constructions are indeed explicitly recast by Fitch in the form of applications of the
ﬁxed point theorem for monotone operators, e.g. cf. [Fitch, 1967a], pp. 99-101. He also regards
this method only weakly or moderately impredicative and even intuitionistic (reporting a remark
to him by Myhill, ibid. p. 94).
135According to [Fitch, 1964], the existence of semantically closed systems is vital for vindicating
the adequacy of formal methods to philosophy, against the idea that Tarski’s theorem would
destroy them for the very fact that no adequate truth predicate is available.

938
Andrea Cantini
yields a neat reinterpretation of the proper structural mathematical content of
Fitch’s program. First of all, given an arbitrary lambda model M, the standard
syntax of elementary logic136 is uniformly represented by objects of the model M,
using in a crucial way the fact that M is a combinatory algebra. The syntax en-
coding via M-objects preserves the functional character of the syntactical objects
involved: e.g. to each formula ϕ(⃗a) with n parameters in the list ⃗a, there is as-
sociated an operation, represented by the term λ⃗x. ˙ϕ(⃗x), expressing an operation
M n →M. Of course, this allows the maximum freedom in carrying out direct
self-referential constructions.
Then M is expanded to M ∗:= ⟨M, TM, FM⟩with a pair ⟨TM, FM⟩of subsets
of M, simultaneously generated by transﬁnite induction.137 and playing the role
of truth and falsity The pair ⟨TM, FM⟩evaluates the objects representing logically
complex formulas according to the standard truth functional clauses, but the main
point is that negation is never applied to TM, FM (e.g an object represented by
˙

¬a is true (false) if and only if a is false (true)). So, as in §5.1, the construction
amounts to expanding the ground model with a three-valued truth predicate.
The expanded structure can be roughly regarded as a model for Fitch’s extension
of basic logic (see [Fitch, 1948], §4.2) and the underlying lambda model M makes
sense of membership/predication, predicate abstraction and truth by deﬁning :
a ∈b
:=
ba
(2)
{x | ϕ}
:=
λx. ˙ϕ
(3)
Ta
:=
(λx.x)a
(4)
Type free comprehension and the naive T-schema are elegantly subsumed under
lambda abstraction and trivially, for every a ∈M,138 one has:
˙



a ∈{x | ϕ}M ∈TM
:⇔
˙



ϕ[x := a]M ∈TM;
(5)
˙

Tϕ M ∈TM
⇔
˙

ϕ
M ∈TM;
(6)
. . .
(7)
The paper also sketches a proof theory axiomatizing the consequence relation
for three-valued logic,139 and it is suggested [Scott, 1975, p. 20] that there might
136There is an exception due to the semantics of three-valued logic.
The primitive logical
operators include also the so-called squadge connective, which gives the common part of ∧and
∨and allows to introduce a formula ϕ
∨∧ψ, such that ϕ
∨∧ψ is true (false) if and only if ϕ and
ψ is true (false). The squadge with ∨, ∧and ¬ yields a system of connectives which is complete
for all monotone three valued operators.
137Like the least ﬁxed point model in the sense of Kripke (see §5.1).
138We assume that the language contains individual constants for each element of the ground
universe; if t is a closed term, let tM be the value of t in the lambda model M.
139It is understood that a sequent Γ ⊢Δ holds if and only if, whenever all elements of Γ are
true, then some element of Δ is true, and whenever all elements of Δ are false, then at least one
element of Γ is false, too.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
939
be interesting formal systems, formalizing the properties of truth modelled by the
construction of M ∗. Last but not least, connections with inductive deﬁnability,
which were developed by (and were somewhat hidden in) the complex formalism
of Fitch and [Lorenzen and Myhill, 1959], are made perspicuous.140
In the ﬁnal part, there emerges an unexpected link among type-free foundations,
constructive type theory in the sense of Martin-L¨of [1975] and De Brujin, and
Curry’s idea of functionality. If one considers the collection V of all deﬁnite or
total classes141 over a given lambda model M, expanded as above, that is
V := {a | ∀x(x ∈a ∨¬x ∈a)},
V represents a rich universe of types. In fact, it is closed under exponential →,
generalized products Π and sums Σ, which are among the basic constructors in
Martin-L¨of’s type theory. On the same par, the constructors can be shown to
verify the type assignments rules for Π, Σ, →.
Since V ∈V does not hold and V itself cannot be deﬁnite, [Scott, 1975] sketches
the deﬁnition of a hierarchy ⟨Tn, Fn⟩of truth/falsity predicates, which induces a
corresponding hierarchy ⟨Vn | n ∈ω⟩of universes, satisfying
V := V0 ∈V1 ∈V2 ∈V3 . . .
and closed under stronger and stronger recursion and induction principles. The
construction parallels those of §4.2; it is analogous to the hierarchy of universes
appearing not only in later developments of type theories, but also of Feferman’s
Explicit Mathematics.
Frege structures
A few years later there appears a work, related to the foundations of constructive
type theory, due to Aczel [1977]; there, the author deﬁnes a classical interpretation
of Martin-L¨of’s type theory with one universe [Martin-L¨of, 1975], in a framework,
which is amenable to a proof-theoretic analysis. Roughly, the formal system might
be considered a counterpart to the step M →M ∗with a constructive ﬂavour.
First of all, Aczel deﬁnes a system CFA of combinatory arithmetic, i.e. combi-
natory logic embedded in classical ﬁrst order logic, extended with a predicate for
natural numbers, which satisﬁes Peano axioms and is equivalent to Peano arith-
metic. Then CFA is extended to a new system CFA1 supplied with a notion of
‘reﬂection on CFA’, i.e. with two predicates P and T, which classify the elements
of the underlying combinatory algebra in propositions and truths. As to the axioms
on P and T, they state:
140To each positive elementary operator form ϕ(x, P) in the language of lambda calculus ex-
panded with a truth predicate, there is associated an operation in the model represented by the
lambda term λpλx. ˙ϕ(x, p), such that the set theoretic least ﬁxed point of the operator associated
with ϕ(x, P) is represented by the combinatory ﬁxed point of λpλx. ˙ϕ(x, p)
141Of course, that a class b is total means that it splits the universe in two disjoint and exhaustive
subsets, i.e. that for every a in M, either ba is true or ba is false.

940
Andrea Cantini
• if ˙ϕ is the form
˙
  
x = y or
˙
  
N(x), P( ˙ϕ) ∧(T ˙ϕ ↔ϕ);
• P(x) ∧P(y) →[P(
˙
  
x →y) ∧(T(
˙
  
x →y) ↔T(x) →T(y))];
• ∀xP(ax) →(P(˙∀a) ∧(T(˙∀a) ↔∀xT(ax))).
(˙∀,
˙
  
x →y are closed terms representing the corresponding logical operations).
Using the closure properties of P and T , it is shown how to interpret (a formulation
of) the predicative constructive type theory ML1 with a universe V (i.e. a type
of small types) in CFA1. The basic idea is that a is a type if and only if a is
a propositional function, i.e. it satisﬁes ∀xP(ax), while the judgement z : a is
simply translated with T(ax) and the type of small types is given by the collection
of all propositional functions.
As to the proof theoretic analysis, the strength of CFA1 results from a sequence
of intermediate steps, which involve the formal systems IAAC, ID−
1 and Σ1
1 −AC.
All systems have the same proof-theoretic strength, corresponding to ramiﬁed
analysis up to any level < ε0. IAAC is a subsystem of intuitionistic arithmetical
analysis with choice, that it is interpretable in ML1 and hence it yields the lower
bound on ML1.
As to the upper bound, the main idea is to exploit a formal counterpart of
Scott’s construction of M ∗, since M ∗is a model of CFA1 (and hence validates
ML1). This can be done within the theory ID−
1 , which is simply the extension of
Peano arithmetic with the axioms granting that each positive elementary operator
form (in the arithmetical language; see [Moschovakis, 1974]) has a ﬁxed point
(in fact, it is not necessary to choose the least one, in order to validate CFA1).
Then ID−
1 is elegantly interpreted in Σ1
1 −AC,142 which is reducible by a result
of Friedman to ramiﬁed analysis up to any level < ε0. It is worth mentioning
that some of the ideas in Aczel’s paper have been later improved by Feferman
[1982], in order to prove the so-called Hancock’s conjecture, i.e. the proof theoretic
equivalence between predicative analysis and the constructive type theory ML<ω
with universes Vn, for arbitrary n ∈ω.
Along the same line of thought, Aczel [1980] introduces the notion of Frege
structure, as a coherent context for the rigorous development of Frege’s logical
notion of set and an explanation of Russell’s paradox, but also as “the structural
counterpart of Martin-L¨of’s language for the foundations of constructive mathe-
matics”.143
In order to capture the sharp distinction between objects and functions, which
is fundamental in Frege’s thought, [Aczel, 1980] deals with a kind of second order
variant of lambda models: the notion of lambda structure, which consists of
142Σ1
1 −AC is the subsystem of second order arithmetic, whose main schema is the choice axiom
(∀x)(∃Y )A(x, Y ) →(∃Z)(∀x)A(x, Zx), where A is a ﬁrst order formula. So no set quantiﬁer
occurs bound in A; u ∈Zx shortens p(x, u) ∈Z, p being a primitive recursive pairing function.
143See also the paper of J. Smith, [1984].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
941
(i) a family F= F0, F1, . . ., where F0 is a collection of objects, and, for n > 0,
each Fn is a collection of n-ary functions with values in F0, which is closed
under explicit deﬁnitions;
(ii) a lambda system for F, i.e. a pair of functionals λ : F1 →F0 and APP :
F0 × F0 →F0 such that, for all f ∈F1, a ∈F0,
APP(λ(f), a) = f(a)
A Frege structure has the form F := ⟨F, λ, APP, PM, TM⟩, where:
1. ⟨F, λ, APP⟩is a lambda structure;
2. PM, TM are two subsets of F0 with TM ⊆PM (the collections of propositions
and truths);
3. F includes a distinguished system of standard logical operations, under which
the set PM of propositional objects is closed and whose truth conditions are
standard and speciﬁed by means of TM. By contrast with [Aczel, 1977], only
the interpretation of implication is non-standard (see Curry), as satisﬁes the
axiom:
P(x) ∧(T(x) →P(y)) →[P(
˙
  
x →y) ∧(T(
˙
  
x →y) ↔(T(x) →T(y)))]
Of course, this makes propositions dependent upon truth and the existence proof
for Frege structures relies upon a tricky application of the ﬁxed point theorem for
monotone operators.
Concerning the foundational aims, a Frege structure F shows that the logical
notion of set can be made precise: if f is a propositional function, the Fregean
Wertverlauf of f is simply the object of F0 represented by λ(f), which, as in (5),
plays the role of a class abstraction operation {x | f(x)} and satisﬁes the naive
comprehension schema. Of course, no contradiction arises, since by the Russellian
paradox ¬x ∈x does not deﬁne a propositional function of F. The root of the
contradictions are to be found, in Aczel’s view, in the fact that Frege’s Grundge-
setze have exactly two propositions, the True and the False. But this would have
the eﬀect of rendering truth internally deﬁnable, against Tarski’s theorem.
As to the logicistic program, it cannot implemented that far in F. For instance,
it is not possible to deﬁne a propositional function, whose extension is an isomor-
phic copy of the natural numbers, though there exist Frege structures where such
standard copies of N exist. More generally, if A is a set of objects of F, A is
internally deﬁnable if and only if there exists a propositional function fA in F1
such that, for every object a, a ∈A if and only if fA(a) is in the truth set of F. It
turns out that the collections of propositions, truth and sets in a Frege structure
are not internally deﬁnable, as well as the collection of subsets of a given set. Also
extensionality in the sense of the internal membership relation fails.
To sum up: contrary to their original inspiration, Frege structures reveal them-
selves more suitable for the predicative and constructive foundations than for the
impredicative logicistic foundations.

942
Andrea Cantini
Extending Frege structures: from Fitch’s K′ to κ-continuous lattices
Myhill’s works [1975] [1984] can be explicitly understood as a continuation of
Fitch’s work of the ﬁfties (§4.2). However, it is just from the seeds of [Myhill, 1984]
and the foundational weakness of [Flagg and Myhill, 1987b] that the interaction
with lambda calculus models is deeply exploited by [Flagg, 1987].
First, a conceptual remark. Myhill’s work strongly vindicates, in agreement
with G¨odel, that there never were set-theoretic paradoxes (and so the Cantorian
notion of set is untouched by Russell’s contradiction). Paradoxes only aﬀect those
conceptions which are inspired by the Fregean logical notion of set (as primarily
given by a property). With this in mind, Myhill is mainly interested in reﬁning
Fitch’s systems and in ﬁnding links with present forms of constructive mathemat-
ics.
The main problem with Fitch’s system K′ is of course implication and the fact
that, as soon as implication satisﬁes modus ponens and the deduction theorem,
Curry’s paradox arises.
The idea of Myhill is roughly this: in a non-classical
context, an implication A →B is reasonably identiﬁed with a deducibility relation
A ⊢R B with respect to a given set of rules R.
But if we allow the natural
introduction rule
(8)
A ⊢R B ⇒⊢A →B
“we cannot without circularity include amongst those rules the rules for the very
implication which we are trying to deﬁne”.144 This leads Myhill in [Myhill, 1975],
[Myhill, 1984] and [Flagg and Myhill, 1987a] to introduce a hierarchy of implica-
tions →0, →1, →2, . . ., where A →0 B is true if and only if A is deducible from B
without using any sort of implication, A →1 B is true if and only if A is deducible
from B without using any sort of implication, except possibly →0, and so on. As
to the falsity conditions, which are necessary in the present context, the rule is
that A →i B is false if and only if A is true and B is false.
As to the technical beneﬁt, the enriched logical machinery allows to quantify
over collections that can be only positively represented in the system (but they are
not total or classical). In particular, there exist exponentials of diﬀerent levels: if
a is not total, one can deﬁne, depending on the level i ∈ω
[a →i b] := {f | (∀x)(x ∈a →i fx ∈b)}
On the formal side, the hierarchy of implications gives rise to a system Σ∞of
illative combinatory logic,145 which includes:
(i) combinatory logic with extensionality;
144See [Myhill, 1984, p. 138].
145So formulas are identiﬁed with certain terms, to which combinatory logic applies; think of
them as their representatives in a combinatory algebra, cf. Scott [1975]. In particular, logical
constants and predicate constants become individual constants naming operations in the ground
algebra.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
943
(ii) natural deduction rules for introducing and eliminating terms of the form
M ∧N, ¬(M ∧N), ∀M, ¬∀M;
(iii) closure rules for a predicate N, representing the set of natural numbers and
a corresponding N-induction rule;
(iv) additional rules, ensuring that the underlying logic is classical on terms rep-
resenting propositions (i.e. terms A for which A∨¬A is provable146 and that
expressions of the form t = s, N(t) represent propositions, i.e. that N and
= are deﬁnite or total);
(v) introduction and elimination rule for →i, where i = 0, 1, 2 . . ., where the
introduction rule for A →i B has to meet the proviso that in the deduction
of B from A only rules for implications with lower index j < i are applied.
There are two problems left.
The ﬁrst one is metamathematical: is the new system [Flagg and Myhill, 1987b]
with levels of implication consistent? The answer is positive, and the techniques
developed in [Flagg and Myhill, 1987b] to prove the theorems are the most interest-
ing part of the work, since they lead the authors to apply inductive deﬁnability in
depth and give evidence for the close two-sided link between self-referential truth
and generalized recursion theoretic themes (cf. §5.3). After Fitch’s work and Scott
[1975], for every combinatory algebra A there exists a classical N-standard Frege
structure F(A), consisting of (i) a subset NA of A isomorphic to the natural num-
bers; (ii) a subset T , which is consistent, i.e. for no a ∈A, a ∈T and (¬a) ∈T ,
and satisﬁes the closure conditions:147
(a = b) ∈T
⇔
A |= a = b;
¬a = b ∈T
⇔
A |= ¬a = b;
(Na) ∈T
⇔
a ∈NA;
(¬Na) ∈T
⇔
a /∈NA;
(a ∧b) ∈T
⇔
a ∈T and b ∈T
(¬(a ∧b)) ∈T
⇔
(¬a) ∈T or (¬b) ∈T
(∀b) ∈T
⇔
ba ∈T , for all a ∈A
(¬∀b) ∈T
⇔
ba ∈T , for some a ∈A
(¬¬a) ∈T
⇔
a ∈T
Then the results of Fitch (§4.2), [Lorenzen and Myhill, 1959], [Scott, 1975] are
generalized. Recall that a subset X of A is (completely) representable in A if and
146These inference amount to rules for introducing and eliminating double negation and to
the distributive law linking universal quantiﬁer with disjunction, corresponding to the schema
(∀x)(A ∨B(x)) →A ∨(∀x)B(x), where x is not free in A.
147For the sake of simplicity, we do not distinguish (a) between objects of the structure and
their names in the language; (b) between application terms of the combinatory language and the
corresponding objects in the ground algebra A.

944
Andrea Cantini
only if there exists some c in A, such that X (the complement of X) has the form
{a ∈A | ca ∈T } ({a ∈A | (¬ca) ∈T }).
Let Rep(A)) (Comp(A)) be the collection of (completely) representable sets of
A, while Ind(A) (Hyp(A)) is the collection of inductive (hyperelementary) sets in
the sense of Moschovakis [1974]. Then, [Flagg and Myhill, 1987b] proves:
(♭) Rep(A) = Ind(A)
Furthermore, if A is an eﬀective combinatory algebra, that is, A is suﬃciently
similar to a closed term model of combinatory logic148, it also holds:
(♭♭) Comp(A) = Hyp(A)
The eﬀectiveness of A is then exploited by Flagg and Myhill for lifting to the
context of Frege structures the fundamental stage comparison lemma of inductive
deﬁnability,149 which yields the main lemma for the consistency of Σ∞, i.e. the
dual representability theorem:
(♯♯) There exists an object L in A such that, whenever a, b represent disjoint
subsets X and Y of A, then
u ∈X ⇔(Lab)u ∈T ;
u ∈Y ⇔(¬Lab)u ∈T
(♯♯) is the key step for modelling the hierarchy of implications of Σ∞.150 Indeed, let
I0 be the set encoding the deducibility relation A ⊢0 B of level 0 (no implication
involved) while J0 encodes {⟨A, B⟩| A ∈T and (¬B) ∈T }.
Since they are
disjoint, there is an object I0 representing I0, while its negation represents J0.
So one can (roughly) interpret →0 by means of I0 and this yields a consistent
deducibility ⊢1 of level 1. By applying the same procedure to the pair encoding
⊢1 and J0, one obtains a consistent interpretation of →1, and so on.
The second problem is foundational: to what extent can we proceed to formalize
analysis in Σ∞? According to the sketches of [Flagg and Myhill, 1987b], the use
of levels of implication yields a version of the Dedekind reals in the system, and
it allows to state and prove in Σ∞results like Peano’s theorem for solutions of
148That A is eﬀective means that there are an object E ∈A, two recursive functions App, Num
satisfying the conditions:
1. for all a in A, there exists a natural number n (in the sense of A) such that En = a;
2. for all k ∈N, E(Num(k)) = k;
3. for all m, n in N, E(App(m, n)) = (En)(Em).
[Cantini, 1993] shows that the assumption that A is eﬀective, is superﬂuous for proving the
deﬁnability results of [Flagg and Myhill, 1987b].
149See [Moschovakis, 1974] According to this result, the relation comparing the ordinal stages
of the elements of the least truth set over a Frege structure is expressible within the language of
the structure itself.
150A consequence of dual representability is that the squadge operator is deﬁnable in the full
language with truth; see [Flagg and Myhill, 1987b].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
945
ordinary diﬀerential equations or the Heine-Borel lemma, which are not available
neither in Fitch’s nor within the frame of Frege Structures. However, the system
is not that manageable, due to the stratiﬁcation of implications and deducibility.
It seems fair to say that Σ∞is unsatisfactory and this is witnessed by the switch
towards diﬀerent sorts of strengthening for the illative approach. In [Flagg and
Myhill, 1987b] the question is raised of “powerful metatheorems relating Σ∞to
well-known systems”. As proven later, Σ∞has an inner model in a theory of the
same proof theoretic strength as ramiﬁed analysis up to any level α < ϵ0. Hence
it is not an essential step even beyond CFA1 and constructive type theory with
one universe.
A highlight of the interaction between lambda calculus and class abstraction is
the subsequent work of Myhill and his student Flagg [Flagg and Myhill, 1987a],
[Flagg and Myhill, 1989], [Flagg, 1987]. The initial observation is that Scott’s
lattice theoretic model D∞is an injective T0-space (with respect to its Scott
topology151) and hence an arbitrary function from a discrete subspace can be
extended to a continuous function on the whole space.
If one builds a Frege
structure on the top of D∞, the choice schema
(9)
(∀x ∈N)(∃y)ϕ(x, y) →(∃f)(∀x ∈N)ϕ(x, fx)
holds for arbitrary formulas ϕ, as the natural numbers N form a discrete sub-
space of D∞. This is essentially suﬃcient to prove the consistency of a natural
formal (illative combinatory logic) system FL for Frege structures extended with
a comprehension rule CR for discrete classes.152
Then it is easy to show that
FL+CR is strong enough to model second order arithmetic with full second order
comprehension, and that it can be further enlarged to a system EFL, which also
embodies a well-ordering principle of the universe, additional choice principles and
can develop a considerable amount of analysis.153
However, in order to get higher type choice and comprehension principles, it
would be desirable that the collection of discrete subsets be closed under exponen-
tials or even under generalized sums and products. But this is not true for D∞,
since the collection of objects representing number-theoretic operations in D∞is
not discrete. [Flagg, 1987] remedies to this limitation by a clever extension of
Scott’s lattice theoretic machinery. If k is a regular inﬁnite cardinal, it is possi-
ble to construct an injective κ-space154 Dκ, where the collection DIS of discrete
151See [Scott, 1972, p. 99].
152Indeed the property of being discrete can be easily represented in the language of Frege
structure: in the sense of [Flagg and Myhill, 1987a], a set X is (formally) discrete if and only if
there exists a well deﬁned total property representing X which satisﬁes the condition that the
equality relation restricted to X has a characteristic operation f, i.e. whenever a, b are elements
of X, then fab = 0, if a = b, else fab = 1. This deﬁnition allows to prove in FL that N is
discrete.
153There is a classical reference here: the fourth supplement of Hilbert-Bernays [1939].
154This mean that (1) the topology is T0 and the intersection of fewer than κ opens is open;
(2) every continuous function f from a subspace X to Dκ extends to a continuous function on
the whole space.

946
Andrea Cantini
sets is closed under generalized sums Σ and products Π. Dκ immediately implies
the soundness of the extension of the theory FL of Frege structures, which (i)
includes a comprehension rule corresponding to (9) with N replaced by (an object
representing) an arbitrary discrete subset A; (ii) proves that the ﬁnite types gen-
erated from N are all discrete. The resulting theory goes far beyond higher order
arithmetic and hence is fully impredicative; so it has no problem in formalizing
ordinary mathematical analysis.
In [Flagg and Myhill, 1989] it is further proved that, if k is strongly inaccessible,
the resulting Dκ-model veriﬁes the axioms EFL∗of a theory of Frege structures,
in which ZFC itself can be embedded. Roughly, this is achieved by postulating -
in the style of illative combinatory logic and Frege structures - axioms ensuring
that a well-ordering of the universe is available, and that this well-ordering has
a discrete initial segment of strongly inaccessible length [Flagg and Myhill, 1989,
p. 85]. The deﬁnitional strength of combinatory logic implies the existence of a
copy of the cumulative hierarchy with closure properties, granting that standard
set theoretic operations are well-deﬁned.
It can also be consistently added that discrete classes are closed under direct
images. As observed by H. Friedman, this follows from the existence of extensional
combinatory algebras, in which every ﬁnite set is separable. We recall that, given
a combinatory algebra A = ⟨A, · k, s⟩, X ⊆A, X is separable if any function
f : X →A is representable by an element f ♯∈A, i.e. there exists f ♯∈A, such
that
(10) for all a ∈A, f(a) = f ♯· a
Plotkin [1995] has shown that this is indeed the case. For instance, there exist
extensional combinatory algebras having the power of the continuum, in which
every countable subset is separable.
REMARK 3. A new attempt towards an integrated foundation of mathematics,
logic and computer science on the basis of the primitive notion of self-applicable
operation, is recently implemented by the so-called map theory MT, due to Grue
(see e.g. the work in cooperation with Berline [1997], where a comparison with
the Flagg and Myhill framework is sketched.).
4.4
Non-extensional formal theories of classes and operations
Towards the end of the sixties and culminating - in parallel to formal semantics
(cf.
Kripke 5.1) and the combinatory logic approach - around 1975, there are
investigations which contribute to put in a proper perspective the technical essence
of the previous work and open novel directions for applications of (some form of)
untyped comprehension.
Again, as with the combinatory logic approach, a common feature is that all
the proposals give up extensionality, and membership ∈is properly interpreted as
predicate application (predication). The traditional abstract notation for classes
{x | ϕ}, which is usually eliminable in extensional contexts, must be considered an

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
947
independent logical ingredient in its own, and, as such, it is thoroughly investigated
by Gilmore [1974]–[2001].
It is realized especially through the work of Feferman [1974a]–[1984] that in
many contexts it is essential to make the uniform dependence of a given class
construct {x | ϕ} on its free parameters explicit; moreover, it is natural and useful
to enrich the picture of the logical universe with a theory of operations, that
regards the external operation
⃗v →{x | ϕ(⃗v)}
as an internal operation. This is an important conceptual feature that leads to
theories where classes and operations of a very general nature interact to a certain
extent: we can apply operations to classes, but we can also classify operations. In
a sense, we are close again to the original inspiration of combinatory logic, but
without assuming its “ontological monism” (it is no more true that everything is
a function, since functions and classes, though living in the same universe, obey
to distinct principles).
Combining unrestricted abstraction with standard logic
A rather inﬂuential paper for the investigation of self-referential systems - and
implicitly for the clariﬁcation of the set theoretic core of Fitch’s work - is Gilmore’s
[1974] (published in 1974, but presented in 1967), which makes the set theoretic
construction behind Fitch’s extended basic logic fairly explicit and outlines a plain
theory of non-extensional partial classes, based on ﬁrst order classical logic with
identity. A partial class P is extensionally identiﬁed by a pair (X, Y ) of disjoint
subsets (of a given universe V ), where in general, X ∪Y is only a subset of V .
If X ∪Y = V , the class is total and Y coincides with the usual set theoretic
complement of X. However, the basic choice of [Gilmore, 1974] is to stick to a
non-extensional point of view and to work directly with pairs of attributes (not
with their extensions).
Formally, Gilmore’s theory PST’ includes an equality predicate =, and two
binary predicates ∈(membership), /∈(anti-membership); so prime formulas have
the form t = s, t ∈s, t /∈s.
An essential feature of PST’ is that it involves an abstraction operator for pro-
ducing explicit notations for partial classes. Thus terms and formulas are simul-
taneously and inductively generated by means of standard logical operators and
the following clauses:
• if t, s are terms, t ∈s, t /∈s, t = s are formulas;
• if φ, ψ are formulas, then {x | φ(x), ψ(x)} is a term whose free variables
include all the free variables of φ, ψ, except x.
{x | φ(x), ψ(x)} represents a (possibly) partial property P, whose elements satisfy
φ but not ψ, while the complement is the set of all elements satisfying ψ, but not
φ.

948
Andrea Cantini
PST’ comprises a consistency condition on membership and its dual, and two
comprehension schemata ruling the abstraction operator:
1. ∀x∀y.¬(x ∈y ∧x /∈y);
2. ∀v((v ∈{x | φ(x), ψ(x)} ∨(φ(v) ∧ψ(v))) ≡φ(v))
3. ∀v((v /∈{x | φ(x), ψ(x)} ∨(φ(v) ∧ψ(v))) ≡ψ(v))
The meaning of the comprehension schemata is easily grasped through their
consequences.
In particular, PST’ actually implies a more elegant abstraction
principle, which relies upon the idea of positive counterpart φ+ of an arbitrary
formula φ.
Deﬁne t ̸= s := ∃z(t ∈z ∧s /∈z); then φ+ is the unique formula which is
obtained from the negation normal form of φ by replacing each occurrence of
¬t ∈s, ¬t /∈s, ¬t = s respectively by t /∈s, t ∈s, t ̸= s. Clearly φ+ is positive; if
we let φ−= (¬φ)+, we then have by consistency:
φ+ →φ →¬φ−
If φ(x) is arbitrary and {x | φ(x)} := {x | φ+, φ−}, [Gilmore, 1974] shows in PST’,
for arbitrary φ(x):
∀v(v ∈{x | φ(x)}
↔
φ+(v));
(11)
∀v(v /∈{x | φ(x)}
↔
φ−(v))
(12)
Let us now brieﬂy recall the idea behind the model construction. First of all,
the model’s universe is the set of all closed terms of PST’. In particular, a term
{x | φ(x, v), ψ(x, v)} with the free variable v shown, is interpreted as the function
assigning to every element a of D the closed term {x | φ(x, a), ψ(x, a)} ∈D.
In order to evaluate arbitrary sentences, the strategy is to specify a (consistent)
set M of atomic sentences: for this naturally induces an interpretation of the
primitive predicates of PST’, once we identify the meaning of ∈(/∈, = respectively)
with the set of all ordered pairs ⟨t, s⟩such that (t ∈s) (t /∈s, t = s) is in M
(respectively).
The construction is implemented by transﬁnite recursion on ordinals. First, one
deﬁnes the set M0 of all true prime formulas, which do not involve ∈, /∈, i.e. of
the form t = s. Since = is interpreted as literal identity, it is enough to choose
M0 := the set of all identity sentences t = t, where t ∈D. Assume that we have
deﬁned Mμ; then Mμ+1 consists of:
• the sentences of Mμ;
• all sentences of the form t ∈{x | φ(x), ψ(x)} and t /∈{x | ψ(x), φ(x)}
provided φ(t) ∧¬ψ(t) holds in the interpretation induced by Mμ.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
949
If we choose Mλ = {Mβ | β < λ}, when λ is a limit ordinal, we obtain a
non-decreasing transﬁnite sequence {Mα | α ordinal }.
With the crucial help of the assumption that φ, ψ are positive, Gilmore then
proves that there exists a countable limit ordinal κ such that Mκ = Mκ+1 and Mκ
is a model of PST’. The non-extensional interpretation is in some sense intrinsic:
PST’ provably refutes extensionality, by showing that there are at least two prov-
ably diﬀerent objects representing the empty set. For the proof, it is essential that
the comprehension schema is in explicit form; in fact, if (11) is stated as a pure
existential principle for positive formulas and the term constructor ϕ →{x | ϕ}
is omitted, one obtains a system consistent with extensionality. This follows from
results due to Malitz [1976] in his 1976 Ph.D.Thesis, Weydert [1988] and more
recently to Forti-Hinnion [1989].
P. C. Gilmore has further pursued the investigation of type free predicative and
impredicative systems as suitable frameworks for the foundations of mathematics
and computer science [Gilmore, 1980], [Gilmore, 1986], [Gilmore, 2001]), which
are formalized in Gentzen style and proved consistent by semantic cut elimination
arguments. All systems have an underlying partial logic and in this sense they
develop ideas we already saw in §4.1, §4.2. The problem with these theories is
that they have only term models and in the impredicative case the constructions
are rather involved.
“Towards useful type-free theories”
In 1975, in parallel with (but independently on) substantial contributions in the
ﬁeld of formal semantics (c.f. §5, §5.1, §5.2), there appear two papers by Fefer-
man155 [1974a] and [1975], which mark a deﬁnite shift towards type-free systems
inspired by speciﬁc foundational needs more than programmatic or ideological mo-
tivations. While [Feferman, 1975] is concerned with the development of systems
for representing Bishop’s constructive mathematics and logical issues arising from
theoretical computer science,156 [Feferman, 1974a] considers relatively unrestricted
comprehension principles which permit self-application and are motivated by the
formalization of theories of global structures, as occur in categorical approaches to
algebra, topology and the like. All type-free systems are based to a certain extent
upon the notion of self-applicable operation. Since a substantial body of experi-
ence is extracted from (generalized) recursion theory, operations are conceived as
partial and non-extensional, given by possibly abstract rules, which (i) may not be
deﬁned everywhere and yet have no a priori bound on their domain of application,
and (ii) are always associated (and identiﬁed) with a speciﬁc presentation.
The ﬁrst option considered in [Feferman, 1974a] is to extend any given theory
T by means of a comprehension principle C for arbitrary monotonic formulas and
a corresponding application relation. Thus the language of T is expanded to a
155Presented in 1974.
156This will become explicit in later work by Feferman and J¨ager during the second part of the
eighties.

950
Andrea Cantini
language L(≃) with a ternary application predicate ≃; the corresponding atomic
formula, usually written as xy ≃z, means that the operation represented by x
applied to y yields z as value.
Incidentally, expressions of the form xy, the so-called application terms (a.t. in
short), are not properly part of the language, since they can be undeﬁned. If t
is a. t. and deﬁned, we write t ↓. Application terms can easily be handled by
natural contextual deﬁnitions,157 or else one can adopt a logic of partial terms in
the background (see [Beeson, 1985], [Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988]).
Of course, ≃satisﬁes a uniqueness condition U:
(13) xy ≃z ∧xy ≃v →z = v
A formula ϕ of L(≃) (with parameters ⃗v) is ≃-monotonic if and only if , whenever
M is a model for T, R, S are ternary relations on M (the domain of M) interpreting
≃and ⃗a is an arbitrary assignment of values in M to ⃗v, then
R ⊆S and ⟨M, R⟩|= ϕ[⃗a] ⇒⟨M, S⟩|= ϕ[⃗a]
If ϕ(x, y,⃗v) is an arbitrary ≃-monotonic formula, the ϕ-instance of C is
(∀⃗u)(∃f)(Fϕ⃗u ≃f ∧(∀x)((∃!y)(ϕ(x, y, ⃗u) →fx ↓)∧
∧(∀x)(∀y)(fx ≃y →ϕ(x, y, ⃗u))
Here Fϕ represents the operation associating to ⃗v the unique y satisfying the
formula ϕ(x, y,⃗v).158 The main result is that
(α) every model of T can be expanded to a model of T+U+ C, and hence:
(β) T≃:= T + U + C is conservative over T.
For the proof, one recursively deﬁnes a non-decreasing sequence ≃δ of ternary
relations, which are approximations of the proper application relation. The as-
sumption on ϕ again ensures that the sequence converges to a relation which is
closed under every instance of C.159
157Here is the list of the inductive rules:
• if t := x, t ≃z is x = z;
• if t = rs, then t ≃z is (∃u)(∃v)(r ≃u ∧s ≃v ∧uv ≃z;
• t ≃s := (∀u)(t ≃u ↔s ≃u);
• t ↓:= (∃x)(t ≃x).
158The deﬁnition of Fϕ depends on the code of ϕ; it is always assumed that T contains a
constant 0, a unary function symbol suc and a binary operation symbol P, with the axioms
implying that P is an ordered pairing function, 0 with suc satisfy the standard postulates for
zero and successor. This is suﬃcient for representing natural numbers in T and for encoding
arbitrary formulas with parameters.
159The link with the theory of monotone inductive deﬁnitions is present to the author; see p. 77.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
951
Consistent variations - again motivated by recursion theoretic principles - are
possible (see e.g. the corresponding selection and reduction schemata). An impor-
tant consequence of C is that the collection of operations represented by elements
of M via application is indeed a partial combinatory algebra (so there exists K,
S satisfying the ≃-analogues of the usual combinatory equations), and hence a
version of the second recursion theorem160 is provable. It is also important to
observe that the applicative structure is provably non-extensional
¬(∀f)(∀g)((∀x)(fx ≃gx) →f = g)
However, if classes are identiﬁed with two-valued operations, even if it is possible to
have good closure conditions on classes, it is not enough for obtaining closure under
an analog of the function space construction. This leads to consider alternative
frameworks where operations and classes are independently assumed as primitive
notions. Thus [Feferman, 1974a] contains a generalization of Gilmore’s schemata,
the so called ”ampliﬁed η, ¯η-comprehension schema ˜Cη: if ϕ0, ϕ1 are monotonic
in η, ¯η, then there exists a term {x | ϕ0(x), ϕ1(x)} such that
(∀⃗u)(∃c)({x | ϕ0(x, ⃗u), ϕ1(x, ⃗u)} ≃c ∧(∀v)(vηc ↔ϕ0(v, ⃗u))∧
∧(∀v)(v¯ηcϕ1(x, ⃗u)} ↔ϕ1(v, ⃗u)))
(η, ¯η stand for intensional membership and anti-membership, respectively). Since
the deﬁning conditions are allowed to contain the application relation, total classes
turn out to closed under the operation a, b →ab.
[Feferman, 1975] deﬁnitely sticks to a two-step strategy. If T is any ﬁrst-order
theory, T is enriched to an applicative theory T≃, which embodies principles grant-
ing that the universe of partial operations is a partial combinatory algebra, ex-
panded with deﬁnition by cases over the universe and an operation representing
existential quantiﬁcation on the universe. Then partial predicate application is in-
troduced by means of modally restricted naive comprehension principles (see Fitch
[1967a], section 4.2 with the schema (1), Lemmon [1963]). The logic is extended
with an S4-modality operator □and the comprehension schema assumes the form:
if ϕ is an arbitrary formula of the expanded language, η, ¯η stand for intensional
membership and anti-membership, respectively,
(∃f)(∀⃗a)(∃c)(fa ≃c ∧(∀x)(xηc ↔□ϕ)∧
∧(∀x)(x¯ηc ↔□¬ϕ))
The idea is that predication is given by a generalized investigative procedure I,
whose aim is to determine which elements of the domain fall under a given property.
160There exists a term R such that for every f, x,
Rf ↓∧f(Rf)x ≃(Rf)x

952
Andrea Cantini
□ϕ informally means that the sentence can be veriﬁed (by means of I) and the
eﬀect of the modality is just to make the veriﬁcation process monotone, and hence
to render an inductive deﬁnition of the interpretations of the predicate application
pair η, ¯η possible. Of course, the modality is not signiﬁcant if a statement does
not contain predication.161
Adding modal comprehension to any given system T still results in a conser-
vative extension of T. As to the speciﬁc aim - the search for foundations of Un-
restricted Category Theory - the author maintains a cautious attitude, although
there are positive applications, showing that the modal extension gains a great
freedom (e.g. the extended theory can form the partial classiﬁcation of all total
categories or of all total structures of a given type; a version of the Yoneda’s lemma
can also be expressed, etc.). It is nevertheless fair to say that the supervenience of
the modal structure is not as easy to handle. Additional investigations on modally
restricted comprehension are pursued by J. Kraj˘cek in [1987a], [1987b].
There are later developments (of 1980 and 1982), where the underlying (classi-
cal) logic is extended with an intensional equivalence operator ≡, which is in some
sense speciﬁcally tailored for the task of living with paradoxes.
The idea is implemented in a joint paper of Aczel and Feferman [1980], where
unrestricted comprehension is made consistent by means of an extension of classical
logic based on a new intensional operator ≡. According to the authors, ≡is to
be read as: “A is equivalent to B in consequence of given basic deﬁnitions” and
Feferman refers to Behmann’s work of 1931 (cf. [Behmann, 1931] and section 3.3)
as a source of inspiration.
In order to summarize the axioms, let us assume that we are given a ﬁrst-
order language L. Let L∗be the expansion of L with abstraction operator, the
new binary operator ≡with propositional constants ⊤(true) ⊥(false) and the
membership ∈. Let us further deﬁne the truth (falsity) operator TA (FA) by
A ≡⊤(A ≡⊥); DA ( A is determinate) means that A has a deﬁnite truth value
(true or false).
If S is any theory in the basic language L, S∗is the extension of S in L∗, which,
in addition, includes the ≡-logic and naive abstraction in the form
∀x(x ∈{u | ϕ} ≡ϕ[u := x])
(ϕ arbitrary formula of L∗). The ≡-axioms require that
(i) ≡is an equivalence relation, preserving the standard logical connectives and
quantiﬁers;162
(ii) T and F meet the Kleene weak three-valued logic conditions for standard
logical connectives and quantiﬁers;163
161In this case □ϕ ↔ϕ will be provable.
162For instance, (∀x)(A ≡B) →(∀x)A ≡(∀x)B.
163Logical connectives are interpreted as strict operations, i.e. they are undeﬁned, insofar as at
least one arguments is undeﬁned. E.g. one has the schemata

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
953
(iii) T(A ≡B) ↔(A ≡B) ; F(A ≡B) ↔DA ∧DB ∧(¬A ≡B) ;
(iv) T(A) ↔A (A atomic); F(A) ↔A (A atomic in the ground language L)
It is immediate to see that the paradoxes simply show (in S∗) that there exist
ﬁxed points of negation with respect to intensional equivalence, i.e. statements
satisfying
ϕ ≡¬ϕ.
But this fact does not imply an inconsistency, as it can be seen by means of an
elegant model theoretic construction. The crucial step is to interpret A ≡B as
“A and B have a common reduct”, with respect to a suitable reduction relation
≥, which is generated by associating to the formulas suitable inﬁnitary terms and
a corresponding set of rewrite rules. The consistency proof is then reduced to a
Church-Rosser argument, but, since one has inﬁnitary terms and rules around,
the conﬂuence proof involves additional diﬃculties which are controlled with a
stratiﬁcation of ≥into (transﬁnitely many) layers ≥α.164 The procedure yields
a model of S∗uniformly in any given model of S, and hence one can establish a
conservative extension result, granting that S and S∗have the same theorems in
the common language.
To sum up the conceptual and methodological aspects, the emphasis of the
paper is mainly on the instrumental role of the principles involved, showing that
the use of certain principles is primarily ‘a matter of convenience’.
Also, it is
stressed that, insofar one is searching for workable version of untyped principles,
the logical basis has to be manageable and hence it is better to experiment with
expansions of ordinary logic than to rely upon some sort of three-valued logic
(which is regarded as debilitating).
Applications of type-free principles to constructive foundations
Historically, Feferman [1974a; 1977; 1979] were originally motivated by a speciﬁc
interest in the logical analysis of Bishop’s constructive analysis. Indeed, in [Fefer-
man, 1975] there appear the ﬁrst formal systems for explicit mathematics (EM in
short), based on the notions of partial operation and total class(iﬁcation), where
a considerable amount of self-application is allowed. For instance, the intended
universe is always a (suitably extended) partial combinatory algebra; so it makes
sense to apply an operation f to itself, even if it is not true in general that f
converges to a value. On the same par, it makes sense, to consider if a class X is
a member of itself, and there exists a universal class V such that V ∈V .
F(A ∧B) ↔D(A) ∧D(B) ∧(F(A) ∨F(B));
F(¬A) ↔T(A) ; T(¬A) ↔F(A);
. . .
164According to techniques used by Maas and Girard.

954
Andrea Cantini
[Feferman, 1975] is in fact the ﬁrst of a series of papers developing a non-
extensional approach to the foundations of constructive or semi-constructive (pred-
icative or borelian) mathematics. As a whole, the project is named explicit math-
ematics, because it insists on the tenet that mathematical objects ought to be
explicitly presented by means of computational rules, if one is dealing with func-
tions, or of deﬁnitions, if we deal with classes.
A distinctive feature of EM-systems is that, since operations and classes are
ﬁrst-class individuals, they can be classiﬁed and operated upon. However, there is
a certain asymmetry between classes and operations. Principles ruling operations
are primarily computational (even if they can include some abstract functional,
like a quantiﬁer), while classes are deﬁned by combining the basic notions by means
of logical operations and can be highly non-eﬀective (though many principles are
either predicative or produce inductively generated objects of higher and higher
complexity).
Formally, in their original intensional version, systems of EM are formulated in
a two-sorted language with individual variables x, y, z . . ., classiﬁcation variables
X, Y , Z . . ., predicates symbols for natural numbers N (unary), application Ap
(ternary), equality =, membership ∈, individual constants naming combinators
and basic number theoretic operations, and in addition constants j, cn (for every
n ∈ω) required by the uniform class existence axioms.
Prime formulas have
the form t = s, t ∈X, Ap(t, r, s)(usually shortened as tr ≃s), where terms are
variables of either sort or constants.
Formulas are inductively generated from
prime formulas by closing under logical operations and quantiﬁcation (of either
sort).
Due to the freedom of the syntax, one has to carefully choose the set
of conditions which are admissible in the class existence principles.
Stratiﬁed
formulas are those which contain class variables only in contexts of the form t ∈X,
where t is an individual variable or a constant; elementary formulas are those
stratiﬁed formulas, which contain no bound class variable.
An essential aspect of EM is that the class existence principles are always given
uniformly, by means of an operation of the underlying combinatory algebra. For
instance, there is an operation j which takes care of generalized sums, in the
following sense: if f is an operation such that fa is a class, for every element
a ∈X, then j(X, f) is a class containing exactly every ordered pair (u, v), where
u ∈X and (v ∈fu).
In EM there are two main comprehension principles under which classes can be
consistently required to be closed: elementary comprehension ECA and stratiﬁed
comprehension SCA. They correspond to special cases of uniform comprehension
F-CA
(∃X)(cA
−→
Y ≃X ∧(∀x)(x ∈X ↔A(Y, x))
where A is elementary (or stratiﬁed) and cA is ck, for some k depending upon the
G¨odel-number of A.
As it has been readily realized, this uniformity is essentially responsible for
paradoxes, or, more precisely, for refutations of classical set theoretic principles:

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
955
• non-extensionality of classes (Gordeev, see [Beeson, 1985]);
• inconsistency (see [Feferman, 1975]) of ECA, join and (a form of) weak power
class-existence;165
• inconsistency of (some forms of) the axiom of choice [Feferman, 1975; Fefer-
man, 1979];
• inconsistency of the so called strong power-class axiom166 with ECA [J¨ager,
1997].
Similarly, the interplay between operations and classes yields very strong induction
principles, whose strength or even consistency is not fully understood.167 Since the
eighties, EM-theories are investigated as potential tools in the area of Logic and
Computer Science168 and as theories of ﬂexible types. The change in perspective
has prompted a new formalization of EM, J¨ager’s theories of types and names
[J¨ager, 1987]. In these systems intensional and extensional aspects coexist: besides
individuals, abstract extensional collection or types, are admitted and they are
linked by means of a representation relation R(x, Y ), meaning that x represents Y
(or is a name of Y ). Every type has a name and the uniformity of class existence
principles amounts to this feature: to each type constructor CS producing a type
CS(X1, . . . , Xn) uniformly in X1, . . . , Xn, there corresponds an operation cs such
that cs(x1, . . . , xn) is a name of CS(X1, . . . , Xn), provided xi names Xi (1 ≤i ≤
n). For inconsistencies in EM as a theory of types and names, see also [Cantini
and Minari, 1999].
4.5
Contraction-free and many-valued logics
In the early ﬁfties and sixties, several logicians experiment with type free compre-
hension, in presence of some form of many valued logics, in particular Lukasiewicz’s
165The weak power axiom POW has the form:
(∀X)(∃Y )((∀x)(x ∈Y →(∃Z)(Z ⊆X ∧Z = x) ∧(∀Z)(Z ⊆X →(∃U)(U ≡Z ∧U ∈Y ))))
166The strong power axiom POW+ has the form:
(∀X)(∃Y )(∀x)(x ∈Y ↔(∃Z)(Z ⊆X ∧Z = x))
167As an instance, let us only recall the so-called principle UMID of Uniform Monotone Inductive
Deﬁnition. If
Mon(f) := (∀X)(∀Y )(X ⊆Y →fX ⊆fY ),
UMID claims that there exists an operation fix such that
Mon(f) →(∃Y )(fix(f) ≃Y ∧fY ≃Y ∧(∀X)(fX ⊆X →X ⊆Y )).
For results on UMID, cf. [Takahashi, 1989], [Rathjen, 1998], [Rathjen, 1999].
168Hayashi and Nakano [1988] proposed a constructive logic for computation PX, which was
explicitly based on [Feferman, 1979].

956
Andrea Cantini
many valued logics (see [Skolem, 1957b], [1957c], [1957a],[1960], [1963], [Mow-
Shaw-Kwei, 1954], [Chang, 1963], [1965], [Fenstad, 1964], [Brady, 1971]).
Among them, Mow-Shaw-Kwei’s work of 1954 studies the contraction rule An:
from
A →. . . →A →B
(n + 1 arrows)
infer
A →. . . →B
(n arrows)169
It is easily shown that Curry’s paradox is derivable, as soon as one deals with a
system which comprises An, modus ponens, abstraction. Also, the author remarks
that:
1. the Lukasiewicz systems Ln do have contraction An−1;
2. the Lukasiewicz system Lℵwith inﬁnitely many values does not allow con-
traction An, for each n ∈ω.
While it follows that L3 is inconsistent with abstraction, one can naturally raise
the question whether the theory of sets with unrestricted abstraction in Lℵcan be
consistently developed.
In a philosophical context, Geach [1955] suggested that a promising route for
the semantical paradoxes might be rejecting contraction. Indeed, aiming at showing
that there are semantical insolubilia not involving negation, he produces a semi-
formal argument, yielding a ﬁxed point of the formula T(x) →A, whence a proof
of A, where A is an arbitrary sentence, under the assumption that T is a naive
notion of truth.170 In a brief discussion, he notices that besides modus ponens,
the paradox exploits “the rule of absorbtion” (that is, infer A →B from (A →
(A →B))) and that “ it might be worth consideration whether this rule should be
modiﬁed”, as “it never occurs in ordinary discourse and we might have a wrong
idea of its logical force”.
Historically, Geach’s short paper marks the appearance171 in a logical context
of the formula involved in L¨ob’s theorem (cfr. [L¨ob, 1955], [Smorinski, 1985]),
modulo the substitution of the naive truth predicate with a standard provability
predicate
Mow-Shaw-Kwei’s problem is tackled in 1957 by Skolem [1957b], who presents
a partial solution. After remarking that unrestricted comprehension is inconsis-
tent with each ﬁnite-valued L-logic, he goes on to show that, if comprehension
is restricted to quantiﬁer-free conditions, then naive comprehension is consistent
modulo Lℵ. Skolem’s approach is conceptually important, since he observes that
the problem of type-free comprehension can be recast as a problem in Analysis. In
Skolem’s words, the consistency issue amounts to the
169Brackets are restored by associating to the right.
170Thus satisfying T(⌈A⌉) ↔A.
171Is this the ﬁrst time?

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
957
“the investigation of a mathematical function E(x, y), which assumes
as values rational numbers ≥0 and ≤1, where x, y must range over
individuals of a domain. Therefore the comprehension axiom can be
stated within the usual predicate calculus in the form
(14) (∃y)(∀x)(E(x, y) = U(x))
where now U(x) is a mathematical function, which is built up by means
of minimum and maximum operations”.
Indeed, Skolem remarks that, if A(p) is a sentential function built up by means of
the logical connectives ∧, ∨, ¬, →, which are interpreted `a la Lukasiewicz as the
functions min(x, y), max(x, y), 1 −x, min(1, 1 −x + y) (in the given order), then
A(p) is piecewise-linear and deﬁnes a polygonal curve, whose pieces have rational
derivatives and whose edge-points are rational (and the geometrical representation
is easily generalized in case of formulas with several variables). Since the function
p →A(p) maps the real interval [0, 1] into itself and is continuous, there exists at
least a ﬁxed point h solving the equivalence
(15) h ↔A(h)
Now Skolem is able to prove that (14) can be solved for E. First, all propositionally
deﬁnable functions of Lℵwith ﬁnitely many variables in the list x, x1, x2, . . . are
enumerated as U1, U2, . . . Then, by crucially exploiting (15), an inﬁnite sequence
x1, x2, . . . of individuals beginning with 0 is inductively deﬁned, which meets the
following requirements:
(i) if x1, . . . , xm are already introduced, Un(x, x1, . . . , xm) is a propositional
function in the ﬁxed enumeration, there is a new individual fn(x1, . . . , xm) =
xm+1 and
(ii) it is possible to ﬁx stepwise the values of all atoms of the form x ∈y, so
that the value of x ∈y, for y = fn(x1, . . . , xm), coincides with the value of
Un(x, x1, . . . , xm).
The paper also contains a discussion of the diﬃculties arising with quantiﬁers
and of possible signiﬁcant applications to the foundations of mathematics (this is
apparently Skolem’s main motivation for the whole work172).
Skolem’s partial result is improved by [Chang, 1963]. Using the Brouwer’s ﬁxed
point theorem and a version of the compacteness theorem for the logic Lℵ, Chang
is able to show the consistency of the set of all sentences of the form
(16) ∃y∀x(x ∈y ↔ϕ(x, y))
where ϕ(x, y) is an arbitrary ﬁrst order formula with at most the variables x, y
free, whose only predicates are ∈, =. Consistency is understood semantically, as
172Similar issues are also discussed in the partially overlapping [Skolem, 1957a].

958
Andrea Cantini
the existence of a model M = ⟨S, e⟩assigning value 1 to each instance of (16);
here S is a non-empty set, e is a function from S × S →[0, 1] (= is understood as
true identity on S) and formulas are evaluated according to the Lℵ-interpretation
of logical operations. Further results of [Chang, 1963] and [Fenstad, 1964] concern
consistency when parameters are present, though they are allowed to occur in
restricted contexts.
Skolem’s ideas will be further developed in the frame of fuzzy arithmetic more
than forty years later (see [H´ajek et al., 2000]).
In the early sixties Skolem obtains another consistency result, which shows
that Lℵis not necessary for consistency, as soon as implication is not involved in
the comprehension schema: L3-logic, extensionality and type-free comprehension
can consistently live together, provided the comprehension formula contains only
negation and conjunction [Skolem, 1960], [Skolem, 1963]. [Brady, 1971] slightly
improves upon this result: consistency holds even if the universal quantiﬁer is
allowed in the comprehension formulas.
Roughly, the point is that, if you do
not have implication, the underlying evaluation schema is monotone; so Gilmore’s
inductive method for partial set theory applies (see above and Feferman [1984]).
Consistency of full naive comprehension with parameters and abstraction oper-
ator in the inﬁnite valued predicate logic is eventually proved in the 1979 paper
of White, who outlines an elaborated proof combining proof theoretic techniques
(partial normal form theorem for a ﬁnite variant of the complete inﬁnitary axiom-
atization of predicative L–logic) with a ﬁnal Henkin type argument.173 He further
notices that inconsistency arises with extensionality.
Gri˘sin [1974], [1981] develops a “non-standard logic” without contraction and
proves that the unrestricted type free comprehension principle is consistent by
using a constructive cut-elimination argument.174 Interestingly, the same author
notices in [Gri˘sin, 1981] that extensionality (in the usual formulation) ruins con-
sistency, since it implies contraction, in presence of full comprehension.
As to the possible applications, one should observe that naive comprehension
does not attain enough deductive power, in order to recover the role of a ‘grand
logic’ (in the old-fashioned foundational sense), though there are some attempts
toward sensible blends or non-trivial reﬁnements, with the help of the now ﬂour-
ishing tree of substructural logics. Systems with naive comprehension and some
form of contraction free logic, being very expressive, may have some interest not
for the foundations of mathematics, but for computability theory.175
173The argument is involved and we have not been able to check the proof in all details.
174[Gri˘sin, 1981] deﬁnes an algebraic semantics for the given logical calculus and proves a cor-
responding completeness theorem; this is of interest for the history of substructural logics, since
Gri˘sin’s calculus is a version of linear logic with weakening, i.e. aﬃne logic without exponentials
(see [Girard, 1987a]) As far as we are aware of, at present, there exist only proof-theoretic con-
sistency proofs for Gri˘sin’s system (except for Komori’s illative version in [Komori, 1989], which
is any way weaker, being based upon intuitionistic aﬃne logic).
175In recent years, Girard [1998] has proposed a logical characterization of polynomial time
computability by means of naive comprehension together and a suitably modiﬁed linear logic
(the so called ‘light linear logic’).

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
959
5
THE PROBLEM OF SEMANTICAL CLOSURE: PHILOSOPHICAL AND
TECHNICAL VARIATIONS
Though there is a variety of motivations, scattered approaches and sketchy solu-
tions, a strong impulse derives from the philosophy of language and from attempt-
ing a rational reconstruction of natural language semantics, against the Tarskian
negative verdict.
Examples of philosophical diagnoses of semantical paradoxes intertwined with
logical analysis are to be found in van Fraassen’s papers [1966]–[1972], in R. L.
Martin’s collective book [Martin, 1970] and in C. Parsons’s essay [1974] on the
Liar paradox. Some papers are indeed preparatory of signiﬁcant technical work,176
which is carried out only a few years later.
Clearly, the shift of emphasis from formalized languages to natural ones explains
why the resolution strategies tend to reject the hierarchy of truth predicates, aim-
ing instead at formal frames, capable of the highest degree of semantical closure.
Furthermore, in order to avoid inconsistencies, the new investigations generally
set up some form of three valued semantics (gap solution) against bivalence. The
idea is that one should add a third value u (‘undeﬁned’ or ‘undetermined’), so
that negation ¬ could consistently satisfy (¬u) = u (this equation being implicitly
regarded as characteristic of paradoxical claims), and thus avoid contradictions.
The ﬁxed point condition on negation is only a minimal requirement and it
becomes important to choose semantical frameworks, which allow partially deﬁned
predicates and yet stay close to ordinary classical reasoning. A straightforward
move is to replace classical truth tables – regarded as truth functions F : 2m →2
of the appropriate arity – with their three-valued extensions in the sense of [Kleene,
1952], which satisfy the conditions:
(i) the set 2 = {t, f} of classical truth values is replaced by 3 := {t, f, u}, u
stands for the third value ‘undeﬁned’ (or ‘undetermined’) and 3 is partially
ordered by letting u ≤T t and u ≤T f;
(ii) they are ≤T –monotone.177
The simplest three-valued truth schema is given by the weak Bochvar-Kleene ta-
bles (see [Bochvar, 1937]), the unique extensions of the two valued ones obtained
by supplying u as soon as any of the arguments is u. Alternatively, the strong
Kleene tables are the strongest possible monotone extensions of the classical truth
functions.178
176Let us only mention the papers of Skyrms, Herzberger, Martin in [Martin, 1970].
177A three-valued m-ary function F
: 3m →3 is monotone if, whenever xi ≤T yi where
1 ≤i ≤m, xi, yi ∈3, then F(x1, . . . , xm) ≤T F(y1, . . . , ym).
178They can explicitly described by the following stipulations: a conjunction, disjunction, or
implication, one of whose components is assigned u, receives t or f according to the case that
the truth value is already classically ﬁxed, independently of whether u is replaced by t or f, and
is given value u otherwise.

960
Andrea Cantini
Both semantical schemata allow extensions with three-valued quantiﬁers. Let
∀c, ∃c be the standard classical quantiﬁers.179 In the case of weak Bochvar-Kleene
logic, if Φ : D →3, and Qc is ∀c or ∃c, let
QwkΦ =

u,
if Φ(a) = u, for some a ∈D;
QcΦ,
else.
As to strong Kleene logic, the quantiﬁers ∀sk, ∃sk satisfy:
∀skΦ =
⎧
⎨
⎩
t,
if Φ(a) = t, for every a ∈D;
f,
Φ(a) = f, for some a ∈D;
u,
else;
∃skΦ =
⎧
⎨
⎩
t,
if Φ(a) = t, for some a ∈D;
f,
Φ(a) = f, for all a ∈D;
u,
else.
Kleene’s three-valued logics, though quite natural, cannot justify the observa-
tion180 that, even if paradoxical sentences must be regarded as semantically de-
fective, the lack of truth value is the result of arguments. So one ought to deﬁne
systems where classical logical validity and logical consequence still make sense,
and yet one can deal with possibly semantically undeﬁned sentences. For instance,
one would like to maintain the tautological character of L∨¬L, even if L is neither
true nor false; but this is plainly impossible with Kleene’s three-valued logics.
In this respect, a solution is given by the supervaluation semantics of [van
Fraassen, 1966]– [van Fraassen, 1972].181 Roughly, the basic idea is this: a sentence
which contains a partially deﬁned predicate is made true if it is true under all
possible classical completions (compatible with the available deﬁnite information).
More precisely, assume that L is an elementary language where for each sentence
ϕ there exists a name (i.e. a closed term) g(ϕ) designating ϕ and there exists a
predicate T, to be interpreted as a truth predicate for the entire L.
Let V be a three-valued map from the set of all sentences to the set of truth
values {t, f, u}. Now the supervaluation182 induced by the three-valued valuation
V is deﬁned as the unique three-valued valuation V sv such that
V sv(ϕ) =
 t (f),
if V ′(ϕ) = t (f), for all classical V ′ extending V ;
u,
otherwise
Clearly V sv(ϕ ∨¬ϕ) = t, even if no valuation V is deﬁned on ϕ (in the sense
that it assumes a boolean value). It then follows that the new semantics is not
179Regarded as functionals acting on the space D →2; if Φ ∈D →2, ∀cΦ = t if and only if Φ
is everywhere t, and ∃cΦ = t if and only if Φ is somewhere t.
180Cf.[van Fraassen, 1966],[van Fraassen, 1968].
181Originally suggested as a tool for providing a logical analysis of presupposition and a sys-
tematic interpretation of non-denoting singular terms.
182The deﬁnition given here admits possible variants; for instance one could quantify on all
partial valuations, and not only on classical ones.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
961
compositional (or truth-functional): e.g. the truth value of a disjunction cannot
be computed from the truth values of its disjuncts. On the other hand, supervalu-
ations allow truth-value gaps (e.g the Liar) and yet are conservative with respect
to classical reasonings (in the sense that supervaluations do not aﬀect the truth
value of sentences not involving truth, but, if all classical valuations assign value
t to an arbitrary sentence ϕ, so do all supervaluations).
A ﬁnal preliminary question is that, if we accept semantical gaps, Tarski’s
schema ϕ ↔T(g(ϕ)) cannot be stated unrestrictedly for arbitrary ϕ. In other
words, it is not even clear how to state a sensible adequacy condition for truth,
in accord with a partial semantics. A reasonable answer, which is actually im-
plemented in Kripke, Martin-Woodruﬀ, Kindt, is in [van Fraassen, 1970], [van
Fraassen, 1971], p. 167.183 The basic observation is that the existence of truth
value gaps still retains an important consequence of the schema, i.e. that, for ar-
bitrary sentence ϕ, ϕ and T(g(ϕ)) have the same value and hence are inferentially
equivalent. Hence T should be regarded as an adequate truth predicate if and only
if the following inferences are sound for T, given any arbitrary sentence ϕ:
• (T-intro), from ϕ, infer T(g(ϕ));
• (T-elim, from T(g(ϕ)), infer ϕ.
The problem of semantical closure then becomes: ﬁnd a formal elementary lan-
guage L184 with a truth predicate T, a naming injective operation g mapping
sentences of L into closed terms of L, and a valuation W such that, for every
sentence ϕ,
(17) W(T(g(ϕ))) = W(ϕ)
Clearly, if such a language is proven to exist, there is a language representing its
own truth in (an inferentially) adequate fashion.
5.1
Two solutions based on monotone semantics
The problem is not solved until 1975, when we can ﬁnd three diﬀerent solutions,
due to Kindt [1978b], Kripke [1975], and Martin and Woodruﬀ[1975].185
We summarize the common background and features of these approaches (with-
out literally following them); then we’ll consider some details pertaining to each
contribution. The starting point is an elementary language L, which comprises
183But a general form of it is also in Fitch [1964], p. 499.
184This restriction is not trivial: for combinatory languages the solution was already there, as
we know from [Fitch, 1964].
185These works are apparently independent. Kindt’s paper appears in 1978; but the author
states in [Kindt, 1978a] that the basic ideas were presented at a conference in Bielefeld already
in December 1974. Kripke’s paper was read in December 1975 at a meeting of the American
Philosophical Association. As a matter of fact, the mathematical tools are already applied in
Fitch, see 4.2, [Gilmore, 1974](presented in 1967 at UCLA), [Myhill, 1975], [Nepeivoda, 1973],
Chauvin’s thesis of 1974, [Feferman, 1974a] (presented at the Kiel Symposium of August 1974),
[Scott, 1975](which refers to Fitch, Feferman) .

962
Andrea Cantini
a special monadic predicate symbol T for truth, besides additional relation and
function symbols. The T-free part of the language is endowed with an interpreta-
tion ⟨D, I⟩, where D is a non-empty set and I is an interpretation function in the
standard sense; so it assigns elements of D to individual constants, n-ary relations
on D to n-ary predicate symbols and n-ary functions of Dn →D to n-ary function
symbols. Further, if r is a closed term of L, there exists a unique I(r) ∈D, which
is the value of r in D. Henceforth ⟨D, I⟩remains ﬁxed. It is also convenient to
assume that L comprises distinct names for each element of D186 and that the full
syntax of L may be represented in L. As usual, if ϕ is a sentence of the given lan-
guage (possibly containing T), ⌈ϕ⌉will stand both for the closed term designating
ϕ and the corresponding object of D.
Let 3 := {t, f, u} be the set of truth values, together with the partial ordering
≤T of the previous subsection. ≤T naturally induces a pointwise partial ordering
on the space 3Dn of all n-ary functions from Dn to 3 (n ≥1): if F, G are elements
of 3Dn, let
F ≤T G ⇔(∀⃗a ∈Dn)(F(⃗a) ≤T G(⃗a))
In particular, ≤T is inherited by the set of partial subsets of D, which can simply
be identiﬁed with functions of the space D →3, or, equivalently, with pairs
X = ⟨X+, X−⟩of disjoint non-empty subsets of D,187 where X+ (X−) is named
the extension (antiextension) of the set X. Partial sets are the natural candidates
for interpreting the truth predicate T.
Given these preliminaries, the solutions presented by [Kindt, 1978b], [Kripke,
1975] and [Martin and Woodruﬀ, 1975] essentially amount to the choice of a speciﬁc
semantical schema S, which inductively assigns a truth value V S
X (ϕ) to arbitrary
sentences (once one has chosen a partial subset X for T and stipulated that, for
arbitrary closed term r, V S
X (T(r)) = X(I(r))).
Martin and Woodruﬀ[1975]188 stick to the Bochvar-Kleene schema (henceforth
in short S = WK) and argue non constructively. First of all, they notice that
(18) X ≤T Y ⇒V wk
X
≤T V wk
Y
Then they consider the class PR of all WK-valuations “partially representing the
truth”, i.e. those satisfying the closure condition
(19) V wk
X (T(⌈ϕ⌉)) ≤T V wk
X (ϕ).
They further observe that every ≤T –chain of PR-valuations has an upper bound
in PR, whence by Zorn’s lemma there exists a maximal valuation V ∞∈PR. By
186So, strictly speaking, we should make the dependence on D explicit and write LD instead of
L.
187In this presentation, we could deﬁne the ordering on partial sets by:
X = ⟨X+, X−⟩≤Y = ⟨Y +, Y −⟩⇔X+ ⊆Y + and X−⊆Y −.
188We disregard the fact that their proposal deals with a many-sorted language and we omit the
philosophical context, the so-called category solution, for which we send the reader to [Martin,
1970].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
963
maximality, (18) and (19), V ∞also satisﬁes V ∞(ϕ) ≤T V ∞(T(⌈ϕ⌉)) and hence
V ∞yields a solution to (17).
Kindt [1978b] is motivated by investigations in the ﬁeld of theoretical linguistics
and aims at a canonical general method for introducing truth predicates.
His
starting point is the natural intuition that the truth value of T(⌈ϕ⌉), must be
reducible to the truth value of ϕ, and that, in general, every decision about the
denotation of T must be grounded upon statements holding for the base structure
S = ⟨D, I⟩([Kindt, 1978b], p. 361). The intuition is made precise by deﬁning a
relation of reducibility189 and a corresponding notion of groundedness.190 sentence
Roughly, a sentence ϕ, possibly involving the truth predicate, is grounded if ϕ is
the root of a well-founded191 reducibility tree, whose leaves are labelled by true
formulas in the T-free language. Of course, it is not diﬃcult to show that the set
G(S) of grounded sentences (with respect to S) can be inductively deﬁned (apply
the clauses).
The notion of groundedness is then crucially used by Kindt, together with the
strong Kleene three valued logic, for characterizing a truth interpretation W, which
is recursively generated by closing under the rule
V sk
W (ϕ) = t (f) ⇒W(T(⌈ϕ⌉)) = t (f),
and hence uniquely determined as minimal among the set of all truth extension
satisfying (17).
5.2
Kripke’s “Outline of a theory of truth”
Kripke [1975] oﬀers a unifying conceptual frame for reconsidering and evaluating
previous scattered contributions arising in philosophical contexts.192 Technically,
his proposal is a genuine extension of Tarskian semantics, it provides a mathemat-
ical classiﬁcation of self-referential statements and it also subsumes [Kindt, 1978b]
and [Martin and Woodruﬀ, 1975] as special cases.
A few words on Kripke’s philosophical starting points. First of all, he argues that
a sentence ϕ is always meaningful, but the act of using it to express a proposition
is potentially risky, since in unfavorable circumstances193 it can fail to have a
189Similar notions are to be found in connection with the construction of the canonical search
tree used for the completeness proof `a la Sch¨utte and in the related semantical concept of Sch¨utte
valuation, cf. [Sch¨utte, 1960], [Sch¨utte, 1977], [Girard, 1987b].
190Of course, a similar notion is used by [Kripke, 1975], p. 695, which refers also to [Herzberger,
1970] and to previous unpublished work of Herzberger and Katz.
191Kindt calls these well-founded trees ‘ﬁnite’; but this is rather odd, these trees being inﬁnitary
in general.
192He actually complains that previous contributions in the ﬁeld give only mere suggestions and
not precise concepts. According to him, the (then yet) unpublished paper [Martin and Woodruﬀ,
1975] is the only exception, recognizing it as a (partial) solution, in the sense that maximal ﬁxed
points are shown to exist. He also refers to work of Fitch, Gilmore, Feferman as fairly close to
his own approach, though related to set-theoretical paradoxes.
193Empirical, and not only derived from self-referential tricks, as in the paradoxes. A related
observation has been made earlier; the role of accidental self-reference is noticed in [van Fraassen,
1970].

964
Andrea Cantini
deﬁnite truth value. Consequently, we must live with gaps and partially deﬁned
predicates194 and there is no hope for a syntactical regimentation of the language;
a solution to paradoxes must necessarily follow a semantical route.
In the second place, Kripke addresses the question: how could we explain the
word ‘true’ to someone who does not yet understand it? The answer is similar to
the one presented by [Kindt, 1978b]. But Kripke explicitly describes a model of
this attempt to ground sentences with truth predicate occurrences upon sentences
that do not speak about truth, as an evaluation process developing in stages and
approximating the extension (and the antiextension) of the (necessary partial)
truth predicate. The approximation process is naturally cumulative or monotone:
no proper truth value t or f, once established, is discarded, and a statement can
only pass from the undeﬁned state to a deﬁnite truth value. First of all, Kripke
deals with a language L for an acceptable structure (say, of domain D) in the
sense of Moschovakis [1974]; this ensures that L has enough encoding abilities
for the formalization of syntax.
Then he proceeds to deﬁne a jump operation
JS : 3D →3D such that, if SentD is the set of all codes of L–sentences and
a ∈D,
JS(X)(a) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
t,
if a = ⌈ϕ⌉, for some sentence ϕ with V S
X (ϕ) = t;
f,
if a = ⌈ϕ⌉, for some ϕ with V S
X (ϕ) = f, or a /∈SentD;
u,
else.
JS(X) yields the sentences whose truth value can be grounded assuming that X
is the denotation of truth. Kripke is the ﬁrst to notice explicitly that, if S is any
≤T –monotone scheme for handling truth-value gaps, the induced jump operator
is monotone, and hence there are plenty of ﬁxed points, i.e. partial sets M such
that JS(M) = M;195 clearly they solve (17) and hence there are many possible
candidates for semantically closed predicates.
Of course, a privileged role is still played by the minimal ﬁxed point OD. Math-
ematically, OD is generated by iterating the jump operator over the ordinals,
starting from the empty partial set, and it directly implements the informal idea
of grounding and approximating truth from below. By a standard set theoretic
argument, the process becomes saturated at a certain point (the closure ordinal),
and hence it reaches the least set closed under JS, which is in fact the least ﬁxed
194As before (with a little violence against the text of [Kripke, 1975] and for expository reasons),
we regard partial logic and three-valued logic as interchangeable, thus relying upon the space 3,
ordered by ≤T . But Kripke ﬁrmly claims that the third value u only stands for lack of a proper
value; so it should not be regarded as a departure from classical logic.
195For the existence, one might appeal to some generalized form of Tarski’s ﬁxed point theorem;
for instance, see [Markowski, 1976], where the ﬁxed point theorem is proven for monotone maps
of a chain-complete poset into itself or for maps of a strictly inductive poset into itself, satisfying
f(x) ≥x. An abstract setting explicitly devised for Kripke’s paper is to be found in section 2
of [Visser, 1989] and is inﬂuenced by work done in denotational semantics. Visser deﬁnes the
notion of coherent complete partial ordering (ccpo). A ccpo D is a poset, where every consistent
subset has a sup; a subset X of D is consistent, provided any two elements of D have an upper
bound in D. If D is a ccpo, monotone maps from D into D have ﬁxed points, and the set of all
ﬁxed points of a given monotone map yields a ccpo. Related work is in [Fitting, 1986].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
965
point.
So it is natural to call all sentences with a deﬁnite truth value in OD
grounded.
The plurality of ﬁxed points is nicely exploited to deﬁne a semantical classiﬁ-
cation of ungrounded sentences. Consider the informal statements
(‡) (‡) is true.
(♮) (♮) is not true;
Clearly both sentences are ungrounded; there is however an intuitive diﬀerence
between (‡) and (♮). We cannot apparently derive a contradiction by assuming
that (‡) is true (or false); and in fact there are ﬁxed points which make (‡) true and
others where (‡) is false. But exactly this is forbidden by the second statement,
which is in fact a version of the Liar and is undeﬁned in every ﬁxed point. So we
can deﬁne a sentence as paradoxical if it is undeﬁned in every ﬁxed point.
These remarks open up the place to a closer study of ﬁxed points and a con-
sequent subtler classiﬁcation of ungrounded non-paradoxical sentences.196 In this
respect, Kripke mentions two noteworthy classes of ﬁxed points. As we know al-
ready from [Martin and Woodruﬀ, 1975], there exist by Zorn’s lemma plenty of
maximal ﬁxed points.197 They deserve attention, since they converge on as many
sentences as possible. On the other hand, there exist the so-called intrinsic ﬁxed
points: they assign a value to a sentence ϕ, only if this value remains the same in
every other ﬁxed point which is deﬁned on ϕ. Interestingly, intrinsic ﬁxed points
do form a complete lattice and hence there exists the largest intrinsic ﬁxed point
ID. ID can be regarded as an improved notion of truth, which is optimal,198 once
we extend the minimal ﬁxed point with ungrounded sentences, but under the con-
straint that no arbitrary choice is made in assigning truth values. Quite naturally,
we say that an arbitrary sentence ϕ has an intrinsic value (or simply is intrinsic)
if ϕ has a value in ID. This means that ϕ is deﬁned and has the same value in
every maximal ﬁxed point. For instance, if we let
(♯) Either (♯) is true or its negation is true,
then (♯) is ungrounded and intrinsically true. On the other hand, if we let
(♭) either (‡) is true or its negation is true,
one veriﬁes that (♭) is ungrounded, it is true in every ﬁxed point where (‡) has a
truth-value, but it cannot be intrinsically true (as there are maximal ﬁxed points
where (‡) is undeﬁned).
196Warning: this type of results will not be invariant under the choice of a monotone three
valued schema S. As Kripke himself remarks, there may occur sensible diﬀerences, once one
varies S choosing a special class of supervaluations ([Kripke, 1975], p. 711) or the weak Kleene
Schema (cf. [Cain and Damnjanovic, 1991]).
197E.g., if the language is countable, there are uncountably many maximal ﬁxed points; for a
proof, see [Cantini, 1989].
198In fact, this is connected with the notion of optimal ﬁxed point coming from computer
science. It is also possible to show that the cardinality of intrinsic ﬁxed points is the highest
possible with respect to the cardinality of the domain of the interpretation; cf. [Cantini, 1989].

966
Andrea Cantini
5.3
Kripke’s oﬀsprings
Last but not least, Kripke’s paper suggests applications of his own theory of truth
to recursion theory.199
For instance, the Π1
1-sets of numbers coincide with the
extensions of monadic formulas, and Δ1
1-sets are the extensions of totally deﬁned
monadic formulas. So the language of self-referential truth gives a notation-free
version of hyperarithmetical sets. More generally, Kripke naturally conjectures
a generalization of the result to the case of languages with partial truth, based
on acceptable structures.200 Not only Kripke’s construction is an application of
the theory of inductive deﬁnition, but it will later result that Kripke’s ﬁxed point
approach yields “a natural formulation of many elementary facts about inductive
deﬁnition” and hence one can naturally speak of a two-sided connection between
the two ﬁelds .201
Concerning the philosophical import of his paper, Kripke is rather cautious:
certainly, his model improves upon the hierarchical solution of the Liar paradox,
since it satisﬁes more closure properties than Tarski’s.202
However, there are
deﬁnite limits to what we can express in the Kripkean language. Typically, it is
shown that the Liar is not true in any ﬁxed point, but this very fact cannot be
expressed in the language: so one cannot refrain from saying, with Kripke’s words,
that “the ghost of the Tarski hierarchy is still with us (p. 714)”.
A fortiori, it should also be considered that typical semantical notions in Kripke’s
work (e.g. ‘intrinsic’, ‘paradoxical’, etc.) have a high complexity from the recursion-
theoretic point of view and go beyond the borders of Kripke’s language.
The main results in this direction are due to Burgess [1986], [1988]. If S :=
K(V F) is a label designating the Kleene strong three-valued (supervaluation)
schema (respectively), let O+
S be the least S-ﬁxed point; further, let V +
S
(V −
S )
be the set of (G¨odel-numbers of) sentences which are true (false) in some S-ﬁxed
point (over the standard model of PA). Then it can be shown:203
(a) V +
K , V −
K and V +
K ∩V −
K are Σ1
1-complete;
(b) ω −(V +
K ∪V −
K ) is Π1
1-complete;
199Henceforth we assume that the reader is acquainted with the basic notions touching the ﬁrst
levels of the analytical hierarchy, as can be found in [Rogers, 1967], ch.15 or in [Odifreddi, 1989],
ch. IV.2.
200A proof of this claim is credited to L. Harrington (footnote, p. 716). There is an implicit
technical assumption behind these results, i.e.
the given language must have ﬁnitely many
non-logical symbols.
The reader should not forget earlier work – in foundational vein – due
to [Lorenzen and Myhill, 1959] [Nepeivoda, 1973]; related results in the context of systems
based on type-free comprehension were announced in Feferman 1975 [1974a] and have been later
established in published form by several people, e.g. [Cantini, 1980], [Flagg and Myhill, 1987b],
[Visser, 1989].
201As far as we know, this has been explicitly underlined by Visser [1989] and systematically
pursued in [Cantini, 1989], [1996], where it has been shown that there is a virtuous link relating
Kripke’s construction, Frege structures and admissible set theory.
202Perhaps, it is appropriate to say that Kripke’s theory is to Tarski’s as ZFC is to the theory
of types.
203Some of these statements are credited by Burgess to Kripke himself.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
967
(c) V +
K −V −
K is complete among the sets which are diﬀerences of Σ1
1-sets.
(d) The set I+
K of (G¨odel-numbers of) sentences true in all intrinsic K-ﬁxed
points is complete among the sets which are Σ1
1 in-a-Π1
1-parameter (actually
in Kleene’s O).
By way of comparison, even if O+
K and O+
V F have same complexity (i.e. are Π1
1-
complete), Burgess has shown:
(a) V +
V F is Σ1
2-complete;
(b) I+
V F is at least Π1
2 and at most Σ1
2-in-a-Π1
2-parameter.
In conclusion, it is diﬃcult to overestimate the inﬂuence of Kripke’s paper on
subsequent work. The 1975 paper is followed by plenty of variations and gener-
alizations, that cannot be referred to here for lack of space (e.g. [Yablo, 1982],
[Yablo, 1985], [McGee, 1991], [Pelham and Urquhart, 1994], with a resolution of
the contradiction in Russell’s original substitutional theory); let me also mention
the natural extension of Kripke’s work by means of the Dunn-Belnap 4-valued
logic by [Visser, 1984] and [Woodruﬀ, 1984] (see the remark below).
Apart from its philosophical import, [Kripke, 1975] leaves open interesting math-
ematical questions, which range from axiomatic and proof-theoretic investigations
to recursion theoretic.204
Kripke’s work also marks a fresh start in formal semantics since Tarski, and
this is witnessed by the number of monographs in the subject that will appear in
the eighties and in the nineties (and still appear).205
Generalized Kripke ﬁxed points
Let us brieﬂy summarize the main content of [Visser, 1984], [Woodruﬀ, 1984].
Apart from inessential diﬀerences, the construction amounts to replacing the space
of truth values in the deﬁnition of Kripke’s jump with the lattice 4 of the subsets
of {t, f}. Then a candidate for truth is simply a map of 4D, or more simply a
pair (X+, X−) of subsets of D. If the pair is disjoint (covers D), it is consistent
(complete).
Then the Kripke jump is still monotone from 4D into itself, and the structure
of ﬁxed points becomes a complete lattice, endowed with the natural involution,
(essentially) sending X+ (X−) into the complement (relative to D) of X−(X+).
204See [Feferman, 1991], [Reinhardt, 1985], [Reinhardt, 1986], [Cantini, 1989], [Turner, 1987]
and others. There is also an application of Kripkean ideas to the discussion of the notion of
proper class in Maddy’s paper [1983].
205Here is a tentative list: [Barwise and Etchemendy, 1987], [McGee, 1991], [Turner, 1990],
[Gupta and Belnap, 1993], [Koons, 1992], [Simmons, 1993], [Yaq¯ub, 1993], [Halbach, 1996],
[Cantini, 1996], [Chapuis, 1996].

968
Andrea Cantini
In this structure the least ﬁxed point has a dual, the greatest ﬁxed point MAXD,
which is complete but inconsistent (as it assigns to the Liar both t and f).206
The structure of the lattice of generalized truth predicates has been further
investigated in [Fitting, 1986], [Fitting, 1989]. If D is a model of PA or a combi-
natory algebra, or else associated with inﬁnitary logics of truth, it has been proved
that the lattice is non-modular ([Minari, 1987], [Cantini, 1989]).
Appendix on semantical closure: minimalism and logical diﬃculties
One might tackle the problem of semantical paradoxes, holding that the naive
theory of truth where one assumes the T-schema T(⌈ϕ⌉) ↔ϕ, for arbitrary ϕ,
is essentially tenable and suﬃcient. One has only to ﬁlter out those instances,
which are responsible for the contradictions. This view (systematically held for
instance by the philosopher P. Horwich) presupposes that the task implicit in the
minimalist standpoint is rationally feasible. However, here is a diﬃculty pointed
out by V. McGee [1992]: there is no eﬀective method to decide whether a speciﬁc
instance of the T-schema is consistent (choose a ﬁxed point ψ of T(x) ↔ϕ, where
ϕ is arbitrary and observe that ϕ is equivalent to T(⌈ψ⌉) ↔ψ).
Interestingly, a similar diﬃculty aﬀects the attempt of amending the naive com-
prehension schema as well as the schema for introducing contextual deﬁnitions
underlying the Fregean deﬁnition of natural number (this remark is due to Boolos
and Heck; see [Boolos, 1998, pp. 232-233]).
5.4
Self-referential truth and type free systems: a uniﬁed framework
In the previous sections 4.2-4.5, 5.1-5.3 we have summarized in parallel some rel-
evant work about type-free principles and formal semantics. Their common con-
ceptual and technical roots are made explicit in [Feferman, 1984], which outlines a
general setting for treating self-referential constructions both at the level of naive
semantics and type-free comprehension. Also, it yields an analysis of the features
that make the Liar and the Russell paradox possible. These can be can grouped
together into three categories:
(i) syntax: there are naming facilities in the language (e.g. individual terms ⌈ϕ⌉
representing sentences ϕ, as well as individual terms {x | ϕ} representing
classes deﬁned by arbitrary ϕ);
(ii) logic: ordinary axioms and rules are accepted;
(iii) basic principles: these typically amount to the naive comprehension schema
and the unrestricted truth schema T(⌈ϕ⌉) ↔ϕ.
206The dual Kripkean approach is a way of making sense of the view that paradoxes force us
to accept inconsistencies. For diﬀerent approaches leading to the investigation of the so-called
‘paraconsistent logics’, see [Priest, 1989].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
969
Strictly speaking, (i)-(iii) can be consistently met and the Liar does not necessarily
appear yet: Gupta [1982, p. 14] has shown that there are classically interpreted
languages containing quotation names for their sentences and their own truth pred-
icate, which satisfy unrestricted T-schema for sentences. Hence satisfaction or the
use of a truth predicate with substitution or concatenation functions, (e.g. in the
style of Quine and [Smullyan, 1957]) are necessary.
Given this warning, a solution route to paradoxes can reasonably attempt to
ﬁnd a consistent theory or a model with restrictions on naming, logic or basic
principles. But, as already stressed in [Aczel and Feferman, 1980], the strategy
followed by Feferman is to neutralize paradoxes by means of extensions of ﬁrst
order logic, in a way that compensates the critical adoption of unrestricted self-
referential principles.
The starting point is a language L0, which only involves total relations, with
a corresponding structure M0 of the same similarity type. It is further assumed
that the language has means to encode a ﬁrst order syntax and that all structures
satisfy a minimal theory S0 which grants it. So there will be terms encoding ﬁnite
sequences (for which we use (x1, . . . , xk)) and G¨odel-numberings ⌈ϕ⌉of formulas
ϕ.
The main problem is now to investigate the semantics for expansions L+of
L0 with k + 1-ary predicates Tk (where k ∈ω). Roughly, the atomic formula
Tk(x1, . . . , xk, z) is read as: “ (x1, . . . , xk) satisﬁes z”.
If k = 0, clearly the
predicate reduces to the truth predicate; if k = 1, T1 is identiﬁed with non-
extensional membership or predicate application. The formulation of the naive
schema for Tk is, for arbitrary ϕ of L+ with the free variables shown:
(20) Tk(x1, . . . , xk, ϕ(ˆu1, . . . , ˆuk, y1 . . . , yn)) ↔ϕ(x1, . . . , xk, y1 . . . , yn))
Here ϕ(ˆu1, . . . , ˆuk, y1 . . . , yn) stands for a term depending on ⌈ϕ⌉and the param-
eters y1 . . . , yn, which plays the role of an abstraction term deﬁned by ϕ and
uniformly depending on the parameters shown.
Since, for the sake of consistency, the Tk’s have to be partial, the paper outlines
a general framework for partial semantics and ﬁxed point techniques, where the
natural objects are partial structures, obtained by adding partial predicates for
interpreting the Tk-predicates.207
The essence of the constructions by Fitch, Gilmore, Kripke, etc., already de-
scribed in the previous sections (cf. §4.4, §5, etc.), is condensed in the so-called
Fixed-Model Theorem:
(⋄) Let L+ be the corresponding language including the predicates T0, T1, . . . and
assume that it has a monotone semantics. For any model M0 satisfying S0,
there is the (least) partial structure M ∗:= ⟨M0, . . . , T M
k , . . .⟩, such that, for
207One considers expansions of the form ⟨M0, R⟩, where R is a three-valued function R of the
appropriate arity, or a disjoint pairs of k-ary relations on the universe M0 of M0; see §4.4, §5,
§5.1, §5.2). Partial structures are naturally ordered according to the relation induced by the
poset on the space of truth-values 3 = {t, f, u}.

970
Andrea Cantini
each k, and each ϕ(ˆu1, . . . , ˆuk, y1 . . . , yn) in L+, then
∥Tk(a1, . . . , ak, ϕ(ˆu1, . . . , ˆuk, b1 . . . , bn)∥= ∥ϕ(a1, . . . , ak, b1 . . . , bn)∥
here above a1, . . . , ak, b1 . . . , bn are (constants naming) arbitrary elements of
M; ∥ϕ∥is the truth value of the sentence ϕ according to the chosen monotone
semantics.
In order to rephrase the semantical construction in an ordinary axiomatic style,
[Feferman, 1984] adopts the intensional solution of [Aczel and Feferman, 1980] and
proposes a non-strict variant of their ≡-logic, where truth T and falsity F behave
like in the Kleene strong three-valued logic and the crucial axiom T(A ≡B) ↔
(A ≡B) is modiﬁed to
(21) T(A ≡B) ↔DA ∧DB ∧(A ≡B)
The consistency of the schema
(22) Tk(x1, . . . , xk, ϕ(ˆu1, . . . , ˆuk, y1 . . . , yn)) ≡ϕ(x1, . . . , xk, y1 . . . , yn),
for arbitrary formulas ϕ, is implied by a conservation theorem.
When (21) is
assumed, there is no need to use a Church-Rosser argument, but it is possible
to set up a semantics for arbitrary formulas which combines the Fixed-Model
Theorem with two diﬀerent interpretations of the biconditional, corresponding to
Kleene’s logic and to Lukasiewicz’s three-valued system.
Let us brieﬂy recall the basic idea, due to Aczel. The informal claim of (22)
is that both expressions must have the same truth value (classical or not). So it
seems natural to interpret A ≡B as a Lukasiewicz 3-valued equivalence, which is
true whenever A and B have the same truth value, it is undeﬁned if a member
is deﬁned and the other is undeﬁned, and it is false in all remaining cases. The
problem is that ∥ϕ∥is not monotone (with respect to the usual ordering of the
truth values) and this forbids an application of the Fixed Model Theorem. The
diﬃculty is avoided by reinterpreting ≡with Kleene’s biconditional . Formally,
if ϕ is an arbitrary formula in the full language (with ≡, ∈), let ϕK be the for-
mula which one obtains by replacing each occurrence of ≡with the corresponding
Kleene equivalence ↔k.208 Then, of course, the K-transform corresponds to a rein-
terpretation of the logical operations of ϕ, which makes ∥ϕK∥monotone. Hence
by the “Fixed-Model Theorem”, one can ﬁnd a partial structure satisfying
(23) ∥Tk(a1, . . . , ak, ϕ(ˆu1, . . . , ˆuk, b1 . . . , bn)∥= ∥ϕK(a1, . . . , ak, b1 . . . , bn)∥
Finally, if we consider the two-valued structure M, consisting of the expansion
of M0 with the positive part of the partial predicates solving (23), the classical
relation M |= ϕ can be extended to arbitrary formulas of L+ by
M |= ϕ ≡ψ ⇔∥ϕK∥= ∥ψK∥
208It is important to note that a ↔k b is true if a, b are both true or false; it is false if one is
true and the other is false; it is undeﬁned elsewhere, so also if both are undeﬁned.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
971
It is then possible to check that the axioms on ≡together with (22) hold and there
is a common core of the two ≡-variants, which can be formalized as a (non-normal)
modal logic.
The ﬁnal conclusion of [Feferman, 1984] is rather problematic and it is noticed
that the mathematical content of the theories considered is rather meager. The
alternative seems instead to develop a theory of total classes and partial functions.
This is just the route followed with the program of explicit mathematics we brieﬂy
touched upon in section 4.4
5.5
From naive semantics to general semi-inductive processes
At the beginning of the eighties, A. Gupta [1982] and H. Herzberger [1982b] in-
dependently discover that semantical paradoxes can be treated by means of the
classical valuation schema.209 The underlying motivation is that paradoxes arise
in the context of classical logic and they ought to be solved in accordance with the
same logic.210 Thus paradoxical sentences are not neutralized by regarding them
as both true and false (there exist truth values gluts) or neither true nor false
(there exist gaps); on the contrary, a sentence can only receive a classical truth
value. However, like in Kripke’s theory, semantical evaluation takes place “along
a process f”, and hence the fundamental characteristic of a sentence is that it is
naturally endowed with a valuational pattern.
A crucial feature of this approach, originally emphasized by Gupta [1982], has
a conceptual ﬂavour: according to him, the concept of truth is characterized by
a revision procedure. So “when we learn the meaning of ‘truth’, what we learn
is a rule that enables us to improve on a proposed candidate for the extension
of truth”([Gupta, 1982]). In dealing with truth, we meet an inherently circular
notion, whose denotation we can try to ﬁx only by proposing a guess X, then by
reﬁning X to a better candidate J(X), and so on, until we eventually get some
deﬁnite value (if any, or at least a general pattern of instability).
Following Herzberger [1982b], let us brieﬂy inquire what happens if we start out
Kripke’s evaluation procedure having the classical evaluation method. If N is the
standard model of PA, deﬁne
(24) J(X) = {⌈ϕ⌉, | ⟨N, X⟩|= ϕ}
and the iteration
JX(0) = ∅
(25)
JX(n + 1) = J(JX(n)).
(26)
Since there are no gaps and the evaluation is non-monotone, no ﬁxed point can
be reached. For instance, if ⟨N, S⟩|= L, where S is a subset of natural numbers
209Below we emphasize the speciﬁc technical aspects, without entering the philosophical dis-
cussions in which both papers are rooted.
210This tenet might be considered as qualifying the approach as “naive”, at least in Herzberger’s
view.

972
Andrea Cantini
interpreting the truth predicate T and L is a Liar sentence satisfying L ↔¬T(⌈L⌉),
then
(N, J(S)) |= T(⌈L⌉), i.e. (N, J(S)) |= ¬L;
hence by iterating the procedure one has, successively:
(N, J2(S)) |= L,
(N, J3(S)) |= ¬L,
(N, J4(S)) |= L, . . .
However, the process does extend into the transﬁnite by using the operation of
lim inf (lower limit). If λ is a limit and f is an operation from ordinals < λ to
subsets of N:
lim inf
α<λ f(α) = {x | (∃δ < λ)(∀γ)(δ ≤γ < λ →x ∈f(γ))};
(27)
lim inf
α<λ f −(α) = {x | (∃δ < λ)(∀γ)(δ ≤γ < λ →x /∈f(γ))}
(28)
Then we can deﬁne:
(29) JX(λ) = lim inf
α<λ JX(α)
As noticed by Herzberger, the construction deﬁned by the clauses (25), (26), (29) is
better understood in a general setting, where the role of the semantical evaluation
schema embodied by the operator of (24) is replaced by any “jump operator”
J : P(M) →P(M), mapping the powerset of M (the so-called “base set”) into
itself. So a semi-inductive process in the sense of Herzberger (henceforth a H-
process, in short) is any transﬁnite ordinal sequence f(α) satisfying
f(0) ∈P(M)
f(α + 1) = J(f(α))
f(λ) = lim inf
α<λ f(α)
Therefore, to every H-process we can naturally associate:
(i) the set of positively stable elements
(30) S+
f = {a : (∃β)(∀δ ≥β)(a ∈f(δ))};
(ii) the set of negatively stable elements
(31) S−
f = {a : (∃β)(∀δ ≥β)(a /∈f(δ))};
(iii) the set Sf := S+
f ∪S−
f of stable elements and its complement, the set of
unstable elements.
It turns out that H-processes share important properties,211 namely:
211As to the proofs, which use essentially standard set theoretic methods, they are not given
in the published version of [Herzberger, 1982b], but they can be found in subsequent work by
Burgess [1986], McGee [1991], Visser [1989].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
973
1. for every H-process f, there exists a “stabilization ordinal” κ 212 such that
(32) S+
f = f(κ) = lim inf
α<κ f(α) and S−
f = lim inf
α<κ f −(α)
2. every H-process f is almost everywhere periodic, that is, there exist ordinals
κ and ρ (the period) such that, for every ν and every ξ > κ,
f(κ) = f(κ + ρ · ν);
(33)
f(ξ) = f(κ + μ);
(34)
for some μ < ρ.
3. for any H-process f, there exists an ordinal (saturation point) μ such that,
for all α, there exists γ < μ such that f(α) = f(γ).
By (33), (34), “once a saturation point is reached, every subsequent stage repeats
some earlier stage and the process becomes cyclic”. So the process can be decom-
posed into an initial piece till the stabilization point κ is reached; then the process
enters a cycle of a ﬁxed length, the period ρ, which repeats endlessly all terms
f(β) of the sequence, for κ ≤β < κ + ρ (the so called grand loop).
In a certain sense, the results above show that the Herzberger semi-inductive
processes are adequate for the intended semantical application. In fact, the H-
process induced by the classical valuation schema exactly generates at a given
stage κ exactly the set of sentences S+
f (S+
f ), which yields an interpretation of
truth (falsehood) as the set of stable truths (the set of stable falsehoods). The
initial piece of the process has the eﬀect of ﬁltering out the unstable sentences, so
that at stage κ exactly the sentences with a stable truth value are generated. Then
unstable sentences enter the process again, but after ρ steps they are again ﬁltered
out.
As a criticism of H-processes, one can underline their dependence upon the
initial points (the assignment to the truth predicate T at stage 0) and also the
fact that the deﬁnition of the limit rule is clearly somewhat arbitrary.
Gupta
[1982] and Belnap [1982] have proposed variants.
Typically, one may stick to the intuition that the initial guess (the value of
f(0)) deserves a priority: so, if a sentence is unstable below λ, then it is made true
or false according to the value it receives from the initial guess. This is the idea
behind Gupta’s limit rule:
(35) f(λ) = lim inf
α<λ f(α) ∪(f(0) −lim inf
α<κ f −(α))
Belnap [1982] adopts a more general solution, which is inspired by the idea that
a revision process should rely only upon the jump operation (e.g. on Tarski’s val-
uation schema) and the arbitrariness of the initial guess and of the limit choices
212This also called enclosure ordinal in [Herzberger, 1982b] and alignment point in [Herzberger,
1982a]. Clearly κ will depend on the jump f and its underlying structure. That it cannot made
independent on the initial choice f(0), is shown in [McGee, 1991], p. 134.

974
Andrea Cantini
ought to be eliminated by quantifying on all possible “bootstrapping policies”. A
B-process (i.e. a semi-inductive process in the sense of Belnap) is then character-
ized by any limit clause satisfying
(36) lim inf
α<λ f(α) ⊆f(λ) ⊆−lim inf
α<λ f −(α).
It should be noticed at this stage that the properties stated for H-processes do
not hold for arbitrary semi-inductive processes; yet, it is possible to prove suitable
generalizations thereof, following [Burgess, 1986] and [McGee, 1991]. So, given a
process f (where we can assume that each f(α) is a subset of natural numbers),
we deﬁne an ordinal κ reﬂecting for f provided it meets the conditions:
S+
f = lim inf
α<κ f(α) and S−
f = lim inf
α<κ f −(α)
(37)
lim inf
α<κ f(α) ⊆f(η) ⊆−lim inf
α<κ f −(α)
(38)
for all κ < η. Then it can be shown:
(*) The set of all limit ordinals ξ that are reﬂecting for f contains a closed and
unbounded subset of ordinals.213
For further developments towards a general theory of revision sequences, the reader
should consider [Gupta and Belnap, 1993], ch.5, 5C.
We cannot conclude our brief historical survey on the birth of the revision theory
without mentioning that the semi-inductive approach to semantics yields a rather
subtle method for classifying self-referential statements, which is as powerful as
Kripke’s. For the sake of comparison with Kripke’s, we only recall a few examples,
following the notation of [Burgess, 1986].
Let P := H, G, B; , we assign a sentence ϕ a P-type S, where S is any label
from the list ⟨T, F, U, TF, TU, FU, TFU⟩, and T(F, U) occurs in S if and only
if ϕ is stably true (stably false, unstable) for some P-process.214 So, while the
Liar is of type U over all processes, every logically valid sentence, by contrast
with the Kripkean case, is always of type T. It is easy to check that the Truth
Teller is of type TF for each process, while the conjunction χ of a Truth Teller
with the disjunction of a Truth Teller and a Liar is of type TFU. Moreover, there
are concrete examples of situations, which turn to be ungrounded on Kripke’s
approach, which can be made easily semantically deﬁnite by means of the classical
valuation.215
In the present context, one can even distinguish several paradoxical sentences by
explicitly taking into account another crucial parameter, the degree of instability,
which can be assigned to a given sentence, as a measure of its cyclic valuation
213A set X of ordinals is unbounded if for every ordinal α, there is an ordinal β ∈X such that
α < β; X is closed if and only if every bounded subset of X has a sup in X.
214If a sentence is of H-type TFU, then there are (at least three distinct) H-processes where
the sentence is stably true, stably false and unstable (respectively).
215For Gupta’s puzzle, see [Gupta, 1982], pp. 34-35.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
975
pattern. For instance, the Liar is paradoxical and oscillating with the pattern
1, 0, 1, 0, . . ., and hence it has period 2. BL := TL ∨T¬L is paradoxical as well,
but it has period ω;216 indeed, one can produce paradoxical statements with large
transﬁnite cycles.
A closer look clearly shows that “revision theories of truth are complicated”
in the technical sense of generalized recursion theory and this naturally raises
“deﬁnability issues” ([Welch, 2001a]). Let us only present a concise account of the
central results, which are known up to now.
We stick to the notation from Burgess [1986]. If P := H(G, B), □P T (□P F,
□P U, ♦P T, ♦P F, ♦P U) denotes the class of all (G¨odel-numbers of) sentences ϕ,
such that ϕ is stably true (stably false, unstable) over all (some) P-processes.217
Burgess [1986] and McGee [1991] have shown
(†) the sets □HT, □GT, □BT are all Π1
2-complete.
The result has then been extended to the general framework of the theory of
arbitrary circular deﬁnitions in [Kremer, 1993], [Antonelli, 1994c], [Antonelli, 1998]
-[Antonelli, 1994b] and quite recently by [Welch, 2001a], [Welch, 2001b], [L¨owe and
Welch, 2000].
What is a circular concept G? Well, G is simply a notion that must satisfy a
circular condition, just like the Tarski biconditional T(⌈ϕ⌉) ↔ϕ, where ϕ may
contain T itself.
In order to make this precise, Gupta and Belnap consider any ﬁrst order lan-
guage L (think of the standard arithmetical language) and its expansion L+ with
possibly denumerably many predicate symbols Gn(x1, . . . , xn).
A set D of circular deﬁnitions is simply a set of conditions of the form
(39) G(⃗a) =df AG(⃗a)
where AG(⃗a) is formula of L+, possibly containing some Gn’s.
In analogy with the case of truth, the idea is that, in order to assign a meaning
to G with respect to a given structure M for L, a revision process must be invoked,
where we start by suggesting an initial hypothesis h218 on the extension of G, and
we keep revising it by means of a jump operation, usually embodied by a formula
AG(⃗a). Now, given M, a Γ-process f is simply a revision process, where we have
adopted a deﬁnite policy (or rule) Γ at limit stages and an initial hypothesis h.
This leads to a suitable general notion of deﬁnability:
(i) a set X ⊆|M| is weakly deﬁnable in SΓ if and only if there exists a formula
ϕ(x) of L+ which deﬁnes X in SΓ, i.e. for all a ∈|M|, a ∈X if and only if
ϕ[a] is stably true in every Γ-process.
216In fact, BL is false at stage 0, but true at any ﬁnite subsequent stage; thereafter it is false
at stage ω, but again true at every stage of the form ω + k (k ﬁnite), etc.
217So ♦GF is the class of all (G¨odel-numbers of) sentences ϕ, such that ϕ is stably false over
some G-process.
218h is a subset of |M|n, n being the arity of the circular predicate G.

976
Andrea Cantini
(ii) a set X ⊆|M| is strongly deﬁnable in SΓ if and only if it is weakly deﬁn-
able in SΓ by means of a formula ϕ(x), and its negation weakly deﬁnes the
complement of X in SΓ.
If we identify M with N, the problem is: which sets of natural numbers are
deﬁnable when the complexity of the AG’s and Γ varies? The main theorem is due
to Welch [2001a]:
(♮) if Γ is Δ1
2-deﬁnable ,219 then the class of SΓ-deﬁnable reals (where ‘real’ means
‘set of natural numbers’) is precisely the class of Π1
2-reals
(♯) on the same assumption, the class of Δ1
2-reals and the class of strongly SΓ
deﬁnable reals coincide.
As noticed by Welch, a nice pattern emerges, linking formal semantics, generalized
recursion theory and admissible set theory. On one side, we know that there are
deep connections between the Kripke theory of truth and the theory of inductive
deﬁnitions, and hence the notion of next admissible set. In fact, given an arbitrary
acceptable ﬁrst order structure M, the set of inductive subsets over M coincide
with the collection of sets which are Σ1-deﬁnable over the next admissible structure
HY PM.220 On the other side, revision theoretic deﬁnability is deeply related to
the notion of “next stable structure” SM:221
(♭) let M be an acceptable structure in the sense of Moschovakis [1974], and let
Γ be Δ1-deﬁnable over the universe of hereditarily countable sets generated
above M. Then the class of SΓ-deﬁnable subsets of M is precisely the class
of Π1(SM) sets.
(♯) On the same assumptions, the class of Δ1(SM)-subsets of |M| and the class
of strongly SΓ deﬁnable subsets of |M| coincide.
REMARK 4.
(i) Apart from analytic inspiration, some germs of revision theoretic ideas can
be found in the recursion theory of the ﬁfties. Let us only mention the char-
acterization of Δ0
2-subsets of natural numbers as trial and error predicates,
due to Shoenﬁeld (see [Odifreddi, 1989], p. 373).
(ii) Magari [1974], [1975] (English abstract in [Magari, 1973]) has shown that
there exists a notion of (experimental) arithmetical truth, which corresponds
to recursion theoretic complexity Σ0
2, see also [Ursini, 1977], [Ursini, 1978];
219Upon coding, and this includes the usual H-, G-, B-processes.
220Roughly, the least constructible universe, containing M as an element and satisfying the
Kripke-Platek axioms; see [Barwise, 1975].
221Roughly, SM is the least constructible universe built above M, such that it is a Σ1-elementary
substructure F the whole universe V , see [Barwise, 1975] for details.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
977
(iii) [Antonelli, 1994c] has indeed applied these tools back to standard deﬁnabil-
ity; e.g. he shows that every set in the arithmetical hierarchy can be given
an explicit revision theoretic deﬁnition.
(iv) Revision theoretic ideas have also been applied in the construction of non-
well-founded sets again by [Antonelli, 1994a].
(v) An ultraproduct construction for deﬁning a notion of self-referential notion
of truth is given in [Negri, 1989]; ‘true in a ultraproduct’ roughly amounts
to ‘true almost everywhere’ and this is somewhat reminiscent of the revision
theoretic approach.
5.6
Non-well-founded sets and semantical paradoxes
In 1987 Barwise and Etchemendy propose a novel approach to the Liar paradox
and to the semantics of natural languages, which takes place within a set-theoretic
universe, where self-reference and circularity are intrinsic features of propositions
and of the states of aﬀairs they describe. According to [Barwise and Etchemendy,
1987], propositions are not linguistic entities and truth is not a predicate of sen-
tences, like in the Tarskian or Kripkean theory. A state of aﬀairs corresponds to
a structured set theoretic object, whose constituents are respectively a relation R,
a list ⃗a of objects whose length is equal to the arity of R and a polarity i ∈{0, 1},
selecting positive or negative states.222 Collections of states of aﬀairs, which are
called situations, play in the present framework the role of partial models or “co-
ordinate systems” with respect to which propositions are evaluated.
It is important to stress that, according to [Barwise and Etchemendy, 1987], a
state-of-aﬀairs can involve semantics as well, e.g. it can have the form ⟨Tr, p, i⟩,
where i = 0 or i = 1, Tr stands for the property of being true and p is a proposition.
Moreover, it is allowed to have propositions that contain themselves as constituents
(so we do have direct self-reference). It then follows that an adequate modelling
of semantics is only possible insofar as the universe of sets is not the standard
cumulative hierarchy, but it satisﬁes the anti-foundation axiom AFA ([Forti and
Honsell, 1983], [Aczel, 1988]):
(♦) given any structure ⟨a, r⟩with r ⊆a2, there exists a unique surjective homo-
morphism f : ⟨a, r⟩→⟨b, ∈⟩, for some transitive b, satisfying, for x ∈a:
f(x) = {f(y)|⟨y, x⟩∈r}.223
AFA grants that the set theoretic universe is inhabited by plenty of circular or
reﬂexive224 objects, satisfying systems of ﬁxed point conditions τ(x) = x, where
222Of course, the positive (negative) polarity corresponds to the fact that the given relation
obtains (does not obtain) among the objects of the given list. States of aﬀairs which only diﬀer
by their polarity are naturally named dual.
223AFA admits of a geometrical reading, ensuring the existence and uniqueness of decorations
for arbitrary graphs (⟨a, r⟩is any graph, and the homomorphism plays the role of a decoration).
224Call x reﬂexive if x ∈x.

978
Andrea Cantini
x ∈X and X is a set of ‘indeterminates’. Roughly, τ(x) denotes any set built up
from indeterminates in X and possibly atoms from a given set A, using set theoretic
operations, and the import of the anti-foundation axiom essentially amounts to
show that the equation has a unique solution. For instance, under AFA, there
exists a unique set Ω satisfying {x} = x, as well as there are unique propositions
L, S corresponding to the Liar and to the Samesayer, i.e. satisfying the identities
p = [Fa(p)] and q = [Tr(q)].
AFA-universes225 - whose elements are usually termed hypersets - are applied
in order to give two diﬀerent versions of self-referential truth, and hence diﬀerent
responses to semantical paradoxes: the former inspired by Russell and the latter
by Austin.
It is impossible to give justice to [Barwise and Etchemendy, 1987]
within a short space; so we only limit ourselves to a few sketchy hints.
First of all, in either case the language implements direct self-reference by in-
cluding explicitly demonstratives, like this, that_i (i ∈ω), and a scope operator
↓. The idea is that if ϕ is a sentence in which a demonstrative this occurs, then
this in ↓ϕ refers to the whole proposition expressed by ϕ. So to each sentence ϕ of
the language involving a given list this, that_1, etc., is assigned a unique propo-
sition V al(ϕ)(p, −→q ), depending on the parameters p, −→q ; moreover, V al(↓ϕ)(−→q )
is the unique p solving
V al(↓ϕ)(p, −→q ) = p
According to the Russellian option, propositions are claims about a model (of the
world) M, which is conceived as a collection of states of aﬀairs. A proposition p
is made true (false) by M - in symbols M |= p (M ⊭p) – if and only if for some
(no) s ⊆M, s |= p (s ⊭p). It is important to notice that, by contrast with the
Kripkean approach, the semantical notion of proposition and the classical relation
s |= p – though relatively standard as to the closure conditions they satisfy – must
be introduced as largest ﬁxed points of suitable monotone operators, and this is a
typical feature of constructions taking place in AFA-universes.
As to the Liar proposition, it is not made true by any given model, but this very
claim cannot become a fact of the model. Thus it is essential to distinguish between
internal negation and external denial of a proposition: the negation establishes
a claim about how things are in the world, while the denial is just the rejection
of an assertion. Therefore, that p is true (false) in a model M means that the
state of aﬀairs ⟨Tr, p, 1⟩(respectively ⟨Tr, p, 0⟩) is an element of M. This should
be contrasted with the external fact that M |= p (M ⊭p).
This is reminiscent of similar distinctions arising from the Kripke approach and
other truth-gap solutions. In spite of the use of non-well-founded and co-inductive
objects, inductive methods `a la Kripke are still essential for building up almost
semantically closed models,226 which correspond to the best possible approxima-
tions to semantically closed worlds. Here a model M is almost semantically closed
if M is coherent (i.e. no state of aﬀairs with its dual belongs to M), and it holds:
225These can be given a category-theoretic characterization as ﬁnal coalgebras of the power-set
functor Pow, i.e. roughly as largest ﬁxed points of Pow.
226Cf. theorem 10, p. 82,

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
979
(i) for every proposition p, p is true in M if and only if p is made true by M; (ii)
p is false in M if and only if its negation ¯p is made true by M.227 Once more, the
lesson from the paradoxes is that we cannot in general ﬁnd models where we can
jump from the assertion that M does not make p true to the fact that p is false in
M.
According to the Austinian approach, a sentence does not uniquely determine a
proposition, but it is necessary to explicitly ﬁx its context sensitive elements. Thus
a proposition properly amounts to a pair of constituents, given by (i) a situation
parameter s228 and (ii) a type T, which is uniquely ﬁxed by a state of aﬀairs σ.
Now a given proposition is true if and only if the situation the proposition is about
is of the given type, i.e. σ ∈s.
As to the paradoxes, AFA implies that, for every situation s, there are Liar-
propositions fs claiming that the falsity of fs is a fact about s. In general, seman-
tical contradictions are avoided by changes in the situation parameters. Indeed,
when one uses a Liar sentence λ of the form ¬True(this) to make a statement
about the actual situation s0, it expresses a false proposition fs0; but this very
fact can be used to deﬁne a larger situation s1 with respect to which the Liar
sentence now expresses a true proposition fs0. Of course, there exists a unique
Liar proposition fs1; again, this is false with respect to s1 and by iteration, we
are led to s2 verifying fs1, etc. Thus the Liar paradox “does not force one into
abandoning the intuitive idea that the world is total and that any claim is true or
it is not true. What it does, is that it forces one to be extraordinary sensitive to
subtle shifts in context” [Barwise and Moss, 1996, p. 189].
To sum up, the solution of Barwise and Etchemendy is dependent upon an idea
of set, which is heavily anti-hierarchical: sets are abstractions from arbitrary rela-
tional structures or graphs. This is clearly against the traditional type-theoretical
cumulative view of sets. An important technical feature of this approach to se-
mantics is that it emphasizes the use of coinduction and corecursion principles
(e.g. the choice of greatest ﬁxed points of monotone operators, bisimulation as
a way of comparing observationally equivalent systems) and hence it is in some
sense dual to the inductive methods emphasized in previous proposals.
The Barwise-Etchemendy semantical theory is part of a general methodology
for dealing with the mathematics of non-well-founded phenomena, which since re-
cent years is prompted by several developments coming from linguistics, computer
science, philosophy, cognitive science.229
REMARK 5. The Austinian theory is an instance of the contextual approach, that
is, of a solution to the paradoxes which takes into account the context of utterance
of a sentence and attempts to render these ideas with mathematical tools. Other
candidates in this directions are [Parsons, 1974], [Burge, 1979], [Burge, 1982],
[Gaifman, 1988], [Gaifman, 1992], [Simmons, 1988], [Simmons, 1993].
227The negation ¯p being as unique solution of a suitable set of equations by AFA.
228Informally, a limited portion of the real world or a possible context.
229For a systematic account, the reader, is urged to consult the monograph of Barwise and Moss
[1996].

980
Andrea Cantini
6
AXIOMATIC THEORIES OF TRUTH
As stressed by Sheard [1994, p. 1044] in his guide to truth predicates in the modern
era, the problem of semantical closure and self-referential truth can be tackled
with the tools of the formal axiomatic method, as “one of creating not models
but consistent theories”. However, it has to be remarked that the motivations
behind the axiomatic work are at ﬁrst mainly foundational, even proof-theoretical
(and quite apart from philosophical surroundings), and that they reach a ﬁnished
(published) form only somewhat later than the related semantical constructions.
In the subsequent sections, we consider the principal contributions between the
end of the eighties and mid 90’s.
6.1
Classifying the “logics of truth”: Friedman and Sheard
In this direction, a landmark is represented by the contribution of Friedman-Sheard
(1987); there the authors ” create a list of plausible axioms and rules of inference
concerning the truth predicate T, each of which embodies some aspect of its in-
tended interpretation as truth”. Then they classify all subsets of the list as either
consistent or inconsistent, and they measure the proof-theoretic strength of sev-
eral subsets by comparing them with familiar systems of arithmetic and analysis”
([Friedman and Sheard, 1987, p. 1]).
The paper in question marks a point of high sophistication: techniques from
recursion theory and proof theory interact with modal intuitions; moreover, certain
scattered metamathematical contributions (e.g. see [Kaplan and Montague, 1960],
[Montague, 1963]) of the early sixties, which could be regarded as reﬁnements of
Tarski’s and G¨odel’s theorems, but also had motivations in philosophical logic,230
are here systematically developed in a uniﬁed framework. The generality of the
results contained in [Friedman and Sheard, 1987], [1991] not only provide a useful
way to detect possible inconsistencies and consistency results, but also make it
reasonable to speak of logics of truth.
Let us brieﬂy summarize the core of the principal paper [Friedman and Sheard,
1987]. First of all, the axiomatic investigation is built upon a base theory BaseT ,
which consists of a weak fragment of Peano arithmetic (say, including primitive
recursive arithmetic) in the language expanded with the truth predicate, where
syntax and a certain amount of semantical notions can be formalized. Thus it is
assumed that there is a predicate V al(x) expressing that x is the G¨odel number
230Let us quote as an example (theorem 3) of Montague [1963]. If T-Out is the schema T(⌈A⌉) →
A, then T-Out is inconsistent with the rule T-Intro of T-introduction A/T(⌈A⌉) (modulo a ground
theory Q which includes enough of arithmetic, to prove the diagonalization theorem). The result
can then be regarded as a negative verdict against a syntactical treatment of modality, and
in particular against interpreting the verb “to know” as a predicate of sentences (it actually
arose in a formalization of the so-called Hangman Paradox and this explains why it was termed
Knower’s paradox). Just to cite Montague, “if necessity is to be treated syntactically, that is, as
a predicate of sentences, as Carnap and Quine have urged, then virtually all of modal logic must
be sacriﬁced”(cf. [Montague, 1963], p. 294 ). A sharpening of the paradox is later achieved by
Thomason [1980].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
981
of a valid ﬁrst-order formula. Also, if ◦is a logical symbol, there is a deﬁnable
function symbol ˙◦, naming the corresponding arithmetical operation on codes, etc.
Now the basic axioms stipulate that T satisﬁes
V al(x) →T(x)
T(x ˙→y) →T(x) →T(y)
Hence truth is always closed under classical ﬁrst order logical consequence and this
is in marked contrast with all approaches stemming from proposals based on gap
semantics.
Following Friedman and Sheard, we now recall the list Optional Axioms, made
up with truth axioms and rules, which form the basic combinatorial ingredients.
In order to make clear the intuitive content and possible analogies with modal
principles, we will abuse notation and we will not distinguish between a formula
and its code numbers, leaving to the reader an appropriate strict formalization.231
As to the Truth Axioms, they include:
• T-In: A →TA;
• T-Out: TA →A;
• T-Rep: TA →TTA;
• T-Del: TTA →TA;
• T-Cons: ¬(TA ∧T¬A);
• T-Comp: TA ∨T¬A;
• U-Inf: ∀nT(A(n)) →T((∀x)A(x));
• E-Inf: T((∃x)A(x)) →∃nT(A(n)).
Then four Truth Rules are also considered:
• T-Intro: A / TA;
• T-Elim: TA / A;
• ¬T-Intro: ¬A / ¬TA;
• ¬T-Elim: ¬TA / ¬A.
The main theorem states that the following are the only maximal consistent subsets
of the optional list:
(A) T-In, T-Rep, ¬T-Elim, T-Intro, T-Del, T-Comp, U-Inf, E-inf ;
231In particular, when we write (∀n)T(A(n)), we understand that the quantiﬁcation within the
scope of T makes sense because we can use a standard formalized substitution operation.

982
Andrea Cantini
(B) T-Rep, T-Cons, T-Comp, U-inf, E-Inf;
(C) T-Del, T-Cons, T-Comp, U-Inf, E-Inf;
(D) ¬T-Elim, T-Intro, T-Elim, ¬T-Intro, T-Cons, T-Comp, U-Inf, E-Inf;
(E) T-Intro, T-Elim, ¬T-Intro, T-Del, T-Cons, U-Inf;
(F) ¬T-Elim, T-Intro, T-Elim, T-Del, U-Inf;
(G) T-Rep, ¬T-Elim, T-Intro, T-Elim, U-Inf;
(H) T-Out, T-Rep, T-Elim, ¬T-Intro, T-Del, T-Cons, U-Inf;
(I) T-Rep, ¬T-Elim, T-Elim, T-Del, U-Inf.
The proof consists of displaying ω-models or else suitable consistent sets satisfying
the required optional axioms, and, in order to get maximality, by a systematic
recollection of various inconsistencies. Among them, it is worth mentioning the
proof of L¨ob’s theorem in the form
(40) T(TA →A) →TA
from the axioms BaseT with T-Rep and T-Intro.
Connections with proof theory are made apparent by two theorems:
(i) Let FS⌈be the system including BaseT with the optional axioms ¬T-Elim,
T-Intro, T-Elim, ¬T-Intro, T-Cons, T-Comp. Then FS⌈is a conservative
extension of Peano Arithmetic.
(ii) Let T0 be BaseT with the optional axioms T-Out, T-Elim, ¬T-Intro, T-Del,
T-Cons, U-Inf. Then T0 is conservative over the ﬁrst order theory ID1 of
one inductive deﬁnition (or the subsystem BI of second order arithmetic).
[Friedman and Sheard, 1987] raised the question whether (ii) holds even if T-Rep is
added; the problem has been solved in [Cantini, 1990] by proof theoretic methods
(and actually by investigating a cut free inﬁnitary calculus based on inferences
which are essentially Gentzen-like versions of T-intro and ¬T-Intro). In the same
paper, it is also shown that the Friedman-Sheard theory is naturally related to the
van Fraassen supervaluation semantics.
Recently, Halbach [1994] has shown that the result (i) extends to the case where
even U-Inf and E-inf are assumed. If the induction schema is restricted to arith-
metical formulas, the restricted system FS⌈, consisting of T-intro, T-elim, T-Cons,
T-Comp, and the quantiﬁer principles U-Inf and E-Inf, is conservative over Peano
Arithmetic. Moreover, if FS is the system which includes the induction schema
for arbitrary formulas, then it has the same strength as ramiﬁed analysis of rank
at most ω (and it roughly corresponds to a theory of ﬁnitely iterated arithmetical
truth).

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
983
Clearly the systems FS and FS⌈are very close to axiomatize a notion of consis-
tent and complete truth; yet, full adequacy is not reached (as T-Rep is not present,
as it would be inconsistent).
On the conceptual side, though the FS is a good approximation to a naive
notion of (arithmetical) truth, FS has no ω-model. In fact, in 1987 McGee [1985]
proved with an ingenious ﬁxed point argument that any theory including U-Inf,
T-Cons and closed under T-Intro must be ω-inconsistent.
On ill-founded Tarskian hierarchies
Another example of ω-inconsistent theory of truth is given by Visser [1989]. There
he shows the existence of an inﬁnite descending sequence {Ln | n ∈ω} of Tarskian
languages,232 such that L0 contains a truth predicate T0 for L1, L1 has a truth
predicate T1 for L2, etc. The resulting set
Th(N) + {Ti(⌈α⌉}) ↔α | α sentence of Li+1, i ∈ω}
(where Th(N is the set of sentences true in the standard model N of PA) is easily
seen consistent by compactness. However, already the set PA + {Ti(⌈α⌉}) ↔α |
α sentence of Li+1, i ∈ω} is ω-inconsistent
6.2
Reﬂective closures
From a wholly diﬀerent perspective, axiomatic theories of self-referential truth,
which formalize the closure conditions related to Kripke’s jump operator, were in-
vestigated by Feferman in connection with an unramiﬁed approach to predicativity
and with the general problem of the incompleteness of formal systems (reﬂective
closure of a theory, see [Feferman, 1991]). The idea is to give a formally precise
answer to the question: “which statements in the base language L of a theory S
ought to be accepted if one has accepted the basic axioms and rules of S ? ” The
answer receives an axiomatic formalization by means of Feferman’s notion of weak
reﬂective closure Ref(S) of S, which consists in expanding the ground system with
a notion of partial self-applicable truth.
For example, let S:=PA and assume we actually work in a deﬁnitional extension
of Peano arithmetic, which represents and proves the basic fact about elementary
syntax233 and whose language includes two additional unary predicate T and F .
232An apparently independent paper is [McCarthy, 1988]. By the way, there is a hint already
in Kripke [1975].
233Of course, we presuppose a standard encoding of the ground arithmetical language L: #E
is the code of E (E being an expression, i.e. a term or a formula of L); ⌈E⌉stands for the
term (actually the numeral) representing #E. So CT(x), For(x), Sent(x) are (respectively) the
predicates “x is the code of a closed L-term”, “x is the code of a formula ”, “x is the code of a
sentence”; if O is a logical symbol, the dot notation ˙O stands for the corresponding (syntactical
representation of the same) operations deﬁned on codes of terms, formulas, etc. The notation
a(x) is a shortening for the term representing the operation of substituting the ﬁrst free variable
of the expression encoded by a with the xth-numeral. val(x) designates the operation, associating
to the term encoded by x the numeral representing its value.

984
Andrea Cantini
Then Ref(PA) is the theory which includes Peano axioms with the induction
schema extended to the whole language and the so-called Self-Truth axioms:
(i) CT(x) ∧CT(y) →((T(x ˙=y) ↔val(x) = val(y)) ∧(F(x ˙=y) ↔¬val(x) =
val(y)));
(ii) CT(x) →(T( ˙T(x)) ↔T(val(x))) ∧(F( ˙T(x)) ↔F(val(x)));
(iii) CT(x) →(T( ˙F(x)) ↔F(val(x))) ∧(F( ˙F(x)) ↔T(val(x)));
(iv) (T( ˙¬(x)) ↔F(x)) ∧(F( ˙¬(x) ↔T(x)));
(v) (T(x) ∧T(y) ↔T(x ˙∧y)) ∧(F(x) ∨F(y) ↔F(x ˙∧y));
(vi) ((∀x)T(a(x)) ↔T(˙∀a)) ∧((∃x)F(a(x)) ↔F(˙∀a)).
The main theorem states
Ref(PA) ≡RA<ϵ0
This means that the ordinary reﬂective closure of arithmetic is in fact equivalent
to predicative analysis of any level up to the ﬁrst ϵ-number ϵ0 i.e. roughly to
the fragment of second order arithmetic, which is based upon transﬁnite iteration
(along ϵ0) of the standard arithmetical comprehension
(∃X)(∀u)(u ∈X ↔ϕ(u))
ϕ being a formula containing only number theoretic quantiﬁers and possibly free
second order variables.
The notion of ordinary reﬂective closure can be also extended by a suitable
substitution rule in order to answer the problem of which schemata can be re-
garded as implicit in accepting a given list of schematic axioms and rules. It turns
out that the resulting notion of schematic reﬂective closure Ref ∗(PA(P)) yields
an alternative unramiﬁed characterization of predicative analysis (cf. [Feferman,
2005]:
Ref ∗(PA(P)) ≡RA<Γ0
234
The example witnesses how investigations deriving from formal semantics and
paradoxes have reached a high level of integration with diﬀerent advanced areas
of mathematical logic; for instance, while the lower bound result is actually a re-
ﬁnement of typical predicative well-ordering techniques, the upper bound theorem
exploits sophisticated methods and results from reductive proof theory, depending
on the fact that Ref(PA) can be modelled in ﬁxed point theories, and that these
are interpretable, via a trick of Aczel [1977], in the subsystem Σ1
1 −AC of second
order arithmetic, which is known, since a celebrated result of Friedman (1968),
to be predicatively reducible to RA<ϵ0. It is worth recalling that this proof of
234Γ0 is the ﬁrst strongly critical ordinal, which is known to be the ﬁrst impredicative ordinal
(in the sense of the Feferman-Sch¨utte characterization of predicativity).

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
985
the upper bound result uses the fact that Ref(PA) does not exclude non-minimal
ﬁxed point models,235 since the consistency axiom Cons
(∀x)(Sent(x) →(¬T(x) ∨¬F(x))
is not assumed.
REMARK 6. That the main theorem still holds once consistency is assumed, has
been proved in [Cantini, 1989].
Furthermore, the system where consistency is
replaced by completeness, i.e. by the axiom
(∀x)(Sent(x) →(T(x) ∨F(x))
has the same strength (it is actually intertranslatable with the theory based on
consistent truth) and it corresponds to axiomatizing the largest ﬁxed point of the
Kripkean operator of §5.3.
It turns out that suitable variants of ‘reﬂective closure’ can be proﬁtably applied
as tools for proof-theoretic investigations: for instance, as an intermediate step for
computing the proof theoretic strength of transﬁnitely iterated ﬁxed point theories
(see [J¨ager et al., 1999]); or for designing strong systems conservative over PA or
even weaker systems (see [Cantini, 1997]).
6.3
Recursively saturated models of PA and classical arithmetical
truth
Classical arithmetical truth has been investigated in the context of non-standard
models of PA. Indeed, once formal languages are arithmetized, one necessarily
meets in arbitrary models of PA non-standard correlates of syntactical notions236
and the question arises: for which models of PA can we deﬁne a notion of truth
(or satisfaction) for such non-standard languages?
More precisely, if M is a model of PA, L(M) is the language obtained by
adjoining constants naming the elements of M, and L∗(M) is the set of formulas
in the sense of M, it is natural to inquire whether there exists a full satisfaction
class for M, that is, a subset Σ of sentences of L∗(M), containing all true atomic
and negated atomic sentences, satisfying the conditions
• for every sentence ϕ of L∗(M), exactly one of ϕ and ¬ϕ belongs to Σ;
• for every sentence ϕ, ψ of L∗(M), ψ ∨ϕ ∈Σ if and only if at least one of ϕ,
ψ belongs to Σ;
• for each sentence ∃xψ of L∗(M), ∃x.ψ ∈Σ if and only if ψ(a) ∈Σ, for some
a ∈|M|.
235So in a sense the theory axiomatizes the closure properties of an arbitrary ﬁxed point model,
see §5.2.
236This was noticed as early as 1963 by Abraham Robinson [1963].

986
Andrea Cantini
Since the mid seventies, the problem has received fruitful attention (see [Kot-
larski et al., 1981], [Lachlan, 1981], [Smith, 1987], [Kotlarski, 1991], [Kaye, 1991],
[Kotlarski and Z.Ratajczyk, 1990]) and a highlight of this research is certainly
the discovery of the connection between recursive saturation237 and existence of
satisfaction classes over non-standard countable PA-models:
(i) Lachlan [1981] showed that, if a non-standard model M of PA has a satis-
faction class, then M is recursively saturated;
(ii) conversely, [Kotlarski et al., 1981] has established that every countable re-
cursively saturated model of PA has a full satisfaction class.238
The proof of theorem (ii) is ingenious and it is based upon a proof theoretic
characterization of recursive saturation by means of M-logic relative to a given
countable M; recursive saturation is actually equivalent to the consistency of
the empty set (of sentences) in M-logic. Another crucial idea is that of ﬁnite
approximation of non-standard formulas.
Quite recently, with diﬀerent motivations, stemming from the philosophical de-
bate on the so-called deﬂationist theories of truth, Halbach [1994] noticed that
the main theorem of
[Kotlarski et al., 1981] has an interesting proof theoretic
by-product for theories of classical arithmetical truth.
Let AT (acronym for “arithmetical truth”) be the natural extension of Peano
arithmetic PA, which comprises: 1. the inductive clauses of the classical Tarskian
truth predicate T, restricted to (arbitrary codes of) arithmetical (i.e. T-free) for-
mulas; 2. the axiom T-ind, saying that every arithmetical instance of the induction
principle is true.
Then AT and PA have the same arithmetical theorems;239 for, if M is an ar-
bitrary countable model of PA and ϕ is an arithmetical sentence, then there also
exists a recursively saturated elementary (countable) extension M∗, which satis-
ﬁes ϕ; by the Kotlarski-Krajewski-Lachlan theorem, there exists a subset X of
M∗, having the closure conditions of a satisfaction class and hence also satisfying
the axioms of AT. [Halbach, 1999] also shows that, if only arithmetical induction
is allowed and T-ind is omitted from AT, then the resulting system is proof-
theoretically reducible to PA240 by means of a suitable ﬁnitary cut elimination
argument.
237Recall that a structure M is recursively saturated if and only if, for every n ∈ω, for every
recursive set Φ(x1, . . . , xn) of L(M)-formulas with free variables in the list x1, . . . , xn, if every
ﬁnite subset of Φ(x1, . . . , xn) is satisﬁable in M, then Φ(x1, . . . , xn) is satisﬁable in M.
238The satisfaction class may be chosen to be highly pathological, i.e. to contain the negation
of a non standard sentence which is a disjunction of 0 = 0.
239Feferman [1991] has considered (a version of) AT without T-ind, but endowed with arith-
metical induction, under the name of “ordinary truth theory of PA”, and he has stated its
conservativity over PA.
240Of course AT with full induction schema is much stronger than AT and can be proven of
the same strength as arithmetical comprehension with full induction.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
987
7
CONCLUSION
This ﬁnal section has a three-fold aim:
(i) it quickly surveys additional logical results, related to paradoxes, truth, self-
reference, which have been published in the interval 1990-2002;
(ii) it considers a few tentative applications in diﬀerent ﬁelds (Theoretical Lin-
guistics, Computer Science, AI);
(iii) it ﬁlls up some gaps in the previous exposition.
We do not claim completeness and the choice largely depends on the interests
of the present author; we simply wish to complete the picture with a sample of
updated references and an idea of future directions.241
7.1
Miscellaneous works: 1990-2002
Paradoxes without self-reference
Self-reference is apparently crucial in the whole matter of paradoxes and ﬁxed point
theorems represent the mathematically literate way of rephrasing most paradoxical
arguments. So it may be of interest to inquire to what extent self-reference is
essential or it can be eliminated in favor of alternatives. Historically, as we already
know from §2.5 and §5.6., there are genuine paradoxes arising from unfoundedness
or ungroundedness. For instance, it has been remarked that using inﬁnite levels,
one can also obtain a semantical contradiction without self-reference.
This is
Yablo’s paradox [Yablo, 1985], [Yablo, 1993].
Assume that there are inﬁnitely many people a0, a1, a2, . . . and each one says
the same sentence: “at least one of the people following me is lying”. Then there
is no classical assignment to the statements, since, if a sentence ai is true, it must
be followed by a false one, say ak, for some k > i, which in turn must be followed
only by true statements. Then ak+1 is true and hence followed by a false sentence:
contradiction. Hence ai must be false; so it is followed only by true statements; a
fortiori, ai+1 is true, hence followed by a false sentence; contradiction.242
241To this aim, let us also mention: (i) contributions on circularity, truth and paradoxes, due to
Gupta, Chapuis, and others, with developments of Gaifman’s theory of pointers, in the collective
volume [Chapuis and Gupta, 2000]; (ii) McDonald [2000] which introduces a theory of truth,
which is comparable in expressive power to Kripke’s, and, in addition has a notion of being
meaningful, that “can internally express the meaningfulness of any meaningless expression can
itself be meaningful expressed”; (iii) Field [2003]; (iv) the discussion of the analogy between the
logic of truth and the logic of rational choice in Gaifman [1999].
242At a closer look, this is actually not a paradox without self-reference; for instance, if we try
to formalize the very deﬁnition of the sequence (ai)i∈ω in the language of Peano arithmetic with
a truth predicate T, it is natural to proceed self-referentially, selecting with the second recursion
theorem (for primitive recursive indexes PRI) a PRI-index ﬁxed point a, such that
[a](n) =
˙
z
}|
{
⌈(∃k)(k > n ∧¬T([a](k))⌉

988
Andrea Cantini
In the same vein, it may be of interest to mention a game-theoretic version of
Mirimanoﬀ’s paradox: the so called hypergame paradox of Zwicker (see [Zwicker,
1987]). A game G between two players A and B is grounded if every game of G
terminates after ﬁnitely many moves. The hypergame is: A chooses a grounded
game G, B chooses a move in G and the game then follows the rules of G. G being
grounded, also the hypergame is grounded. So A can choose the hypergame itself,
and then B has to choose. But B can choose the hypergame again, and so on; so
we get an inﬁnite game carried out according to the rule of a grounded game . . .
The general proof pattern behind the hypergame argument has been exploited
by [Bernardi and D’Agostino, 1997] as a sort of general proof schema for proving
results in recursion theory, set theory and the theory of Magari algebras.
A mathematical approach to the general issue self-reference vs. unfoundedness
has been recently developed by Bernardi [2001]. He observes that, besides Yablo’s
and Hypergame paradoxes, several classical results - existence of a non r.e. set,
Cantor’s theorems on the non-denumerability of the reals and the non-existence of
a surjection from a set onto its power set - can be transformed into unfoundedness
arguments.
This leads to the natural idea of regarding unfounded chains as generalized
ﬁxed points and to investigate corresponding existence theorems (in analogy with
standard ﬁxed point theorems).
To make this precise, let f : X →X: a sequence (x)n∈ω of elements of X is
an unfounded chain if f(xn+1) = xn for every n ∈ω. The problem is to ﬁnd
conditions on X and f, guaranteeing the existence of an unfounded chain. Here
is an example of a topological solution:
Theorem ([Bernardi, 2001, p. 167]). Let X be a compact Hausdorﬀspace and
let f : X →X be a continuous function. Then f has an unfounded chain.
On the proper logical side, there is an interesting application to Magari algebras:
Theorem ([Bernardi, 2001, p. 172]).
Every term in a Magari algebra has an
unfounded chain.
This is a generalization of the well-known ﬁxed point theorem of provability logic,
where f(x) = x has solutions, provided every occurrence of x is boxed or positive
in f(x) (see [Boolos and Sambin, 1991], [Boolos, 1993] ).
Category theoretic and type-theoretic paradoxes
In 1969 Lawvere [1969] observes that “the similarity between the famous arguments
of Cantor, Russell, G¨odel and Tarski (. . .) suggests that these arguments should all
be special cases of a single theorem about a suitable kind of abstract structure”.
He goes on to oﬀer a ﬁxed point theorem in cartesian closed categories (in short
c.c.c’s).

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
989
This kind of conceptual frame has been later worked out with the categorical
interpretation of untyped lambda calculus 243 and in a corresponding categorical
treatment of ﬁxed point constructions.
Recently, Pavlovic [1992] develops Lawvere’s insight by introducing the notion of
paradoxical structure over the type Ω of truth values in a cartesian closed category;
again paradoxical structure are so devised that every morphism t from Ω to Ω in
a given c.c.c C has a ﬁxed point Yt, in the sense that t ◦Yt = Yt.
[Pavlovic, 1992] also introduces a notion of generalized paradoxical structure,
in order to cover recent paradoxes arising from (polymorphic) type theories, in
particular Reynolds’s construction in [Reynolds, 1984] of a type A ≃PPA.244
In type-theoretic context, there is a well-known paradox, due to Girard, for
Martin-L¨of’s (unpublished version of) type theory with the type of all types [Troel-
stra and van Dalen, 1988] ch.11, 7.4. If the type U of all types exists, it is possible
to deﬁne the type of all well-founded relations on elements of U and this yields
a contradiction, which is a type-theoretic version of the paradoxes of Burali-Forti
and Mirimanoﬀ.
Since the mid 80’s, Girard-type paradoxes have become important as consis-
tency tests of certain impredicative extensions of polymorphic lambda calculus
and its generalization (the theory of constructions). For instance, Coquand [1986]
has proved that the theory of constructions with four levels as well as its extension
with the Σ constructor are inconsistent; see also [Coquand, 1994]. A general point
is that we cannot accept simultaneously second order impredicative quantiﬁcation
as granted, say, by the axiom stating that the collection of propositions forms
a type and interpret existential quantiﬁcation as generalized disjoint sum (with
projections; this the so-called strong Σ). For additional discussion of the problem,
see [Jacobs, 1989].
It is worth mentioning that all these paradoxes could also be naturally grouped
with those of §7.1.
Berry’s paradox and incompleteness
In 1966 P. Vopenka [1966] gave an alternative proof of the second incompleteness
theorem for the Bernays-G¨odel axiomatic theory by exploiting Berry’s paradox
(§2.3). Further work can be found in the textbook on set theory of Krivine [1972].
More recently, an elegant application of Berry’s paradox is to be found in Boolos
[1989], where incompleteness is proved in the form: there is no algorithm whose
output contains all true statements of arithmetic and no false ones. The idea is
to render the notion of nameability, which is crucial for Berry’s argument, in the
243See Lambek’s work, [Lambek and Scott, 1986] with the notion of C-monoid, and Longo and
Asperti [1991].
244More generally, it has been established that, for each inhabited type B in polymorphic
lambda calculus with equality, there exists a type A such that
(A →B) →B ≃A

990
Andrea Cantini
arithmetical language and this can be achieved using some precise version of the
notion of algorithm (Turing machines, etc.). So, assuming that M is a machine
whose output contains no false statement, one says that F(x) names n, provided
M outputs the (code of the formula) (∀x(x = ¯n ↔F(x)). This implies a smooth
and elegant rephrasing of Berry’s argument; remarkably, Boolos’ argument does
not use diagonalization.
Boolos’s version can be criticized, since it is weaker than the standard one and
hence it does not yield the second incompleteness theorem. Kikuchi [1994] shows
that the diﬃculty can be overcome, if one understands the relation “F(x) names
n” as:
PA ⊢F(¯n) ∧(∀x)(F(x) →x = ¯n)
The second incompleteness theorem is then proved by model-theoretic methods,
in particular using the existence of deﬁnable end extensions for models of PA +
Cons(T), where T is a recursively axiomatizable extension of PA, Cons(T) is the
formalized consistency statement for T. This is a consequence of the so-called
arithmetized completeness theorem and takes inspiration from Kreisel’s model the-
oretic proof of the second incompleteness theorem.
Usually, these model theoretic proofs need stronger metamathematical assump-
tions, but a careful analysis, as carried out in [Kikuchi and Tanaka, 1994], shows
that the relevant work can be done in the well-known fragment of second order
arithmetic, WKL0, which is conservative over primitive recursive arithmetic by a
theorem of Friedman (see [Simpson, 1999]).
The Berry paradox is linked to the incompleteness phenomena also because of
work (going back to the sixties and the seventies) in the so-called Kolmogorov
complexity and algorithmic information theory (due to Kolmogorov, Solomonoﬀ,
Chaitin; see for references [Chaitin, 1995], [Odifreddi, 1989]).
Indeed, let the Kolmogorov complexity K(n) of a number n be deﬁned as the
least (index of a ) Turing machine e such that {e}(0) ≃n and call a number n
random if and only if n ≤K(n).
Kolmorogov proved in 1963 that the set of random numbers is simple (so it
is recursively enumerable, but its complement is inﬁnite and does not contain
inﬁnite r.e. subsets). Remarkably, the proof is again a form of Berry’s argument
and Chaitin has shown how to exploit randomness to make the limitations of
formal systems precise.
Kikuchi [1997] proved the second incompleteness theorem via Kolmogorov com-
plexity. The formalized ﬁrst incompleteness theorem takes the form: for every
recursively axiomatizable extension T of PA, there exists a numeral e such that,
provably in T,
Cons(T) →(∀x)(¬PrT (
˙



⌈e < K(x)⌉))
(41)
ω −Cons(T) →(∀x)(e < K(x) →¬PrT (
˙



⌈K(x) ≤e⌉))
(42)

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
991
(ω-Cons(T) formalizes ω-consistency). The unprovability of Cons(T) is then im-
plied by (41)-(42) with the arithmetized completeness theorem and the same tech-
niques of [Kikuchi and Tanaka, 1994].
For an updated survey of new proofs of the incompleteness, found in 1990s, see
[Kotlarski, 2003].
Neo-Fregean theories
Since the eighties, there has been an attempt to isolate those parts of the system of
the Fregean Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, that can be vindicated as consistent and
yet have enough strength to deﬁne a model of natural numbers. This has the con-
sequence of inducing a critical reappraisal of logicistic foundations of arithmetic,
where numbers are viewed as extensions of concepts.
Roughly, the prototype Fregean system can be regarded as an extension of
second order logic with a function symbol designating an injective application ϵ
from concepts into individuals, i.e. satisfying
(43) ϵ(F) = ϵ(G) ↔F ≡G
Here F, G, etc. stand for concept variables , while ≡means that (∀x)(Fx ↔Gx).
(43) corresponds to axiom V of Frege’s Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, which allows
a deﬁnition of membership as
x ∈y ⇔(∃F)(y = ϵ(F) ∧Fx)
and the provability of the naive comprehension by means of full second order
comprehension CA2,245 whence Russell’s contradiction. In the literature one can
ﬁnd two strategies for repairing the system:
(i) restricting (43);
(ii) restricting CA2.
Ad [(i)]. This direction was inaugurated in 1983 by C. Wright, followed then by
Burgess, Hodes, Boolos, Heck and others.
An idea of technical results and of
the still ongoing research can be extracted from Boolos’s work [1987] and from
the essays in part II of [Boolos, 1998]. Roughly, the technical achievement can be
summarized as follows. Let us consider the extension FA of second order logic with
a binary relation η which makes sense of concepts (represented as second order
variables) and individuals. Let FeqG be the second order formula expressing the
relation “ there is a bijection between the objects falling under F and those falling
under G”. Add the axiom Numbers
(∀F)(∃!x)(∀G)(Gηx ↔FeqG)
245I.e. the schema (∃F)(∀x)(Fx ↔ϕ), where ϕ is an arbitrary formula and F does not occur
in ϕ.

992
Andrea Cantini
Then the main theorem is that FA is (ﬁnitistically) interpretable in second order
arithmetic PA2, and conversely FA yields an inner model of PA2. Thus FA is
powerful enough to recover the crucial parts of Frege’s construction. In particular,
Numbers implies the so-called Hume Principle, that is, there exists an operation
F →NF satisfying
NF = NG ↔FeqG
Ad [(ii)] The instance of CA2 which is responsible of contradictions, is Σ1
1 (see the
deﬁnition of ∈). There are results ensuring the consistency of the Fregean subsys-
tems based on comprehension restricted to predicative formulas (Heck [1996]) and
to Δ1
1-formulas (Ferreira and Wehmaier [2002]; see also Bell [1994]).
Quinean set theories
We already mentioned Quine’s theories in §3.4 .
Let us add that in the early
ﬁfties Quine’s theory was used also as a basic logical system for mathematical
logic and the foundations of mathematics. Later most work has dealt with the
consistency problem. There are important results, due to Specker, Jensen, Gri˘sin,
Boﬀa, Crabb´e, Forster and others. Here is a sample:
1. Specker [1962] establishes the equivalence of NF with standard type the-
ory with extensionality plus the schema of typical ambiguity, which roughly
states that two arbitrary types i and i+1 are isomorphic; Specker’s construc-
tion leads to a structural counterpart of NF-models, reducing the consistency
problem to the existence of models for type theory with shifting automor-
phisms (i.e. with automorphisms granting that typical ambiguity holds);
2. R. B. Jensen [1969] has shown the existence of models with shifting auto-
morphisms, provided extensionality is weakened to allow atoms. This yields
the consistency of a theory NFU and variants thereof with axioms of inﬁnity
and choice; 246 the proof requires models with indiscernibles and Ramsey’s
theorem;
3. Gri˘sin proved that the full strength of NF is already given by NF4, i.e. the
system using the types 0, 1, 2, and 3; on the other hand, it is known that
NF3 is consistent and weak, see [Boﬀa, 1977];
4. Crabb´e [1982] has proven the consistency of the impredicative subsystems
NFI of NF, where a set {x | ϕ} exists provided ϕ can be stratiﬁed using
types not exceeding the type of the set itself.
Feferman [1974b] experiments with NF, in order to delineate a foundation for a
general theory of structures and category theory. A systematic survey of NF is
given by Forster [1995], while a reappraisal of the restricted system NFU with
246NF is inconsistent with choice and proves an axiom of inﬁnity as known by Specker NFU is
consistent relative to Peano arithmetic.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
993
urelements is due to R. Holmes in the monograph [1998], where also a form of
stratiﬁed combinatory logic version of NFU is investigated.
At last, NF has ramiﬁcations into the theory of concepts: there are contribu-
tions by Cocchiarella [1986], [1992] to property theory and to predication [1989],
basically on extensional grounds and closer in spirit to the original Fregean ideas.
This work leads to theories of concepts equiconsistent with Quinean set theories.
Recently, [Cantini, 2004] has investigated a Kripke-like theory of truth in a
consistent, though fully impredicative fragment of Quine’s set theory. In the new
model, the set of all propositions and the set of all truths do exist, and, to a
certain extent, the notion of truth has rather strong closure properties (this is
motivated by the Russell paradox of §2.1; for alternative analyses, [Oksanen, 1999],
[Cocchiarella, 2000]).
Positive set theories and hyperuniverses
We already know from §4.4 that non-uniform positive comprehension is consistent
with extensionality. But it is important to observe that principles like GPC and its
models occur in apparently unrelated ﬁelds, like the foundations of set theory and
the mathematical theory of concurrency (for references regarding the applications,
[Forti and Honsell, 1996b]).
New results strengthening [Forti and Hinnion, 1989] appear in [Forti and Hon-
sell, 1996b] and in [Forti and Honsell, 1996a], which is mainly motivated by the
consistency problems of GPC with choice principles.
The notion of hyperuniverse is introduced, in order to provide abstract struc-
tural counterparts of models by the comprehension principle GPC of [Forti and
Hinnion, 1989] for the class GPF of generalized positive formulas.247
Hyperuniverses can be deﬁned via algebraic closure conditions: a transitive set
N is a hyperuniverse if and only if
1. N is closed under binary union and arbitrary intersections;
2. if x ∈N, then {x},  x, P(x) = {u ∈N | u ⊆x}, D(x) = {u ∈N | u∩x = ∅}
are all in N;
3. separation: if x and y are disjoint elements of N, there exists z ∈N such
that x ⊆z and y ⊆(N −z).
On the other hand, there are topological characterizations of hyperuniverses: they
can be naturally assigned a k-compact uniform k-topology, for some weakly com-
pact strongly inaccessible cardinal, and they coincide with their exponential space.
Furthermore, it is possible to give a general concrete construction of hyperuniverses
(within models of set theory with choice and Anti-foundation AFA), which spe-
cializes at once to all the previously known hyperuniverses, like the topological
models Mk of Malitz and the models Nk studied in [Forti and Honsell, 1996a].
247Recall that GPF is the least collection which contains prime formulas of the form x = y, x ∈y
and is closed under disjunction, conjunction and quantiﬁcation (both existential and bounded
universal quantiﬁcation).

994
Andrea Cantini
GPC-theories can have great strength and their relations with choice is rather
delicate; for instance, Esser [1999] shows that the Morse-Kelley impredicative class
theory and GPC with the inﬁnity axiom and a suitable closure schema due to Boﬀa
are mutually interpretable. On the other hand, the same theory is inconsistent
with the axiom of choice.
Topological models are also studied by Hinnion [1994], who tackles the consis-
tency problem of naive comprehension with extensionality in partial logic and its
dual (called here paradoxical; see §5.3 ).
Recently, Hinnion and Libert [2003] show that if uniform positive comprehen-
sion is restricted to =-free conditions, then it is consistent to add extensionality in
the form: if two sets have the same elements, then they belong to the same sets (=
is deﬁned `a la Leibniz). So all the inconsistency results involving uniform compre-
hension and extensionality (think of Gilmore’s and Gordeev’s proofs) essentially
depend on the fact that = is assumed as a primitive notion.
Possible world semantics for modal notions conceived as predicates
This is a most recent work done by Halbach, Leitgeb and Welch [2003]. In spite
of the well known negative results of [Montague, 1963], [Kaplan and Montague,
1960] (see section 6.1), there are good reasons to interpret modal notions with
predicates:248 in particular, the expressive power of the language is severely re-
stricted when □is a modal operator. It is then shown how to develop a Kripke
semantics for the modality □understood as a predicate (and hence □A is properly
□(⌈A⌉)). A frame ⟨Wd, R⟩consists of a set Wd of worlds and a binary relation
R on Wd, where each world is a standard model of Peano Arithmetic, expanded
with a denotation for □. Then □A holds in a world i if and only if k |= A in all
models k, which are R-accessible from i.
As expected, paradoxes or limitative theorems (like the Liar, G¨odel’s second
incompleteness theorem, Montague [1963] and McGee [1985]) transform into re-
sults, implying the non-admissibility of many frames, e.g., reﬂexive frames, for the
predicate interpretation. Thus the main problem is to ﬁnd suﬃcient and neces-
sary conditions for the existence of a suitable interpretation of □at any world
(Characterization Problem CP).
Besides many non-trivial results and methods, already surveyed in §5 above, the
(partial) solution of CP requires hard work and results of admissible set theory,
higher recursion theory, ω-logic. Once more, it witnesses the technical sophistica-
tion of to-day formal semantics.
Logics with generalized quantiﬁers and paradoxes
This work is essentially due to Hintikka and his school ([Hintikka, 1995a], [Hin-
tikka, 1998], [Sandu, 1998]). The starting point is that the Σ1
1-fragment of the sec-
ond order language of arithmetic can be characterized as an independence friendly
248Earlier work in this direction is due to Asher and Kamp [1989] and to Gupta and Belnap
[1993].

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
995
(IF) ﬁrst order language, “which permits that an existential quantiﬁer (∃y) is
independent on a universal quantiﬁer (∀x) within whose scope it occurs. This
IF-quantiﬁcation is indicated with (∃y/∀x) and it allows a game theoretical se-
mantics, where truth corresponds to the existence of suitable Skolem functions (or
strategies); in particular (∃y/∀x) corresponds to the choice of a move disregard-
ing any information about the move of the player associated with the universal
quantiﬁcation on x.
It is shown that the truth predicate for the IF-language is again expressible as
an IF-formula and hence one obtains a semantically closed language in complexity
Σ1
1. The Liar paradox implies that in the IF-language the law of excluded middle
fails, since there are games that are not determinate. Another feature of truth for
the IF-language is that the deﬁnition is not compositional: the truth of a complex
sentence is not fully determined by its simpler components.
Recent developments with contraction free logics
White [1987], [1993] has investigated a strengthening of Gri˘sin’s logic.
He ob-
serves that a ﬁxed point property holds in the system and proves inconsistency
with extensionality, again in a natural deduction framework. In [Restall, 1993]
there is an attempt to give an abstract characterization of those logics which sup-
port naive comprehension. Akama [1996] introduces a natural deduction calculus
based on contraction free logic and untyped comprehension, which also includes
a constructive negation in the sense of Nelson. The main result is a normal form
theorem, which implies the consistency of the corresponding naive set theory (in a
sense, this is a natural deduction counterpart 249 of Gri˘sin’s set theory). Petersen
[2000] considers a contraction free calculus based on inclusion and abstraction as
primitive notions, where logical notions can be deﬁned.
The calculus actually
amounts to the intuitionistic fragment of Gri˘sin (i.e. BCK-logic). After proving a
cut elimination theorem and a ﬁxed point theorem (compare with [Girard, 1998],
[Cantini, 2003]), he faces the problem of founding natural numbers in a contrac-
tion free framework. There is a diﬃculty here, since proving the main closure
conditions and induction for numbers does require some form of contraction. This
leads to extend the basic calculus with suitable rules of induction, and the consis-
tency proof becomes quite complex (it is carried out `a la Gentzen using an ordinal
assignment to derivations and transﬁnite induction up to ωω). Interestingly, the
249In this connection, let us recall also a much earlier suggestion in proof-theoretic vein, inspired
by Fitch [1952], and given by Prawitz in his monograph [1965].
There he considers natural
deduction with the additional abstraction rules:
(44)
A[x := t]
t ∈{x | A}
t ∈{x | A}
A[x := t]
He then observes that paradoxes involve deductions without normal form, and so he proposes to
distinguish between quasi-deductions (arbitrary usual natural deductions in the extended calcu-
lus) and deductions in the proper sense, that have to be normal. So the lesson from paradoxes
is that there are quasi-deductions, which cannot be normalized. This idea of a proof theoretic
characterization of paradoxes has received an interesting development in the papers of Tennant
[1982], [1995].

996
Andrea Cantini
calculus becomes inconsistent as soon as the Lukasiewicz logic Lℵis assumed (in
contrast with [White, 1979]).
Contraction free truth. Skolem’s idea of applying analytical techniques to solve
classical paradoxical situations has been recently revived by H´ajek, Paris and
Shepherdson [2000]: they prove that there exist models of the theory PALTr2,
i.e. Peano Arithmetic with self-referential truth, endowed with (a suitable version
of) L-logic250 and the schema
T(⌈ϕ⌉) ↔ϕ
ϕ being an arbitrary sentence of the appropriate extended arithmetical language.
However there is no way to expand the standard model of Peano arithmetic to a
model of PALTr2. So we cannot have a natural truth notion for arithmetic even
in fuzzy logic.251 It is also shown that it is not possible to ﬁnd a model of PA
with L-logic and (some) inductive axioms for truth, since the resulting theory is
contradictory.
REMARK 7. Incidentally, observe that levels of implication (see §4.3, [Flagg and
Myhill, 1987b]) are a way of blocking contraction for implication.
ZFC in a linear environment. Proof-theoretic methods have been successfully
applied by Shirahata [1996] in order to show that the theory LZF with naive com-
prehension and linear logic is a conservative extension of ZF−, i.e. ZF without
foundation. The proof makes use of a cut elimination argument (based on a suit-
able triple induction), and an extension to the set-theoretic language of Girard’s
translation A →A+ of classical logic into linear logic: the main result is that, if
LZF proves A+, then ZF−proves A.
7.2
“From the Liar Paradox to Computer Science”
Self-referential theories of truth and abstraction, though originally suggested by
the Foundations of Mathematics, are tentatively applied to problems, arising from
Theoretical Linguistics, Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Concerning the ﬁrst direction, there are applications of type free systems based
on Feferman and Aczel work to the process of nominalization in natural languages.
By nominalization one roughly means the process of creating a noun phrase out
of sentences, inﬁnitives, etc.; e.g. this is apparent in passing from “the old Galileo
lived in Arcetri” to: “that the old Galileo lived in Arcetri is widely known”. This
linguistic process has non-trivial logical aspects for two reasons.
On one side, there is an analogy with the abstraction process and with the
problem of representing classes or concepts by means of individuals, which is basic
in Frege’s approach and in naive set theory, as well as in recent proposals (think
of J¨ager’s systems cited in section 4.4 ).
On the other side, it is apparent that nominalization often generates inten-
sional contexts and calls for a theory of properties or concepts; see [Chierchia and
250It is the so called RPL∀-logic, see [H´ajek et al., 2000].
251An ω-inconsistency is also stated in [Restall, 1992]

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
997
Turner, 1988], also the collective volume [Chierchia et al., 1989], [Turner, 1983],
[Turner, 1987], [Turner, 1997], [Kammeradine, 1992a], [Kammeradine, 1992b],
[Orilia, 2000], [Hamm and van Lambalgen, 2001]. Technically, there is a variety
of methods at work here, from domain theory, to ﬁxed point theory and revision
theory. Also, the work of Bealer [1994], [Bealer and M¨onnich, 1989] on property
theory is naturally subsumed under the applications to natural languages.
There is an additional issue which is of importance for Linguistics and has
played a relevant role since the early investigations on paradoxes: partiality. For
an updated analysis, the reader is referred to [Fenstad, 1997].
A less direct, but equally relevant fact concerns the use of partial models, three
valued semantics, ﬁxed point methods and related proof theoretic tools to prob-
lems pertaining to the semantics of Logic Programming.
Here some pertinent
paper: [Kunen, 1987], [Fitting, 1986], [Fitting, 1989], [Fitting, 1993]; [J¨ager and
St¨ark, 1995]. As in the case of the relation between inductive deﬁnability and
Kripkean truth languages, there is a two-sided link: for instance, [Fitting, 1997]
lifts to the theory of truth the notion of stable model coming from the semantics of
logic programming. The latest contribution in this direction is to our knowledge
[Fitting, 2002].
Formal systems incorporating some form of self-referential truth or predica-
tion together with a ground applicative structure have been considered for appli-
cation in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, especially to the issue of knowledge representa-
tion ([Perlis, 1985], [Perlis, 1988], [Perlis, 1989], [Perlis and Subrahmanjan, 1994],
[Turner, 1990]) and to the theory of reasoning agents. The systems in question
exploit supervaluation methods or semi-inductive methods (see [Davies, 1991]).
Logical frameworks for Computer Science, suggested by Frege structures (Aczel,
Mendler, Carlisle [Aczel et al., 1991]) have been also investigated and taken into
account, as well as illative theories of relations, in connection with situation se-
mantics, [Plotkin, 1990].
Similarly, theories of operations and classes of the sort Feferman investigated in
the seventies and in the eighties (see §4.4) have inspired logical systems, to be used
as foundations of computation and (functional) programming (e.g. see [Talcott,
1992], [Talcott and Mason, 2002]).
It is worth recalling that the circularity issue is typically borderline, and it
bears at the same time upon linguistics, computer science and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence. This is exempliﬁed by the applications of the anti-foundation axiom and
the corresponding mathematics of non-well founded phenomena, as developed by
Barwise and Moss [1996]. As to the link with situation theory, we refer the reader
to the chapter of [Seligman and Moss, 1997] in [Benthem and Meulen, 1997]
Interestingly enough, there has been an attempt [Moschovakis, 1990] to solve
Frege’s puzzle of the Morning and Evening Star within abstract recursion theory.
In particular, Moschovakis [1990] works out a proposal of making the distinction
between sense (Sinn) and reference(Bedeutung) precise. The natural informal idea
is that senses correspond to algorithms, while denotations correspond to values
(the sense of an expression, just as an algorithm, allows us to grasp the meaning

998
Andrea Cantini
of an expression and identify its denotation, i.e the value).
This has been formally implemented in the deﬁnition of an extension LPCR
(lower predicate calculus with reﬂection) of ﬁrst order logic with a formula con-
structor WHERE for directly introducing self-reference.
Formulas of LPCR have a denotational semantics, i.e. they are interpreted as
partial monotone functionals (using essentially a strong Kleene semantics) and
the operator WHERE corresponds to the deﬁnitions by simultaneous recursion.
Kripke’s notion of self-referential truth is easily represented in LPCR.
Besides standard denotational semantics, LPCR possesses an intensional se-
mantics: i.e. to each LPCR-expression one can associate a normal form (corre-
sponding to the intension), so that intensional equality is decidable.
7.3
Appendix I: truth and logical complexity, a summary
Getting around the theorem on the undeﬁnability of truth requires attention to
the logical complexity involved in the chosen semantical schema. The moral is
that under suitable weakening of logical complexity, there exist languages which
can deﬁne their own truth. Here is a summary of what has been achieved:
1. positive existential languages admit of a positive existential truth predicate:
this is essentially proved by Myhill [1950];
2. Σ2-languages can express their own truth deﬁnition; this has been proved by
Magari [1975];
3. there exist several natural languages of complexity Π1
1, typically the combi-
natorial system of Fitch, Kripke’s languages;
4. there exist truth predicates of complexity Σ1
1 for languages that are seman-
tically closed, typically (i) those obtained by considering the greatest ﬁxed
points of the monotone operators of the previous point; (ii) those based on
the so-called IF-languages.
5. there exist self-referential truth predicates of complexity Π1
2.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Research for this work has been supported at diﬀerent stages by MURST and
the University of Florence. It originated more than ten years ago (an extended
abstract dates back to 1993) under the stimulus of Professor D. van Dalen, who
kindly invited the author to contribute with a paper on paradoxes to a project
for a History of Mathematical Logic. Since then, due to the slow pace the plan
developed, the work has been updated several times and has grown up by successive
extensions and revisions, till its merging in the present Handbook. We are grateful
to the Editors for hospitality in the new enterprise. We wish to thank Reinhard
Kahle and Akihiro Kanamori for useful comments and corrections.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
999
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Ackermann, 1941] W. Ackermann. System der typefreien Logik I. Forschungen zur Logik und
zur exakten Wissenschaften, Heft 7, 1941.
[Ackermann, 1950] W. Ackermann. Widerspruchsfreier Aufbau der Logik. Typenfreies System
ohne Tertium non datur. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 15:33–37, 1950.
[Ackermann, 1952] W. Ackermann. Widerspruchsfreier Aufbau einer typenfreien Logik I. Math-
ematische Zeitschrift, 55:364–384, 1952.
[Ackermann, 1958] W. Ackermann. Ein typenfreies System der Logik mit ausreichender logis-
chen Anwendungsf¨ahigkeit. Archive for Mathematical Logic, 4:3–26, 1958.
[Ackermann, 1961] W. Ackermann. Grundgedanken einer typenfreien Logik. In A. Fraenkel,
editor, Essays on the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 143–155. Magnes Press, Jerusalem,
1961.
[Aczel and Feferman, 1980] P. Aczel and S. Feferman. Consistency of the unrestricted abstrac-
tion principle using an intensional equivalence operator. In Hindley and Seldin [1980], pages
67–98.
[Aczel et al., 1991] P. Aczel, P. Carlisle, and N. Mendler.
Two frameworks of theories and
their implementation in Isabelle. In G.M. Plotkin, editor, Logical Frameworks, pages 5–39,
Cambridge, 1991. Cambridge University press.
[Aczel, 1977] P. Aczel. The strength of Martin-L¨of’s intuitionistic type theory with one universe.
In S. Mietissen and J. Va¨an¨anen, editors, Proceedings of the Symposium in Mathematical Logic
in Oulu 1974 and Helsinky 1975, volume 2, pages 1–32. Dept. of Philosophy, University of
Helsinky, 1977.
[Aczel, 1980] P. Aczel.
Frege structures and the notions of proposition, truth and set.
In
J. Barwise, H.J. Keisler, and K. Kunen, editors, The Kleene Symposium, pages 31–59. North
Holland, Amsterdam, 1980.
[Aczel, 1988] P. Aczel. Non-Well-Founded Sets. CSLI, Stanford, 1988.
[Akama, 1996] S. Akama.
Curry’s paradox in contractionless constructive logic.
Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 25:135–150, 1996.
[Anellis, 1991] I. Anellis. The First Russell Paradox. In T. Drucker, editor, Perspectives on the
History of Mathematical Logic, pages 33–46. Birkh¨auser, 1991.
[Antonelli, 1994a] G. A. Antonelli. Non-well-founded sets via revision rules. Journal of Philo-
sophical Logic, 23, 1994.
[Antonelli, 1994b] G.A. Antonelli. The complexity of revision. Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic, 35:67–72, 1994.
[Antonelli, 1994c] G.A. Antonelli. A revision-theoretic analysis of the arithmetical hierarchy.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 35:204–208, 1994.
[Antonelli, 1998] G. A. Antonelli. The complexity of revision. revised version, pp. 1-3, 1998.
[Asher and Kamp, 1989] N. Asher and H. Kamp.
Self-reference, attitude and paradox.
In
Chierchia et al. [1989], pages 85–158.
[Asperti and Longo, 1991] A. Asperti and G. Longo. Categories, Types and Structures. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1991.
[Baldwin, 1905] J. Baldwin.
Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology.
Clarendon, Oxford,
1905.
[Barwise and Etchemendy, 1987] J. Barwise and J. Etchemendy. The Liar. An Essay in Truth
and Circularity. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1987.
[Barwise and Moss, 1996] J. Barwise and L. Moss.
Vicious Circles. On the Mathematics of
Non-Wellfounded Phenomena. CSLI Publications, Stanford, 1996.
[Barwise, 1975] J. Barwise. Admissible sets and structures. Springer, Heidelberg, 1975.
[Bealer and M¨onnich, 1989] G. Bealer and U. M¨onnich.
Property theories.
In Gabbay and
Guenthner [1989], pages 133–251.
[Bealer, 1994] G. Bealer. Property theory: the type-free approach vs. the Church approach.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 23:139–171, 1994.
[Beeson, 1985] M. Beeson.
Foundations of Constructive Mathematics.
Springer, Berlin-
Heidelberg, 1985.
[Behmann, 1931] H. Behmann. Zu den Widerspr¨uchen der Logik und der Mengenlehre. Jahres-
bericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 40:37–48, 1931.

1000
Andrea Cantini
[Behmann, 1959] H. Behmann. Der Pr¨adikatenkalk¨ul mit limitierten Variablen: Grundlegung
einer nat¨urlichen exakten Logik. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 24:112–140, 1959.
[Bell, 1994] J.L. Bell. Fregean extensions of ﬁrst-order theory. Mathematical Logic Quarterly,
40:27–30, 1994.
[Belnap, 1982] N. Belnap. Gupta’s rule of revision theory of truth. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 11:103–116, 1982.
[Benthem and Meulen, 1997] J. Van Benthem and A. Ter Meulen, editors. Handbook of Logic
and Language. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1997.
[Bernardi and D’Agostino, 1997] C. Bernardi and G. D’Agostino. Translating the hypergame
paradox: remarks on the set of founded elements of a relation. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
25:545–557, 1997.
[Bernardi, 2001] C. Bernardi. Fixed points and unfounded chains. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 109:163–178, 2001.
[Bernays, 1973] P. Bernays, editor. L. Nelson: Gesammelte Schriften in neun B¨andern, vol-
ume II. Hamburg, 1973.
[Bernstein, 1905a] F. Bernstein. Die Theorie der reellen Zahlen. Jahresbericht der Deutschen
Mathematker-Vereinigung, 14:447–449, 1905.
[Bernstein, 1905b] F. Bernstein. ¨Uber die Reihe der transﬁniten Ordnungszahlen. Mathematis-
che Annalen, 60:187–193, 1905.
[Bernstein, 1905c] F. Bernstein. Zum Kontinuumproblem. Mathematische Annalen, 60:463–464,
1905.
[Betti, 1999] A. Betti. The Porohy on Dnepr. Leswenieskian roots of Tarski’s semantics. In
T. Childers, editor, The Logic Yearbook 1998, pages 99–109, Filosoﬁa, Prague, 1999.
[Bochvar, 1937] D.A. Bochvar.
Ob odnom tr´ehzna˘cnom is˘cisl´enii i ´ego prim´en´enii k anlizu
paradocsov klassi˘c´eskogo ras˘sir´ennogo funknional’nogo is˘cisl´eni´a. Mathematicheski Sbornik,
4 (46):287–308, 1937. (English translation by M. Bergmann: ‘On a three-valued logical cal-
culus and its applications to the analysis of the paradoxes of the classical extended functional
calculus’ in: History and Philosophy of Logic vol.2:87-112, 1981).
[Boﬀa, 1977] M. Boﬀa. The consistency problem for NF. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 42:215–
220, 1977.
[Boolos and Sambin, 1991] G. Boolos and G. Sambin. Provability: the emergence of a mathe-
matical modality. Studia Logica, 50:1–23, 1991.
[Boolos, 1987] G. Boolos. The consistency of Frege’s foundations of arithmetic. In J. J. Thomson,
editor, On Being and Saying: Essays for Richard Cartwright, pages 3–20, Cambridge, Mass.
MIT Press, 1987. MIT Press.
[Boolos, 1989] G. Boolos.
A new proof of the G¨odel incompleteness theorem.
Notice of the
American Mathematical Society, 36:388–390, 1989.
[Boolos, 1993] G. Boolos. The logic of provability. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1993.
[Boolos, 1998] G. Boolos. Logic, Logic and Logic. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.,
1998. R. Jeﬀrey, ed.
[Borel et al., 1905] E. Borel, R. Baire, J. Hadamard, and H. Lebesgue. Cinq lettres sur la th´eorie
des ensembles. Bulletin de la Soci´ete´e Math´ematique de France, 33:261–273, 1905.
[Borel, 1904] E. Borel. Quelques remarques sur les principes de la th´eorie des ensembles. Math-
ematische Annalen, 59:514–516, 1904.
[Borel, 1908] E. Borel. Les paradoxes de la th´eorie des ensembles. Ann. ´Ecole Nor. Sup., 25,
1908. also in [Borel, 1914].
[Borel, 1914] E. Borel.
Le¸cons sur la th´eorie des fonctions.
Gauthier-Villars, Paris, second
edition, 1914.
[Brady, 1971] R.T. Brady. The consistency of the axioms of abstraction and extensionality in a
three-valued logic. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 12:447–452, 1971.
[Brouwer, 1907] L.E.J. Brouwer. Over die Grondslagen der Wiskunde. Dissertation, Amster-
dam, 1907. (English translation in: Collected Works I, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1975).
[Burali-Forti, 1897a] C. Burali-Forti. Sulle classi ben ordinate. Rendiconti del Circolo Matem-
atico di Palermo, 11:260, 1897.
[Burali-Forti, 1897b] C. Burali-Forti. Una questione sui numeri transﬁniti. Rendiconti del Cir-
colo Matematico di Palermo, 11:154–164, 1897.
[Burge, 1979] T. Burge. Semantical paradox. Journal of Philosophy, 76:169–198, 1979.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
1001
[Burge, 1982] T. Burge. The liar paradox: tangles and chains. Philosophical Studies, 41:352–
366, 1982.
[Burgess, 1986] J. Burgess. The truth is never simple. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 51:663–681,
1986.
[Burgess, 1988] J. Burgess. Addendum to: “The truth is never simple”. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 53:390–392, 1988.
[Cain and Damnjanovic, 1991] J. Cain and Z. Damnjanovic.
On the weak Kleene scheme in
Kripke’s theory of truth. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 56:1452–1468, 1991.
[Cantini and Minari, 1999] A. Cantini and P. Minari. Uniform inseparability in explicit math-
ematics. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 64:313–326, 1999.
[Cantini, 1980] A. Cantini. A note on three-valued logic and Tarski theorem on truth deﬁnitions.
Studia Logica, 39:405–415, 1980.
[Cantini, 1989] A. Cantini. Notes on formal theories of truth. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische
Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 35:97–130, 1989.
[Cantini, 1990] A. Cantini. A theory of formal truth arithmetically equivalent to ID1. Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 55:244–259, 1990.
[Cantini, 1993] A. Cantini.
Extending ﬁrst order theory of combinators with self-referential
truth. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 58:447–513, 1993.
[Cantini, 1995] A. Cantini. Levels of truth. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 36:185–213,
1995.
[Cantini, 1996] A. Cantini.
Logical Frameworks for Truth and Abstraction.
North Holland,
Amsterdam, 1996.
[Cantini, 1997] A. Cantini. Proof-theoretic aspects of self-referential truth. In M. Dalla Chiara,
K.Doets, and D.Mundici, editors, Logic and Scientiﬁc Methods, I, pages 7–27. Reidel, Dor-
drecht, 1997.
[Cantini, 2003] A. Cantini. The undecidability of Gri˘sin’s set theory. Studia Logica, 74:345–368,
2003.
[Cantini, 2004] A. Cantini.
On a Russellian paradox about propositions and truth.
In Link
[2004], pages 259–284.
[Cantor, 1932;1962] G. Cantor. Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophis-
chen Inhalts. Berlin; Hildesheim, 1932;1962.
[Cantor, 1991] G. Cantor. Briefe. Olms, Berlin–Hildesheim, 1991. edited by H. Meschkowski
and W. Nilson.
[Carnap, 1932-33] R. Carnap. Die logizistiche Grundlegung der Mathematik. Erkenntins, 2:91–
105, 1932-33.
[Carnap, 1934a] R. Carnap. Die Antinomien und die Unvollst¨andigkeit der Mathematik. Monat-
shefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 41:263–284, 1934.
[Carnap, 1934b] R. Carnap. Die logische Syntax der Sprache. Springer, Berlin, 1934.
[Chaitin, 1995] G. Chaitin. The Berry paradox. Complexity, 1:26–30, 1995.
[Chang, 1963] C.C. Chang. The axiom of comprehension in inﬁnite-valued logic. Mathematica
Scandinava, 13:19–39, 1963.
[Chang, 1965] C.C. Chang.
Inﬁnite-valued logic as a basis for set theory.
In Y. Bar Hillel,
editor, Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science: Proceedings of the 1964 International
Congress, pages 93–100. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
[Chapuis and Gupta, 2000] A. Chapuis and A. Gupta, editors.
Circularity, Deﬁnition and
Truth. Indian Council of Philosophical Reserach, New Dehli, 2000.
[Chapuis, 1996] A. Chapuis. Alternative revision theories of truth. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 24:399–423, 1996.
[Chierchia and Turner, 1988] G. Chierchia and R. Turner. Semantics and property theory. Lin-
guistics and Philosophy, 11:261–302, 1988.
[Chierchia et al., 1989] G. Chierchia, B. Partee, and R. Turner, editors. Properties, Types and
Meaning I, Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy, Dordrecht, 1989. Reidel.
[Church, 1932] A. Church. A set of postulates for the foundations of logic (1st paper). Annals
of Mathematics, 33:346–366, 1932.
[Church, 1933] A. Church. A set of postulates for the foundations of logic (2nd paper). Annals
of Mathematics, 33:839–864, 1933.
[Church, 1934] A. Church. The Richard’s paradox. American Mathematical Monthly, 41:356–
361, 1934.

1002
Andrea Cantini
[Church, 1941] A. Church. The Calculi of λ-Conversion. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, 1941.
[Church, 1976] A. Church.
Comparison of Russell’s resolution of the semantical antinomies.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 41:747–760, 1976.
[Chwistek, 1921] L. Chwistek. Antinomje logiki formalnej. Przeglqd Filozoﬁczny, 24:164–171,
1921. (English translation by Z. Jordan: Antinomies of formal logic, in: S. McCall, Polish
Logic 1920-1939, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1967, pg.338-345).
[Chwistek, 1922] L. Chwistek.
¨Uber die Antinomien der Prinzipien der Mathematik. Mathe-
mathische Zeitschrift, 14:236–243, 1922.
[Chwistek, 1926] L. Chwistek.
¨Uber die Hypothesen der Mengenlehre.
Mathemathische
Zeitschrift, 25:439–473, 1926.
[Chwistek, 1929] L. Chwistek. Neue Grundlagen der Logik und Mathematik. Mathemathische
Zeitschrift, 30:704–724, 1929.
[Chwistek, 1932] L. Chwistek. Neue Grundlagen der Logik und Mathematik, Zweite mitteilung.
Mathemathische Zeitschrift, 34:527–534, 1932.
[Chwistek, 1933] L. Chwistek. Die nominalistische Grundlegung der Mathematik. Erkenntnis,
3:367–388, 1933.
[Chwistek, 1948] L. Chwistek. The Limits of Science. Kegan Paul, London, 1948. (English
edition of Granice Nauki).
[Cocchiarella, 1986] N. Cocchiarella. Logical Investigation of Predication Theory and the Prob-
lem of Universals. Bibliopolis, Naples, 1986.
[Cocchiarella, 1989] N. Cocchiarella. Formal theories of predication. In Gabbay and Guenthner
[1989], pages 254–326.
[Cocchiarella, 1992] N. Cocchiarella.
Cantor’s power-set theorem versus Frege’s double-
correlation thesis. History and Philosophy of Logic, 13:179–201, 1992.
[Cocchiarella, 2000] N. Cocchiarella. Russell’s paradox of the totality of propositions. Nordic
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 5:25–37, 2000.
[Coquand, 1986] T. Coquand. An analysis of Girard’s paradox. In LICS’86, pages 227–236.
IEEE Press, 1986.
[Coquand, 1994] T. Coquand. A new paradox in type theory. In D. Prawitz, B. Skyrms, and
D. Westerstahl, editors, LMPS’90, pages 555–571. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 1994.
[Crabb´e, 1982] M. Crabb´e. On the consistency of an impredicative subsystem of Quine’s NF.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 47:131–136, 1982.
[Curry, 1930] H.B. Curry. Grundlagen der kombinatorischen Logik. American Journal of Math-
ematics, 52:509–536, 739–834, 1930.
[Curry, 1934a] H.B. Curry. Functionality in combinatory logic. In Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, volume 20, pages 584–90, 1934.
[Curry, 1934b] H.B. Curry. Some properties of equality and implication in combinatory logic.
Annals of Mathematics, 35:849–860, 1934.
[Curry, 1941] H.B. Curry. The paradox of Kleene and Rosser. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 41:454–516, 1941.
[Curry, 1942a] H.B. Curry.
The combinatory foundations of mathematical logic.
Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 7:49–64, 1942.
[Curry, 1942b] H.B. Curry.
The inconsistency of certain formal logics.
Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 7:115–117, 1942.
[Davies, 1991] N. Davies. A ﬁrst-order theory of truth, knowledge and belief. In J. van Eijck,
editor, Logic in AI, pages 170–179, Springer, Berlin, 1991.
[Dixon, 1907] A.C. Dixon. On well-order aggregates. Proceedings of the London Mathematical
Society (2nd series), 4:18–20, 1907.
[Drucker, 1991] T. Drucker, ed. Perspectives on the History of Mathematical Logic, Birkh¨auser,
1991.
[Epstein, 1992] R. Epstein. A theory of truth based on a medieval solution of the liar paradox.
History and Philosophy of Logic, 13:144–177, 1992.
[Esser, 1999] O. Esser. On the consistency of a positive theory. Mathematical Logic Quarterly,
45:105–116, 1999.
[Feferman, 1964] S. Feferman. Systems of predicative analysis I. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
29:1–30, 1964.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
1003
[Feferman, 1974a] S. Feferman.
Non-extensional type free theories of partial operations and
classiﬁcations I. In J. Diller and G.H. M¨uller, editors, Proof Theory Symposium, volume 500
of Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 73–118, 1974.
[Feferman, 1974b] S. Feferman. Some formal systems for the unlimited theory of structures and
categories. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 39:374–375, 1974. abstract.
[Feferman, 1975] S. Feferman. A language and axioms for explicit mathematics. Springer Lec-
ture Notes in Mathematics, 450:87–139, 1975.
[Feferman, 1977] S. Feferman. Categorical foundations and foundations for category theory. In
R. Butts and J. Hintikka, editors, Logic, Foundations of Mathematics and Computability,
pages 149–169, Reidel, Dordrecht, 1977.
[Feferman, 1979] S. Feferman. Constructive theories of functions and classes. In M. Boﬀa and
D. van Dalen, editors, Logic Colloquium ’78, pages 159–224. North Holland, Amsterdam,
1979.
[Feferman, 1982] S. Feferman. Iterated inductive ﬁxed point theories: application to Hancock’s
conjecture. In G. Metakides, editor, Patras Logic Symposion, pages 171–195. North Holland,
Amsterdam, 1982.
[Feferman, 1984] S. Feferman. Towards useful type-free theories I. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
49:75–111, 1984.
[Feferman, 1991] S. Feferman. Reﬂecting on incompleteness. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 56:1–49,
1991.
[Feferman, 2005] S. Feferman. Predicativity. In S. Shapiro, editor, The Oxford Handbook of
Philosophy of Mathematics and Logic, pages 590–625, Oxford, 2005. Oxford University Press.
[Fenstad, 1964] J.E. Fenstad.
On the consistency of the axiom of comprehension in the
Lukasiewicz inﬁnite-valued logic. Mathematica Scandinava, 14:64–74, 1964.
[Fenstad, 1997] J.E. Fenstad. Partiality. In Benthem and Meulen [1997], pages 649–682.
[Ferreira and Wehmeier, 2002] F. Ferreira and K. Wehmeier.
On the consistency of the Δ1
1-
fragment of Frege’s Grundgesetze. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 31(2002):301–311, 2002.
[Field, 2003] H. Field. A revenge-immune solution to the semantic paradoxes. Journal of Philo-
sophical Logic, 32:139–177, 2003.
[Finsler, 1925] P. Finsler.
Gibt es Widerspr¨uche in der Mathematik?
Jahresbericht der
Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 34:143–155, 1925.
[Finsler, 1926a] P. Finsler.
Formale Beweise und die Unentscheidbarkeit.
Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 25:676–682, 1926.
[Finsler, 1926b] P. Finsler. ¨Uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre. Mathematische Zeitschrift,
25:683–713, 1926.
[Fitch, 1936] F.B. Fitch. A system of formal logic without an analogue to Curry W-operator.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1:92–100, 1936.
[Fitch, 1942] F.B. Fitch. A basic logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 7:105–114, 1942.
[Fitch, 1944] F.B. Fitch. Representations of calculi. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 9:57–62, 1944.
[Fitch, 1946] F.B. Fitch. Self-reference in philosophy. Mind, 55:64–73, 1946.
[Fitch, 1948] F.B. Fitch. An extension of basic logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 13:95–106,
1948.
[Fitch, 1949] F.B. Fitch. The Heine-Borel theorem in extended basic logic. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 13:9–15, 1949.
[Fitch, 1952] F.B. Fitch. Symbolic Logic. Ronald Press, New York, 1952.
[Fitch, 1954a] F.B. Fitch. A deﬁnition of negation in extended basic logic. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 19, 1954.
[Fitch, 1954b] F.B. Fitch. A simpliﬁcation of basic logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 18:317–325,
1954.
[Fitch, 1958] F.B. Fitch. Quasi-constructive foundations for mathematics. In A. Heyting, editor,
Constructivity in Mathematics, pages 26–36. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1958.
[Fitch, 1963] F.B. Fitch.
The system CΔ of combinatory logic.
Journal of Symbolic Logic,
28:87–97, 1963.
[Fitch, 1964] F.B. Fitch.
Universal metalanguages in philosophy.
Review of Metaphysics,
17:396–402, 1964.
[Fitch, 1967a] F.B. Fitch. A complete and consistent modal set theory. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 32:93–103, 1967.
[Fitch, 1967b] F.B. Fitch. A theory of logical essences. The Monist, 51:104–109, 1967.

1004
Andrea Cantini
[Fitch, 1980] F.B. Fitch. A consistent combinatory logic with an inverse to equality. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 45:529–543, 1980.
[Fitting, 1986] M. Fitting. Notes on the mathematical aspects of Kripke’s theory of truth. Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 27:75–88, 1986.
[Fitting, 1989] M. Fitting. Bilattices and the theory of truth. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
18:225–256, 1989.
[Fitting, 1993] M. Fitting. The family of stable models. Journal of Logic Programming, 17:197–
225, 1993.
[Fitting, 1997] M. Fitting. A theory of truth that prefers falsehood. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 26:477–500, 1997.
[Fitting, 2002] M. Fitting. Fixpoint semantics for logic programming: a survey.
Theoretical
Computer Science, 278:25–51, 2002.
[Flagg and Myhill, 1987a] R. Flagg and J. Myhill.
An extension of Frege structures.
In
M. Dekker, editor, Lecture Notes in Pure and Applied Mathematics, volume 106, pages 197–
217, New York, 1987.
[Flagg and Myhill, 1987b] R. Flagg and J. Myhill. Implications and analysis in classical Frege
structures. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 34:33–85, 1987.
[Flagg and Myhill, 1989] R. Flagg and J. Myhill. A type-free system extending (ZFC). Annals
of Pure and Applied Logic, 43:79–97, 1989.
[Flagg, 1987] R. Flagg. κ-continuos lattices and comprehension principles for Frege structures.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 36:1–16, 1987.
[Forster, 1995] T. E. Forster. Set Theory with a Universal Set. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1995.
2nd edition.
[Forti and Hinnion, 1989] M. Forti and R. Hinnion. The consistency problem for positive com-
prehension principles. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 54:1401–1418, 1989.
[Forti and Honsell, 1983] M. Forti and F. Honsell. Set theory with free construction principles.
Annali della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, Classe di Scienze, Serie IV, 10:493–522,
1983.
[Forti and Honsell, 1996a] M. Forti and F. Honsell. Choice principles in hyperuniverses. Annals
of Pure and Applied Logic, 77:35–52, 1996.
[Forti and Honsell, 1996b] M. Forti and F. Honsell. A general construction of hyperuniverses.
Theoretical Computer Science, 156:203–215, 1996.
[Frege, 1962] G. Frege. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik I, II. Olms, Hildesheim, 1962.
[Frege, 1976] G. Frege. Wissenschaftslicher Briefswechsel. F. Meiner, Hamburg, 1976.
[Frege, 19842] G. Frege. Nachgelassene Schriften. F. Meiner, Hamburg, 19842.
[Friedman and Sheard, 1987] H. Friedman and M. Sheard.
An axiomatic approach to self-
referential truth. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 33:1–21, 1987.
[Friedman and Sheard, 1991] H. Friedman and M. Sheard. The disjunction and existence prop-
erties for axiomatic systems of truth. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 56:1–49, 1991.
[Gabbay and Guenthner, 1989] D. Gabbay and F. Guenthner, editors. Handbook of Philosoph-
ical Logic IV. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1989.
[Gaifman, 1988] H. Gaifman.
Pointers semantics:
solution to self-referential puzzles I.
In
M. Vardi, editor, TARK’88, pages 43–59, 1988.
[Gaifman, 1992] H. Gaifman. Pointers to truth. Journal of Philosophy, 89:223–261, 1992.
[Gaifman, 1999] H. Gaifman. Self-reference and the acyclicity of rational choice. Annals of Pure
and Applied Logic, 96:117–140, 1999.
[Gasser and Volken, 1975] J. Gasser and H. Volken, editors.
Logic and Set Theory in 20th
century Switzerland, Bern, 1975.
[Geach, 1955] P. Geach. On insolubilia. Analysis, 15:71–72, 1955.
[Gilmore, 1974] P. C.
Gilmore. The consistency of partial set theory without extensionality.
In T. Jech, editor, Axiomatic set theory II, volume 13 of Proceedings of Symposia in Pure
Mathematics, pages 147–153. A.M.S., Providence R.I, 1974.
[Gilmore, 1980] P. C. Gilmore. Combining unrestricted abstraction with universal quantiﬁca-
tion. In Hindley and Seldin [1980], pages 99–123.
[Gilmore, 1986] P. C. Gilmore. Natural deduction based set theories: a new resolution of the
old paradoxes. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 51:393–411, 1986.
[Gilmore, 2001] P. C. Gilmore. An intensional type theory: Motivation and cut- elimination.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 66:383–400, 2001.
[Girard, 1987a] J. Y. Girard. Linear logic. Theoretical Computer Science, 50:1–102, 1987.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
1005
[Girard, 1987b] J. Y. Girard. Proof Theory and Logical Complexity. Biliopolis, Napoli, 1987.
[Girard, 1998] J. Y. Girard. Light linear logic. Information and Computation, 143:175–204,
1998.
[G¨odel, 1931] K. G¨odel.
¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I. Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 38:173–198, 1931.
[G¨odel, 1944] K. G¨odel. Russell’s mathematical logic. In P. A. Schilpp, editor, The Philosophy
of Bertrand Russell, pages 125–153. Northwestern University Press, Evanston, Ill., 1944.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1978] I. Grattan-Guinness. How Bertrand Russell discovered his paradox.
Historia Mathematica, 5:127–137, 1978.
[Grelling and Nelson, 1908] K. Grelling and L. Nelson. Bemerkungen zu den Paradoxien von
Russell und Burali-Forti. Abhandlungen der Fries’chen Schule, 2:301–334, 1908. (also in: L.
Nelson, Ges.Werke).
[Griﬃn, 2004] N. Griﬃn. The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox. In Link [2004], pages 349–371.
[Gri˘sin, 1974] V. N. Gri˘sin. A non standard logic and its application to set theory (in Russian).
In Studies in formalized languages and non classical logics, pages 135–171, Izdat, Nauka,
Moskow, 1974.
[Gri˘sin, 1981] V. N. Gri˘sin. Predicate and set theoretic calculi based on logic without contraction
rules (Russian). Izvestiya Akademii Nauk SSSR Seriya Matematicheskaya, 45(1):47–68, 1981.
(English translation in: Math. USSR Izv., vol. 18(1):41-59, 1982).
[Grue and Berline, 1997] K. Grue and C. Berline. A κ-denotational semantics for map theory
in ZFC+SI. Theoretical Computer Science, 179:137–202, 1997.
[Gupta and Belnap, 1993] A. Gupta and N. Belnap. The Revision Theory of Truth. The MIT
Press, Cambridge Mass., 1993.
[Gupta, 1982] A. Gupta. Truth and paradox. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 11:1–60, 1982.
[H´ajek et al., 2000] P. H´ajek, J. Paris, and J. Shepherdson. The liar paradox and fuzzy logic.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 65:339–346, 2000.
[Halbach et al., 2003] V. Halbach, H. Leitgeb, and P. Welch. Possible world semantics for modal
notions conceived as predicates. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 32:179–223, 2003.
[Halbach, 1994] V. Halbach. A system of complete and consistent truth. Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic, 35:311–327, 1994.
[Halbach, 1996] V. Halbach. Axiomatische Wahrheitstheorien. Akademie Verlag, Berlin, 1996.
[Halbach, 1999] V. Halbach. Conservative theories of truth. Studia Logica, 62:353–370, 1999.
[Halld´en, 1949] S. Halld´en. The Logic of Nonsense. Uppsala Universitets ˚Arskrift, 1949.
[Hamm and van Lambalgen, 2001] F. Hamm and M. van Lambalgen. Event calculus, nominal-
isation, and the progressive. preprint, 1-77, 2001.
[Hayashi and Nakano, 1988] S. Hayashi and H. Nakano. PX: a computational logic. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass., 1988.
[Heck, 1996] R. G. Heck, Jr. The consistency of predicative fragments in Frege’s Grundgesetze
der Arithmetik. History and Philosophy of Logic, 17:209–220, 1996.
[Herzberger, 1970] H. Herzberger. Paradoxes of grounding in semantics. Journal of Philosophy,
17:145–167, 1970.
[Herzberger, 1982a] H. Herzberger.
Naive semantics and the liar paradox.
The Journal of
Philosophy, 79:479–497, 1982.
[Herzberger, 1982b] H. Herzberger. Notes on naive semantics. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
11:1–60, 1982.
[Hessenberg, 1906] G. Hessenberg. Grundbegriﬀe der Mengenlehere. Vandenhoek und Ruprecht,
G¨ottingen, 1906. (also in: Abhandlungen der Fries’chen Schule, Neue Reihe, 1:479-706, 1906).
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann.
Grundz¨uge der theoretischen
Logik. Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg, 1928.
[Hilbert and Bernays, 1939] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Die Grundlagen der Mathematik I,II.
Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg, 1939.
[Hilbert, 1905] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber die Grundlagen der Logik und der Arithmetik. In Verhandlun-
gen des Dritten Internationalen-Mathematiker Kongresses, pages 174–185. Teubner, Leipzig,
1905.
[Hilbert, 1918a] D. Hilbert. Axiomatisches Denken. Mathematische Annalen, 78:405–415, 1918.
[Hilbert, 1918b] D. Hilbert. Prinzipien der Mathematik. Vorlesung von D. Hilbert, Mathema-
tisches Institut der Georg-August Universit¨at G¨ottingen., 1918.
[Hindley and Seldin, 1980] R. Hindley and J. P. Seldin, editors. To H. B. Curry: Essays on
Combinatory Logic, Lambda Calculus and Formalism, New York, 1980. Academic Press.

1006
Andrea Cantini
[Hinnion and Libert, 2003] R. Hinnion and T. Libert. Positive abstraction and extensionality.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 68:828–836, 2003.
[Hinnion, 1994] R. Hinnion. Naive set theory with extensionality in partial logic and in para-
doxical logic. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 35:15–40, 1994.
[Hintikka, 1995a] J. Hintikka. Deﬁnire la verit`a, tutta la verit`a, nient’altro che la verit`a. Rivista
di Filosoﬁa, 86:3–54, 1995.
[Hintikka, 1995b] J. Hintikka, editor. From Dedekind to G¨odel. Essays on the development of
the foundation of mathematics, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1995.
[Hintikka, 1998] J. Hintikka. Truth deﬁnitions, Skolem functions and axiomatic set theory. The
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 4:303–337, 1998.
[Hobson, 1905] E. W. Hobson. On the arithmetic continuum. Proceedings of the London Math-
ematical Society, 4:21–28, 1905.
[Holmes, 1998] M. R. Holmes.
Elementary Set Theory with a Universal Set, volume 10 of
Cahiers du Centre de Logique. Academia Bruylant, Louvain-La-Neuve, 1998.
[Howard, 1980] W. A. Howard. The formulas as types notion of construction. In Hindley and
Seldin [1980], pages 480–490.
[Husserl, 1979] E. Husserl. Aufs¨atze und Rezensionen (1890-1910). Nijhoﬀ, The Hague, 1979.
[Jacobs, 1989] B. Jacobs.
The inconsistency of higher order extensions of Martin-L¨of’s type
theory. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 18:399–422, 1989.
[J¨ager and St¨ark, 1995] G. J¨ager and R. St¨ark. A proof theoretic framework for logic program-
ming. In S.R. Buss, editor, Handbook of Proof Theory. Elsevier, 1995.
[J¨ager et al., 1999] G. J¨ager, R. Kahle, A. Setzer, and T. Strahm. The proof-theoretic analysis
of transﬁnitely iterated ﬁxed point theories. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 64:53–67, 1999.
[J¨ager et al., 2001] G. J¨ager, R. Kahle, and T. Strahm.
Universes in explicit mathematics.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 109:141–162, 2001.
[J¨ager, 1987] G. J¨ager. Induction in the elementary theory of types and names. In E. B¨orger,
H. Kleine-B¨uning, and M.M. Richter, editors, Proceedings CSL’87, volume 329 of Springer
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 118–128, 1987.
[J¨ager, 1997] G. J¨ager. Power types in explicit mathematics. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 62:1142–
1146, 1997.
[Jech, 1973] T. Jech. The Axiom of Choice. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathe-
matics. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1973.
[Jensen, 1969] R.B. Jensen. On the consistency of a slight (?) modiﬁcation of Quine’s New
Foundations. In D. Davidson and J. Hintikka, editors, Words and Objections: Essays on the
work of W.V.O.Quine, pages 278–291, Dordrecht, 1969. Reidel.
[Kahle, 2002] R. Kahle. Universes over Frege Structures. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic,
pages 1–33, 2002.
[Kahle, 2004] R. Kahle. David Hilbert ¨uber Paradoxien. unpublished, 1-42, 2004.
[Kammeradine, 1992a] F. Kammeradine. Set theory and nominalisation I. Journal of Logic and
Computation, 2:579–604, 1992.
[Kammeradine, 1992b] F. Kammeradine. Set theory and nominalisation II. Journal of Logic
and Computation, 2:687–707, 1992.
[Kanamori, 2004] A. Kanamori.
Zermelo and set theory.
The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic,
10(4):487–553, 2004.
[Kaplan and Montague, 1960] D. Kaplan and R. Montague. A paradox regained. Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, 1:79–90, 1960.
[Kaye, 1991] R. Kaye. Models of Peano Arithmetic. Clarendon, Oxford, 1991.
[Kikuchi and Tanaka, 1994] M. Kikuchi and K. Tanaka. On formalization of model-theoretic
proofs of G¨odel’s theorems. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 35:403–412, 1994.
[Kikuchi, 1994] M. Kikuchi. A note on Boolos’ proof of the incompleteness theorem. Mathe-
matical Logic Quarterly, 40:528–532, 1994.
[Kikuchi, 1997] M. Kikuchi. Kolmogorov complexity and the second incompleteness theorem.
Archive for Mathematical Logic, 36:437–443, 1997.
[Kindt, 1978a] W. Kindt. The introduction of truth predicates into ﬁrst order languages. In
F. Guenthner and S.J. Schmidt, editors, Formal Semantics and Pragmatics for Natural Lan-
guages, pages 359–371, Reidel, Dordrecht, 1978.
[Kindt, 1978b] W. Kindt.
¨Uber Sprachen mit Wahreitspr¨adikat.
In Ch. Habel and S. Kan-
ngiesser, editors, Sprachdynamik und Sprachstruktur, pages 205–238, T¨ubingen, 1978. Max
Niemeyer.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
1007
[Kleene and Rosser, 1935] S.C. Kleene and J.B. Rosser.
The inconsistency of certain formal
logics. Annals of Mathematics, 36:630–637, 1935.
[Kleene, 1934] S.C. Kleene. Proofs by cases in formal logic. Annals of Mathematics, 35:529–544,
1934.
[Kleene, 1935] S.C. Kleene. A theory of positive integers in formal logic. American Journal of
Mathematics, 57:153–173; 219–244, 1935.
[Kleene, 1952] S.C. Kleene. Introduction to Mathematics. Wolters-Nordhoﬀ, 1952.
[Kleene, 1955] S.C. Kleene. On the forms of predicates in the theory of constructive ordinals
(2nd paper). American Journal of Mathematics, 66:405–428, 1955.
[Komori, 1989] Y. Komori. Illative logic based on BCK-logic. Mathematica Japanica, 34:585–
597, 1989.
[K¨onig, 1905a] J. K¨onig. ¨Uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre und das Kontinuumsproblem.
Mathematische Annalen, 61:156–160, 1905.
[K¨onig, 1905b] J. K¨onig.
Zum Kontinuum-Problem. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathem-
atiker-Vereinigung, 14:177–180, 1905.
[K¨onig, 1906] J. K¨onig.
¨Uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre und das Kontinuumsproblem.
Zweite Mitteilung. Mathematische Annalen, 63:217–221, 1906.
[Koons, 1992] R. Koons. Paradoxes of Belief and Strategic Rationality. Cambridge Studies in
Probability, Induction and Decision theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992.
[Kotlarski, 2003] H. Kotlarski. The incompleteness theorems after 70 years. Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, 126:125–138, 2004.
[Kotlarski and Z.Ratajczyk, 1990] H. Kotlarski and Z.Ratajczyk. Inductive satisfaction classes.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 47:199–223, 1990.
[Kotlarski et al., 1981] H. Kotlarski, S. Krajewski, and A. Lachlan. Construction of satisfaction
classes for non-standard models. Canadian Mathematical Bulletin, 24 (3):283–293, 1981.
[Kotlarski, 1991] H. Kotlarski. Full satisfaction classes: a survey. Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic, 32:573–579, 1991.
[Kraj˘cek, 1987a] J. Kraj˘cek. A possible modal formulation of comprehension scheme. Zeitschrift
f¨ur Mathematische ogik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 33:461–480, 1987.
[Kraj˘cek, 1987b] J. Kraj˘cek.
Some results and problems in the modal set theory MST.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 33:123–134, 1987.
[Kreisel, 1960] G. Kreisel. La pr´edicativit´e. Bulletin de la Societ´e Math´ematique de France,
88:371–391, 1960.
[Kremer, 1993] M. Kremer.
The Gupta-Belnap systems S# and S∗are not axiomatizable.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 34:583–596, 1993.
[Kripke, 1975] S. Kripke. Outline of a theory of truth. Journal of Philosophy, 72:690–716, 1975.
[Krivine, 1972] J.L. Krivine. Th´eorie Axiomatique des Ensembles. PUF, Paris, 1972.
[Kunen, 1987] K. Kunen.
Negation in logic programming.
Journal of Logic Programming,
4:231–245, 1987.
[Kuratowski and Tarski, 1931] K. Kuratowski and A. Tarski.
Les op´erations logiques et les
ensembles projectifs. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 17:240–248, 1931.
[Lachlan, 1981] A. Lachlan. Full satisfaction classes and recursive saturation. Canadian Math-
ematical Bulletin, 24 (3):295–297, 1981.
[Lambek and Scott, 1986] J. Lambek and P. J. Scott. Introduction to Higher Order Categorical
Logic. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1986.
[Landini, 2004] G. Landini. Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’ and Their Solution by Russell’s Substitu-
tional Theory. In Link [2004], pages 373–399.
[Lawvere, 1969] F. W. Lawvere.
Diagonal arguments and cartesian closed categories.
In
P. Hilton, editor, Category Theory, Homology Theory and their Applications, II, volume 92
of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 134–145, Berlin-Heidelberg, 1969. Springer.
[Lemmon, 1963] E.J. Lemmon. A theory of attributes based on modal logic. Acta Philosophica
Fennica, 16:95–122, 1963.
[Lesniewski, 1913] S. Lesniewski. Krytyca logicznej zasady wylaczonego ´srodka. Przegl¸ad ﬁlo-
zoﬁczny XVI, pages 315–352, 1913.
(English translation in:
[Surma et al., 1992], vol.1,
pp. 47-85).
[Levi, 1902] B. Levi. Intorno alla teoria degli aggregati. Rendiconti del Reale Istituto Lombardo
di Scienze e Lettere (seconda serie), 35:863–868, 1902.
[Levi, 1908] B. Levi. Antinomie logiche? Annali di Matematica (terza serie), tomo 15:188–216,
1908.

1008
Andrea Cantini
[Lewis and Langford, 1932] C.I. Lewis and C.H. Langford. Symbolic Logic. The Century Co.,
New York, 1932. (Reprinted Dover, New York, 1952).
[Link, 2004] G. Link, editor. One Hundred Years of Russell’s Paradox, Berlin, 2004. De Gruyter.
[L¨ob, 1955] M. L¨ob. Solution of a problem of Leon Henkin. The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
20:115–118, 1955.
[Lorenzen and Myhill, 1959] P. Lorenzen and J. Myhill. Constructive deﬁnitions of certain an-
alytic sets of numbers. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 24:37–49, 1959.
[L¨owe and Welch, 2000] B. L¨owe and P. D. Welch. Set theoretic absoluteness and the revision
theory of truth. Logic Colloquium, to appear, 2000.
[Maddy, 1983] P. Maddy. Proper classes. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 45:113–139, 1983.
[Magari, 1973] R. Magari. Meaning and truth in the Peano Arithmetic. Atti dell’Accademia dei
Lincei, Cl. Sci. Fis. Mat. Nat., 54:592–593, 1973.
[Magari, 1974] R. Magari.
Su certe teorie non enumerabili.
Annali di Matematica Pura e
Applicata, 97:119–152, 1974.
[Magari, 1975] R. Magari. Signiﬁcato e verit`a nell’aritmetica peaniana. Annali di Matematica
Pura e Applicata, 103:343–368, 1975.
[Malitz, 1976] R.J. Malitz.
Set theory in which the axiom of foundation fails.
PhD thesis,
University of California, Berekeley, California, 1976.
[Mancosu, 1999] P. Mancosu. Between Russell and Hilbert: Behmann on the foundations of
mathematics. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 5:302–330, 1999.
[Mancosu, 2003] P. Mancosu. The Russellian Inﬂuence on Hilbert and his School. Synth`ese,
137:59–101, 2003.
[Markowski, 1976] G. Markowski. Chain-complete posets and directed sets with applications.
Algebra Universalis, 6:53–68, 1976.
[Martin and Woodruﬀ, 1975] R. L. Martin and P. Woodfruﬀ. On representing ‘True-in-L’ in L.
Philosophia, 5:217–221, 1975.
[Martin-L¨of, 1975] P. Martin-L¨of. Intuitionistic type theory: predicative part. In H. Rose and
J. Shepherdson, editors, Logic Colloquium ’73, pages 73–118, North Holland, Amsterdam,
1975.
[Martin, 1970] R. L.
Martin, editor. The Paradox of the Liar. Yale University Press, Yale,
1970. (Reprinted by Ridgeview Press, Independence Ohio, 1978).
[Martin, 1970] R. L.
Martin, editor. Truth and the Liar Paradox, Oxford Univeristy Press,
1984.
[McCarthy, 1988] T. McCarthy. Ungroundedness in classical languages. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 17:61–74, 1988.
[McDonald, 2000] B. E.
McDonald. On meaningfulness and truth. Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 29:1–50, 2000.
[McGee, 1985] V. McGee. How truthlike can a predicate be? A negative result. Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 14:399–410, 1985.
[McGee, 1991] V. McGee.
Truth, Vagueness and Paradox.
Hackett Publishing Company,
Indianapolis-Cambridge, 1991.
[McGee, 1992] V. McGee. Maximal consistent sets of instances of Tarski’s Schema (T). Journal
of Philosophical Logic, 21(235-241), 1992.
[Minari, 1987] P. Minari. Some aspects of Kripke’s theory of truth. Unpublished notes, 1987.
[Mirimanoﬀ, 1917a] D. Mirimanoﬀ. Les antinomies de Russell et de Burali-Forti et le probleme
fondamentale de la th´eorie des ensembles. L’enseignement math´ematique, 19:37–52, 1917.
[Mirimanoﬀ, 1917b] D. Mirimanoﬀ. Remarques sur la th´eorie des ensembles et les antinomies
cantoriennes I. L’enseignement math´ematique, 19:209–217, 1917.
[Mirimanoﬀ, 1920] D. Mirimanoﬀ. Remarques sur la th´eorie des ensembles et les antinomies
cantoriennes II. L’enseignement math´ematique, 21:29–52, 1920.
[Montague, 1963] R. Montague. Syntactical treatment of modality, with corollaries on reﬂection
principles and ﬁnite axiomatizability. Acta Philosophica Fennica, 16:153–167, 1963.
[Moore and Garciadiego, 1981] G.H. Moore and A. Garciadiego. Burali-Forti’s paradox: a reap-
praisal of its origins. Historia Mathematica, 8:319–350, 1981.
[Moore, 1995] G.H. Moore. The origin of Russell’s paradox: Russell, Couturat and the antinomy
of inﬁnite number. In Hintikka [1995b], pages 215–239.
[Moschovakis, 1974] Y.N. Moschovakis. Elementary Induction on Abstract Structures. North
Holland, Amsterdam, 1974.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
1009
[Moschovakis, 1990] Y.N. Moschovakis. Sense and reference as algorithm and value. In Logic
Colloquium’ 90, Springer Lecture Notes in Logic, pages 210–249, 1990.
[Mow-Shaw-Kwei, 1954] Mow-Shaw-Kwei. Logical paradoxes for many-valued systems. Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 19:37–40, 1954.
[Myhill, 1950] J. Myhill. A system which can deﬁne its own truth. Fundamenta Mathematica,
37:190–192, 1950.
[Myhill, 1952] J. Myhill. A ﬁnitary metalanguage for extended basic logic. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 17:164–178, 1952.
[Myhill, 1975] J. Myhill. Levels of implications. In R. Barcan Marcus, R.L. Martin, and A. Ross,
editors, The Logical Enterprise, pages 179–185, New Haven, 1975. Yale University Press.
[Myhill, 1984] J. Myhill. Paradoxes. Synth`ese, 60:129–142, 1984.
[Negri, 1989] M. Negri. An autoapplicable truth predicate. Bollettino dell’Unione Matematica
Italiana, 3-B:29–39, 1989.
[Nepeivoda, 1973] N.N. Nepeivoda. A new concept of predicative truth and deﬁnability. Math-
ematical Notes, 13:439–444, 1973.
(English translation from:
Matematicheskie Zametki,
13:735-745, 1973).
[Odifreddi, 1989] P. Odifreddi.
Classical Recursion Theory I.
Studies in Logic 125. North
Holland, Amsterdam, 1989.
[Oksanen, 1999] M. Oksanen. The Russell-Kaplan paradox and other modal paradoxes: a new
solution. Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic, 4:73–93, 1999.
[Orilia, 2000] F. Orilia. Property theory and the revision theory of deﬁnitions. The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 65:212–245, 2000.
[Parsons, 1974] C. Parsons. The liar paradox. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 3:381–412, 1974.
(Reprinted in: [Martin, 1970], pages 9-45, with a Postscript).
[Pavlovic, 1992] D. Pavlovic. On the structure of paradoxes. Archive for Mathematical Logic,
31:397–406, 1992.
[Peano, 1902-1906] G. Peano. Additione. Revista de Matematica, 8:143–157, 1902-1906.
[Peckhaus and Kahle, 2002] V. Peckhaus and R. Kahle. Hilbert’s paradox. Historia Mathemat-
ica, 29:127–155, 2002.
[Peckhaus, 1990] V. Peckhaus. Hilbert’s Programm und Kritische Philosophie. Vandenhoek and
Ruprecht, G¨ottingen, 1990.
[Peckhaus, 2004] V. Peckhaus. Paradoxes in G¨ottingen. In Link [2004]. 501-515.
[Pelham and Urquhart, 1994] J. Pelham and A. Urquhart.
Russellian propositions.
In
D. Prawitz, B. Skyrms, and D. Westerstahl, editors, Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of
Science IX, pages 307–326, Amsterdam, 1994. Elsevier.
[Perlis and Subrahmanjan, 1994] D. Perlis and V.S. Subrahmanjan. Meta-languages, reﬂection
principles and self-reference.
In D.M. Gabbay, C.J. Hogger, and J.A. Robinson, editors,
Handbook of Logic in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Logic Programming, volume 2. Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1994.
[Perlis, 1985] D. Perlis.
Language with self-reference I: foundations.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
25:301–322, 1985.
[Perlis, 1988] D. Perlis. Language with self-reference II: knowledge, belief and modality. Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence, 34:179–212, 1988.
[Perlis, 1989] D. Perlis. Truth and meaning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 39:245–250, 1989.
[Petersen, 2000] U. Petersen. Logic without contraction as based on inclusion and unrestricted
abstraction. Studia Logica, 64:3065–4003, 2000.
[Plotkin, 1990] G. Plotkin. An illative theory of relations. In R. Cooper, K. Mukai, and J. Perry,
editors, Situation Theory and its Applications, pages 134–146, Stanford, 1990. CSLI.
[Plotkin, 1995] G. Plotkin. On a question of Friedman. pp. 1-16, 1995.
[Poincar´e, 1905] H. Poincar´e.
Les math´ematiques et la logique.
Revue de M´etaphysique et
Morale, 13:815–835, 1905.
[Poincar´e, 1906a] H. Poincar´e.
Les math´ematiques et la logique.
Revue de M´etaphysique et
Morale, 14:17–34, 1906.
[Poincar´e, 1906b] H. Poincar´e.
Les math´ematiques et la logique.
Revue de M´etaphysique et
Morale, 14:294–317, 1906.
[Poincar´e, 1909a] H. Poincar´e. La logique de l’inﬁni. Revue de M´etaphysique et Morale, 17:461–
482, 1909.
[Poincar´e, 1909b] H. Poincar´e. R´eﬂexions sur les deux notes pr´ec´edentes. Acta Mathematica,
32:195–200, 1909.

1010
Andrea Cantini
[Poincar´e, 1910] H. Poincar´e.
¨Uber transﬁniten Zahlen. In Sechs Vortr¨age ¨uber ausgew¨ahlte
Gegenst¨ande der reinen Mathematik und Physik, pages 43–48, Leipzig, Berlin, 1910.
[Poincar´e, 1912] H. Poincar´e. La logique de l’inﬁni. Scientia, 12:1–11, 1912.
[Prawitz, 1965] D. Prawitz. Natural Deduction. A Proof-theoretical Study. Almqvist and Wik-
sell, Stockholm, 1965.
[Priest, 1989] G. Priest. Reasoning about truth. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 39:231–244, 1989.
[Quine, 1937] W.V.O. Quine. New foundations for mathematical logic. American Mathematical
Monthly, 44:70–80, 1937.
[Ramsey, 1926] F. P.
Ramsey. The foundations of mathematics. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society, 25:338–384, 1926.
[Rathjen, 1998] M. Rathjen.
Explicit mathematics with the monotone ﬁxed point principle.
Journal fo Symbolic Logic, 63:517–550, 1998.
[Rathjen, 1999] M. Rathjen. Explicit mathematics with the monotone ﬁxed point principle ii:
Models. Journal fo Symbolic Logic, 64:509–542, 1999.
[Reinhardt, 1985] W. Reinhardt.
Remarks on signiﬁcance and meaningful applicability.
In
L. P.
de Alcantara, editor, Mathematical Logic and Formal Systems, volume 94 of Lecture
Notes in Pure and Applied Mathematics, pages 227–242. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1985.
[Reinhardt, 1986] W. Reinhardt. Some remarks on extending and interpreting theories with a
partial predicate for truth. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 15:219–251, 1986.
[Restall, 1992] G. Restall. Arithmetic and truth in Lukasiewicz’s inﬁnitely valued logic. Logique
et Analyse, 139-140:303–313, 1992.
[Restall, 1993] G. Restall. How to be really contraction free. Studia Logica, 52:381–391, 1993.
[Reynolds, 1984] J. C. Reynolds.
Polymorphysm is not set-theoretic.
In Semantics of Data
Types, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science 174, pp. 145–156, 1984.
[Richard, 1905] J. Richard.
Les principes des math´ematique et le probl`emes des ensembles.
Revue G´en´erale des Sciences Pures et Appliqu´ees, 16:541, 1905. (also in: Acta Mathematica,
30:295-296, 1906).
[Robinson, 1963] A. Robinson. On languages based on non-standard arithmetic. Nagoya Math-
ematical Journal, 22:83–107, 1963.
[Rogers, 1967] H. Rogers.
Theory of Recursive Functions and Eﬀective Computability.
Mc
Graw-Hill, New York, 1967.
[Rosser, 1939] J.B. Rosser. An informal exposition of proofs of G¨odel’s and Church’s theorem.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 4:53–60, 1939.
[Rouilhan, 2004] P. De Rouilhan. Substitution and Types: Russell’s Intermediate Theory. In
Link [2004], pages 401–415.
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics. Routledge and Kegan, London, 1903.
[Russell, 1905a] B. Russell. On denoting. Mind, 14:479–493, 1905.
[Russell, 1905b] B. Russell.
On the substitutional theory of classes and relations.
Received
by the London Mathematical Society on 24 April 1906, (in: B. Russell, Essays in Analysis,
edited by D. Lackey, Allen and Unwin, London, 1973), 1905.
[Russell, 1906a] B. Russell. Les paradoxes de la logique. Revue de M`etaphysique et Morale,
14:627–650, 1906.
[Russell, 1906b] B. Russell. On some diﬃculties in the theory of trasﬁnite numbers and order
types. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society (2nd series), 4:29–53, 1906.
[Russell, 1908] B. Russell.
Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types.
American
Journal of Mathematics, 30:222–262, 1908.
[Russell, 1993] B. Russell. The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell. Toward the Principles of
Mathematics: 1900-02. Routledge, London, 1993.
[Sainsbury, 1988] R.M. Sainsbury. Paradoxes. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1988.
[Sandu, 1998] G. Sandu. IF- logic and truth deﬁnitions. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 27:143–
164, 1998.
[Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1924] M. Sch¨onﬁnkel. ¨Uber die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik. Mathema-
tische Annalen, 92:305–316, 1924.
[Sch¨onﬂies, 1906] A. Sch¨onﬂies. ¨Uber die logischen Paradoxien der Mengenlere. Jahresbericht
der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 15:19–25, 1906.
[Sch¨onﬂies, 1909] A. Sch¨onﬂies.
¨Uber eine vermeintliche Antinomie der Mengenlehre.
Acta
Mathematica, 32:177–184, 1909.
[Sch¨onﬂies, 1911] A. Sch¨onﬂies. ¨Uber die Stellung der Deﬁnition in der Axiomatik. Jahresbericht
der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 20:222–255, 1911.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
1011
[Schr¨oder, 1890] E. Schr¨oder. Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik, Bd.1. Teubner, Leipzig,
1890.
[Sch¨utte, 1953] K. Sch¨utte. Zur Widerspruchsfreiheit einer typenfreien Logik. Mathematische
Annalen, 125:394–400, 1953.
[Sch¨utte, 1954] K. Sch¨utte. Ein widerspruchfreies System der Analysis auf typenfreier Grund-
lage. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 61:160–179, 1954.
[Sch¨utte, 1960] K. Sch¨utte. Beweistheorie. Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg, 1960.
[Sch¨utte, 1977] K. Sch¨utte. Proof Theory. Springer, Heidelberg, 1977.
[Scott, 1972] D. Scott. Continuous lattices. In W. Lawvere, editor, Toposes, Algebraic Geometry
and Logic, volume 274 of Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 97–136, 1972.
[Scott, 1975] D. Scott.
Combinators and classes.
In C. B¨ohm, editor, Lambda-calculus and
Computer Science, volume 37 of Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–26,
1975.
[Seldin, 1976] J. P.
Seldin. Recent advances in Curry’s program. Rendiconti del Seminario
Matematico dell’Universit`a e del Politecnico di Torino, 35:77–88, 1976.
[Seldin, 1980] J. P. Seldin. Curry’s program. In Hindley and Seldin [1980], pages 3–33.
[Seligman and Moss, 1997] J. Seligman and L. S. Moss.
Situation Theory.
In Benthem and
Meulen [1997], pages 239–310.
[Sheard, 1994] M. Sheard. A guide to truth predicate in the modern era. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 59:1032–1054, 1994.
[Shen-Yuting, 1953] Shen-Yuting. The paradox of the class of all grounded sets. The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 18:114, 1953.
[Shirahata, 1996] M. Shirahata. A linear conservative extension of Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory.
Studia Logica, 56:361–392, 1996.
[Sieg, 1999] W. Sieg. Hilbert’s Programs: 1917-1922. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 5:2–43,
1999.
[Simmons, 1988] K. Simmons. On a medieval solution to the liar paradox. History and Philos-
ophy of Logic, 8, 1988.
[Simmons, 1993] K. Simmons.
Universality and the Liar. An Essay on Truth and Diagonal
Argument. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993.
[Simpson, 1999] S.G. Simpson. Subsystems of second order arithmetic. Perspectives in Mathe-
matical Logic, 1999.
[Skolem, 1957a] T.S. Skolem. Bemerkungen zum Komprehensionsaxiom. Zeitschrift f¨ur Math-
ematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 3:3–17, 1957.
[Skolem, 1957b] T.S. Skolem.
Mengenlehre gegr¨undet auf einer Logik mit unendlich vielen
Wahrheitswerten. Sitzungsberichte Berliner Mathematische Gesellschaft, 58:41–56, 1957.
[Skolem, 1957c] T.S. Skolem. Two remarks on set theory. Mathematica Scandinava, 5:40–46,
1957.
[Skolem, 1960] T.S. Skolem. A set theory based on a certain three valued logic. Mathematica
Scandinava, 8:127–136, 1960.
[Skolem, 1963] T.S. Skolem. Studies on the axiom of comprehension. Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic, 4:162–170, 1963.
[Smith, 1984] J. Smith. An interpretation of Martin-L¨of’s type theory in a type-free theory of
propositions. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 49:730–753, 1984.
[Smith, 1987] S. Smith. Non standard characterization of recursive saturation and resplendency.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 52:842–863, 1987.
[Smorinski, 1981] C. Smorinski. Fifty years of self-reference. Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic, 1981.
[Smorinski, 1985] C. Smorinski. The development of self-reference: L¨ob’s theorem. In [Drucker,
1991], pages 110–133, Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg, 1985.
[Smullyan, 1957] R. Smullyan. Languages in which self-reference is possible. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 22:55–67, 1957.
[Sobocinski, 1949] B. Sobocinski. L’analyse de l’antinomie russellienne par Lesniewski. Metho-
dos, 1:94–107/220–238/308–316, 1949.
[Specker, 1962] E. Specker. Typical ambiguity. In E. E. Nagel, P. Suppes, and A. Tarski, edi-
tors, Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, pages 116–123, Stanford, 1962. Stanford
University Press. Proceedings of the 1960 International Congress.
[Specker, 2001a] E. Specker.
Die Antwort von Finsler.
In Gasser and Volken [1975], pages
50–56.

1012
Andrea Cantini
[Specker, 2001b] E. Specker. La r´eponse de Dmitry Mirimanoﬀ. In Gasser and Volken [1975],
pages 44–49.
[Spector, 1961] C. Spector. Inductively deﬁned sets of natural numbers. In Inﬁnitistic Methods,
pages 97–102. Pergamon Press, New York, 1961.
[Surma et al., 1992] S. Surma, J. Srzednicki, D. Barnett, and V. F. Rickey, editors.
St.
Lesniewski. Collected Works, 2 Voll., volume 2. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1992.
[Takahashi, 1989] S. Takahashi.
Monotone inductive deﬁnitions in a constructive theory of
functions and classes. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 42:255–279, 1989.
[Talcott and Mason, 2002] C. Talcott and J. Mason.
Feferman-Landin Logic.
In W. Sieg,
R. Sommer, and C. Talcott, editors, Reﬂections on the Foundations of Mathematics, pages
293–328, Natick, Mass., 2002. Association of Symbolic Logic, A. K. Peters.
[Talcott, 1992] C. Talcott. A theory of program and data type speciﬁcation. Theoretical Com-
puter Science, 104:129–159, 1992.
[Tarski, 1931] A. Tarski. Sur les ensembles d´eﬁnissables des nombres r´eels vol.1. Fundamenta
Mathematicae, XVII:210–239, 1931.
[Tarski, 1936] A. Tarski. Der Wahrheitsbegriﬀin den formalisierten Sprachen. Studia Philo-
sophica, 1:261–405, 1936.
[Tennant, 1982] N. Tennant. Proof and paradox. Dialectica, 36:265–296, 1982.
[Tennant, 1995] N. Tennant. On paradox without self-reference. Analysis, 55.3:199–207, 1995.
[Thomason, 1980] R. Thomason.
A note of syntactical treatments of modality.
Synth`eese,
44:391–395, 1980.
[Troelstra and van Dalen, 1988] A. Troelstra and D. van Dalen. Constructivism in Mathematics
I,II. Elsevier-North Holland, Amsterdam, 1988.
[Turner, 1983] R. Turner. Montague semantics, nominalization and Scott’s domains. Linguistics
and Philosophy, 6:259–288, 1983.
[Turner, 1987] R. Turner. A theory of properties. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 52:455–471, 1987.
[Turner, 1990] R. Turner. Truth and Modality for Knowledge Representation. Pitman, London,
1990.
[Turner, 1997] R. Turner. Types. In Benthem and Meulen [1997], pages 535–586.
[Ursini, 1977] A. Ursini. A sequence of theories for arithmetic whose union is complete. Rendi-
conti del Seminario Matematico dell’Universit´a di Padova, 57:75–92, 1977.
[Ursini, 1978] A. Ursini.
On the set of ‘meaningful’ sentences of arithmetic.
Bollettino
dell’Unione Matematica Italiana, V, serie A, 16:237–241, 1978.
[van Dalen and Monna, 1972] D. van Dalen and A. Monna. Sets and Integration. An Outline
of the Development. Wolters-Nordhoﬀ, Groningen, 1972.
[van Dalen, 1999] D. van Dalen.
Mystic, Geometer and Intuitionist:
the Life of L. E. J.
Brouwer. Clarendon, Oxford, 1999.
[van Fraassen, 1966] B. van Fraassen. Singular terms, truth-value gaps and free logic. Journal
of Philosophy, 63:481–494, 1966.
[van Fraassen, 1968] B. van Fraassen. Presupposition, implication and self-reference. Journal
of Philosophy, 65:135–152, 1968.
[van Fraassen, 1970] B. van Fraassen. Truth and paradoxical consequences. In R.L. Martin,
editor, The Paradox of the Liar, pages 13–24. Ridgeview Pu. Co., Atascadero CA, 1970. (2nd
edition 1978).
[van Fraassen, 1971] B. van Fraassen. Formal Semantics and Logic. The Mac Millan Press,
New York, 1971.
[van Fraassen, 1972] B. van Fraassen. Inference and self-reference. In D. Davidson and G. Har-
man, editors, Semantics of Natural Language, pages 695–708, Reidel, Dordrecht, 1972.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort. From Frege to G¨odel. A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic 1879-1931. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1967. (3rd printing 1977).
[Visser, 1984] A. Visser. Four-valued semantics and the liar. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
13:181–212, 1984.
[Visser, 1989] A. Visser. Semantics and the liar paradox. In Gabbay and Guenthner [1989],
pages 617–706.
[von Neumann, 1923] J. von Neumann. Zur Einf¨uhrung der transﬁniten Zahlen. Acta Litter-
arum ac Scientiarum Regiae Universitatis Hungariae Francisco Josephinae, Sectio Scien-
tiarum math. 1, 1:199–208, 1923.
[von Neumann, 1925] J. von Neumann. Eine Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre. Journal f¨ur die
reine und angewandte Mathematik, 154:219–240, 1925. Corrections in vol.155, 1926, p. 128.

Paradoxes, Self-reference and Truth in the 20th Century
1013
[Vopenka, 1966] P. Vopenka. A new proof of the G¨odel’s result on non-provability of consistency.
Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences, 14:11–115, 1966.
[Wagon, 1985] S. Wagon. The Banach-Tarski Paradox. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
1985.
[Wang, 2001] H. Wang. A Logical Journey. From G¨odel to Philosophy. The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, Mass., 2001.
[Welch, 2001a] P. Welch. On Gupta-Belnap revision theories of truth, Kripkean ﬁxed points
and the next stable. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, pages 1–15, 2001.
[Welch, 2001b] P. Welch. On revision operators. submitted to Journal of Symbolic Logic, 2001.
[Weydert, 1988] E. Weydert. How to approximate the naive comprehension scheme inside clas-
sical logic. PhD thesis, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universit¨at, Bonn, 1988.
[Weyl, 1910] H. Weyl. ¨Uber die Deﬁnitionen der mathematischen Grundbegriﬀe. Mathematisch-
naturwissenschaftliche Bl¨atter, 7:93–95; 109–113, 1910.
[Weyl, 1918] H. Weyl. Das Kontinuum. Veit, Leipzig, 1918.
[Weyl, 1921] H. Weyl.
¨Uber die neue Grundlagenkrise der Mathematik.
Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 10:37–79, 1921.
[White, 1979] R.B. White. The consistency of the axiom of comprehension in the inﬁnite value
predicate logic of Lukasiewicz. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8:509–534, 1979.
[White, 1987] R.B. White. A demonstrably consistent type-free extension of the logic BCK.
Mathematica Japonica, 32:149–169, 1987.
[White, 1993] R.B. White.
A consistent theory of attributes in a logic without contraction.
Studia Logica, 52:113–142, 1993.
[Wolenski, 1995] J. Wolenski. On Tarski’s background. In Hintikka [1995b], pages 331–341.
[Woodruﬀ, 1984] P. Woodruﬀ. Paradox, truth and logic. part I: paradox and truth. Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 13:213–233, 1984.
[Yablo, 1982] S. Yablo. Grounding, dependence and paradox. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
11:111–137, 1982.
[Yablo, 1985] S. Yablo. Truth and reﬂection. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 14:297–349, 1985.
[Yablo, 1993] S. Yablo. Paradox without self-reference. Analysis, 53:251–252, 1993.
[Yaq¯ub, 1993] A.M. Yaq¯ub. The Liar Speaks the Truth. A Defense of the Revision Theory of
Truth. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1993.
[Zambelli, 1999] P. Zambelli.
Alexandre Koyr´e alla scuola di Husserl a Gottinga.
Giornale
Critico della Filosoﬁa Italiana, 19:303–354, 1999.
[Zermelo, 1908a] E. Zermelo. Neuer Beweis f¨ur die M¨oglichkeit einer Wohlordnung. Mathema-
tische Annalen, 65:107–128, 1908.
[Zermelo, 1908b] E. Zermelo. Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I. Math-
ematische Annalen, 65:261–281, 1908.
[Zermelo, 1909] E. Zermelo. Sur les ensembles ﬁnis et le principe d’induction compl´ete. Acta
Mathematica, 32:186–193, 1909.
[Zwicker, 1987] W.S. Zwicker. Playing games with games: the hypergame paradox. American
Mathematical Monthly, 94:507–514, 1987.


INDEX
AT , 209
[x1, ..., xn] notation, 726
β-redex, reduction, 732
βη-reduction, 739, 749
δ, discriminator, 733
η-postponement, 739
λ notation, origin, 731
λ, short for “λ-calculus”, 723
λ-calculus, 684
λI-calculus, 731, 738
λK-calculus, 731
Tn, 209
ω, type-constant, 773
(ζ), rule, 729
4, see Becker’s axiom486
A (generalized abstraction in Church’s
system), 919
Abadi, M., 750
Abdali, S. K., 729
Abramsky, S., 785, 787, 789–791
absolute geometry, 592
absolute idealism, 4
absolutely undecidable propositions,
655–657
abstract
classes, 65
entity, 64, 65
general idea, 59
mathematical entity, 33
abstract projective geometries, 580
abstraction, 821, 835, 856, 858, 863,
865
bracket, 828, 829, 835, 864
class, 919, 924, 941, 945
λ-, 918, 932, 937, 938, 945
unrestricted, 947
Abstraction (or Comprehension) ax-
iom, 9
abstraction in CL, 726
algorithms, 728–730
full, 784–785, 789, 791
notations, very early, 725
abstracts, 46
{x | ϕ}, 947
{x | ϕ}, 938, 946, 949, 968, 992
λx.M, 918, 921
absurdity, 492, 848
accidental class, 292
Ackermann function, 364
Ackermann, W., 82, 89, 90, 94, 98,
147, 172, 202, 206, 227, 233,
237, 247, 250, 251, 354, 357–
359, 362, 366, 367, 378, 391,
392, 408, 583, 672, 711, 716,
728, 903, 906, 907, 926, 931–
933
Aczel, P., 83, 117, 741, 781, 905, 906,
922, 927, 930, 939–941, 952,
970, 977, 984, 996, 997
Addison, J., 565, 725
adjoint functors, 756
admissible, 101
rules, 100, 102
rules of inference, 100
aﬃne logic, 790
Ajdukiewicz, K., 309, 517, 752
Akama, S., 995
Alexandroﬀ, Paul, 826
algebra of logic, 513, 525
algebraic aspects, 162
algebraic interpretation, 103
algebraic logic, 524, 526, 736
algebraic semantics, 103
algebraic tradition, 171

1016
algebraization of logic, 522, 581
algebraization of set theory, 603
Algol language, 742, 760
algorithms for typability, 747, 774–
776
all-embracing One, 72
(α), 858
α, 211, 857
Amadio, R., 783
analysis
intuitionistic, 485, 496, 500
analysis, consistency of, 667
analytic geometry, 528
analytic philosophy, 1, 21
analytic truth, 30
Anaphora, 389, 395, 407, 418, 430–
432, 436
Anderson, C. A., 730
Andr´eka, H., 589, 736
Andrews, P. B., 207, 217–218, 230,
247, 248, 737, 766
Anellis
Archives, 250
Irving H., 195, 210, 216, 226, 231,
237, 244, 247
Annahmen, 35, 46, 58
thesis, 58
Anscombe, E., 258
anti-foundation, 905, 977, 978, 993,
997
anti-prenex, see direction, anti-prenex
and form, anti-prenex254
anti-psychologism, 5
AFA, 977–979, 993
antimonies, 314
antinomy, see paradox875
Antonelli, G. A., 975, 977
apartness, 81
APL language, 744
applicability, 856
application, 821, 826, 827, 856, 858,
863, 864
application term, 917, 943, 950
applied λ and CL, 723
approximants, 749
approximate normal form, 779
Aquinas, T., 32
Arai, T., 713
Aristotelian
inherence, 69–71
metaphysics, 61
realism, 72
thesis, 72
Aristotle, 60, 61, 72, 307, 313, 529,
541, 555
arithmetic, 112
consistency of, 667
ﬁnitist, 355
primitive, 368, 374
primitive recursion, 364
of real numbers, 513
recursive, 363, 377
arithmetical hierarchy, 651–652
arithmetization, 336, 468
arithmetizations of analysis, 331
Artemov, S., 487
artiﬁcial intelligence, 742
Artin
’s Theorem, 238–239, 247
Artin’s proof, 238, 248
Emil, 198, 206, 238, 239, 247,
252
Asher, N., 994
Asperti, A., 750, 989
Asser, G., 386, 404, 410, 411
assertional system, 846
assumption, 46
AT, 986
atom, 845
atomism, 263, 264, 289
Atten, M. van, 83, 96, 98, 120
Außersein, 61
Austin, J., 978
Autexier, Serge, 195, 224
Automath, 760–761, 783
book, line, 760
automorphism
shifting, 992
Index

1017
Avigad, J., 325
Ax, J., 565
axiom, 845
of choice, 210, 214, 224–229, 396,
497, 498, 598, 600, 602, 603
weak forms, see Principle of
Dependent Choice, Kœnig’s
Lemma254
of inﬁnity, 206
of reducibility, 206
of substitutability, 230
axiom of constructibility, 497
axiom of countable choice, 89
axiom of elementary sets, 600
axiom of extensionality, 600
Axiom of inaccessible cardinals, 601
axiom of inaccessible set, 602
axiom of inﬁnity, 161
axiom of reducibility, 11
axiom of regularity, 153
axiom of replacement, 153, 154, 602
axiom of separation, 153, 600
axiom system, 515
axiomatic method, 328, 519, 521, 522
axiomatic set theory, 152, 176
axiomatics
contextual, 360
existential, 326, 355, 361, 371,
377
formal, 360
sharpened, 377
axiomatisability, 514–516
axioms, 40, 50, 57
Dedekind–Peano, 230
of equality, 230, 232
of set theory, 44
B-H-K interpretation, 89
B¨orger, E., 175
Backus, J., 744
Badesa, C., 83, 172, 174, 176, 177
Baer, R., 178
Baire, R., 888
ball, 595
Banach, S., 596, 597
Banach-Tarski paradox, 596, 597
bar induction, 116
bar theorem, 78, 113, 114, 492, 496
Bar-Hillel, Y., 755
Barendregt, H. P., 723, 725, 730, 741,
744–746, 749, 773, 779–780
ω-rule, 780
quasi-leftmost reductions, 749
Barr, M., 790
Barwise, J., 967, 976–979, 997
Barzin, M., 82, 483
Bays, T., 178
Bealer, G., 997
Becker’s axiom (4), 486
Becker, O., 483, 486
Beeson, M., 83, 117, 950, 955
Beethoven, 70, 71
Behboud, A., 348
Behmann, H., 346, 500, 727, 826, 918,
926, 927, 931, 952
Behnke, H., 348
being, 35, 63
being thus-and-so, 33, 35
being-independent being-indiﬀerent So-
seine, 64
beingless impossible Meinongian ob-
ject, 70
beingless incomplete objects, 61
beingless Meinongian objects, 64
beingless objects, 64–66, 68–71
beingless One, 72
beinglessness, 68
Bell, J. L., 179, 992
Belnap, N., 967, 973–975, 994
Ben-Yelles, C., algorithm, 776
B´enabou, J., 762
Benacceraf, P., 414
Benaissa, Z., 750
Benzm¨uller, Christoph, 195
Berarducci, A., 746, 769
Bergstra, J., 746, 749
Berkeley, G., 32, 37, 59
Bernardi, C., 946, 988
Index

1018
Bernays, P., 84, 86, 87, 93, 104, 135,
152, 172,198, 202, 206, 212,
214, 217–218, 220, 222, 227,
231–233, 237, 247, 250, 321,
323, 346, 354, 355, 385, 387,
388, 396, 402, 407, 418, 434,
436, 485, 489–492, 495, 519,
522, 573, 619, 620, 660, 667,
670, 672, 675, 682, 700, 703,
706, 707, 709, 712, 727, 728,
736, 743, 826, 895–897, 921,
932, 945, 989
Bernstein, F., 353, 878, 887, 888, 894
Berry, G., 536, 785, 786, 791, 895
Berry’s Paradox, 442, 443, 536
(β), 858
β, 211, 857
Beth model, 106, 116, 487, 489
Beth semantics, 488
Beth, E. W., 83, 106, 108, 117, 565,
594, 700
Beth–Kripke semantics, 103
Beweistheorie, 322
Bezem, M., 83
Birkeland, K., 128
Birkhoﬀ, G., 103, 172, 573, 825
Bishop, E., 84, 109, 117
bisimulation, 906, 979
Blass, A., 790, 791
Blok, W. J., 522, 524, 526, 608
Bloo, R., 750
Blue Mosque, Istanbul, 30
Bochvar, D. A., 924–926, 959, 962
Boﬀa, M., 992, 994
B¨ohm, C., 741, 743–747, 769, 772,
777, 780
B¨ohm’s theorem, 745, 747
compiler, 743
numerals, 746
range theorem, 746
B¨ohm tree, B¨ohming out, 745, 780
Bolyai-Lobachevsky geometry, 592
Bolzano, B., 141, 337, 449, 530
Boole, G., 139, 314
Boole–Peirce–Schr¨oder tradition, 171
Boolean algebra, 523–526, 545, 563,
581–584, 586, 587, 589
Boolean clones, 633–641
Boolean equations, 163
Boolean functions, 633–641
Boolean operation, 539, 540
Boolean set algebra, 524
Boolean values, 769
Boolos, G., 968, 989–991
Boos, W., 177
Borel, E., 82, 353, 888, 892, 894, 895,
934, 945
Born, M., 338, 345
Bostock, D., 413, 414
bound variables in LISP, 742
Bourbaki, N., 386, 395, 396
Bradley’s regress, 260
Bradley, F. H., 3
Brady, G., 172
Brady, R. T., 956, 958
Brentanian, 64
Aristotelianism, 72
empiricism, 59
intentionality thesis, 33
thesis, 30
Brentano’s intentionality thesis, 30,
34
Brentano, F., 29, 32, 60, 61, 314
Briaud, D., 750
Bridgeman, P. W., 825
Bridges, D., 84
Broda, S., 776
Brouwer and intuitionism, 168, 180
Brouwer’s bar theorem, 113
Brouwer’s continuity principle, 112
Brouwer’s fan theorem, 112
Brouwer’s ﬁxed point theorem, 78
Brouwer’s inﬂuence on G¨odel, 96
Brouwer’s principle, 114
Brouwer’s principle for functions, 114
Brouwer’s theory of species, 83
Brouwer, L. E. J., 77–81, 84, 87, 89,
92, 100, 105, 108–113, 115,
Index

1019
117, 200, 204, 235, 248, 324,
348, 350, 353, 354, 490, 492,
493, 495–502, 607, 683, 888,
892, 894
Brouwer–Heyting–Kolmogorov (B-H-
K) explication, 88
Brouwerian algebra, 581
Brouwerian assertion of p, 82
Brouwerian counterexample, 92
Bruce, K., 783
de Bruijn, N. G., 757, 762
Automath, 760–761, 783
variable-less λ notation, 750
Brun, V., 128, 179
Buchholz, W., 711
Bunder, M. W., 741, 776, 840
Burali-Forti, C., 8, 725
Burge, T., 979
Burge, W. H., 743
Burgess, J., 966, 967, 972, 974, 975,
991
Burris, S., 173
Bussotti, Paolo, 195, 244
C-system, 840
Cain, J., 965
calculus ratiocinator, 23
calculus of (binary) relations, 586
calculus of classes, 545, 547, 549, 562,
581, 582, 586
calculus of constructions, 772
calculus of deductive systems, 523,
525, 581, 586
calculus of relations, 583, 584, 586,
606
calculus of sentences, 523, 524, 563,
581, 586
calculus of systems, 525, 526, 563
call by value, 743
Campbell, R., 64
canonical elements, 765
canonical real number generator, 111
canonical terms, 834
Cantini, A., 944, 955, 965–968, 982,
985, 993, 995
Cantor’s absolute, 601, 603
Cantor’s Paradox, 441, 442
Cantor’s second number class, 79, 109
Cantor’s set theory, 79
Cantor’s theorem, 881, 883, 885, 896,
901
Cantor, G., 8, 15, 80, 109, 131, 153,
316, 325, 337, 338, 340, 353,
441, 442, 499, 878–881, 883,
885, 886, 888, 893, 897, 905,
988
Cardelli, L., 750, 774
cardinal addition, 603, 604
cardinal algebra, 603–605
cardinal arithmetic, 13, 14, 598, 603,
604
cardinal degree of completeness, 516,
518
cardinal number, 600, see number, car-
dinal875
cardinal numbers, 598
Cardone, F., 774
Carlisle, T., 997
Carnap, R., 498, 561, 714, 910–912,
918, 921, 924, 980
Carroll, L., 314
Cartesian closed category, 755–757,
777, 785
Cartesian product, 41
Cartesian space, 592
Cassirer, E., 348
categorial grammar, 752, 755
categorical, 536
categorical abstract machine, 786
categorical combinators (Curien), 786
categorical set, 534, 536
categorical set of sentences, 536
categoricity, 156
category theory, 952, 992
category theory and types, 755–759
CFA, 939
champ ﬁni, 208–209, 214–215, 220–
Index

1020
221, 237
deﬁnition, 209
Chang, 564, 565, 568, 957
Chang, C. C., 160, 956
Chapuis, A., 967, 987
characteristica universalis, 23
characteristica universalis, 498
Chauvin, A., 741, 961
Chevalley
Catherine, 197
Claude, 197, 204, 207, 245, 246,
248, 369
Chierchia, G., 997
Chin, L., 584, 589
Chisholm, R. M., 36, 62
choice, 45
choice law, 110
choice sequences, 109, 116, 488, 495–
497
Chu, P. H., 790
Church’s rule, 105
Church’s thesis, 104, 105, 114, 628,
631, 643, 644, 732, 791, 823
Church, A., 82, 95, 98, 171, 175, 217,
252, 309, 374, 379, 483, 497,
575, 576, 618, 619, 624, 628,
631, 632, 641–644, 649, 655,
657, 660, 684, 714, 729–733,
737–738, 746, 749, 819, 856,
860, 909, 917–924, 929, 931,
953, 970
Church numerals, 731
Church-Rosser, see conﬂuence732
Church-Rosser Theorem, 823, 860, 865
Chwistek, L., 307, 737, 751, 903, 907–
909, 911, 912, 929, 934
circular class, 928
circular concept, 905, 971, 975
circular deﬁnition, 890, 903, 905, 975
circular predicate, 975
circularity, 891–893, 900, 903, 907,
910, 942, 977, 987, 997
CL, for “combinatory logic”, 723
class
full satisfaction, 985, 986
non-extensional partial, 947
partial, 947
proper, 967
total, 947, 953
class of all ordinals, see ON875
classical decision problem, 175
classical deduction theorem, 50
classical deductive systems, 516
classical ﬁrst-order arithmetic, 77
classical logic, 77, 684, 848
classical second-order logic, 77
closure
reﬂective, 983–985
schematic, 984
weak, 983
semantical, 934, 959, 961, 968,
980
transitive, 924
Cocchiarella, N., 385, 993
coﬁnality, 601
coﬁnality of leftmost reductions, 749
quasi-leftmost, 749
Cogan, Edward J., 839
Cohen’s independence proofs, 158
Cohen, P. J., 158, 497, 498, 500
coherence space, 786
coincidence, 81
coinduction, 979
combinator, 826
B, 826, 863
basic, 863
C, 826, 863
commutator, 863
composition operator, 863
duplicator, 863
ﬁxed point, 859
I, 822, 826, 863
J, 822, 863
K, 826, 863
S, 826, 863
W, 826, 863
Y, 859
combinatorial completeness, 921, 922
Index

1021
combinatorially complete, 726, 728
combinatorics, 132, 180
combinators, 917, 924, 934, 936, 937,
954
combinators, basic, 726, 729
combinatory algebra, 781, 938, 939,
942, 946, 954, 968
eﬀective, 944
extensional, 946
partial, 951
combinatory completeness, 826, 828
combinatory logic, 820, 822, 863, 864
illative, 836, 840
pure, 836
combinatory reduction systems, 738
compact cardinal, 602
compactness
proof, 35
theorem, 54
compactness problem, 602
compactness theorem, 602
compiler, B¨ohm’s, 743
complement of a property, 40
complemented ordered lattices, 580
complete, 516, 534, 536, 540
complete developments, 738
complete existent object, 62
complete existent or subsistent ob-
ject, 61
complete object, 61
complete systems, 526
completeness, 35, 49, 103, 106–108,
202, 206, 227–230, 330, 514–
516, 520, 529, 536, 547, 554,
567, 572
deﬁnition, 202
semantical, 482, 487
completeness of concepts, 534
completeness of ﬁrst-order logic, 174
completeness problem, 592
completeness theorem, 366
intuitionistic, 482, 488, 489
classical, 449
comprehension, 46
elementary (ECA), 954, 955
positive
non-uniform, 993
uniform, 994
stratiﬁed (SCA), 954
type-free, 876, 930, 938, 955, 956,
958, 966, 968
uniform, 954
uniform (F-CA), 994
untyped, 924, 934, 946, 995
comprehension principle, 58
Comp(A), 944
computable functionals, 482, 489–491,
493–495, 754
computable functions, 490, 491, 493,
494, 732
computable reals, 887
concept
of being, 67
of set, 45
concrete domains, 785
condensed detachment, 775, 776
conditional, 38, 42
conditional expressions, 742
conﬂuence, 732, 738, 748
of β-reduction, 732, 748, 750
of weak reduction, 732, 748
conﬂuence theorem, 823
conjunction, 42
connectives, 38
consequence, 514, 523, 525, 536, 547
consistency, 35, 49, 58, 114, 156, 200–
202, 333, 338, 514–516, 520,
529, 547, 554, 567, 914, 955,
956, 958, 969, 980, 985, 992–
994
of arithmetic, 202, 230–233, 235–
238
of ﬁrst-order logic, 199, 226
proof of, 202, 230–233, 235–238
Gentzen’s, see Gentzen’s con-
sistency proof254
Herbrand-style, see Herbrand-
style consistency proof254
Index

1022
semantic, 333
syntactic, 345
consistency of arithmetic, 680, 703
consistency problem, 321, 325, 332,
337, 341, 343
consistency program
ﬁnitist, 324, 347
consistency proof, 322, 367, 376
of PA, 484, 485, 490, 491, 493
direct, 342, 344, 356, 362
consistency theorem, 363, 366
Constable, R. L., 765, 788
constant, 858, 864
constants, 38
constitutive property, 33, 37, 62–64,
66, 70, 71
constructions, calculus of, 772
constructive disjunction, 98
constructors, 765
content, 29
contexts, 747, 862
contextual equivalence, 747
continuations, 779
continuity, 330, 332
continuity (completeness), 328
continuity principle, 78, 113, 497, 498
continuous lattices, 777, 787
continuum, 108, 115, 498
continuum hypothesis, 158, 655–656,
659
contraction, 857, 859
α, 859
β, 859
η, 859
contraction, contractum, 732
contractum, 859, 859
contradiction, see paradox875
convention T, 547, 549
convention T, 551, 552
conversion, 819, 826, 859
β, 859
=β , 859
βη, 859
=βη , 859
=∗, 859
weak, 863, 865
=w , 863, 865
for λ-terms, 866
conversion-invariant, 841
Conway, J. H., 790
Copi, I., 388, 438, 439, 443
Coppo, M., 773–774, 787
Coquand, T., 764, 787, 791, 989
calculus of constructions, 740, 772
Corcoran, J., 522, 530, 545, 546, 608
corecursion, 979
correction (of Herbrand’s False Lemma)
G¨odel’s and Dreben’s, 217–218,
221
deﬁnition, 218
Heijenoort’s, 218, 220, 221, 224
deﬁnition, 218
correlation law, 110, 117
correspondence theory of truth, 555,
558
Corry, L., 325
Count terms, 386, 413, 414
countable models, 134, 156
counteraxiom, 848
counterexample
strong, 500
weak, 500
Counterparts, 429, 430, 435
Courant, Richard, 198
Cousineau, G,, 786
Couturat, L., 499, 881, 889
CPC (classical propositional logic), 482,
483
cpo (complete partial order), 783, 787
CQC (classical predicate logic), 482,
484
Crabb´e, M., 992
Craig’s Interpolation Theorem, 238
Craig, W., 238, 248, 565, 736
Cresswell, M. J., 386, 417, 419, 428
Critical formulas, 390, 391
Crossley, J. N., 725
CUCH language, 744
Index

1023
Curien, P. L., 750, 785, 786, 791
Curry semantics, 845
Curry’s paradox, 160, 733, 832
Curry, H. B., 683, 699, 723, 725, 726,
728–730, 733–735, 739, 740,
742, 749, 752, 819, 825, 856,
917, 918, 920–924, 929–931,
939, 941, 942, 956
normalization proof, 766
typability algorithm, 775
undecidability theorem, 745
Curry-Howard isomorphism, 735, 838
currying, 726, 756, 856
cut, 669
cut elimination, 687, 688, 931, 933,
949, 986, 995, 996
Cut Elimination Theorem, 834
cycle, 926, 928, 973, 975
cylindric algebra, 586–589, 736
cylindric set algebra, 586–588
D∞, see models of untyped λ
D’Agostino, G., 988
van Dalen, D., 83, 96, 117, 236, 248,
724, 746, 760
Damas, L., 775, 776
Damnjanovic, Z., 965
Dantzig, D. van, 97
Daumal, R., 37, 41
David, M., 556
Davidson, D., 559
Davies, N., 997
Davis–Putnam procedure, 242
Davis, M., 175, 241–242, 248, 628,
653, 659–662, 732
Davison, 559
Dawson, C., 708
Dawson, John W., Jr., 199, 235, 244,
248, 249, 708
De Morgan, A., 314
De Rouilhan, P., 891
de Swart, H. C. M., 489
decidability, 566, 567, 572, 575, 581,
589
decidability of elementary Euclidean
geometry, 590
decidability of elementary geometry,
573
decidability of the arithmetic of the
natural numbers with addi-
tion, 575
decidability of the ﬁrst-order theory
of the reals, 567, 573
decidability of the theory of reals, 566
decidability problem, 592
decidable, 540
decidable classes, 146
decidable theories, 151
decision domain, 518
decision method, 573
decision method for real-closed ﬁelds,
567
decision method of eliminating quan-
tiﬁers for axiomatic theories,
134
decision problem, 134, 566, 586, 593
decision procedure, 566, 568, 570, 571
decision procedure for the elementary
theory of multiplication of
natural numbers, 152
decision procedure for the ﬁrst-order
theory of reals, 571
Dedekind, R., 79, 80, 200, 321, 325,
328, 330, 332, 333, 335–343,
353, 360, 379, 499, 600 see
also axioms, Dedekind–Peano254
deduction theorem, 57, 58, 517, 821,
829
deductions as terms, 735, 759, 765
deductive method, 529
deductive system, 515, 525, 547
deductive systems (Lambek), 758
deductive theory, 529
deductively valid, 40
deep, see inference, deep254
deﬁnability, 530–532, 534, 536–538,
564, 565, 572, 607
deﬁnability of the reals, 571
Index

1024
deﬁnability, absolute notion of, 657–
659
deﬁnable concept, 531
deﬁnable set, 538, 539
deﬁnable set of real numbers, 539,
540
deﬁnable set of reals, 540
Deﬁnite Descriptions, 6, 385, 387, 416,
419, 430, 432, 436
deﬁnite eigenschaften, 177
deﬁnite property, 134, 152
deﬁnite set, 845
deﬁnition, 581
deﬁnition of truth, 550
deﬁnitions, 40, 307
deﬂationary theory of truth, 555, 558
degrees of unsolvability, 645–648, 650–
654
Dekkers, W., 741
δ, 211
δ-quantiﬁer, see quantiﬁer, δ-254
δ-variable, see variable, δ-254
denial
external, 978
denumerably unﬁnished, 499
denumerably unﬁnished set, 79, 109
dependent types, 740, 761, 764, 771
derivability, 532
derivability condition, 370
derivable, 100, 101
derivable sentence, 531
Desargues’ axiom, 593
Descartes, R., 81
descriptors, 46
designated reference lcass, 41
designation, 41
detachable subspecies, 115
Detlefsen, M., 392
developments, 738
equivalence theorem, 749
ﬁniteness theorem, 739, 749
minimal complete, 748
Dezani, M., 744, 773–774, 787
diagonal argument, 551
diagonalization, 499
diagonalization theorem, 911, 980
Dialectica, see G¨odel, K.744
Dialectica Interpretation, 449, 485, 491,
493–496, 500
Dieudonn´e, Jean, 197, 207, 248
dilator, 786
Diller, J., 83, 767
D∞, 945
Diophantine equations, 131
Diophantine sets, 175
Diophantische Gleichungen, 175
direct proof, 334
direction
anti-prenex, 214
deﬁnition, 213
prenex, 214
deﬁnition, 213
disjunction, 105, 118
disjunction property, 98, 100, 101
disjunctive normal form, 622, 633–
634
Diskin, Z. B., 781
dispute with Zermelo, 178
disquotational theory of truth, 556,
557
distributive lattices, 581
Dixon, A. C., 887
Dκ, 945, 946
doctrine of external relations, 5
doctrine of internal relations, 4, 5
domain, 41, 46, 856
concrete, 785
eﬀective (Ershov), 788
qualitative, 786
reﬂexive, 778
Scott, 777, 786–787
universal, 783
domain comprehension principle, 69
domain theory, 783–789
dominance, 788
Doner, J., 575, 608
Donnellan, K., 416–418, 434, 444
double negation shift, 114
Index

1025
Dragalin, A., 83, 701, 767
Drakengren, T., 783
Dreben, B., 174, 175, 203, 210, 217,
218, 237, 245, 246, 248, 253
Dreben–van Heijenoort introductory
note, 175
Dries, L. van den, 176, 575, 608
Droste, M., 783
Dummett, M. A. E., 83, 173, 488, 684
Dunn, M., 967
Dybyg, K., 742
Dyckhoﬀ, R., 701
dynamic binding, 742
Dyson, V., 117
Dzik, W., 100
ε-substitution method, 358
ε-theorem
ﬁrst, 365
second, 366
Ebbinghaus, H.-D., 176, 342
Eckart, C., 71
Edelberg, W., 429, 430
Edinburgh Logical Framework, 753
eﬀective topos, 771, 788
EFL∗, 946
Egli, H., 788
Ehrenfeucht, A., 565
Eklund, M., 173
elementary algebra, 567
elementary equivalence, 565
elementary formal system, 846
elementary geometry, 593
elementary linear set, 540
elementary measure theory, 13
elementary predicate, 845
elementary propositions, 260
Elimination Theorem, 848
embedding-projection pair, 778
empirical phenomena, 72
empiricist methodology, 61
Enderton, H. B., 730
Engeler, E., 782
ENIAC, 835
entity, 41
Entscheidungsproblem, 624, 635
Entscheidungsproblem, 132, 323, 727,
732
epistemic limitatin, 72
epistemic logicism, 18
ϵ0, 491
Epsilon Theorem, 176
epsilon-substitution method, 176
Epstein, R., 902
equality, 89, 91
equation-invariant, 841
equational theories of relation alge-
bra, 581
equational theories of relation alge-
bras, 580
equational theory, 580
≡, 859
equivalence, 524
equivalence, contextual, 747
Ermine, F., 746
Errera, A., 82, 483
Ershov, Y. L., 565, 788
Essay on the Foundations of Geome-
try, 4
essential class, 292
essentially richer, 534, 536
essentially undecidable, 473, 576, 579,
580
essentially undecidable theory, 576,
577
Esser, O., 994
(η), 859
η, 857
Etchemendy, J., 559, 562, 563, 608,
967, 977–979
Euclid, 3, 530
Euclidean aﬃne geometry, 594
Euclidean geometry, 534, 573, 590,
592–595, 901
Euclidean space, 597
Evans, G., 432, 434
Ewald, P. P., 325
exclusion, 41
Index

1026
existence, 35, 98
existence property, 98, 105, 118
existence–subsistence distinction, 32
existenital axiomatics, 324
existent, 41, 72
entity, 65
object, 32–34, 41, 70, 71
existential claims, 22
existential import, 41
experimental psychology, 29
explicit substitution, 750
explicitly deﬁnable notion, 900, 901
exponentiation and λ-abstraction, 756
(Ext), 859
extended Church’s thesis, 106
extensional equality, 729, 901, 903
extensional semantic domain, 69
extensionalist
logic, 31, 35
semantic ontologists, 66
extensionality, 312, 859, 912, 915, 936,
941, 942, 946, 949, 958, 992–
995
extensions, 46
extralogical, 61
applications, 50
extranuclear, 37, 58
(nonconstitutive) property, 34
incompleteness, 37
property, 36, 37, 58
extraontic domain commitment, 69
extraontological
economy, 69
jungle, 68, 69
extraontology, 65, 72
F, see types, Curry’s734
F (Girard’s system), 768
F-deductions, 837
F1, 834
F2, 834
F3, 834
fan, 111
induction, 116
theorem, 119
Feferman, S., 181, 237, 239, 249, 325,
378, 565, 713, 741, 900, 926,
927, 930, 939, 940, 947, 949,
951–955, 958, 961, 963, 966,
968–971, 983, 984, 986, 992,
996, 997
Felscher, W., 789
Fenstad, J. E., 160, 956
Ferm¨uller, Christian G., 212, 215, 218,
244, 247
Ferreir`os, J., 325
Ferreira, F., 378, 992
Feys, R., 683, 723, 725, 739
Field, H., 558, 987
ﬁlter models, 773, 787
FIM, 113
Findlay, G. D., 755
Findlay, J. N., 37, 62, 64
Fine, K., 406
ﬁnitary mathematics, 490, 500
ﬁnitary reasoning, 493
ﬁnitary spread, 111, 116
ﬁnitary standpoint, 485, 494
ﬁnite axiomatization, 152
ﬁnitely axiomatisable, 579
ﬁnitely axiomatizable, 593, 594
ﬁnitely deﬁnable countable ordinals,
see FOD875
ﬁniteness of developments, 739, 749
ﬁnitest mathematics, 357
ﬁnitiesm, 367
ﬁnitiest mathematics, 373
Finitism, 390–395, 409, 415, 441
ﬁnitism, 199–202, 204–206, 224–228,
235, 323, 353, 371, 376, 379,
495
ﬁnitist mathematics, 351, 354, 376
ﬁnitist methods, 373
ﬁnitist number theory, 363
ﬁnitist proof theory, 354
ﬁnitist standpoint, 361, 375, 376
Finsler, P., 903, 905, 906, 910
ﬁrst act of intuitionism, 77
Index

1027
ﬁrst and second incompleteness the-
orems, 98
ﬁrst-order systems, 173
Fitch, F. B., 735, 740, 741, 744, 760,
923, 924, 930, 933–939, 942,
943, 945, 947, 951, 961, 963,
969, 995, 998
Fitting, M., 83, 400, 417, 420, 422,
426, 427, 964, 968, 997
ﬁxed point
combinatory, 939
intrinsic, 965
maximal, 963, 965
minimal, 964, 965
optimal, 965
set theoretic, 939
Tarski’s, 923, 964
ﬁxed point
Brouwer’s, 957
ﬁxed point theorem, 922, 923, 937,
941, 964, 987, 988, 995
Fixed-Model theorem, 969, 970
ﬁxed-point combinators, 732–733, 778
ﬁxed-point induction, 742
ﬁxed-point, least, 747, 754
in D∞, 778
Flagg, R., 934, 942–946, 966, 996
FOD, 886
forcing, 107, 116, 497
forcing relation, 106
form, 261
anti-prenex, 216
deﬁnition, 213
functional, 210
prenex, 209, 216–218, 220, 221,
223, 224, 229
deﬁnition, 213
Skolem normal, 229
(outer) Skolemized, 210, 212, 214–
218, 221, 227, 230
deﬁnition, 212
example, 210
vs. Skolem normal form, 229
inner Skolemized, 212, 218
deﬁnition, 212
formal deﬁnability, 530, 531
formal object, 845
formal semantics, 41
formal system, 845
formalism, 79, 853
formation, 36
principles, 39
formula
Δ1
2, 976
Δ1
1, 992
elementary, 954
generalized positive, 993
monotonic, 949, 950
numeric, 356
positive, 949
stratiﬁed, 954
formulae as types, see propositions as
types734
formulas
veriﬁable, 362
formulas-as-types, 838
formulas-as-types interpretation, 918
Forrest, P., 71
Forster, T. E., 734, 992
Forti, M., 949, 977, 993
foundational matters, 179
foundations of mathematics, 1, 7
Fourman, M., 83, 787
Fra¨ısse, R., 565
Fraassen, B. C. van, 71
Fraenkel, A., 131, 152
Frayne, T. E., 565
free assumption, 34, 58
Free-variable statements, 391
Frege structure, 939–942, 944–946, 966
Frege’s Rule V, 8
Frege, G., 1, 2, 6, 8, 9, 12, 18, 24, 31,
41, 46, 79, 139, 171, 199–
201, 205, 206, 209, 216, 249,
255–257, 260, 261, 269, 297,
307–309, 311, 313, 317, 319,
339, 342, 385, 389, 392, 393,
399, 401, 413, 414, 416, 419,
Index

1028
426, 431, 672, 725, 726, 731,
880–883, 885, 897, 919, 940,
941, 991, 992, 996, 997
Frege–Peano–Russell–Hilbert tradition,
171
Freudenthal, H., 499
Freyd, P., 784
Friedberg, R., 648, 654, 782
Friedman, H., 83, 99, 378, 753, 940,
946, 980–982, 984, 990
full abstraction, 784–785, 789, 791
full completeness in linear logic, 790
function, 41, 819
calculable, 374
index, 210
indicial, 210
provably total, 920
recursive, 232–235, 237–238, 860
Skolem, 210–212
symbol, 46
function-realizability, 114
functional calculus, 583, 586
functional completeness, 758
functional programming, 742
functionality, see types, Curry’s734,
834, 836, 841
basic, 837
functionals of ﬁnite type, 841
functors, 38, 46
fundamenntal sequence, 110
FV, 858
G¨odel, K., 1, 77, 83, 95, 97, 98, 102,
108, 116, 135, 173, 175, 318,
323, 353, 360, 365, 367–369,
371, 375, 378, 379, 552, 553,
559, 561, 565, 618, 619, 624,
632–633, 641–643, 655–660,
667, 671, 684, 703, 706, 708,
714, 824, 841, 90, 907, 910,
914, 916, 920, 928, 929, 942,
988, 989
G¨odel numbering, 824
G¨odel’s Completeness Theorem, 449
G¨odel’s Completeness Theorem, fore-
runners, 458
G¨odel’s Speed-up Theorems, 479
G¨odel-Gentzen translation, 667, 671
G¨odel’s completeness theorem for pred-
icate logic, 133
G¨odel’s dissertation, 135
G¨odel’s ﬁrst incompleteness theorem,
552, 630, 631, 641, 644–646
G¨odel, K., 8
G´omez-Torrente, M., 562, 563
Gabriel, R. P., 742
Gaifman, H., 565, 902, 979, 987
Galileo’s Paradox, 442
Gallier, J., 768
game semantics, 785, 789–791
γ, 211
γ-quantiﬁer, see quantiﬁer, γ-254
γ-variable, see variable, γ-254
Gandy, R., 725, 737, 791
Garciadiego, A., 878, 880
Geach, P. T., 431, 432, 930, 956
Gegenstandstheorie , 61
general deductive systems, 514
general models, 737, 753
general theory of binary relations, 526
general theory of classes, 549–552
general theory of order, 526
Generalization Theorem, 821
generalized continuity, 114
generalized continuum hypothesis, 600
generalized functionality, 740
generalized quantiﬁer, 994
generalized recursion, 943, 975, 976
Generalized Rule
of δ-Quantiﬁcation, 213, 220–223
deﬁnition, 213
of γ-Quantiﬁcation, 212, 218, 220–
223
deﬁnition, 212
of γ-Simpliﬁcation, 213, 220–222
deﬁnition, 213
of Simpliﬁcation, 213, 214, 218,
220, 224
Index

1029
deﬁnition, 213
generation lemma, 773
generative grammar, 547
Gentzen
’s calculi, 203, 224, 237
’s consistency proof, 233, 237
’s Hauptsatz, 203, 221, 224, 237
’s versch¨arfter Hauptsatz, 224
Gentzen, G., 77, 83, 98–100, 195, 202,
203, 211, 233, 236, 237, 249,
254, 323, 353, 356, 357, 375,
376, 378, 392, 398, 402, 475,
485, 491, 667, 740, 764, 765,
791. 834
Gentzen-style, 99
geometry, 528, 529, 536, 596
geometry of interaction, 790
geometry of straight lines, 513
George, A., 178
Geuvers, J. H., 725, 741, 750
Ghilardi, S., 83, 101
Giannini, P., 788
Gierz, G., 787
Gilmore, P. C., 241, 743, 744, 922,
947–949, 951, 958, 961, 963,
969, 994
Ginsburg, S., 659
Giovannucci, R., 744
Girard, J.-Y., 683, 702, 750, 768–770,
786, 790, 791, 953, 958, 963,
989, 995, 996
candidats de r´eductibilit´e, 768,
772
linear logic, 786, 789
paradox, 764
system F, 768, 786
no typability test, 775
Givant, S., 606, 736
GLC (Takeuti’s system), 768
Glivenko’s theorems, 87, 97
Glivenko, V., 77, 82, 83, 86–88, 96,
97, 484, 670
G¨obel, R., 783
Goddard, L., 417, 420–422, 424, 428
G¨odel, K., 197–199, 203, 204, 206,
210, 217, 227–229, 233–235,
238, 245, 246, 248, 249, 252,
731
Dialectica paper, 744, 766, 790
system T, 766
’s Completeness Theorem, 227–
229
’s First Incompleteness Theorem,
199, 202
’s Second Incompleteness Theo-
rem, 199, 202, 233, 235, 238
’s and Dreben’s correction, see
correction254
number, 468
Goethe, 70, 71
G¨ottingen, 198, 206
Goldbach conjecture, 82
Goldberg, H., 49
golden mountain, 30, 32, 33, 41–43,
65
Goldfarb’s negative solution of the G¨odel
case with identity,
Goldfarb, Warren, 173, 175, 203, 207,
210, 217, 229, 237, 245, 246,
248, 249
Goldstein, R., 180
Gonthier, G., 750
Goodman, N. D., 757, 762
Goodstein, R. L., 438
Gordeev, L., 955, 994
Gordon, M., 754
Gottingen, 529
GPC, 993, 994
Gr¨adel, E., 175
Gramlich, Bernhard, 244
grammar, categorial, 752
graph, 977, 979
graph models of λ, 781–782
Grassmann, H., 166
Grattan-Guinness, I., 643, 656, 660,
661, 725, 880
Gray’s Elegy argument, 257
Gray, J., 325
Index

1030
Grayson, R., 83, 787
Grezegorczyk, A., 318
Gri˘sin, V. N., 922, 958, 992, 995
Griﬃn, N., 31, 62, 880
Griﬃn, T., 766
Gross, W., 743, 777
Grossmann, R., 62
groups, 580
Grue, K., 946
Grundesetze der Arithemetik (The Ba-
sic Laws of Arithemetic), 9
Guard, J. R., 766
Guerrini, S., 744
Guillaume, M., 120
Gunter, C., 774, 783
Gupta, A., 967, 969, 971, 973, 975,
987, 994
Gurevich, Y., 175
G¨odel, K., 400, 401, 408, 410, 423
H¨oﬂer, A., 29
H´ajek, P., 179, 958, 996
HA (Heyting Arithmetic), 482–485,
489–491, 493, 494
Hacker, P. M. S., 64
Hadamard, Jacques S., 197–198, 208,
248, 250, 888
Hahn, H., 110, 483
Halbach, V., 967, 982, 986, 994
Halld´en, S., 926
Haller, R., 36
Hallett, M., 324, 325, 337
Hallmann, Andreas, 244
Halmos, P., 736
Hamm, F., 997
Hanatani, Y., 767
Hancock, P., 765, 782
Hanf, W., 565, 602
Hankin, C., 723
Hannequin, J., 881
Hardin, T., 750
Harrington, L., 966
Harrop, R., 99
Harvard University, 825
Hasse, Helmut, 198, 203, 207, 238,
250–252
Haubrich, R., 336
Hausdorﬀ, F., 310, 597
Hayashi, S., 83
head normal form, 779
Heck, R. G., 968, 991, 992
Hegel, G. F., 501
Heijenoort
’s correction, see correction254
Jean van, 200, 201, 203–207, 214–
218, 220, 221, 224, 227–230,
235, 245–247, 249–251, 253
Heijenoort, J. van, 174, 175, 602, 725
Heisenberg, W., 71
Hendricks, V., 348
Henkin
completeness, 34
model, 57
Henkin, L., 49, 312, 565, 586, 589,
737, 753
Henkin-style semantics, 489
HEOn, 770
Herbrand
’s False Lemma, 208, 216–218,
220, see also correction254
deﬁnition, 216
’s Fundamental Theorem, 203, 208,
213, 215–226, 237, 240
deﬁnition, 220
application, 232–233
–Ribet Theorem, 238–239
-style consistency proof, 237
complexity, 214–215
deﬁnition, 215
example, 215
disjunction, 214–222, 240–241
deﬁnition, 215
example, 215
expansion, 208–209, 214–216, 221
deﬁnition, 209
example, 209
Jacques, Sr. (Herbrand’s father),
197–198, 250
Index

1031
universe, 208, 240–242
deﬁnition, 208
Herbrand’s Completeness Theorem, 455
Herbrand’s dissertation, 135
Herbrand’s Theorem, 385, 393, 406,
407, 488
Herbrand’s theorem, 147
Herbrand, J., 175, 196–253, 323, 360,
362, 366–369, 374, 379, 483,
517, 619, 624, 690, 714
Herbrand-G¨odel recursive, 732
Herbrands’s work, 141
hereditarily undecidable, 594
Hermite, C., 353
Hertz, H., 329
Hertz, P., 669, 691
Herzberger, H., 558, 959, 963, 971–
973
Hesseling, D., 484
Hessenberg, G., 341, 888, 895, 896
heterological, 285
heterological paradox, 551
Heterologicality, 438, 439
Heyting algebra, 103
Heyting arithmetic, 667
Heyting’s arithmetic, 93
Heyting’s arithmetic of ﬁnite types,
94
Heyting’s arithmetic of species, 115
Heyting, A., 77, 81–83, 85–89, 91–
94, 96, 97, 99, 105, 110–115,
117, 203–204, 250, 375, 482–
487, 491, 492, 495, 501–503,
525, 670–672, 677, 679, 683,
761–763
hierarchy
of implications, 942, 944
of universes, 939
hierarchy of languages, 544
higher-order logic, 173
higher-order metametalanguage, 44
Hilbert
’s epsilon, 216, 218, 222, 224, 232,
233, 237, 252, 254
’s ﬁnitism, see ﬁnitism254
’s programme, 563, see programme,
Hilbert’s254
-style calculi, 223, see also Hilbert,
school, calculi of254
school, 204–207, 212, 224, 227,
233, 237
calculi of, 212, 220
’s 10th problem, 133, 175, 660
’s ﬁnitist position, 168
’s proof theory, 351
Hilbert, D., 79, 82, 87, 89, 90, 93,
94, 98, 104, 139, 172, 198,
200–202, 205–206, 212, 214,
216, 217, 220, 222, 227, 229,
231–233, 236–238, 245–247,
250, 251, 321, 350, 385, 387,
388, 390, 392, 393, 395, 402,
407, 410, 415, 418, 431, 434,
485, 490, 491, 495, 499, 501,
529, 530, 573, 583, 594, 607,
619, 621, 624, 625, 660, 671,
672, 698, 709, 714–716, 726,
728, 827, 879, 880, 882, 883,
885, 889, 895, 902, 903, 906,
907, 911, 918, 921, 926, 931,
932, 934, 945
Hilbert–Ackermann, 135, 172, 173
Hilbert–Bernays, 135, 172
Hilbert-style, 99
Hilbert-style formulation, 846
Hinata, S., 767
Hindley, J. R., 723, 739, 749, 773,
775, 776, 781, 840
Hinnion, R., 949, 993, 994
Hintikka, J., 994
Hobson, E., 887, 889
Hodes, H., 991
Hodges, A., 725
Hodges, W., 575, 608
Hoeven, G. F. van der, 83
Hofmann, K., 787
Holmes, M. R., 741, 993
homogeneity, 344
Index

1032
homomorphism, partial, 753
Honsell, F., 787, 977, 993
how-it-is, 35
Howard, W. A., 83, 684, 735, 759,
764, 767, 918
Hudelmaier, J., 701
Huet, G., 738, 772, 786
Hugh, F. C., 71
Hughes, G. E., 386, 417, 419, 428
Hume, D., 59, 60
Huntinton, E. V., 547
Hurwitz, A., 340
Husserl, E., 306, 309, 550, 752, 882,
895, 929
Hyland, M., 749, 771, 780, 784, 785,
788–791
hyperdoctrine, 757–758
hyperset, 978
hyperuniverse, 993
Hyp(A), 944
ID1, 982
ID−
1 , 940
ideal, 526
idealism, 257, 266
identity, 46, see also tautology254, 290,
292, 294
axiom, 44
conditions, 46, 62, 69
normal, 214
deﬁnition, 214
predications, 44
Iemhoﬀ, R., 83, 101, 102
IF, see independence friendly ﬁrst or-
der language875
ill-founded Tarskian hierarchy, 983
illative systems, 740–741
implected object, 62, 64
implection, 63, 68, 71, 72
implexive
being, 59, 65, 69–72
being and nonbeing, 65, 66
nonbeing, 64, 69
so-being, 64
implication, 41, 524
impossible, 32, 58
constitutive property, 69
Meinongian object, 71
nonexistent objects, 64
objects, 33, 37, 40, 48
impredicative deﬁnitions, 155, 156
impredicativity, 493, 495, 502
inaccessible cardinals, 600, 602, 603
incomplete, 32, 33, 64, 594
beingless Meinongian object, 63
beingless object, 62
constitutive property, 69
objects, 37, 40, 41, 58, 61
incompleteness, 667, 906, 916, 920,
983, 989, 990
incompleteness of formal systems, 618,
624, 627–633, 643–645, 655,
657
incompleteness theorem, 367, 369
incompleteness theorems, 462, 483,
491, 499
ﬁrst, 469, 498
second, 470, 487, 499
inconsistent Meinongian objects, 58
independence, 114, 156, 514, 516
of premiss rule, 101, 102
independence friendly ﬁrst order lan-
guage, 995
independent, 515
indeterminate object, 37
indiﬀerence thesis, 35
Ind(A), 944
induction, 18, 392, 394, 407, 408, 410
inductive completeness, 934
inductive deﬁnability, 939, 943, 944,
997
inductive deﬁnition, 914, 933, 934,
937, 952, 966, 976, 982
ﬁnitary, 924
monotone, 950
Uniform Monotone, 955
inductive set, 845
inference, 36
Index

1033
deep, 208, 213, 220, 224
principles, 39
rules of, see Rule254
structures, 39
inﬁnite
the actual, 202, 204
inﬁnitely proceeding sequence, 109–
111
inﬁnity
axiom of, 302
inﬁntesimal analysis, 179
informal rigour, 501
information systems, 783, 787
inhabitant of a type, 776
Ben-Yelles’ algorithm, 776
principal, 776
inherence, 69
inonsubsistent obect, 64
instability
degree of, 974
intended interpretation, 41
intended object, 29, 33, 59
intensional, 69
Meinongian semantics, 33
semantics, 34
set theory semantics, 46
intensional logic, 737
intensionality, 930
intensions, 46, 48
intentional
object, 35, 41, 42
intentionalist purpose, 35
intentionality, 29
of language, 34
of mind, 30
thesis, 30, 35
intermediate lgoic, 100
intermediate propositional logic, 102
internal determinacy, 34, 49
theorem for O, 49, 50
internally determinate Meinongian ob-
ject theory logic, 58
interpretability, 578, 579, 581
interpretation, 526, 532
intersection, 41
Introduction to Mathematical Philos-
ophy, 2, 19
intuition of the continuum, 108, 109
intuition of time, 80
intuitionism, 200, 203–204, 235, see
also ﬁnitism and logic, in-
tuitionistic254, 324, 354, 853
intuitionistic analysis, 83, 108, 109
intuitionistic arithmetic, 77, 93
of arbitrary ﬁnite type, 116
intuitionistic ﬁrst-order predicate logic,
77, 83, 89
intuitionistic logic, 387, 397, 399, 401,
670, 848
intuitionistic logic and arithmetic, 77
intuitionistic predicate logic, 96
intuitionistic propositional logic, 83–
85, 91, 96
intuitionistic second-order logic, 77
intuitionistic sentential calculus, 525,
526
intuitionistic structure for the contin-
uum, 109
intutionistic analysis, 114
invalid inference pattern, 49
invariance of dimension, 78
inversion principle, 765
invertible rules, 687, 694, 700
invertible terms, 746
involution, 967
Iongh, J. J. de, 84
Iongh, M. de, 84
IPC (intuitionistic propositional logic),
482, 483, 485–487
IQC (intuitionistic predicate logic),
482, 484, 487–489
irreducibility, 532
irreducible system, 526, 531, 534
Ishihara, H., 84
iterative classes of Post, 639, 640
Iverson, K. E., 744
J¨ager, G., 936, 949, 955, 985, 996,
Index

1034
997
Ja´skowski, S., 309, 595
Jacobs, B., 764, 989
Jacquette, D., 30, 31, 33, 36, 46, 49,
58, 64–66
Jagadeesan, R., 785, 789, 790
Jan´e, I., 178
Janiszewski, Z., 598
Jaskowski, S., 103, 681, 700
Jeﬀrey, R., 404, 407
Jensen, R. B., 992
Jervell, H. R., 127, 179, 180
Jessop, T. E., 59
Jevons, W. S., 314, 340, 621, 633–634
Johansson, I., 682, 698
Johnstone, P., 787
join axiom, 955
Jongh, D. H. J. de, 84, 101–103
Jonsson, B., 584, 605, 608
Joyal, A., 790, 791
judgement, 277, 289
Jung, A., 783, 787, 788
jungle, 64, 65
(K), 863, 865
K¨onig’s lemma, 113, 116, 181
K¨onig’s paradox, 536
K¨onig, J., 536, 878, 886, 887, 889,
890, 898
Kahle, R., 325, 882, 936
Kahn, G., 765, 785, 786, 791
Kaila, E., 698
Kalish, D., 411, 416
Kalman, J., 725, 776
Kalmar’s class of elementary functions,
170
Kalmar, L., 711
Kamareddine, F., 725, 750, 997
Kanamori, A., 176, 882
Kanda, A., 788
Kant, I., 79, 81, 108, 201–202, 251,
287, 289, 301, 496, 501
Kaplan, D., 930, 980, 994
Kathail, V., 750
Kaye, D., 986
Kearns, J., 729
Keimel, K., 787
Keisler, H. J., 564, 565, 568, 602, 603
Kennedy, J., 83, 96, 98
Kerferstei, H., 333
Ketonen, O., 687, 698, 703
Keyser, C. J., 618, 620, 621
Kikuchi, M., 990, 991
Kindinger, R., 36
Kindt, W., 961–964
Kleene’s number realizability, 104
Kleene, S. C., 42, 83, 88, 92–99, 104–
106, 110, 113, 114, 374, 488,
494, 644, 650–998
Kleene’s applicative structure, 770
Kleene-Rosser paradox, 732
Kline, G. L., 727
Klop, J. W., 738, 746, 749, 750
Kneale, W. C., 64, 401
Kneebone, G. T., 388
Kneser, H., 670, 677
Kochen, S., 565
Kœnig’s Lemma, 227–229
Kohlenbach, V., 379
Kolmogorov’s probelm interpretation,
88
Kolmogorov, A. N., 77, 83, 84, 88,
89, 96, 375, 484, 486, 670,
683, 990
Komori, Y., 750
Koons, R., 967
Korselt, E. W., 139
Korteweg, D. J., 78, 80
Kotarbi´nski, T., 306, 316, 319, 606
Kotlarski, H., 986
Kowalewski, J., 348
Koymans, C. P. J., 781, 786
Krajewski, Z., 986
Kraj˘cek, J., 952
Krauss, P., 97
Kreisel, G., 84, 108, 111, 114, 117,
237, 248, 249, 251, 252, 378,
391, 393, 394, 482, 485, 488,
Index

1035
492, 493, 500, 501, 704, 712,
744, 754, 757, 761, 762, 771,
780, 782, 900, 990
Kreisel, K., 706
Kripke model, 106–108, 487, 489
Kripke semantics, 103, 488
Kripke, S., 84, 106–108, 116, 117, 389,
399, 401, 938, 946, 961–967,
969, 971, 974, 976, 978, 983,
993, 998
Krivine, J. L., 723, 989
Krol’, M. D., 84, 103
Kronecker, L., 166, 179, 204, 238, 324,
325, 327, 335, 340, 342–344,
352, 356, 378, 379
Kunen, K., 997
Kuratowski, C., 540
Kuzichev, A. S., 727, 741
K¨onigsberg conference, 465, 472, 474,
486, 501, 502
L¨owenheim
–Skolem Theorem, 130, 137, 173,
205, 215, 220, 224–229, 237,
564
`a la [L¨owenheim, 1915], 226
`a la [Skolem, 1923b], 229
–Skolem–Tarski Theorem
Upward, 230
L¨owenheim, L., 135, 139, 144, 172,
199, 205, 206, 210, 214, 216,
218–219, 224–229, 251, 453,
564, 567, 736
L¨auchli, H., 84
L¨ob, M., 84, 956, 982
L¨owe, B., 975
L´evy, L., 82
Laan, T., 725
labelled terms, 749, 750
Lachlan, A., 986
Lackey, D., 31
Lafont, Y., 789
Lamarche, F., 791
λ, 857
λ-calculus, 917, 919–921, 937, 939,
942, 945, 989
polymorphic, 989
lambda abstraction algebra, 781
lambda algebra, 781
λI-calculus, 860
λK-calculus, 860
lambda model, 781
lambda-abstraction, 35
λβ-calculus, 857
λβη-calculus, 857
λ-calculus, 820, 856, 857
λη-calculus, 857
Lambek, J., 751, 752, 755, 758–989
Lambert, K., 36, 62, 70
Lamping, J., 750
Landin, P., 742–743, 747, 760, 777
constructors, 765
Landini, G., 891
Langford’s result, 152
Langford, C. H., 486, 567, 568, 927
large cardinal axioms, 603
large cardinals, 598
lattice
κ-continuous, 942
non-modular, 968
lattice theory, 162, 172
lattices, 580
complete, 777
continuous, 777
L¨auchli, H., 757, 762, 790
Lautman, Albert, 197, 248
law of contradiction, 17, 80
law of deduction, 528, 529
law of double negation, 77, 84
law of excluded middle, 22, 77, 80,
84, 113, 114, 517, 525
law of identity, 23
law of non-contradiction, 517
lawless sequences, 488, 495, 500, 501
Lawson, J., 787
Lawvere, F. W., 751, 755–759, 762,
771, 784
Lawvere, W., 988, 989
Index

1036
LCF project, 754, 784
Le´sniewski, S., 305–319, 511, 529, 530,
550, 582, 595, 606, 752
Lebesgue, H., 888, 908
Leblanc, H., 49
Leeds, S., 556
Leibniz’s Law, 64
Leibniz, G. W., 23, 24, 171, 494
Leibnizian identity conditions, 62, 66,
68
Leisenring, A. C., 386, 402, 411, 415
Leitgeb, H., 994
Leivant, D., 84, 769, 775
Lejewski, C., 318
Lercher, B., 736, 739
Lercher, Bruce, 839
Lescanne, P., 750
Lesniewski, S., 881, 902, 903, 911–
913
levels of implication, 943, 944, 996
Levi, B., 886, 888, 895
Levitz, H., 176
L´evy, J. J., 749, 750, 781, 785
Levy, A., 605, 608
Lewis, C. I., 486, 619–621, 927
liar paradox, 423, 437, 438, 542, 543,
550
Libert, H., 994
Lifschitz, V., 84 972 972
limit rule, 973
limit-colimit coincidence, 778
Lindel¨of, 353
Lindenbaum’s lemma, 516, 518
Lindenbaum, A., 517, 518, 520, 521,
534, 594, 600
Lindenbaum, L., 583
Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra, 524, 525
linear lattices, 162
linear logic, 786, 789, 791
Lipschitz, R., 332
LISP, 742
lists, 769
locally conﬂuent, 732
Loeb, I., 84
Loewen, Kenneth, 839
logic
classical, 50, 199
combinatory, 917, 918, 921–923,
937, 939, 942, 944, 946, 947
Fitch’s, 933, 934
contraction-free, 955, 958, 995
ﬁrst-order, 205
four-valued
Dunn-Belnap’s, 967
illative combinatory, 937, 942, 945,
946
intuitionistic, 203, 205, see also
intuitionism254
linear, 958, 996
M-, 986
machine-oriented, 242
many-valued, 955
modal, 971, 980
non-contractive, 923
of ﬁction, 34
ω-, 994
partial, 949, 994
substructural, 958
three-valued, 924, 938, 952, 953,
964
Lukasiewicz’s, 970
Kleene’s, 960, 963
two-valued, 199
logic of partial terms, 90
logic programming, 670
logical analysis, 21, 24
logical atomism, 21
logical axioms, 39, 40
logical consequence, 528, 530, 531, 536,
537, 559, 561, 562, 564, 565,
607
logical constants, meaning, 765
logical equivalence, 514
logical form, 21, 23
logical laws, 18
logical relations, 753
logical syntax, 43
logical truth, 561
Index

1037
logically equivalent, 515
logically ideal language, 23
logically inconsistent, 58
logically inconsistent Meinongian ob-
ject, 58
logicism, 1, 12
Longley, J., 754
Longo, G., 781, 783, 787, 788, 989
Lorenz, K., 789
Lorenzen, P., 765, 789–791, 932–936,
939, 943, 966
Lo´s, J., 565
Loux, M. J., 436
Luce, A. A., 59
Luckhardt, H., 84
ludics, 791
Lukasiewicz’s 3-valued logic, 160
Lukasiewicz, J., 42, 305, 318, 518–
522, 529, 776, 911–913, 955–
957, 996
Lusin, N., 912
Lyndon, R., 565, 586
M¨onnich, U., 997
Macbeth, 41
MacQueen, D., 774
Magari, R., 976, 988, 998
Majer, U., 324, 325
Mal’cev, A., 565, 788
Malacaria, P., 785, 789
Malitz, R. J., 949, 993
Mally, E., 29, 62
Mancosu, P., 83, 120, 176, 177, 325,
907, 926
Mann, C. R., 758
Mannoury, G., 84
many-valued system, 520, 521
Manzano, M., 725, 730
map theory, 946
Markov’s principle, 105, 108, 114, 119
Markov’s rule, 102
Markov, A. A., 84, 105
Martin, N. M., 634, 641
Martin, R. L., 558, 959, 961–963, 965
Martin-L¨of, P., 84, 378, 684, 697, 748,
753, 769, 782, 787, 936, 939,
940, 989
type theory, 763–765
Mason, J., 997
Mass terms, 386, 413, 414, 425
Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy, 825
material implication, 84
material spatiotemporal object, 71
mathematical epistemology, 18
mathematical identity, 90
mathematical induction, 14, 56
mathematical logic, 3
mathematical notation, 38
mathematics
ﬁnitist, 368
Matiyasevich, Y., 176
matrices, 522
matrix, 519, 520
matrix method, 519–522
Mauny, M., 786
maximal consistent subset, 981
maximally
consistent, 52, 55
impossible beingless object, 70
impossible object, 65–69, 71
Mazurkiewicz, S., 598
McCall, S., 42
McCarthy, J., 742, 744, 754
McCarty, D. C., 84, 488
McCracken, N., 783
McCusker, G., 791
McGee, V., 967, 968, 972, 974, 975,
983, 994
McGuinness, B., 275
McKinsey, J. C. C., 486, 572
McNulty, G., 580, 608
McTaggart, J. M. E., 3
measurable cardinals, 603
Medvedev, Ju. T., 762
Megill, N., 776
Mehra, J., 71
Meinong’s
Index

1038
concept, 66
implection theory, 69
Jungle, 65
object theory, 64, 72
object theory semantics, 72
theory, 65
Meinong, A., 29–34, 36, 41, 59–62,
64, 65, 69. 70, 71
Meinongian, 34, 35
deﬁnite descriptor, 68
desccription and abstraction, 68
domain, 46, 68
extraontology, 66
implection, 71
logic, 29–58
object theory, 33, 46
objects, 41, 62, 67
One, 71
Permenidean One, 72
predicate object theory O, 57
quantiﬁcation, 68
quantiﬁcational logic, 41
semantic domain, 41, 59, 69
semantic domain’s extraontology,
64
set identity axiom, 45
set membership, 43
set theory, 43, 45, 46
theory of deﬁninite description,
67
memory, 30
Mendler, N., 997
menge, 109
Menger, K., 483, 485, 498, 671, 736
mental acts, 33
Menzler-Trott, E., 668, 698, 706, 709,
714, 715
Meredith, C. A., 759, 776
Meredith, D., 776
mereological physical containment, 70
mereologically, 61
mereology, 306, 307, 311, 316
metalanguage, 544, 545, 549–554, 559
metalanguages, 44
metalogic, 308, 512, 529
metamathematics, 79, 84, 512, 526,
529
metaphysical systems, 72
metaphysically impossible, 58
metaphysics, 72
metasystem, 537, 538
metatheoretical device, 40
metatheory, 69, 549, 552
metatheory of ﬁrst order arithmetic,
179
method
axiomatic, 326, 334, 351
genetic, 326, 334
method of eliminating quantiﬁers in
decision problems, 151
method of elimination of quantiﬁers,
564, 567, 581
method of proof by interpretation, 528
method of quantiﬁer elimination, 568,
575
Meyer Viol, W. M. P., 399, 404, 405,
410, 411
Meyer, A. R., 781
Meyer, F., 79
Meyer, R. K., 417, 420–422, 424, 428,
776, 781
Mezghiche, M., 739
Mill, J. S., 306, 389
Milner, R., 754, 784
ML, 754, 775
typability algorithm W, 775
Minari, P., 955, 968
minimal complete development, 748
minimal logic, 682, 848
minimalism, 968
Mints, G., 84, 101, 176, 392, 398, 776
Mirimanoﬀ, D., 153, 764, 903–906,
928, 988, 989
Mislove, M., 787
Mitchell, J. C., 774
Mitschke, G., 749, 750
ML language, 754, 775, 786
model, 526–528, 561, 592
Index

1039
Nk-, 993
ω-, 982, 983
recursively saturated, 986
model consequence, 588
model theory, 526, 536, 564, 565
models of typed λ, 737, 753, 770–771
general and standard, 737, 753
of polymorphic λ, 770, 771, 786,
789
PERs, 771
types in P(ω), 782
models of untyped λ, 773, 777–789
approximation theorem, 779
as inverse limits, 778
continuous lattices, 777
D∞(Scott), 777–778, 783, 784
ﬁlter models, 773, 787
graph models, 781–782
Engeler’s model, 782
P(ω), 782–783
Tω (Plotkin), 783
reﬂexive domains, 778
several deﬁnitions, 781
universal domains, 783
modern logic, 6, 24
modular lattices, 580
modus ponendo ponens, 40
modus ponens, 80, 203, 212, 218, 220–
224, 238, 826
deﬁnition, 212
elimination, 203, 218, 221–224,
238
Moerdijk, I., 84
Moggi, E., 771, 788, 789
Monk, D., 586, 589, 608
monoid structure of CL, 746
monotransformable set of sentences,
536
Montague grammar, 753
Montague, R., 411, 416, 423, 438, 565,
930, 980, 994
Moore, G. E., 1, 255, 275, 287, 597,
600, 608
Moore, G. H., 325, 878, 880, 881
Morel, A. C., 565
Morgan, A. de, 583
Morley, M., 652–653
Morris, J. H., 747, 766, 772, 774–787
typability algorithm, 775
Morse, M., 501
Moschovakis, J. R., 97, 114
Moschovakis, Y., 120, 935, 944, 964,
976, 997
Moser, Georg Ch., 244
Moses, J., 742
Moss, L., 979, 997
Mostowski, A., 103, 565, 575, 577,
606, 607
Mow-Shaw-Kwei, 956
MP (Markov’s Principle), 482, 487–
489, 495, 502
Mt. Analogue, 37, 41, 42
(μ), 858, 865
Muchnik, A. A., 648, 654
multiple-relation theory of judgement,
2
Muller, F. A., 178
multiplicity, 879, 880
Murthy, C., 766
My Philosophical Development, 2
Mycielski, J., 597
Myhill, J., 84, 378, 746, 771, 782,
920, 922, 924, 928, 933–937,
939, 942–946, 961, 966, 996,
998
n, 860
Nagel, E., 330
naive comprehension principle, 46
naive set theory, 7
Nakajima, R., 745, 780
names, 260
natural deduction, 99, 667, 672, 695,
829, 846
natural languages, 544
NBG set theory, 727
Neale, S., 432
Nederpelt, R. P., 725, 739, 750
Index

1040
negation, 41, 42, 77, 674
external, 926
internal, 925, 978
negation as absurdity, 84
negative translation, 97, 484
Negri, M., 977
Negri, S., 694, 697, 702
Nelson’s theorem, 104
Nelson, D., 84, 88, 104–106
Nelson, L., 878, 888, 895–898, 995
Nemeti, I., 589
neo-Meinongian
extraontology, 68–70
logic, 68
ontology, 69
semantic domain, 69
semantics, 68
Nepeivoda, N., 961, 966
Nerode, A., 652–653, 777
Neumann, J. von, 152, 198, 206, 229,
233, 235, 251. 727
New Foundations, see NF875
new realism, 5
Newell, A., 24
Newman, M. H., 732, 734, 738
typability algorithm, 775
Newton, I., 24
next stable structure, 976
NF, 930, 992, 993
NF (“New Foundations”), 734, 741
NFU, 992, 993
Nickau, H., 791
Nidditch, P. H., 59
no-classes theory, 878, 890, 891, 897
Noether, Emmy, 198, 238, 251
nominalism, 60, 64, 316, 318, 319,
606
nominalization, 996
Non-attributive reference, 389, 416,
417, 436, 443
non-Euclidean geometry, 593
non-extensionality, 916, 946, 947, 949,
951, 954
non-Fregean, 46
non-standard models of arithmetic,
474
non-standard models of axiomatic num-
ber theory and set theory,
134
nonbeing, 35, 59, 63, 69, 71, 72
nonentity, 41
nonexistent, 31, 71, 72
nonsubsistent object, 64, 65
objects, 34, 37, 41, 42, 48
nonlogical axioms, 40
nonsense, 288, 299
nonstandard analysis, 179
nonstandard models for arithmetic,
156, 158, 178
nonstanrdard set theory semantics, 34
nonstardard deduction theorem, 34
nonsubsistent object, 66
normal form, 732, 859
approximate, 779
head, 779
normal form theorem, 837
normal inhabitant, 776
normal matrix, 521
normal systems of Post, 623, 627–
633, 644, 648, 651, 656
normalization, 678, 766
proofs, 735, 737, 740, 747, 766–
767, 772, 773
notation
uniform, 210–211
Novikoﬀ, P. S., 791
normal form, 130
(ν), 858, 865
nuclear, 58
(constitutive) property, 34
-extranuclear property distinction,
36
-unrestricted comprehension, 45
constitutive property, 46
predications, 47, 48
property, 36, 37, 58, 63
relational properties, 43
number
Index

1041
cardinal, 878, 879, 881, 885
ordinal, 878–880, 885, 896
numerals
of B¨ohm, 746
of Scott and others, 744
of Church, 731, 769
numeralwise expressibility, 468
Nuprl system, 765
ob, 845
ob-system, 845
object, 29, 30, 44, 256, 257, 259, 261,
262, 264, 271, 292
constant, 38
form of, 266
language, 46, 544, 545, 549–551,
553, 554, 559
theory, 34, 65, 549
theory O, 37, 39
theory (Gegenstandstheorie), 29
theory semantic domain, 58
theory semantics, 41
variable, 38
with being, 32
objectives, 32
observationally equivalent, 784
Ockham, W., 313, 891, 903
Odifreddi, P., 976, 990
O’Donnell, M. J., 738
Ogasawara, T., 103
Oksanen, M., 993
ω-consistency, 468
Omega Rule, 395, 410
ω-consistency, 824
ω-inconsistency, 983, 996
ω-rule, 916, 932
ON, 879, 887, 890, 896, 905
One, 71
1, 860
Ong, L., 785, 789–791
Ono, K., 698
ontic
domain commitment, 69
neutrality, 72
status, 71
ontological
commitment, 34
import, 41
status, 35
ontology, 33, 64, 307, 314
ontology of existent or subsistent ob-
jects, 64
Oosten, J. van, 84, 106, 120
van Oostrom, V., 738
operational semantics, 765
operative approach of Lorenzen, 180
operator
abstraction, 918, 947, 948, 952
equivalence intensional, 952
intensional equivalence, 952
jump, 964, 972, 983
logical, 933, 938, 947
modal, 896, 994
monotone, 923, 937, 941, 978,
979, 998
monotone three valued, 938
positive elementary, 939, 940
order of a function, 899
order of a language, 549
ordered n-tuple, 48
ordinal
closure, 964
reﬂecting, 974
stabilization, 973
ordinal addition, 604
ordinal algebras, 605
ordinal analysis, 933
ordinal number, see number, ordinal875
ordinal-deﬁnable sets, 658–659
Ore, Ø., 129
Orilia, F., 997
Orlov, I. E., 486
P(ω), see models of untyped λ
P´eter, R., 168
PA, see Peano Arithmetic875
PA (Peano Arithmetic), 460, 467, 468,
474–476, 481–485, 490, 491,
Index

1042
493
Padoa’s method, 534
Padoa, A., 531, 532, 534
pairing, 45
de Paiva, V., 789
Pani, G., 791
paradox, see Russell’s Paradox and
Skolem’s Paradox254, 338,
536, 538, 539, 553, 554
Banach-Tarski, 877
Berry’s, 888, 892, 898, 907, 989,
990
Burali-Forti’s, 877, 879, 881, 887,
889, 890, 893, 896–898, 904,
905, 930, 989
Cantor’s, 879–881, 893, 897
Curry’s, 917, 923, 942, 956
Girard’s, 989
Grelling’s, 897, 926, 929
Grelling-Nelson’s, 888
Hangman, 980
hypergame, 988
K¨onig’s, 886, 890, 898
Knower’s, 980
Liar, 876, 891–893, 895, 898, 902,
908, 912, 913, 916, 928, 934,
937, 959, 965, 966, 975, 977,
979, 994–996
Mirimanoﬀ’s, 988, 989
Newcomb’s, 877
of Curry, 733
of Girard, 764
of Kleene and Rosser, 732
of vagueness, 877
Richard’s, 892–894, 896, 898, 900,
906–908, 910–912, 916, 917,
920
Russell’s, 877, 881, 882, 890, 893,
894, 896–898, 906, 908, 918,
919, 922, 923, 926, 928, 934,
936, 937, 940–942, 968, 991,
993
semantical, 876–878, 893, 910–
912, 916, 956, 959, 968, 971,
977, 978
Yablo’s, 987, 988
parallel computation, 784
parallel conditional, 784
parallel or, 785, 786
parallel reductions, 748
parametricity, 769
Paris, J., 958, 996
Paris-Harrington Theorem, 476
Park, D., 778
Parmenidean idealism, 72
Parmenideanism, 71
Parmenides, 71, 72
Parsons, C., 41, 374, 497, 502, 959,
979
Parsons, T., 36, 37, 325
part-whole relations, 61
partial homomorphism, 753
partiality, 919, 929, 933, 997
Pasch’s axiom, 590
Pasch, M., 530
Paulson, Lawrence C., 195, 244
Pavlovic, D., 989
PCF language, 755, 784–786, 789, 791
Peano, see also axioms, Dedekind–
Peano254
Peano Arithmetic (PA), 575, 576, 667,
939, 940, 966, 968, 971, 980,
982, 983, 985–987, 990, 992,
994, 996
Peano, G., 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 24, 79, 81, 87,
177, 200, 205, 206, 313, 499,
530, 531, 725, 731, 877, 878,
881, 883, 888, 889, 891–894,
944
Peckhaus, V., 324, 338, 882
Pegasus, 30, 32, 71
Peirce
–Schr¨oder tradition, 205, 216, 231
–Schrœder tradition, 227
Charles S., 200, 205, 208, 209,
216, 247, 252
Peirce, C. S., 317, 583, 736
Pelham, J., 891
Index

1043
Pelletier, F. J., 634, 641
PER model, 771
perception, 30
Perlis, D., 997
Personal pronouns, 385, 418, 432, 433
Petersen, U., 995
phenomenal world, 71, 72
phenomenlogical
tradition, 29
phenomenological, 32, 60
standpoint, 58
phenomenology, 501
Phlogiston, 30–32
Phoa, W., 789
physical reality, 71
Π (restricted implication in Church’s
system), 919
picture theory, 261
Pierce, B. C., 774
Pieri, M., 594, 901
Pigozzi, D., 522, 524, 526, 781
Πm, 884
Pinsent, D., 280
Piperno, A., 729
ΠR, 884
Pitts, A., 771
Platek, R., 754, 976
Plato, J. von, 99, 173, 174
Platonic subsistence, 35
platonism, 853
Plotkin, G. D., 765, 770, 774, 778,
780, 782–788, 791, 937, 946,
997
P(ω) model, 781
Tω model, 783
pluralism, 5
Pogorzelski, W., 607
Pohlers, W., 378
Poincar´e, H., 10, 80, 339, 346, 348,
353, 204, 886, 888–893, 895–
898, 900, 902, 904, 908, 911,
912, 918
polarity, 977
polyadic algebras, 736
polymorphism in types, 734, 771
models of, 770, 771
parametric, 768
Popper, K., 700
Possel, R. de, 572
possible-world semantics, 106
Post
-completeness, 622, 659
-consistency, 622
correspondence problem, 648, 649,
659
machines, 641–643
productions, 626–627
Post’s
Principia Mathematica, 618–622,
625, 627–628, 631–633
lattice, 634–639
problem, 643–648, 654
theorem, 651–652
thesis, 628–629, 631–632
Post, E., 175, 515, 516, 714
Posterior Analytics, 529
Pottinger, G., 766, 773
Poutsma, H., 501
power class-existence
strong, 955
weak, 955
power set, 45
axiom, 46
power set axiom, 600
Powers, L., 781
Prawitz, D., 678, 682, 696, 764, 765,
768, 995
Pre-suppositions, 387, 388, 418, 434
predicate, 38, 46
complementation, 38, 40
expression, 42, 44
object theory logic, 54
partially deﬁned, 959, 960, 964
semantics, 46
symbol, 37
total, 945, 969
trial and error, 976
predicate logic, 586, 588, 589
Index

1044
predication, 34, 40, 313
predicational incompleteness, 71
predicative function, 890, 900, 908,
909
predicative functions, 11
predicativity, 888, 890, 895, 899, 900,
927, 983, 984
prenex, see direction, prenex and form,
prenex254
Presburger
Arithmetic, 231, 241
Moj˙zesz, 231, 252–254
Presburger, M., 93, 96, 362, 567, 575
Priest, G. G., 388, 442, 443, 968
Priestly, J., 30, 31
primary substance, 60, 72
primitive operation, 845
primitive recursive arithmetic, 94, 357
primitive semantic relation, 41
primitive syntax, 38
Princeton University, 826
principal functional character, 841
principal type, 774
algorithms, 774–776
principal type scheme, 841
Principia Mathematica, 2, 3, 10, 12,
13, 15, 18, 24
Principia Mathematica, 517, 545
Principia Mathematica, 200, 206, 212,
220, 254
calculi of, 212, 220
principle of bar induction, 113
Principle of Dependent Choice, 227
Principles of Mathematics, 1, 9, 10,
12, 22
Prior, A. N., 436
priority method, 648, 654
problem of ﬁnite axiomatizability, 592
problem of universals, 59
process
almost everywhere periodic, 973
B-, 974, 976
Γ-, 975
G-, 975, 976
H-, 972–974, 976
non terminating, 926, 927
P-, 974, 975
revision, 973, 975
program composition, 835
programme
Fifth Generation Computer, 243
Hilbert’s, 200–202, 205–206, 233,
236–238
unwinding, 237–238
projective geometry, 593
proof, 566
intuitionistic notion of, 491–495
Proof Interpretation, 482, 487, 488,
491–495, 502
proof search, 223–224, 240–242
automatic, 223, 240–242
human-oriented, 223
proof theory
Hilbert’s, 323
proof-net, 790
proof-theoretic strength, 940, 980
proofs as objects, 761
proofs as terms, see deductions as ...735,
759
proper implection, 68, 70, 71
proper subset, 62
proper subset membership, 63
properties, 32, 33, 37, 66
Property A, 206, 214, 218, 220, 224
deﬁnition, 214
Property B, 214
deﬁnition, 214
Property C, 214–221, 224–227, 230,
232, 237, 240
deﬁnition, 215
example, 215
property implection, 66
property theory, 876, 930, 993, 997
propositional and predicat einference,
34
propositional calculus, 620–623, 633–
641
completeness, 620–622
Index

1045
decidability, 620–622
functional completeness, 622, 634,
640–641
generalized, 622–625
undecidable, 650
propositional connectives, 88
propositional function, 883, 884, 889,
890, 894, 898–900, 907, 909,
919, 923, 926, 929, 940, 941
propositional functions, 6, 7, 11, 13,
24
propositional logic of intuitionistic arith-
metic, 102
propositional negation, 38, 40
propositional object theory logic, 50
Propositional Operators, 410, 421, 422,
424, 426, 436, 437
propositional variables, 38, 40
propositions, 32, 66
propositions as types, 734–735, 756,
759–766
in classical logic, 766
propositions-as-types, 838
protothetic, 307, 311, 312
provability, 554, 567, 573
provability logic, 487
provability operator, 486, 487
pseudo-proposition, 300
psychological acts, 29
psychologism, 29
psychologistically, 30
Pudlak, P., 179
pure λ and CL, 723
pure λ-calculus, 823
Pure Type Systems, 741
qualities, 32
quantiﬁer
δ-, 211
γ-, 211
general, 211
restricted, 211
quantiﬁer elimination, 491
quantiﬁer elimination theorem, 568,
570–572
quantiﬁers, 6, 7, 89, 90, 318
quasi-leftmost reduction, 749
Quine, W. V. O., 31, 41, 59, 65, 317,
319, 416, 423, 425, 556, 607,
730, 734, 736, 875, 890, 924,
929, 930, 969, 980, 992, 993
system NF, 734, 741
RA<α, 984
van Raamsdonk, F., 738
Rabin, M., 565
Raggio, A., 682
raising, 229
Ramsey’s theorem, 147, 149
Ramsey, F. P., 270, 284–287, 293–
297, 737, 751, 877, 903, 907–
909, 911, 929, 992
Range theorem, 746
Rapaport, W. J., 65
Rasiowa, H., 84, 99, 103
Ratajczyk, Z., 986
Rathjen, M., 713, 955
Ravaglia, M., 325
real closed ﬁeld, 592
real number generator, 111, 112, 114,
115
realisation, 526
realism, 14, 264–266, 279
realizability, 494
realizability semantics, 103
realizability, modiﬁed, 761
realizability, recursive, 762
realizability-⊢, 105
realizes, 104
recursion induction, 742, 754
recursion theory, 633, 641–654
recursive arithmetic, 131, 134, 166
recursive deﬁnition, 363
recursive function theory, 169
recursive functions, 732
recursive method, 547, 556
recursive number theory, 364
Index

1046
recursive realizability, 103, 104
recursive types, 774
recursively enumerable sets, 629, 643–
648, 651–652
creative, 645–647
hyper-simple, 647
simple, 646, 647
recursiveness conditions, 374
redex, 732, 738, 859
β, 859
η, 859
K, 863, 865
S, 863, 865
weak, 865
reducibility, 624, 645–648
many-one, 645–646
one-one, 645
truth-table, 646–647
Turing, 645, 647–648, 651–654
reducibility axiom, 890, 907, 908, 927
reduction, 857, 858
λβ-, 732, 748–750
λβη-, 739, 749
abstract, 738
β, 858, 859
β, 859
βη, 859
computational, 378
eﬃcient, optimal, 750
foundational, 378
inside-out, 749
parallel, 748
quasi-leftmost, 749
R´ev´esz’, 750
, 858
strong, 838
strong in CL, 739
weak, 863, 865
w, 863, 865
for λ-terms, 866
weak in CL, 739, 748
reduction classes, 146
reduction diagrams, 749
reduction problems, 134
reduction strategies, 749
reference, 66
Ref(PA), 984, 985
Ref∗(PA(P)), 984
reﬂexive domains, 777, 778
refutability, 848
regressive method, 16, 17, 20
regular cardinals, 602
regular ordinal, 601
Reid, C., 709
relation algebras, 580, 583, 598, 606,
736
relation arithmetic, 13
relation numbers, 15
relational algebra, 589
relational algebras, 584
relations, 32
relative interpretability, 580
relatively interprtable, 580
relativised Hilbert Programs, 475
relevant implication, 737
relizability, 114
replacement, 46
representability condition, 369, 370
representation problem, 592, 594
Rep(A), 944
Rescher, N., 42
residuals, 738, 749
Resnik, M., 556, 558, 608
Restall, G., 995, 996
restricted generality, 834, 841
restricted the axiom of comprehen-
sionto arithmetical proper-
ties, 181
restriction, 46
retraction in P(ω), 783
R´ev´esz, G., 750
revision procedure, 971
revisionprocess, seeprocess,revision875
revision theory, 974, 975, 997
Reynolds, J. C., 768–770, 774, 779,
784, 989
Rezus, A., 783
(ρ), 858, 865
Index

1047
Richard’s Paradox, 442, 536, 823, 832
Richard, J., 353, 536
Richman, F., 84
von Rimscha, M., 781
rings, 580
commutative, 580
ordered, 580
Rios, A., 750
Robinson, A., 179, 565, 575, 985
Robinson, J. A., 170, 240, 242, 252,
565, 580, 775
Robinson, R. M., 577, 581
Rogers, H., 782
Rogers, H. Jr., 935
Ronchi della Rocca, S., 774
Roquette, Peter, 197, 198, 203, 207,
244, 245, 251, 252
Rosen, B. K., 738, 750
Rosenbloom, P., 623, 659, 729, 733,
737
Rosolini, G., 788
Ross, J., 93
Rosser, J. B., 95, 98, 575, 714, 725,
729, 731, 749, 822, 910, 917,
920–924, 929, 930, 953, 970
round square, 30, 33, 37, 43, 65, 66
Routley, R., 36, 64, 417, 420–422, 424,
428
Rouyer-Degli, J., 750
Rowe, D. E., 325
Rubin, H., 600
Rubin, J., 600
Russellian deﬁnite description theory,
67
Ruitenberg, W., 84
Rule, see also Generalized Rule
of δ-Quantiﬁcation, 220
deﬁnition, 214
of γ-Quantiﬁcation, 220, 223
deﬁnition, 214
of Generalization, 214
of Implication, 214
of Passage, 213, 214, 216–218,
220, 224
deﬁnition, 213
of Simpliﬁcation, 214, 218, 220,
222
deﬁnition, 214
rule, 845
rule of inference, 94
Russell, see also Principia Mathemat-
ica254
Russell’s paradox, 1, 7, 8, 10, 12, 305,
306, 310, 314, 660
Russell, B., 1–25, 31, 65, 79, 87, 89,
135, 199, 200, 202, 205, 206,
212, 216, 220, 255–260, 264,
267, 269, 275–277, 282, 285–
287, 289–291, 302, 307, 309,
313, 314, 317, 323, 341, 342,
346, 359, 385, 386, 387, 389,
416–418, 430, 435, 439, 499,
536, 550, 600, 618–622, 625,
672, 725, 728, 731, 735, 751,
764, 769, 821, 822, 877, 878,
880, 881, 883–885, 887–900,
904, 907, 918, 922, 926–928,
978, 988
Russian recursive mathematics, 105
(S), 863, 865
S4, 482, 485–487
Slupecki, J., 318
Saarinen, E., 435
Sacks, G., 652–653
Salibra, A., 781
Salkowski, E., 177
Sall´e, P., 773
Sambin, G., 788
Sanchis, L., 767, 840
Sandu, G., 994
Santa Claus, 32
satisfaction, 539, 540, 547–549, 561
satisfaction class, 986
satisfaction of a sentential function,
536, 537
Sattler-Klein, Andrea, 244
saturation, 117, 118
Index

1048
saturation point, 973
Sayward, C., 438
Sazonov, V. Y., 784
Scanlon, Thomas M., Jr., 210, 233,
237, 249, 252
Scarpellini, B., 84
Scedrov, A., 84
Sch¨onﬁnkel, M., 726–728, 730, 826,
917, 918
Sch¨utte, K.,84, 98, 378, 699, 712, 768,
931–933, 963, 996
Sch¨onﬂies, A., 888, 892–896, 900
Sch¨utte, H., 98
schema
choice, 945
comprehension, 926, 929, 931, 941,
948, 949, 951, 958, 968
T-, 912–915, 938, 968, 969, 975,
996
Scheme (programming language), 742
Schmidt, A., 685, 687, 714, 715
Schoenﬂies, A., 110
Scholastic distinction, 32
Scholz, H., 714
Schr¨oder, see also Peirce-Schr¨oder tra-
dition254
Schr¨oder, E., 200, 205, 210, 216, 252,
313, 314, 583, 619, 622, 736
Schr¨oder, M., 135, 139
Schroeder-Heister, P., 670, 697
Schroer, D. E., 738, 739, 749
Schwichtenberg, H., 378, 701
scientiﬁc outlook, 5
scientiﬁc thought, 64
Scott, D. S., 84, 103, 179, 565, 602,
744–745, 757, 760, 779, 782–
784, 786–788, 922, 937, 939,
940, 942, 943, 945, 961
continuous lattices, 777
ﬁrst model of λ (D∞), 777–778
LCF system, 754
numerals, 744
reﬂexive domains, 778
as inverse limits, 778
Scott domains, 786–787
Scott topology, 777
synthetic domain theory, 788–789
theory of constructions, 761–763
undecidability theorem, 744
Scott-continuous function, 777
Scott-open set, 777
Scowcroft, P., 84
SECD-machine, 743, 744
second act of intuitionism, 77, 108
secondary substance, 60
Seely, R. A. G., 790
Segerberg, K., 926
Sein -indiﬀerent, 62
Sein-independent, 62
Selby-Bigge, L. A., 59
Seldin, J. P., 723, 725, 728–730, 739,
740, 742, 771, 772, 840, 917
self, 278, 279
self-application, 730, 882
self-reference, 876, 877, 889, 903, 910,
928, 963, 977, 987, 988, 998
direct, 882, 917, 922, 924, 977,
978
indirect, 910, 922
Self-truth axioms, 984
Seligman, J., 997
semantic category, 550
semantic conception of truth, 558
semantic deﬁnability, 531, 537
semantic paradox, 544
semantical category, 549
semantical paradoxes, 559
semantically closed, 542, 543, 937, 964,
978, 998
semantically universal, 543, 544
semantics, 31, 41, 72, 536
consistency, 54
domain, 41
inconsistency, 54
model, 41
of predicate logic, 44
theory, 29
semi-inductive process, 971–974, 997
Index

1049
semi-separability of λ-terms, 780
semi-Thue system, 627, 649–650
semigroups, word problem, 648–650
semtically universal, 542
sense, 256, 257, 267, 268
sentence
grounded, 963
Liar, 892, 899, 972, 978, 979
paradoxical, 960, 965, 971, 974
ungrounded, 965
sentential calculus, 513, 516, 518, 520,
524, 525, 547
sentential function, 532, 537–540, 546–
549, 551, 561
sentential tautology, see tautology, sen-
tential254
separability of λ-terms, 780
separated system, 841
sequent calculus, 667, 677, 684, 691,
695, 698
sequentiality, 785–786
sequential algorithm, 785
sequential function, 785
on concrete domains, 785
series, 13
set
(completely) representable, 944
(formally) discrete, 945
admissible, 976, 994
circular, 905, 906
Δ1
1, 966
Δ0
2, 976
denumerable, 894
discrete, 946
eﬀectively enumerable, 894
extraordinary, 904
grounded, 904
hyperarithmetical, 934, 935, 966
internally deﬁnable (in Frege struc-
tures), 941
logical notion of, 940–942
non-well-founded, 904, 905, 977
of ﬁrst kind, 904
of grounded set, see WF875
of second kind, 904
ordinary, 904
partial, 962, 964
Π1
1, 935, 966
Π1
2, 967, 975, 976
positive, 993
positive inductive, 935
separable, 946
Σ1
1, 967
strongly deﬁnable, 976
transitive, 993
unbounded, 974
weakly deﬁnable, 975
well-ordered, 879, 886
set theory, 580, 598, 606, 876, 877,
879, 880, 888, 889, 893, 895,
896, 901, 903, 905–907, 911,
928, 930, 988, 993
Cantorian, 878, 879
set theory, ﬁnitely axiomatized, 727
set-theoretic relativism, 133
Sethi, R., 774
sets, 66
abstraction, 46
identity axiom, 44
membership, 44
theoretical semantics, 46
theory, 44, 46
theory paradoxes, 46
Shaw-Kwei, M., 171
Sheard, M., 980–982
Shepherdson, J. C., 160, 771, 782,
958, 996
Sherlock Holmes, 32
Shirahata, M., 996
Shoenﬁeld, J. R., 58
Sieg, W., 725, 730, 885
Siekmann, J¨org, 195, 242, 248, 249,
251, 252
Sierpi´nski, W., 310, 311, 598, 600
(σ), 859, 865
Σ (existential quantiﬁer in Church’s
system), 919
Σ∞, 942, 944, 945
Index

1050
sign, 273–275
signiﬁcist, 84
Sikorski, R., 103
similarity, 13–15
Simmons, K., 551, 558, 902, 967, 979
Simon, H., 24
Simons, P. M., 70
simple theory of types, 531, 534, 537,
562
simple type theory, see types, sim-
ple737
Simpson, S., 378
situation theory, 977, 979, 997
Skokem, T., 130, 205, 206, 210, 214,
216, 219, 226–231, 241, 252–
254, 410, 453, 564, 567, 699,
703, 901, 956–958, 995, 996
Skolem, see also form, Skolem nor-
mal and form, Skolemized
and function, Skolem and
Lœwenheim–Skolem Theorem
and Lœwenheim–Skolem–Tarksi
Theorem and Skolemization
and term, Skolem254
’s Paradox, 229
Skolem 1920, 453
Skolem 1922, 454
Skolem 1928, 454
Skolem functions, 130, 134
Skolem Hull construction, 178
Skolem normal form theorem, 136
Skolem’s paradox, 127, 155, 177
Skolem–Noether, 132
Skolemization, 210
Skyrms, B., 959
Slomson, A. B., 179
Smielew, W., 580
Smith, James T., 244, 251, 252
Smith, S., 986
Smorinski, C., 84, 910, 956
Smullyan
’s uniform notation, see notation,
uniform254
Raymond M., 211, 253
Smullyan, R., 969
Smyth, M., 784
Smyth, M. B., 778, 784, 787, 788
SN, 766, 767, see normalization
so-being, 33, 35, 43, 59, 64, 69
Soames, S., 558, 559
Soboci´nski, B., 314, 318
Sobocinski, B., 518, 520
solid geometry, 595, 596
solipsism, 266
Solving solution, 391
Sosein, 35, 37, 41, 58, 64, 66, 67, 70,
71
function, 63, 67, 68
set, 63
Sosein set theoretical interpretation,
72
Soseine, 43, 46, 48, 59, 62, 63
soundness, 103
space, 595, 887, 945, 960, 962, 964
injective T0-, 945
compact Hausdorﬀ, 988
discrete, 945
exponential, 993
function, 921, 951
κ-, 945
of truth-values, 967, 969
spatio-temporal entities, 65, 69
spatio-temporal existence, 35
spead, 108
species, 109, 115
species of ﬁrst order, 109
species of second order, 109
Specker, E., 903, 905, 992
Spector, C., 83
spheres, 595, 597
spread, 109, 110, 117
spread law, 110, 117
squadge, 938, 944
St¨ark, R., 997
stable element
negatively, 972
positively, 972
stable function, 786
Index

1051
stable truth, 973
Stalnaker, R. C., 416, 417, 420, 422,
428
standard models, 737, 753
Standardization Theorem, 839
standardization theorem, 749
Staples, J., 750
state of aﬀairs, 256, 259–262, 289,
290, 977–979
Statman, R., 753
Steele, G. L., 742
Steen, S. W. P. , 405
Steinby, M, 738
Steinitz, W., 174
Stenlund, S., 723
Stigt, W. P. van, 81, 84, 110
Stone, M. H., 103, 525, 526, 586
Stoy, J., 777
Strachey, C., 768, 777, 779
stratiﬁed formula, 734, 774
Streicher, T., 789
strict refutability, 848
strong completeness theorem, 54, 57
strong counterexample, 113, 114
strong equivalence, 45
strong normalization, see SN766
strongly inaccessible cardinals, 601
strongly inacessible, 602
structural rules, 685, 696, 701
structural-descriptive names, 545, 547,
549, 551, 552, 554
structural-descriptive terms, 553
structuralism, 854
structured operational semantics, 765
structured set (menge), 109
Studnet, W., 715
Sturm’s theorem, 571
Størmer, C., 179
subsets, 45
subsistence, 35, 69, 72
subsistent
object, 62, 70, 71
subspecies, 115
substance, 257
substitution, 826, 858, 863, 864
Curry’s analysis, 728
eﬃcient, 750
explicit, 750
−[−/−], 858
very early notations, 725
substitutional theory, 910, 967
Sullivan, P., 296
Sundholm, G., 765
supervaluation, 937, 960, 961, 965,
966, 982, 997
Suppes, P., 330, 608
Surma, S., 607
symbol, 273–276
syntactical
consistency, 52
consistentcy, 55
decidability, 54
inconsistency, 54
syntactical consistency, 40
syntactical system, 846
syntax, 36, 37, 46
synthetic domain theory, 788–789
system
simply inﬁnite, 331
system of arithmetic, 528
Szabo, M., 672, 758
Szczerba, L. W., 572, 592, 593, 595,
608
Szmielew, W., 565, 575
AT , 209
Tω model, 783
Tn, 209
T (G¨odel’s system), 489, 490, 493
T-sentence, 549, 553
T-sentences, 555
TAChλ, 861
TACu, 866
TACuλ, 862
tag, problem of, 625–628
Tait, W., 204, 218, 253, 325, 331,
683, 708, 766, 768
Index

1052
computability method, 753, 767,
768
conﬂuence proof, 748
Takahashi, Masako, 723, 748
Takahashi, Moto-o, 768
Takahashi, S., 955
Takeuti, G., 378, 710, 712
Takeuti, G., system GLC, 768
Takeuti’s conjecture, 768
Talcott, C., 997
Tammet, T., 776
Tanaka, K., 990, 991
Tapp, C., 325
Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth, 541, 545,
547, 548, 552, 553, 559
Tarski’s natural geometry, 596
Tarski’s undeﬁnability theorem, 551,
552
Tarski, A., 103, 199, 231, 253, 305,
307, 310, 312, 316–319, 386,
422, 438, 486, 511, 713, 736,
776, 902, 911–916, 923, 924,
929, 937, 941, 961, 966, 967,
973, 980, 988
(τ), 858, 865
tautology, 30, 40, 49
sentential, 212
substitutional sentential, 212
Taylor, P., 789
Tennant, N., 995
Tennenbaum’s Theorem, 474
Terese research group, 738
term, 845, 857
combinatory, 864
λ, 857
Skolem, 210–211
term rewriting systems, 738
terminological explanations, 308, 311
terms, 46
terms as deductions, see deductions
as terms735
The Cut Elimination Theorem, 402,
403
The Epsilon Substitution Method, 385,
389, 390, 407, 409, 430
The First Epsilon Theorem, 385, 393,
402, 406
The Law of the Excluded Middle, 397
The Paradox of Predication, 439, 440
The Second Epsilon Theorem, 386,
402, 405, 415
theorem, 547, 845
second recursion, 911
theorem proving
automated, 223, 233, 235, 240–
242
human-oriented, 223, 233, 235
inductive, 233, 235
theorems, 40, 49, 50, 57
theoretical computer, 949
theoretical linguistics, 963
theory Q, 577
theory of atomistic Boolean algebras,
526
theory of beingles incomplete objects,
71
theory of Boolean algebras, 575
theory of deﬁnite descriptions, 1, 2,
22, 23
theory of dense linear orderings, 575
theory of dense orders, 526
theory of discrete orders, 526
theory of ﬁelds of sets, 526
theory of groups, 513
theory of identity, 526
theory of logical atomism, 1
theory of logical constructions, 1
theory of logical relations, 1
theory of mathematical knowledge, 17
theory of order, 513
theory of ordinals, 13
theory of real-closed ﬁelds, 567
theory of referece, 34
theory of relation arithmetic, 1, 14
theory of relations, 14
theory of the congruence of line seg-
ments, 527, 563
theory of the reals, 1, 13
Index

1053
theory of transﬁnite induction, 14
theory of types, 1, 10, 11, 24, 280,
287, 309
theory of vectors, 13
theory of well-orderings, 575
Thiel, C., 668, 715, 727
Thomas, W., 738
Thomason, R., 416, 417, 420, 422,
423, 428, 438
Thompson, F. B., 589
thought, 34
three-valued logic, 35
three-valued propositional semantics,
34, 41
Thue system, 175, 649–650
Thue, A., 175, 179, 649–650, 738
Tiles, M., 414, 441, 442
Tiuryn, J., 775
Tk, 969, 970
Toepell, M., 324, 329
topological interpretation, 103
topology
κ-compact, 993
topos, elementary, 759
Torretti, R., 328
transﬁnite induction, 485, 667, 933,
935, 938
transﬁnite types, 737
translation
−H, 865
H to Λ, 865
−L, 865
Λ to H, 865
Troelstra, A. S., 81, 83, 84, 93, 96,
97, 103, 106, 111, 114–117,
120, 486, 493–495, 701, 757,
767
true predication, 66
truth, 530, 531, 536, 537, 541, 561,
564–567, 573, 607
arithmetical, see AT875
axiomatic theory of, 915, 916, 980,
983
logics of, 968, 980
self-referential, 943, 966, 968, 977,
978, 980, 983, 996–998
truth functionally complex proposi-
tion, 49
truth tables
Bochvar-Kleene, 959, 960
strong Kleene, 959, 960, 963
truth teller, 974
truth values, 38, 41, 42, 46, 49
truth-table, 620–623, 635
truth-value
internal, 925
truth-value gaps, 961, 964
truth-value gluts, 971
truth-values space, see space, of truth
values875
Turing Completeness Theorem, 475
Turing machine, 627–629, 631, 641–
643, 649–650
Turing reducibility, 645, 647–648, 651–
654
Turing, A. M., 490, 494
Turing, A., 379, 618, 619, 624, 632,
641–643, 647, 657, 732, 737,
823
normalization proof, 766
Turing computable, 732
Turner, D. A., 729
Turner, R., 967, 997
turnstile, 39, 40
Twardowski, K., 29, 305, 316, 318,
752
2, 860
typable, 734, 774
typability tests, 747, 774–776
type of all types, 764
type theory, 684, 903, 907, 908, 927,
929, 992
constructive, 939, 940, 945
Martin-L¨of’s, 939, 989
ramiﬁed, 924
simple, 912
type-free comprehension, 875
type-free foundations, 930, 931, 939
Index

1054
types, 737–738, 740–741, 747, 751–
776, 824, 856, 860
approaches, four diﬀerent, 751
atomic, 860
Curry’s, 734, 740, 752
dependent, 740, 761, 764, 771
doctrine of, 884, 898, 899
Gentzen-style rules for, 740, 764
Martin-L¨of’s, 763–765
polymorphic, 771
principal, 774–776
recursive, 774
simple, 747, 774–776
Church’s system, 733, 737, 753
theory of, 267
transﬁnite, 737
universe of, 939, 945
with intersection, 746, 772–774,
787
and ω, 773–774
types as propositions or formulae, see
propositions as types734
ultraproduct, 977
ultraproducts, 133, 159, 565, 603
UMID, 955
undecidability, 566, 589, 911
undecidability of λ, 732, 744
undecidability of number theory, 473
undecidability of predicate logic, 473
undecidable, 575–577, 579, 580, 593,
594
undecidable theory, 473
undeﬁnability, 911, 998
undeﬁnedness
in λ, 779
in recursion theory, 780
undetermined, 41
nucleaer predications, 58
proposition, 49
truth value, 42
uniﬁcation, 626
uniﬁcation algorithm, 242–243, 775
uniform notation, see notation, uni-
form254
uniform substitution, 40
uniformity principle, 115
union, 41, 45
union axiom, 600
universal, 59, 69, 71, 544
quantiﬁcation, 38
universal generality, 834
universal generators, 780
universal modiﬁed Kripke model, 118
universal spread, 111
universal Veldman model, 117
universality, 544, 559
universe of discourse, 41
unrestricted comprehension, 34
unrestricted freedom of assumption
thesis, 46, 58
unsolvable problems, 624, 626–633,
648–650, 655, 657
unsolvable terms, 779–780
identiﬁcation of, 780
unstable elements, 972
Urquhart, A., 891
Uspenskii, V., 777
Vafeiadou, G., 120
Vaihinger, H., 348
valid inference pattern, 49
validity, 49
Beth, 489
classical, 487
intuitionistic, 487
Kripke, 489
structural, 487–489
valuation, 960, 961, 973, 974
classical, 961, 971, 974
maximal, 962
partial, 960
PR-, 962
Sch¨utte, 963
three-valued, 960
WK-, 962
valuations (partial, total), 768
Index

1055
van Dalen, D., 496
Van Eijck, J., 434
van Fraassen, B., 959–961, 963, 982
Van Lambalgen, M., 997
Vaporis, N., 120
variable, 268, 857, 864
bound, 857, 858, 863
bound delta-, 211
bound γ-, 211
free, 858, 864
free δ-, 211
free γ-, 211
Variable binding term operators, 390,
404
variables, 38
Vaught, R. L., 173, 524, 526, 552,
564, 565, 608
Veblen, O., 485, 530, 671
Veblen, Oswald, 820, 826
Veldman’s completeness proof, 116
Veldman’s completeness theorem, 119
Veldman’s intuitionistic completeness
proof, 108
Veldman, W., 84, 108, 117, 489
Venn diagram, 48
Venn–Euler diagram, 42
Venneri, B., 773, 774
Venturini Zilli, M., 744
veriﬁability, 364
Vesley, R. E., 83, 110, 113, 114, 120
Vessiot, Ernest, 198
vicious circle principle, 891, 899, 903,
928
vicious circle principle (VCP), 10, 11
Vickers, S., 787
Vielheit, see multiplicity875
Vienna Circle, 264
Visser’s rule, 101
Visser, A., 84, 101–103, 964, 966, 967,
972, 983
Vitali, G., 597
Volken, H., 749
von Neumann, J., 311, 354, 359, 365,
368, 369, 379, 465, 486, 487,
690, 903, 905
von Plato, J., 690, 694, 697, 702, 703,
706
von Schaper, H., 329
Vopenka, P., 989
de Vrijer, R. C., 749
Vuillemin, J., 750
W
combinator, 917, 922–924
ω-consistency, 559
ω-incomplete theory, 559
ω-incompleteness, 559, 562
ω-rule, 562, 563
Waaldijk, F., 84
Wadsworth, C. P., 744, 749, 754, 779–
780, 784
Wagon, S., 597
Wajsberg, M., 518, 521
Wand, M., 774, 784
Wang, H., 172, 227, 228, 231, 253,
254, 497–500
Warsaw, 529
Warsaw School of Logic, 518
Washington, G., 70
Wavre, R., 82
weak completeness proof, 57
weak completeness theorem, 54
weak counterexamples, 114
weak interpretability, 579
weak K¨onig lemma, 179
weak normalization, see WN766
weak reduction, 739
weakly inaccessible cardinal, 600
weakly interpretable, 579
Weaver, G., 49
Weber, H., 327
Wedderburn, Joseph H. M., 198, 252
Wegner, P., 774
Wehmaier, K., 992
Weiermann, A., 767
Weil, Andr´e, 197, 207
Weinstein, S., 84
Weirstrass, C., 337, 340, 341
Index

1056
Welch, P., 975, 976, 994
well-formed formula, 46, 846
well-formed formulas (wﬀs), 39, 41
well-ordering, 879, 882, 886–888, 896,
911, 945, 946, 984
Wells, J., 775
Wertverlauf operation, 919, 941
Weydert, E., 949
Weyl, E., 353
Weyl, H., 177, 180, 200, 204, 254,
348, 350, 359, 620, 630, 632,
895, 897, 898, 900–902
WF, 904
White, M., 607
White, R. B., 958, 995, 996
Whitehead, see also Principia Math-
ematica254
Alfred North, 200
Whitehead, A. N., 2, 3, 12, 13, 15,
24, 87, 89, 135, 302, 307,
309, 311, 314, 323, 550, 600,
619–622, 625, 725, 728, 731
Whitman, P., 173
Wilken, G., 767
will, 278, 279
Williams, C. J. F., 436, 437
Wirth, Claus-Peter, 195, 211, 212, 216,
223, 224, 230, 235, 254
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 199, 254, 498
WN, 766, 767, see normalization
Wolska, Magdalena, 244
Wood, A., 20
Woodruﬀ, P., 926, 961, 962, 967
Woodward, P. M., 742
word problem
for groups, 650
for semigroups, 648–650
word problem for lattices, 173
word problem for semi-groups, 175
Wright, C., 442, 991
(ξ), 858, 866
Y, see ﬁxed-point combinators732
Yablo, S., 967, 987
Yanovskaya, S. A., 727
Yaq¯ub, 967
Yoneda’s lemma, 952
Young, J. W., 530
Yourgrau, P., 491
Yuting, S., 500, 904
Zacchi, M., 787
Zach, R., 83, 90, 120, 176, 177, 325
Zaremba, Stanislaw, 205
Zermelo’s set theory, 601
Zermelo, E., 131, 134, 152, 176, 310,
340–342, 358, 499, 600, 601,
878, 879, 882, 886–888, 893,
895–897, 900–902, 907, 918,
928
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, 43
Zermelo-Fraenkel’s axiom-system, 602
0, 860
(ζ), 827, 859
ZFC, 877, 946, 966, 996
zigzag theory, 890
Zilsel, E., 486, 491, 493
Zucker, J., 753
Zwicker, W. S., 988
{F}(A), 918
Σ1
1 −AC, 940, 984
→i, 942, 943
⊢i, 944
≡, 925, 952, 953, 970, 971, 991
Index

