
SCARECROW PROFESSIONAL 
INTELLIGENCE EDUCATION SERIES
Series Editor: Jan Goldman
In this post–September 11, 2001 era, there has been rapid growth in the 
number of professional intelligence training and educational programs 
across the United States and abroad. Colleges and universities, as well as 
high schools, are developing programs and courses in homeland security, 
intelligence analysis, and law enforcement, in support of national security.
The Scarecrow Professional Intelligence Education Series (SPIES) was 
first designed for individuals studying for careers in intelligence and to 
help improve the skills of those already in the profession; however, it 
was also developed to educate the public in how intelligence work is con-
ducted and should be conducted in this important and vital profession.
 1.  Communicating with Intelligence: Writing and Briefing in the Intelligence 
and National Security Communities, by James S. Major. 2008.
 2.  A Spy’s Résumé: Confessions of a Maverick Intelligence Professional and 
Misadventure Capitalist, by Marc Anthony Viola. 2008.
 3.  An Introduction to Intelligence Research and Analysis, by Jerome Clauser, 
revised and edited by Jan Goldman. 2008.
 4.  Writing Classified and Unclassified Papers for National Security: A Scare-
crow Professional Intelligence Educational Series Manual, by James S. 
Major. 2009.
 5.  Strategic Intelligence: A Handbook for Practitioners, Managers, and Users, 
revised edition by Don McDowell. 2009.
 6.  Partly Cloudy: Ethics in War, Espionage, Covert Action, and Interrogation, 
by David L. Perry. 2009.
 7.  Tokyo Rose / An American Patriot: A Dual Biography, by Frederick P. 
Close. 2010.
 8.  Ethics of Spying: A Reader for the Intelligence Professional, edited by Jan 
Goldman. 2006.
 9.  Ethics of Spying: A Reader for the Intelligence Professional, Volume 2, 
edited by Jan Goldman. 2010.
10.  A Woman’s War: The Professional and Personal Journey of the Navy’s First 
African American Female Intelligence Officer, by Gail Harris, 2010.
11.  Handbook of Scientific Methods of Inquiry for Intelligence Analysis, by 
Hank Prunckun, 2010.


Handbook of Scientific 
Methods of Inquiry 
for Intelligence Analysis
Hank Prunckun
Jan Goldman
Series Editor
Scarecrow Professional Intelligence 
Education Series, No. 11
THE SCARECROW PRESS, INC.
Lanham • Toronto • Plymouth, UK
2010

Published by Scarecrow Press, Inc.
A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc.
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706
http://www.scarecrowpress.com
Estover Road, Plymouth PL6 7PY, United Kingdom
Copyright © 2010 by Hank Prunckun
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by 
any electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval 
systems, without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer 
who may quote passages in a review.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Prunckun, Hank.
   Handbook of scientific methods of inquiry for intelligence analysis / Hank 
Prunckun.
       p. cm. — (Scarecrow professional intelligence education series ; no. 11)
   Includes bibliographical references.
   ISBN 978-0-8108-7191-5 (hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-8108-6753-6 
(pbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-8108-7381-0 (eBook)
   1. Intelligence service—Methodology—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Science—
Methodology—Handbooks, manuals, etc.  3. Social sciences—Methodology—
Handbooks, manuals, etc.  4. Behavioral assessment—Methodology—
Handbooks, manuals, etc.  I. Title.
JF1525.I6P78 2010
327.12072—dc22                                                                                     2009038488
  ™ The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of 
American National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for 
Printed Library Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992.
Printed in the United States of America

To Ann, for all you have done.


vii
Contents
Editor’s Foreword 
ix
Preface 
xi
 1 The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
1
 2 The Intelligence Research Process 
20
 3 Scientific Methods in Intelligence Research 
43
 4 Approaches to Intelligence Research 
54
 5 Unobtrusive Data Collection 
61
 6 Covert Sources of Information 
72
 7 Data Collation Techniques 
97
 8 Basic Statistical Analyses 
107
 9 Presenting Statistical Results 
128
10 Advanced Analytic Techniques 
135
11 Analytic Techniques for Counterterrorism 
162
12 Presenting Spatial Data 
182

viii 
Contents
13 The Intelligence Research Report 
187
14 Ethical Considerations in Intelligence Research 
207
15 Document and Personnel Security 
218
Appendix 
231
About the Author 
233

ix
Editor’s Foreword
T
he goal of this series is first and foremost to develop and contribute to 
the educational literature of the intelligence profession. While other 
intelligence book series discuss “what to do with intelligence” by focus-
ing on issues and policy, the goal of this series will always be ”how to do 
intelligence.” Previous books in the series have dealt with methodologies 
of intelligence analysis. Although there is no agreed-upon method of how 
to process raw intelligence into a finished product, this book contributes 
to a long line of theories and viewpoints on the subject. Hank Prunckun 
is the second Australian intelligence expert to contribute to this series. The 
first book, and extremely well-received by the intelligence community, was 
written by Don McDowell. Both books highlight the worldwide interest of 
improving intelligence analysts beyond any country’s borders. It is hoped 
that as this series develops, additional analytical books will be added, al-
lowing intelligence professionals to decide for themselves which method 
works best.
Jan Goldman
Series Editor


xi
Preface
I
t has been argued that since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, 
no other profession has experienced change to the same extent as that 
of intelligence. It has grown much larger and its mission is more complex. 
As an indicator, government and private-sector security agencies have 
recruited intelligence analysts to process what has become a voluminous 
amount of raw information flowing into these agencies’ data-collection 
systems.
Unfortunately, there is an unmet need for analysts who are able to 
process these data. For this reason, a growing number of colleges and uni-
versities offer intelligence training, so candidates for analyst positions can 
begin their duties without protracted on-the-job instruction. This book 
offers students in such courses a way to gain the analytic skills essential 
in undertaking intelligence work. It is therefore a handbook for analysts 
and other scholar spies.
This book addresses a subject that is inadequately covered in the cur-
rent body of intelligence literature. Although there are many research 
texts available, they focus mainly on social- or behavioral-science re-
search. Despite these academic disciplines being allied to intelligence 
research, a comprehensive text covering the topic from the point of view 
of secret intelligence is absent.
While the literature on intelligence abounds with works on spy gad-
getry and covert surveillance, one has to look far and wide for anything 
on intelligence research and analysis. This book aims to acquaint the 
reader with how intelligence fits into the larger research framework. It 
covers not only the essentials of applied research but also explains the 

xii 
Preface
function, structure, and operational methods involved in intelligence 
work. In particular, it looks at how an analyst works with classified infor-
mation in a security-conscious environment and obtains data via covert 
methods. It also looks at how intelligence data are validated, in marked 
contrast to how a social-science researcher performs the same task. The 
reader is left with little doubt about what intelligence is, how intelligence 
is developed, and how it is processed for a profession that has security 
and secrecy at its core.
The need for such a book was borne out of my personal experience as 
an analyst. In many of the positions I held during my career, I relied on 
texts in other academic disciplines as none addressed the craft of intel-
ligence. Occasionally I found texts in the field of criminal justice and 
criminology that were of value, but again they addressed issues faced by 
analysts obliquely. There are several excellent texts for law-enforcement 
intelligence, but by definition they are narrow in focus (e.g., police-cen-
tric) and do not apply the principles of intelligence holistically.
Handbook of Scientific Methods of Inquiry for Intelligence Analysis examines 
how social- and behavioral-science research methods can be applied to 
intelligence work. It is a systematic presentation of the concepts within 
the intelligence discipline, thereby providing students with practical 
knowledge of how to be effective researchers in a variety of intelligence 
settings: military, national security, law enforcement, business, and the 
private sector.
The book comprises fifteen topics that can be studied over one semes-
ter. Each topic contains a number of concepts that build into a thorough 
understanding of intelligence research and analysis. At the end of each 
chapter is a list of key words and phrases, a number of study questions, 
and learning activities for students to test their understanding of intel-
ligence research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I’d like to thank several people for making this book possible: the series 
editor, Jan Goldman, for his interest in my work; Victoria Herrington, 
my colleague at the Australian Graduate School of Policing, Charles 
Stuart University, for her comments on counterterrorism; and finally my 
postgraduate students, who provided feedback from a scholar’s point 
of view—Luke Langtry, Vicki Rogers, Natalie Carroll, Nathan McGrath, 
Paul Robinson, and especially Sarah Eastlake-Smith, whose editorial sug-
gestions added much to improving the final presentation. Nevertheless, 
any shortcomings remain mine and mine alone.

 
Preface 
xiii
I’d also like to extend a number of belated thanks. To Big Mike, Little 
Mike, Evan, and Pudgy, who many years ago shared an interest, though 
only passing, for the art of spying; it was their interest that fueled my 
passion for the profession in which I have since worked. To Wally and 
my Uncle Ed, for the interest they shared with me in radio and electron-
ics, which eventually led to my involvement in radio engineering and the 
application of this knowledge to secret intelligence. To Evan, my cousin 
Ted, and my father, who showed me the subtleties involved in covert 
photography. And to my father, who, as a former private detetective and 
auxilliary police officer, started me off on my career as a scholar-spy. 
Finally, to my wife, Ann Doolette, for her encouragement and counsel 
throughout the project—I dedicate this book to you.


1
1
c
The Fundamentals 
of Intelligence
T
his topic provides an introduction to intelligence research by exam-
ining:
1.  Intelligence versus information;
2.  Intelligence defined;
3.  Intelligence as knowledge;
4.  Intelligence as a process;
5.  Taxonomy of intelligence research;
6.  Anatomy of intelligence; 
7.  Typology of intelligence; and
8.  Intelligence: a quick glance at its history.
INTRODUCTION
Why be concerned with intelligence? Because intelligence enables one 
to exercise control over a given situation. In this sense, control equates 
to power. Ira Cohen, in his classic treatment of the study of power, wrote:
Power is sought because without power the security and even the ability of 
[one] to continue to exist is generally decreased. Without power, [one] has 
no ability to deter another . . . from actions whose consequences threaten the 
vital interests of the former. Without power [one] cannot cause another . . . to 
do that which the former desires but which the latter desires not to do. Power 
is sought because the more power that [one] has, the greater is the number of 
[his or her] available options. The more options available to [one], the greater 

2 
Chapter 1
[his or her] security. The greater [his or her] security, the better off [he or she 
is]. [He or she is] more secure in [his or her] life and in the enjoyment of [his 
or her] private property.1
Intelligence is, therefore, not a form of clairvoyance used to predict the 
future but an exact science based on sound quantitative and qualitative 
research methods. Intelligence enables the analyst to present solutions or 
options to decision makers based on defensible conclusions. At this junc-
ture, it should be noted that such conclusions are not absolute, and there 
will always be some level of probability or uncertainty involved with 
presenting intelligence findings. Nevertheless, uncertainty can be reduced 
and conclusion limits further defined so decision makers understand the 
boundaries. This must be contrasted with making decisions based on “gut 
feel,” “belief,” “faith,” or “trust.”
Having said that, the word intelligence conjures up assorted notions of 
spying and espionage, secrets, and the world of exotic gadgetry. Yet to 
others, the word intelligence is closely associated with the Orwellian con-
cept of “big brother”—a world of hardball politics and an uncompromis-
ing quest for influence.
To some degree, intelligence work is associated with these concepts, 
but here the study of intelligence is approached from the focus of the 
analytic methods that turn information into intelligence. This process is 
based on methods used in applied research rather than the James Bond-
like devices used by cinema heroes or in the authoritarian oppression 
exercised by police states.
In the post–September 11, 2001, world, colleges and universities across 
the globe have responded to the need to develop intelligence courses for 
the new cadre of analysts needed to support national security. Much of 
what is taught in these courses will also be applicable to other types of 
intelligence: law enforcement, military, business, and private intelligence. 
The growth of these educational programs means that training aids are 
also needed to instruct new analysts in the scientific methods of inquiry 
for intelligence research.
Information is the unreﬁ ned raw material used to produce ﬁ nished, focused 
intelligence. Without information, intelligence could not exist.
INFORMATION VERSUS INTELLIGENCE
Trying to define information is difficult but not impossible. Information is 
like gravity and electricity, as it cannot be defined by tangible examples. 

 
The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
3
Nevertheless, its properties can be observed and described, thus enabling 
improvement in the analytic methods that produce intelligence. The 
problem hard sciences face in trying to define gravity and electricity has 
never prevented engineers from designing and building applications 
that involve these phenomena. Therefore, a lack of a physical variable 
does not prevent analysts from producing intelligence from what we call 
information.
It is quite safe to say that every facet of our lives, whether central or in-
cidental, is in some way related to information. We rely on an alarm clock 
to wake us in the morning, the newspaper to tell us what is happening 
in the world beyond the end of our street, the radio to alert us if rain is 
expected, an array of indicator lights and meters on our car’s dashboard 
to tell us about the car’s performance as we drive to work, traffic lights 
and signs to alert us to road conditions, and on we could go until the clock 
tells us it’s time to lay our work aside and to go off to sleep.
Individuals, organizations, and indeed whole societies owe their sur-
vival to information. The concept of community is only possible because 
of our ability to collect, store, retrieve, and transfer information from one 
person or body corporate to another. The more complex our society, the 
more it necessitates the conversion of information into intelligence.
The late Colonel Russell J. Bowen, a U.S. army and CIA intelligence analyst 
is attributed with saying: “Religion and intelligence are two sides of the same 
coin: both are institutionalizations of man’s attempts to cope with his fear of 
the unknown; one in the spiritual realm, the other in the practical.”
INTELLIGENCE DEFINED
The term intelligence has four meanings:
1.  Actions or processes used to produce knowledge;
2.  The body of knowledge thereby produced;2
3.  Organizations that deal in knowledge (e.g., an intelligence agency); 
and
4.  The reports and briefings produced in the process or by such orga-
nizations.3
In this book, intelligence as a process is categorized by the different func-
tions it performs. Knowledge in the context of intelligence equates to in-
sight, or viewed another way, the ability to reduce uncertainty. Insight and 

4 
Chapter 1
certainty offer mankind the ability to make decisions that enable civiliza-
tions to take better control over the “unknown.”
INTELLIGENCE AS KNOWLEDGE
As a body of knowledge, intelligence deals with an adversary, a potential 
adversary, or a possible area of operation that is useful to managers in 
planning and carrying out their organization’s mandate. Terms like target, 
subject, person of interest, subject of interest are some of the ways intelligence 
manifests itself as knowledge. To demonstrate, consider the following 
notional examples:
Law Enforcement Context. We have intelligence indicating Mack Da-
Knife is planning to break into the Pine Point office of the Springfield Credit 
Union this Friday night.
Business Context. Intelligence suggests Nerro Entertainment is about to 
begin an advertising campaign in the northeast this autumn, attempting to 
capture customers in the 21- to 41-year-old range.
Military Context. We have recently received intelligence indicating the 
French government has authorized a nuclear weapons test. This intelligence 
indicates it will take place at their Pacific test site at Mururoa Atoll during 
the week beginning July 16.
National Security Context. Intelligence from agents in the Caribbean 
alerts us to the imminent passage of legislation by Cuba which will legalize 
a multiparty, democratic political system.
INTELLIGENCE AS A PROCESS
The intelligence process is a series of procedures or steps, forming the intel-
ligence cycle. The cycle is initiated by a decision maker who poses a ques-
tion or requests advice. This is termed an intelligence requirement (in some 
intelligence agencies, such as the military, this is referred to as essential 
elements of intelligence—EEI). The intelligence requirements are forwarded 
to an intelligence agency and the cycle begins.
The intelligence cycle (see fig. 1.1) consists of seven steps, with the first 
five converting the raw data into finished, focused intelligence:
1.  Direction setting (i.e., problem formulation and planning);
2.  Information collection;
3.  Data collation;
4.  Data manipulation and processing; and
5.  Data analysis.

 
The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
5
This resulting intelligence is then treated with two further steps:
1.  Report writing; and
2.  Dissemination to decision makers (which would include provision 
for feedback).
Depending upon the initial intelligence requirements (e.g., the opera-
tional objective), a single “loop” maybe sufficient to complete the intel-
ligence research project and provide the decision maker with the insight 
sought. However, in practice, further data may need to be collected with 
the cycle beginning again, or the cycle may have two or more tasks be-
ing performed at once and may double back before advancing again. For 
instance, once the research question has been formulated and the data col-
lection plan devised, an outline of the report may begin, and as the more 
readily available pieces of information flow in, a database or spreadsheet 
may have been constructed and the data collated.
Furthermore, even before all the data are received, some preliminary 
analysis may be carried out, and depending upon the results, further in-
formation may be requested (e.g., if by chance these results show the data 
would be inadequate to answer the research question or a serious limitation 
Figure 1.1. The intelligence cycle.

6 
Chapter 1
noted). This would mean that the data collection plan is revised and field 
operatives called on to gather more or different data, and so on.
As long as a specific intelligence operation is being conducted, the ana-
lytic process will be continuous—forming a cycle. As new information 
is being collected, other data will be stored and analyzed. The resulting 
outcomes will be disseminated for either immediate use and/or used to 
set new collection goals.
The dissemination of the intelligence product can take a variety of 
forms. Take for instance the case of business intelligence—it could be a 
background history on a company or one of its executives, a diagram of a 
company’s office layout, identification of new projects being researched, a 
prediction on the intended release of a new product, staff salaries, the clas-
sification and number of personnel on a company’s payroll, and so on.
The intelligence cycle is not unique to intelligence research but has paral-
lels with research cycles in other academic disciplines.4 For instance, the re-
search cycle that is used in applied social research shares the same pattern:
•  Establish a plan for information collection and carry out initial field 
work;
•  Observe, discuss and collect data;
•  Analyze the data and write the report; and
•  Distribute the report and gather feedback that can be used to formu-
late further disseminate strategies.
TAXONOMY OF INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH
Intelligence is classified into three categories: tactical, strategic, and op-
erational. Tactical intelligence is information that contributes directly 
to the achievement of an immediate goal, whereas strategic intelligence 
relates to long-term forecasts or broader conclusions on larger objectives. 
Operational intelligence provides support to an operation that is either 
underway or about to begin.
Tactical Intelligence
•  Is short-range or time limited; and
•  Consists of patterns or operational mode activities.
Strategic Intelligence
•  Considered to be a higher form of intelligence;
•  Provides a comprehensive view of a target or an activity;

 
The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
7
•  Comments on future possibilities or identifies potential issues;
•  Provides advice on threats, risks, and vulnerabilities;
•  Provides options for planning and policy development;
•  Assists in allocating resources; and
•  Requires extensive knowledge of the target or the area of activity.
Operational Intelligence
•  Provides immediate insight that supports an operation; and
•  Oriented towards a specific target or an activity.
Although there appears to be an obvious separation between these classes 
of intelligence, in certain situations a given piece of information may be 
relevant to more than one—say, to meet a tactical objective as well as a 
strategic goal.
In military intelligence, there are many categories of strategic, tactical, 
and operational intelligence specific to a branch of an armed service, such 
as combat intelligence to the army:
•  Provides military commanders with advice on the threat posed by 
an enemy through a process known as intelligence preparation of the 
battlefield (IPB);
•  Provides knowledge of an enemy’s order of battle—that is, a list of 
military units, the type of equipment it carries, and the capabilities 
of that equipment, as well as the location of the units and other in-
formation specific to the battlefield environment;
•  Provides analysis of the weather and geographical features likely to 
be encountered by a commander when conducting combat opera-
tions; and
•  Assists commanders in executing existing plans that are based on 
sound decisions—these decisions take into account the enemy’s in-
tentions, capabilities, vulnerabilities, and, therefore, the likely courses 
of action.
Naval intelligence has categories that are specific to its mission, such as 
intelligence for amphibious operations, intelligence for antisubmarine 
warfare, and intelligence for air operations. The air force has categories 
within this taxonomy of strategic, tactical, and operational intelligence 
applicable to its areas of concern and operations in air and space as well 
as information warfare in cyber space—for instance, indications and 
warning intelligence and target intelligence (i.e., target development and 
battle damage assessment).

8 
Chapter 1
ANATOMY OF INTELLIGENCE
Just as the human anatomy is comprised of different components, intel-
ligence is also comprised of components: applied intelligence research, 
counterintelligence, espionage, counterespionage, and covert action.
Applied Intelligence Research
Basic research, or theoretical research as it is sometimes known in other 
academic disciplines, is concerned with research for its own sake—that is, 
when undertaken, it has no practical application in mind. It is knowledge 
for knowledge’s sake. The findings of such research are sometimes used 
later in an applied setting, but at the time of conducting the research, this 
was not the aim.
In contrast, applied research has a practical purpose—to offer a basis for 
making a decision (i.e., to provide insight or reduce uncertainty). Intelli-
gence is in this sense applied research—it is the outcome of processing raw 
information that has been collected from a variety of sources—open, semi-
open, official, clandestine, or covert. Once the information is in the hands of 
an intelligence analyst, it is evaluated and any irrelevant information dis-
carded. The pieces of information pertinent to the matter under investiga-
tion are then analyzed, interpreted, and formed into a finished “product.”
This product can take the form of an oral briefing, a written briefing, a 
target profile, a tactical assessment, a strategic estimate, or any number of 
other forms of reports. These products are them disseminated to the end 
user (the customer). The intelligence process can be summarized as analysis 
that leads to the production of deep, thorough, or meaningful understand-
ing about a particular matter.
Counterintelligence
Counterintelligence is concerned with neutralizing or destroying the 
effectiveness of an adversary’s intelligence activities, which makes it a 
security function. The thrust of counterintelligence is to protect an orga-
nization from infiltration by an adversary, to protect against inadvertent 
leakage of confidential information, and to secure its installations and 
material against theft and sabotage.
As with tactical and strategic intelligence, there is a thin line dividing 
applied intelligence research and counterintelligence. That is, information 
concerning an adversary’s attempts to penetrate one’s organization can 
feed into the intelligence cycle, revealing opponents’ information voids as 
well as their capabilities and possible intentions. Chapter 15 focuses more 
specifically on some of these counterintelligence issues.

 
The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
9
Espionage
Espionage is not a James Bond-like game. Rather, it is a serious business 
that can have deadly consequences. The Wall of Honor at CIA headquarters 
holds testimony to this fact. In 2002, it was reported to hold 79 stars, each 
representing an officer of the agency who gave his or her life in the service 
of country. Forty-eight of those officers have their names listed in the Book 
of Honor,5 but the remaining (at that time) were anonymous as their services 
to their nation were still classified.6
This is the classic form of information gathering dating back centuries, 
and it forms part of the second step of the intelligence cycle. Espionage, or 
simply spying, traditionally utilizes undercover agents. A distinction must 
be made that an agent is someone who acts on behalf of another person or 
agency (e.g., FBI agent) whereas an officer (or an operative) is someone who 
is charged with an authority that requires them to discharge a statutory 
responsibility (e.g., Boston police officer). An agent is someone whom an 
intelligence officer recruits to obtain secrets on behalf of the operative’s gov-
ernment.7 In such situations, the recruiting officer is termed a case officer.
These agents (undercover) are placed in positions allowing them to 
view, overhear, or otherwise obtain information that could not be gained in 
any other way. However, with technological improvements, more technical 
means of espionage (i.e., technical surveillance and unobtrusive methods) 
are favored over the classic use of espionage agents. It could be said that 
this worked reasonably well when intelligence agencies faced actors that 
were states.
But since the al-Qaeda terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, intelligence 
agencies recognized the importance of having agents in place to gather 
data. One reason for the shift to technically gathered data was the compara-
tively high cost of running field agents and improving the reliability of the 
data collected (e.g., aerial and satellite photographs are not susceptible to 
exaggerating the truth as an agent might be. These data simply show what 
is there and what is not).
The events of September 11 and the subsequent terrorist attacks in Ma-
drid, London, and Bali show that the advantages of technically gathered 
data were of little value against terrorist cells operating in a vastly different 
fashion from those of, say, a foreign government’s military. This type of 
confrontation, and other nontraditional challenges to a state-centric para-
digm, no longer applies. Nations now face threats from weak and cor-
rupt governments, rogue states, sub-state and trans-state actors, as well 
as international, organized criminal groups, radical ethnic and religious 

10 
Chapter 1
groups, and right-wing political groups. All of these threats pose special 
data collection problems that defy a purely technical approach.
When it comes to describing cover—a plausible story about all facets 
of the operative’s life—there are essentially two types: official cover and 
nonofficial cover (NOC, pronounced knock). NOC is also referred to as com-
mercial cover when the operative works for a phantom company created 
and maintained by an intelligence agency. The former are personnel posing 
as government employees of some description, and the latter are those who 
on the surface have no connection with government.
The NOC operatives have been described as the truest practitioners of 
espionage as they operate on their own at all times with no protection 
from their government. In the case of foreign espionage, if they are caught 
abroad, they may be tortured during interrogation and perhaps executed. If 
this happens, no media conference will be held, and no one will hear about 
the event. NOC operatives operate alone and die alone.
Nonetheless, espionage still employs audio surveillance devices, ra-
dio frequency devices, and special photographic equipment, including 
space-based reconnaissance satellites. The use of such tools can provide 
the intelligence analyst with an exponential gain in both the quantity and, 
under the right circumstances, the quality of the information gathered. 
However, it is at the peril of the intelligence agency that it neglects data 
collection by human sources. Because the espionage function features so 
heavily in intelligence work, chapter 6 explores various forms of covert 
information gathering.
Counterespionage
“Counterespionage is often touted as the aristocratic sector of secret opera-
tions. In the romantic image the counterespionage man is pitted against his 
fellow professionals on the other side who are trying to get his nation’s 
secrets. His job is to foil them. It is a true adversary relationship unlike the 
espionage situation, in which two men work together to purloin secrets. 
Most spy stories are not about spying but about counterspying.”8
On the surface, counterespionage presents as being simple spying but is in 
some ways related to counterintelligence. It is a precise function that is the 
most subtle and sophisticated of all intelligence functions. It calls for the en-
gineering of complex strategies that deliberately put one’s agent(s) in contact 
with an adversary’s intelligence personnel. This is done so that an adversary 
can be fed with disinformation which will hopefully lead to confusion, thus 
disrupting the adversary and allowing the perpetrator to prosper.

 
The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
11
Covert Action
This intelligence function lies in a somewhat gray area of intelligence 
work. It uses the various methods of information gathering and analysis 
but incorporates areas including advice and counsel, financial and ma-
terial support, as well as technical assistance to individuals, groups, or 
businesses that are opposed to, or working in competition with, a target 
or adversary.
Covert action is a function by which the perpetrator uses the infor-
mation it collects to strengthen its allies and to weaken or destroy its 
opponents.9 The effectiveness of covert action is contingent upon the 
perpetrator’s involvement remaining hidden, or at the very least, deni-
able.
On the one hand, if a “plausible denial” can be maintained, then the 
rewards of such ventures can be enormous. On the other hand, if the 
perpetrator’s involvement is discovered, the consequences of this activity 
can be catastrophic (e.g., the French government’s involvement in the sabo-
tage of the Greenpeace ship, Rainbow Warrior, in Auckland Harbour, New 
Zealand on July 10, 1985, by intelligence operatives of the Direction Générale 
de la Sécurité Extérieure [DGSE] or in English, the Directorate-General for 
External Security).
Figure 1.2. Rainbow Warrior II docked at Port Adelaide, South Australia.

12 
Chapter 1
TYPOLOGY OF INTELLIGENCE
Intelligence is structured according to type, and the typology is based 
on the environment in which the organization operates. There are five 
major types of intelligence, including national security (which includes 
foreign policy and international politics), military, law enforcement, 
business, and private. A sixth type, emergency services (e.g., firefighters 
and search and rescue teams), also has intelligence cells, but although 
they are entitled intelligence, they do not perform the same function or 
perform the same level of analysis as those discussed here.10, 11 Because 
of these limitations, this intelligence type is not considered within the 
pages of this book.
It is important to note these environments can overlap—for example, 
an investigation into the capability of a terrorist cell may be of interest to 
local law enforcement agencies as well as to agencies involved in national 
security, the military, and some private security firms. Moreover, with 
regard to military intelligence, it is in some cases intimately aligned with 
national security because it not only informs military commanders of the 
intent and capabilities of an adversary but also political leaders who are 
responsible for authorizing the use of military force and directing strate-
gic military policy.
In addition to the overlap or close working partnership, the same 
methods of operation, tactics, devices, information storage systems, and 
methods of analysis are used by each intelligence type. This is because 
information holds no bounds as to its usefulness, and a particular piece 
of data could conceivably be the target for more than one type of intel-
ligence user. In other words, the primary difference between the various 
types of intelligence lies in the end use or general thrust of the intelligence 
operation.
National Security Intelligence
National security intelligence is conducted by the various branches of a 
nation’s armed forces, foreign diplomatic service, and, depending on the 
country, its atomic energy authority. It is sometimes referred to as foreign 
policy intelligence, depending on the context. Western nations generally 
tend to have a central agency that acts to coordinate subsidiary intel-
ligence agencies and the collection and processing of information from 
all sources. Other nations, in contrast, have a unified system with one 
supreme agency taking on all three roles—coordination, collection, and 
analysis.
The types of information sought by national security intelligence 
analysts can be anything from the current political issues facing a foreign 

 
The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
13
government; the health, education, and social structures of the country; 
its social problems; and its legal institutions. They may include issues 
concerning the availability of food production and distribution, world 
resources (e.g., oil and potable water), international trade relationships, 
world migration patterns and changes in the ethnic composition of na-
tions, as well as the state of the global monetary order. Without a doubt, 
they seek also information on foreign technological developments, 
nuclear matters, and almost anything to do with foreign weapons produc-
tion, defense industries, defense installations, and military capabilities.
Military Intelligence
Military decisions carry a heavy burden of responsibility. As such, 
these decisions not only impact the lives of the fighting forces but also a 
nation’s liberty. Military intelligence concerns itself with matters key to 
fighting a war: “enemy strength, capabilities, and vulnerabilities as well 
as information on weather and terrain.”12 In addition to dealing with 
these fundamental concerns, intelligence produced by the military “has 
to be timely, accurate, adequate, and usable.”13
Military intelligence is decision making by commanders with regard 
to either the operational environment, forces (whether they are hostile, 
friendly, or neutral), as well as the civilian population in the operational 
(or potential) area. A nation’s military will carry out intelligence activities 
regardless of whether it is at war or at peace (i.e., to prevent a surprise 
attack or to transition to a war footing at short notice) and at the three 
levels—strategic, tactical, and operational.
It would be most unusual for any army, navy, or air force not to have 
some form of a military intelligence capability. It may take the form of a 
specialist unit, or it may be part of another government service. Staff can 
be from the military or civilians assigned to the intelligence agency be-
cause of their particular technical or analytical abilities. Military person-
nel who do not have such skills are often trained at special colleges, which 
are set up specifically for this purpose.
Law Enforcement Intelligence
Law enforcement intelligence aims to increase the accuracy of decisions 
made by commanders. Intelligence provides senior officers with advice 
needed to make sound decisions and in this regard provides a focus on 
those criminal activities that would generally go undetected until they 
evolve into a community problem.
These agencies are much wider than just police and include compliance 
and regulatory agencies that perform law enforcement functions (which 

14 
Chapter 1
can be quite numerous), such as immigration, customs services, and 
prison intelligence units. Law enforcement intelligence also encompasses 
agencies engaged in combating the threat from foreign and internal 
subversion, espionage, sabotage, and terrorism. Other agencies protect 
national security and foreign policy interests by enforcing export regula-
tions relating to prohibited dual-use items, such as certain hardware tech-
nology, software, chemicals, and nuclear material (e.g., U.S. Department 
of Commerce’s Office of Export Enforcement).
Business Intelligence
“The business world is an arena of competition. Like hustling baseball 
clubs, campaigning politicians, and battling armies, companies are in con-
flict with their counterparts.”14
Business intelligence is concerned with the acquisition of trade-related se-
crets and commercial information that is held confidential from competing 
firms. Although the media has exposed much about the unethical behav-
ior of some intelligence practitioners, it is safe to say that a good deal of 
information is gathered through open- and semi-open sources. The focus 
of this activity can be on several levels—local, regional, national, or even 
international. Business intelligence is not only limited to the realms of cor-
porations and businesses themselves but also can include private investi-
gation firms that specialize in this area and intelligence agencies of foreign 
nations. The former often comprises spies-for-hire and the latter foreign 
military and national security agencies that are targeting trade secrets.
Private Intelligence
The structure of private intelligence is very diverse, but for the purpose 
of this book, it will be limited to those firms and private agents who 
offer their services in intelligence work for fee or reward to the public. 
Although the term private implies an individual, there is some overlap 
in what constitutes private intelligence and what may be business intel-
ligence or even national security intelligence. The ultimate determiner is 
who is contracting the “spy-for-hire.”
Private intelligence practitioners offer a range of specialist services that 
go beyond the bounds of the average private investigator or private detec-
tive. Often, the private intelligence practitioner comes from a background in 
law enforcement, military, or national security intelligence work.

 
The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
15
Their specialties may be in background investigations or surveillance. 
They may have extensive training in the use of state-of-the-art optical or 
electronic audio surveillance equipment, and they would be familiar with 
the techniques of intelligence analysis. They may offer advice on business 
counterintelligence and electronic audio countermeasures (debugging). 
They may also specialize in providing close personal protection for impor-
tant public figures, crisis management, or business continuity planning.
Private intelligence agencies could (arguably) include commercial or-
ganizations that maintain databases for specialized inquiry work, for ex-
ample, credit reporting. Likewise, private intelligence agencies might even 
encompass what are called policy institutes (or think tanks) where research 
agencies engage in scholarly investigation for fee paying clients. Private 
intelligence practitioners are being viewed by some of their government 
counterparts as a viable supplementary alternative deemed necessary in 
cases where resources are constrained.
INTELLIGENCE: A QUICK GLANCE AT ITS HISTORY
The operational aspects of military intelligence are remarkably similar 
to those of law enforcement and business intelligence. It is not surpris-
ing then to find that these forms of intelligence find their ancestry in this 
genetic stock.
A cursory examination will suffice in demonstrating the lineage between 
these intelligence relatives. Such a comparison acts to reinforce the under-
lining intelligence theory—the theory developed and refined by the mili-
tary and adopted by its “offspring.”
The history of military intelligence dates back many centuries, and iso-
lated examples of the craft can be cited in events from biblical times and 
earlier. However, it was not until the last 150 years or so that military intel-
ligence came of age. Its official birth was registered with the formal creation 
of intelligence divisions within various countries’ war departments.
Between 1600 and until just after the Second World War, European na-
tions began developing extensive intelligence systems but, compared to to-
day, without great success. This is evidenced by France’s miscalculation of 
the size of the German army at just half of what it really was at the outbreak 
of the First World War.
Between the First World War and the Second World War, military intel-
ligence services expanded greatly in scope and sophistication. The only ex-
ception was that of America, whose intelligence system was to some extent 
disassembled. In 1929, the then U.S. Secretary of State, Henry L. Stimson, 
advanced the now infamous dictum that “gentlemen do not read each 
other’s mail.”15

16 
Chapter 1
Stimson’s comments were in response to having learned the existence 
of Herbert O. Yardley’s “Black Chamber.” Stimson is reported to have 
rejected any argument that justified covert code-breaking operations. He 
strongly disapproved of Yardley’s secret activities, regarding it a low, 
dirty business that violated the principle of mutual trust upon which, in 
Stimson’s view, foreign policy should be based. Stimson then shut down 
Yardley’s code-breaking operations. History has shown the fate America 
suffered in the years leading up to the Second World War because of 
Stimson’s decision to restrict intelligence to decision makers.
World War II dramatically changed any misconceptions political lead-
ers had about the role intelligence could play; its importance to military 
planning and operations today is unquestioned. The intelligence offspring 
of military intelligence—that is, law enforcement intelligence, business 
intelligence, and private intelligence—bear the hallmarks of their parent. 
The foundational features can be outlined as:
1.  Decision makers should not base decisions on information but rather 
on intelligence;
2.  The production of intelligence must be timely;
3.  Intelligence strives to be accurate to win the confidence of those 
making decisions;
4.  Intelligence must be usable; and
5.  Intelligence products must be able to provide sufficient insight to 
enable decisions to be made.
Like military and law enforcement intelligence, national security intelli-
gence is seen as the key to decision making. As Ransom put it: “Nothing 
is more crucial in the making of national decisions than the relationship 
between intelligence and policy, or, in a broader sense, between intel-
ligence and action.”16
National security intelligence is a function that is carried out by a 
country’s foreign diplomatic service or sometimes its closely affiliated 
services. It also includes specialized agencies such as America’s Central 
Intelligence Agency (CIA), Australia’s Office of National Assessments 
(ONA), Canada’s Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS), New 
Zealand’s Security Intelligence Service (SIS), and Britain’s Security Ser-
vice (MI5). These organizations centrally coordinate analysis through 
supporting arrangements with other agencies that process information 
collected from all sources—open, official, and covert.
National security intelligence could be considered a descendent of its 
military parent; although, the link between military and national security 

 
The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
17
intelligence is at times so intimate that a clear demarcation cannot be 
realistically declared. It could be argued, therefore, that national security 
intelligence is not a descendent at all but a discipline that developed at the 
same time and in sympathy with military intelligence.
The responsibility of national security intelligence is to advise political 
leaders on the formulation of policies relating to a wide range of foreign 
policy and international political issues, including the discharging of 
responsibilities under a number of international pacts and treaties. To be 
sound and constructive, foreign policy (and where this realm overlaps 
with military strategy) must be based upon fact and realism. Many of the 
facts needed to support a nation’s foreign policy are therefore provided 
by these intelligence agencies.
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Adversary;
•  Agent;
•  Applied intelligence research;
•  Business intelligence;
•  Counterespionage;
•  Counterintelligence;
•  Cover;
•  Covert action;
•  Decision maker;
•  Espionage;
•  Essential elements of intelligence;
•  Information;
•  Intelligence;
•  Intelligence cycle;
•  Intelligence requirement;
•  Military intelligence;
•  National security intelligence;
•  Officer;
•  Operational intelligence;
•  Operative;
•  Private intelligence;
•  Strategic intelligence;
•  Tactical intelligence; and
•  Target.

18 
Chapter 1
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  By way of example, define the term intelligence.
2.  Provide an overview of the five major types of intelligence as well as 
the different functions within the typology.
3.  Describe what is different between the three major classifications of 
intelligence—strategic, tactical, and operational.
4.  Identify two intelligence consumers in a military setting, and describe 
how they might use intelligence products.
5.  What type of intelligence would it be if an analyst was tasked to assist 
field operatives to locate the individuals responsible for a terrorist 
attack on an iconic landmark? Explain why.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Using Prunckun’s article on comparative research,17 investigate the rea-
sons why the intelligence cycle is related to research cycles in other schol-
arly fields, like applied social research.
NOTES
 1. Ira S. Cohen, Realpolitik: Theory and Practice (Encino, California: Dickenson 
Publishing, 1975), 41–42.
 2. Terry L. Schroeder, Intelligence Specialist 3 & 2, vol. 1 (Washington DC: Na-
val Education and Training Program Development Center, 1983), 2-1.
 3. Christopher Andrew, Richard Aldrich, and Wesley Wark, Secret Intelligence: A 
Reader (London: Routledge, 2009), 1.
 4. Henry Prunckun, “The Intelligence Analyst as Social Scientist: A Compari-
son of Research Methods,” Police Studies 19, no. 3 (1996): 70–72.
 5. Ted Gup, The Book of Honor: Covert Lives and Classified Deaths at the CIA (New 
York: Doubleday, 2000).
 6. T. J. Waters, Class 11: Inside the CIA’s First Post-9/11 Spy Class (New York: 
Dutton, 2006), 4.
 7. Ellis M. Zacharias, Secret Missions: The Story of an Intelligence Officer (New 
York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1946).
 8. Harry Rositzke, CIA’s Secret Operations: Espionage, Counterespionage, and Co-
vert Action (New York: Reader’s Digest Press, 1977), 119.
 9. Dennis Fiery, Out of Business: Force a Company, Business or Store to Close Its 
Doors . . . For Good! (Port Townsend, Washington: Loompanics Unlimited, 1999).
10. Emergency Management Australia, Operations Centre Management, 2nd ed. 
(Canberra, Australia: Emergency Management Australia, 2001), 5–10.
11. Emergency Management Australia, Land Search Operations, 2nd ed. (Canberra, 
Australia: Emergency Management Australia, 1997).

 
The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
19
12. Joseph A. McChristian, The Role of Military Intelligence: 1965–1967 (Washing-
ton DC: GPO, 1974), 3.
13. McChristian, The Role of Military Intelligence, 3.
14. William Sammon, Mark Kurland, and Robert Spitalnic, Business Competitor 
Intelligence: Methods for Collecting, Organizing, and Using Information (New York: 
John Wiley and Sons, 1984), v.
15. David Kahn, The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret Writing (Toronto, Canada: 
The Macmillan Company, 1969), 360.
16. Harry Howe Ransom, The Intelligence Establishment (Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press, 1971), 3.
17. Prunckun, “The Intelligence Analyst as Social Scientist,” 67–80.

20
0
c
Chapter Title
20
2
c
The Intelligence 
Research Process
T
his topic considers the process of intelligence research by examining:
 1.  Problem formulation;
 2.  Literature review;
 3.  Methodology;
 4.  Intelligence collection plan;
 5.  Data collection;
 6.  Data evaluation;
 7.  Quality control;
 8.  Purging files;
 9.  Data collation;
10.  Intelligence systems;
11.  Data analysis;
12.  Inference development and drawing conclusions;
13.  Making recommendations; and
14.  Report dissemination.
Intelligence has to “educate its customers [but] this is a formidable task. . . . 
They have to be convinced of what it can and what it cannot achieve” by ask-
ing the right questions, at the right time and without flooding the system.1

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
21
PROBLEM FORMULATION
Problem formulation is the center of intelligence research. Aristotle is at-
tributed as saying: “Well begun is half done,” and this proverb resonates 
in the intelligence context.
But how do decision makers formulate their questions, and how do 
analysts arrive at the hypotheses that form the basis of their research proj-
ects? Because intelligence research is applied, the questions under inves-
tigation will have real-world origins. Whether the origin is geopolitical 
(national security intelligence), financial markets (business intelligence), 
criminal activity (law enforcement intelligence), or issues involving an 
adversary’s order of battle (military intelligence), the questions decision 
makers pose are concerned with how to address the problem. Intelligence 
provides insight to guide possible options based on defensible conclu-
sions derived from evidence-centered research.
In the social and behavioral sciences, the term hypothesis is used, but some-
times in intelligence research, the term explanation is applied. In this book, 
the term hypothesis will be used.
Having said that, there are times when analysts are asked to provide 
decision makers with possible scenarios of what the future holds for 
a particular environment. In such cases, analysts are free to establish 
their own theories and create their own research questions. To do this, 
analysts use techniques like morphological analysis, which can generate 
large numbers of possible futures. Chapter 10 discusses how to perform 
morphological analysis.
While analysts can provide intelligence, the competing demands of tac-
tical field commanders (e.g., executive directors in a business setting) and 
strategic decision makers can flood the intelligence system, thereby render-
ing it ineffective. Therefore, what is asked of an intelligence unit should be 
minimal and specific.
For instance, a single but nonspecific intelligence request can be quite 
counterproductive. Take the example of a field commander who asks to 
“see all the aerial photos relating to the terrain north of the Orrenabad 
Desert.” This may result in boxes of assorted classified imagery being de-
livered hours or days after the time it is needed, rendering the information 
useless to the commander if he or she had intended to use it to plan an 
attack. Therefore, as specific requests assist intelligence analysts, they can 
reciprocate by yielding answers more useful to the decision makers when 

22 
Chapter 2
choosing the most appropriate operational options. Requests need to be 
specified using questions such as:
•  How many troops does the enemy have positioned north of the Or-
renabad Desert?;
•  What is the enemy’s order of battle?;
•  Will the weather be favorable to launch a frontal assault on these 
positions over the next 24 hours?;
•  If an attack is launched, can resupply of friendly forces be assured?; 
and
•  Can air support provide both suppressing fire in the advance and 
evacuation of the wounded?
LITERATURE REVIEW
The purpose of the literature review is to seek research related to the 
issue under investigation in order to establish a conceptual as well as a 
theoretical context for the research project. The literature review places 
the analyst’s project in the context of the wider issue. “No man is an is-
land onto himself,” wrote the poet John Donne, and his message, though 
intended for a different audience, applies to intelligence problems.2 No 
research question exists in isolation to other issues. The literature review 
allows analysts to develop and ground their arguments, or simply to “tell 
their stories.”
For analysts undertaking a new research project, a literature review 
is one of the first steps. Analysts need to discuss the theoretical base 
they intend to use to test their hypothesis. For law enforcement analysts, 
this might include deterrence theory, target hardening, rationale choice 
theory, differential association, social disorganization, or any number of 
other criminological theories.
For national security intelligence analysts, they might consider the use 
of sociological (e.g., Edwin Sutherland’s theory on white collar crime3), 
anthropological, psychological, political science, economic (especially as 
they relate to illicit drug importation), business (in relation to organized 
crime and antiterrorism), or even military theories (e.g., counterterrorism 
and counterinsurgency) and apply them to the issue under investiga-
tion. The theory component of the literature review should have its own 
subheading (or some such literary device) so the reader does not have to 
“hunt” for this information.
The literature review should talk about why the issue being studied is 
a problem and how the theory (i.e., the presumed relationship between 
the variables), if applied to the problem, could help, improve, solve, make 

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
23
more efficient, and so forth. Effectively, it states what benefit the study’s 
findings might have for decision makers or how the research results 
might “push back the frontiers of knowledge.”
Analysts need to demonstrate they have an understanding of what re-
search has already been conducted and how the new research will either 
add to it, address an area that has not yet been explored, or, if a different 
theory is being used, why changes might be expected that are yet to be 
realized. The key concepts and terms need to be discussed so they can be 
“operationalized” in the methodology.
It is unlikely the analysts will find research that is exactly the same as 
the inquiries they are making (unless they are conducting a reexamina-
tion of previously conducted research). From this perspective, there will 
be no issue so unique the analyst cannot locate some piece of related re-
search to inform the current scholarly investigation.
As with other forms of scientific research, intelligence research seeks 
to push back the boundaries of knowledge by adding to what is known. 
Therefore, the literature review allows the analyst to introduce the prob-
lem under investigation expressed as a research question or hypothesis 
so the reader of the report can understand how it fits within the wider 
context, how exploration of the problem will provide understanding, and 
how to provide critical insight into solving it.
On a practical point, reviewing the literature allows the analyst to gain 
an appreciation of some of the problems encountered in previous re-
search and, therefore, avoid repeating the same mistakes. These problems 
are often in methodological issues including inappropriate sample size 
or selection method, invalid measurement instruments, data reliability 
issues, or inappropriate statistical analysis (e.g., autocorrelation of time-
series data is a commonly experienced problem).
The ancillary benefit of a literature review is the discovery of secondary 
data sources to be used in the study. For instance, an analyst may come 
across quotations from field notes or interviews, and these can be used as 
secondary sources of data.
Even though the literature review sets the scene and appears in the 
forefront of the research report, the analyst can always refer back to the 
literature in the results section of the report as a means of validating cer-
tain aspects of the findings.
METHODOLOGY
Arguably, this section is the most important aspect of the research pro-
cess. If the analyst has crafted the research question well and placed it 
in its historical and theoretical framework, it will guide the rest of the 

24 
Chapter 2
research process. As the methodology deals with the tangible aspects of 
the study, the analyst will need to define the concepts being studied so 
they can be measured (i.e., operationalized).
The most popular research designs include evaluations (to plan inter-
vention programs/operations), case studies (what is going on), longitu-
dinal studies (has there been any change over time), comparisons (are A 
and B different), cross-sectional studies (are A and B different at this point 
in time), longitudinal comparisons (are A and B different over time), and 
experiments or quasi-experimental studies (what effect does A have on 
B).
The methodology requires analysts to identify the type of data they 
need to collect (whether these data are from primary and secondary 
sources or in the form of qualitative, quantitative, or both) and how these 
data will be collated and analyzed (e.g., statistically or content analysis) 
to test their hypothesis.
Analysts also need to consider related issues including sample size and 
control for confounding variables (i.e., the potential that what they are 
observing is due to something else that they are not measuring). These 
extraneous influences may pose limitations for their research (e.g., pos-
sible alternative explanations for the relationship between A and B) or 
limits inherent in the data.
INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION PLAN
Analysts use the intelligence collection plan as a conceptual tool to design 
and manage their data acquisition. The plan is a simple device structuring 
the analyst’s thinking to develop a picture of the data and what is required, 
where it exists, and how it can be gathered. It outlines timeframes for col-
lection of each piece of information against the timeframe of the research 
project, allows for noting when data have been collected, and allows for 
any items outstanding. Therefore, the intelligence collection plan can either 
be a simple collection tool or a combined collection and management tool. 
These can take the form of fishbone diagrams and data collection tables.
Because the objectives of individual intelligence agencies are so diverse, 
there are no set formats for collection plans. Nonetheless, a good collec-
tion plan should be couched in precise terms reflecting:
•  The decision makers’ intelligence requirements (IR) or intelligence col-
lection requirements (ICR);
•  The resources needed to collect data;
•  What priority each data item has in relation to other data and within 
the whole data collection scheme;

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
25
•  Who is responsible for collecting each data item; and
•  The progress tracking of each data item.
The plan should be flexible to allow adjustment as changes in intelligence 
requirements emerge or if the objective of the research project alters.
In some agencies, there are two additional methods of acquiring 
information—the statement of intelligence interest and essential elements of 
information (EEI was discussed in the previous chapter). The former is a 
standing request to receive finished intelligence publications when re-
leased for dissemination. Usually, analysts register their interests in topics 
under investigation, and the reports are forwarded to them for consider-
ation when they become available. The standing request can be viewed 
as an order that remains in force until cancelled, and as new material is 
lodged, it is sent to the analyst. EEI are time urgent requests for informa-
tion (e.g., ground forces engaged in combat operations require EEI).
Fishbone Diagram
A fishbone diagram (see fig. 2.1) can be used to coordinate an intelligence 
collection plan. A fishbone analysis is usually conducted to identify and 
explore cause-and-effect issues but can be adapted by analysts to help 
manage the collection process.
Figure 2.1. Data collection plan using a fishbone diagram.

26 
Chapter 2
The intelligence target or research question is posted at the right-hand 
side of the diagram (the fish’s head). The major bones of the fish are 
constructed by listing the different agencies or sources of information, 
and the minor bones subtend from the major bones, listing the data items 
required. As each piece of data is received, it can be crossed off the dia-
gram with the effect of producing a visual aid as to overall progress. The 
pictorial information can be converted into a progress report in narrative 
form or as a statistical summary.
Data Collection Table
A data collection table can also be used to organize an analyst’s data 
requirements (see table 2.1). Across the top of the table, the analyst 
lists the key issues for consideration. There are five shown, but other 
issues could be included in this row, depending upon the target and the 
ramifications associated with the research project. Other issues could 
include legal constraints, administration, communication, timing, and 
data security.
Starting with “Type of data,” the analyst states the type of questions 
they need answered, placing each category in the row below. The analyst 
could substitute type of data with specific questions that need to be an-
swered. This is followed by completing each cell by moving from left to 
right across the rows. Table 2.1 is an example for the aerospace industry 
compiled by a notional private intelligence firm.
Table 2.1. Data Collection Plan in Table Form
Type of Data 
Source 
Risk 
Expense 
Priority
Statistical 
Aerospace Facts and  
Nil 
Cost of purchasing 
High
 
 Figures 
 
 annual volume or
 
 
 
 online subscription
 
Handbook of Airline 
Nil 
Cost of purchase 
Medium
 
 Statistics
Manufacturers 
World Aviation Directory 
Nil 
Cost of purchase 
High
 
Interavia ABC: World 
Nil 
Cost of purchase 
Medium
 
 Directory of Aviation
 
 and Astronautics
Associations 
Aerospace Industries 
Nil 
Cost of purchase 
Low
 
 Association of America

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
27
DATA COLLECTION
Information can be gathered from a variety of sources. The diversity of 
these sources is exemplified by category in the following list. Many of 
the information sources are the same for the five different types of intel-
ligence practitioners—national security, military, law enforcement, busi-
ness, and private intelligence.
It is conceivable that a single piece of information could have applica-
tion to each functional intelligence group (e.g., information relating to a 
terrorist cell could be of interest to law enforcement intelligence that have 
a responsibility to prevent and deter such attacks on the homeland). Like-
wise, the same information could be of interest to:
•  National security and military intelligence if the cell is internation-
ally based or operates from overseas;
•  Business intelligence if the target of the terrorists is their industry or 
their facilities; or
•  Groups employing private intelligence, such as the antinuclear lobby 
to highlight the vulnerable nature of a nuclear facility in relation to 
terrorism.
Law Enforcement Intelligence
•  The public;
•  Crime investigators (detectives);
•  Patrol officers;
•  Police records;
•  The media;
•  Businesses;
•  Open source information (particularly the Internet);
•  Government departments and agencies;
•  Informants;
•  Covert surveillance (physical and electronic);
•  Undercover operatives; and
•  Other law enforcement agencies and government departments.
Business Intelligence
•  Open source information (particularly the Internet);
•  A business’s own internal records;
•  Information supplied by other businesses;
•  The media, trade, and other open source publications;

28 
Chapter 2
•  Sales personnel;
•  Customers;
•  Distributors;
•  Raw material and component suppliers;
•  Government departments and agencies;
•  A business’s research and development section(s);
•  University and independent research bodies;
•  Market research surveys;
•  Reverse engineering; and
•  Covert physical surveillance (e.g., a hired private investigator).
Military Intelligence
•  Open source information (particularly the Internet);
•  Surveillance planes;
•  Surveillance satellites;
•  Electronic intercepts;
•  Reconnaissance teams;
•  Field operatives;
•  Diplomatic missions and embassies;
•  Defectors;
•  Prisoners;
•  University and independent research bodies; and
•  Other government departments.
National Security Intelligence
•  Open source information (particularly the Internet);
•  Clandestine operatives (official cover);
•  Covert operatives (nonofficial cover);
•  Recruited agents;
•  Diplomatic missions and embassies;
•  Surveillance planes;
•  Surveillance satellites;
•  Electronic intercepts;
•  Defectors;
•  University and independent research bodies; and
•  Other government departments.
Private Intelligence
•  An organization’s own internal records;
•  Open source information (particularly the Internet);
•  Information supplied by other organizations;

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
29
•  The media, trade, and other open source publications;
•  Staff;
•  The public;
•  Government departments and agencies;
•  An organization’s research section;
•  University and independent research bodies;
•  Surveys; and
•  Covert physical surveillance (e.g., a hired private investigator).
DATA EVALUATION
Evaluating information is an integral step in the analytic process and usu-
ally takes place as information is gathered. The data are evaluated accord-
ing to the reliability of the source and the validity of the actual information. 
When evaluating information, the analyst asks many questions including:
•  How reliable is the information source?;
•  Has the source provided information before?;
•  How accurate is the information?; and
•  How recent is the information?
With some types of intelligence, particularly national security intelligence 
and military intelligence, deception is a particular concern. In such cases, 
analysts need to evaluate data to distinguish between objective informa-
tion and that tainted by bias. 
Secondary sources such as government press offices, commercial news organi-
zations, [nongovernment organization] spokespersons, and other information 
providers can intentionally or unintentionally add, delete, modify, or otherwise 
filter the information they make available to the general public. These sources 
may also convey one message in English for US or international consumption 
and a different non-English message for local or regional consumption. It is im-
portant to know the background of open sources and the purpose of the public 
information in order to distinguish objective, factual information from informa-
tion that lacks merit, contains bias, or is part of an effort to deceive the reader.4
The evaluation process firstly assesses the source’s reliability and, sec-
ondly, the information’s accuracy. In theory, this process is performed on 
each piece of information collected. However, in agencies collecting large 
volumes of data, this may be an automated process where a generic rating 
is assigned if the data are merely stored, but if used in an intelligence re-
search project, it is reevaluated on an individual basis. Each piece of data 
is assigned an alphanumeric rating indicating the degree of confidence 
the analyst has in that piece of information. This system is universally 
known as the admiralty ratings and is shown in tables 2.2 and 2.3.

30 
Chapter 2
Imagine a field operative obtains a piece of information from an agent 
in place, but this agent is a new source that has never been exploited 
before. The reliability for this piece of information would therefore have 
to be F—the reliability cannot be judged. If the information obtained 
came from a database that has been the source of previous information 
(i.e., from another agent) and has proven to be truthful in almost every 
instance, then an accuracy code of 2 would be assigned. The combined 
code would be printed on the document to show its overall rating. Cus-
tomarily, accuracy rating precedes the reliability code—for instance, F-2. 
Although the ratings must be logical, assigning a rating of E-2 (unreliable 
source but probably true) would raise questions about whether the evalu-
ation process was rational.
Regarding the accuracy codes 6 and 7, the analyst should be cognizant 
they may obtain data that are unintentionally false, illogical, or contra-
dicted by other sources. In these cases, a code of 6—misinformation—
should be assigned. As for disinformation (code 7), this is data that are 
shown by other sources as deliberately false.
Although the admiralty ratings represent an objective position, it is de-
rived through a subjective process as judgment plays a key role. When as-
Table 2.2. Information Accuracy Codes
Admiralty Ratings
Code 
Descriptors 
Estimated Probability of Truth
1 
Confirmed 
100%
2 
Probably true 
80%
3 
Possibly true 
60%
4 
Doubtful 
40%
5 
Improbable 
20%
6 
Misinformation
7 
Deception
8 
Cannot be judged 
50%
Table 2.3. Information Reliability Codes
Admiralty Ratings
Code 
Descriptors 
Estimated Probability of Truth
A 
Completely reliable 
100%
B 
Usually reliable 
80%
C 
Fairly reliable 
60%
D 
Not usually reliable 
40%
E 
Unreliable 
20%
F 
Cannot be judged 
50%

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
31
signing a rating, the analyst must consider such things as the accuracy of 
previous information provided by the source and the source’s field capa-
bilities (i.e., does the source have access and the ability to obtain what has 
been delivered?). Evaluation is a difficult process but an important one as 
personal or agency bias can adversely affect the results of an intelligence 
research project. A good evaluation is the result of the source’s reliability 
being evaluated independently of the credibility of the information. Infor-
mation discovered to be irrelevant to the issue under investigation should 
be disposed of according to the analyst’s agency document destruction 
policy (e.g., shredding).5, 6, 7
QUALITY CONTROL
To assist the analyst in determining the relevance of any particular piece 
of information to the research project, a method of labeling each data 
item is needed. If the analyst can correlate data with other sources of in-
formation thought to be reliable, then, theoretically, this will increase the 
chances the data are correct. Some intelligence agencies require that to as-
sign a data item an A-1 rating, the data need to be verified independently 
against two or more sources.
However sound this procedure appears, it can be subject to phantom or 
ghost data—data that are self-validating. By way of example, the author 
was once involved in an intelligence operation, and the operational team 
obtained document A, which cited the occurrence of a particular meeting 
involving one of the operation’s targets. If true, this information would 
have led to a major breakthrough by piecing together a hitherto incom-
plete picture of a highly illegal industry.
So the intelligence team set about checking this information with other 
sources, and as a result, they came up with two independent confirmations, 
documents B and C. But acute observation told the team something seemed 
odd. There were a few words in documents B and C (the additional confir-
matory documents) that were similar. Checking the sources (a time consum-
ing task) revealed, to the team’s astonishment, all three reports (A, B, and 
C) were based on a single report, which in turn was authored by another 
source! It should be noted that although these were documentary reports, 
the same holds for oral reports by an informant or undercover agent.
In this case, the data were self-validating. If an intelligence assessment 
was prepared on these data, the consequences do not need to be spelled 
out. But given the guidelines, the assessment would have been correct. It 
is worth noting that data validation systems, such as the admiralty rat-
ings, should be only guidelines, not rules.

32 
Chapter 2
PURGING FILES
Another aspect of quality control is purging redundant data. Intelligence 
systems tend to accumulate data very quickly, and in turn, these data 
contain material which is not always central to intelligence projects. This 
is mainly due to the analysts’ inability to predict what data will be needed 
in the future; therefore, if a piece of data could be used, it tends to be 
retained.
However, at some stage, an assessment of the agency’s holdings should 
be done (i.e., at the end of a project or operation). During such an audit, 
material lacking accuracy, relevance, timeliness, or completeness should 
be purged from the system. Retaining this material does nothing but de-
tract from the quality of the overall database, and if it is used in an intelli-
gence assessment, the data will only reduce the accuracy of, and possibly 
harm, the final recommendations. In some jurisdictions, having irrelevant 
data could be a breach of the criminal law.
When data lacking these qualities are discovered, they should be sub-
ject to upgrading. But, if the cost of validating or verifying this informa-
tion proves to be in excess of the potential value of the anticipated result, 
the data should be removed. This process should be done on a project-
by-project or operation-by-operation basis. In this way, the validating and 
verifying is done with the most ease and effectiveness, while the project is 
still fresh in the minds of the analysts. Likewise, the accuracy of the index 
should be maintained daily—corrections and updates should be done as 
they are encountered. This makes for efficient and effective management 
of time and of the database.
A biyearly quality control exercise could be done on the whole data-
base. The criteria cited in table 2.4 can be applied to the data and up-
Table 2.4. Some Suggestions for Retaining or Purging Information
Accuracy 
How reliable is the source?
Relevancy 
Does it supply the intelligence unit with information necessary to
 
 complete its project?
Timeliness 
Does each piece of the information relate to the current project or
 
 operation?
Completeness 
Externally obtained 
Is the document’s source stated clearly? If not,
 
 data 
 can it be determined and inserted to be
 
 
 made complete?
 
Internally generated 
Is the source of the facts referred to in the
 
 data 
 document footnoted or otherwise
 
 
 differentiated? If not, can the reader be
 
 
 provided with the source or authority for
 
 
 these data items?
 
Considerations for 
Are inferences and comments made by analysts
 
 all data 
 clearly indicated in the document so as not
 
 
 to be confused with verified facts?

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
33
graded and/or discarded. In some intelligence agencies, if data cannot be 
judged, the information is sent to the originator of the report who is asked 
to upgrade it or otherwise make comment on it. The upgraded data are 
then entered into the system, replacing the old. If it cannot be upgraded, 
the data are destroyed.
DATA COLLATION
Collating takes place after the data have been evaluated, whereby the ana-
lyst brings together the disparate pieces of information so the data can be 
subject to some form of analysis. The collation process also acts to remove 
irrelevant, incorrect, or worthless information, which may be collected due 
to error, misdirection, or compulsiveness. Such data should be destroyed 
immediately after being identified; otherwise, it will not only cause con-
gestion in the intelligence database but also may place the analyst and the 
agency in legal jeopardy if a judicial officer tasked with overseeing the 
agency’s operations deems holding such data to be contrary to law.
The remaining data are then stored to be retrieved easily by the analyst. 
If the data are in an unstructured form, this can be done by:
•  Registering the information;
•  Indexing;
•  Cross-referencing; and
•  Keywording.
These data can then be filed so that an electronic database can be inter-
rogated by the analyst using one or more analytic tools. Typically, un-
structured data are stored on a mainframe or a PC server that is accessed 
by the analyst’s workstation computer (which in turn is likely to be net-
worked with other workstations and servers within the agency).
INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS
Basic Data Storage and Retrieval Concepts
Information is stored for the purpose of retrieval and not stored for the 
purpose of warehousing documents. This may seem obvious, but in prac-
tice, this is not always the case. Information retrieval is the selective and 
systemic recall of warehoused information; hence, the information must 
be stored logically, or it may become lost “in the system.”
Storing and retrieving data effectively does require technology. At the 
center of many intelligence systems is some form of index. The purpose 
of the index is to facilitate the retrieval process, but by its nature, an index 

34 
Chapter 2
imposes limits on how information can be retrieved. A superior indexing 
system allows for subjective, intuitive searching that is fundamental to in-
telligence research. The most common types of indexes are those listed be-
low, and a good intelligence database should be capable of producing all.
Author Indexes. People, organizations, corporate authors, government 
departments and agencies, universities, research foundations, and so forth.
Alphabetical Subject Indexes. Headings, subheadings, cross-refer-
ences, and qualifying terms.
Keyword in Context. A system specific to computerized systems. It 
operates by selecting keywords appearing in the body of the text (e.g., the 
keyword blackmail in a corruption report).
Hierarchical Indexes. Data items are arranged in a hierarchy, starting 
with topics of general scope and progressing to more specific topics.
Permuted Title Indexes. Systematically rotating the words in the title 
of a document/file. The success of the permuted index depends on the ac-
curacy of the original author (or where no title is given, e.g., ad hoc papers 
and memos, the collector, writer, or researcher) creating the title to reflect 
the content of the document or file. This may be difficult in the cases where 
a document/file covers a number of topics.
Sound Indexing. Soundex8 is an indexing method based on sound where 
names are encoded for retrieval.
Soundex-Based Systems
Soundex is a way of searching data where the exact spelling is unknown. 
This is particularly valuable as names can be spelled several different 
ways. Because a soundex-based search seeks the phonetic spelling of a 
word, a search will usually be more reliable if carried out for single words 
rather than combinations of words, such as titles and phrases (depend-
ing on the software package used).9 The soundex method of indexing 
involves four steps:10
1.  Retain the first letter of the name, and drop all occurrences of a, e, h, 
i, o, u, w, and y in other positions.
2.  Assign the following numbers to the remaining letters after the first: 
1 = b, f, p, v; 2 = c, g, j, k, q, s, x, z; 3 = d, t; 4 = l; 5 = m, n; 6 = r.
3.  If two or more letters with the same code were adjacent in the origi-
nal name (before step 1), omit all but the first.
4.  Convert to the form “letter, digit, digit, digit” by adding trailing 
zeros (if there are more than three).
Internet-Based Systems
Internet-based search engines use a two-step process for indexing material 
posted to websites. The first step is “web crawling” or “spidering.” Here a 

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
35
software agent methodically browses or crawls the Web and makes cop-
ies of web pages by following the hyperlinks on each page. These copies 
then form the basis for the next step, which is indexing.
However, because the algorithms used to construct Internet search 
engine indexes are commercial-in-confidence, they cannot be reviewed 
here. Nevertheless, it is widely understood these algorithms are based on 
interdisciplinary concepts borrowed for the likes of linguistics, cognitive 
psychology, mathematics, and informatics (and perhaps others).
As Internet-based search engines are commercial ventures and the 
companies running these services have to compete in a very competitive 
marketplace, the owners try to balance the thoroughness provided by a 
search request with retrieval time. In doing so, the search engine needs 
to give the researcher the most relevant web pages. It is in deciding what 
is relevant that each search engine differs in its construction of its search 
algorithm—hence, the interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary approach 
to indexing.
DATA ANALYSIS
Information is analyzed to draw conclusions about an activity, a person(s), 
a group(s), or an organization(s) at the center of inquiry in order to pro-
vide insight for the decision maker (i.e., information is analyzed to produce 
intelligence). The analytical process can be described in a number of steps 
that comprise:
•  Examining the collected data;
•  Sorting facts from opinions (i.e., evaluation of the information);
•  Developing inferences (by means of statistical or other methods);
•  Discussing the strengths and limitations of the various inferences 
(e.g., based on probabilities); and
•  Drawing conclusions from these results and making recommendations 
in accordance with the decision maker’s intelligence requirements.
Despite the complexity of data analysis, the process of analyzing data is 
generally straightforward. Intelligence research projects mostly perform 
analyses following a three-step process:
1.  Preparing the data by cleaning errors and anomalies that may have 
crept in during the collection phase;
2.  Organizing the data so it can be described statistically if quantitative 
and in other ways if qualitative; and
3.  Testing the research hypothesis (or model) using either statistical 
tests or specialized analytic techniques (depending on the type of 
data).

36 
Chapter 2
The first step—preparing the data—starts with some form of logging 
that allows the analyst to check what has been collected against the 
information collection plan. Once assured all data items are present, 
the analyst checks the data for accuracy, which involves entering the 
data into a software program. Depending on the type of data being pro-
cessed, it may mean “double entering” the data to ensure there are no 
mistakes in data entry or checking that the data item is within a speci-
fied range or in a certain format. Software programs designed for data 
analysis will usually have “error trapping” sub-routes that highlight 
such errors or allow the analyst to set parameters depending upon the 
data being manipulated.
The purpose of using a software package is to provide some form of 
organization to the data so descriptive analysis can be performed. Most 
analytic software has this function and will produce a range of descriptive 
statistics forming the basis for testing the research hypothesis. Descriptive 
statistics are not only part of both quantitative research and qualitative 
projects, but also they are important as they describe what is going on. 
Such descriptions include graphical representations (e.g., pie diagrams, 
bar charts, or line graphs) coupled with a narrative discussing the vari-
ous quanta.
INFERENCE DEVELOPMENT 
AND DRAWING CONCLUSIONS
The final phase of the intelligence research process is testing the research 
hypothesis. This can be done using statistics or another technique if the 
data are qualitative. The overall purpose is to draw conclusions allowing 
the analyst to extrapolate meaning from the data to some level beyond 
the immediate. Based on the sample data, an analyst may form some 
inference that could be applied to the general population from which 
the sample was derived. Alternatively, an analyst may use inferential 
statistics to form a judgment about the probability that the observations 
regarding two groups are the result of some variable acting on one of the 
groups, and the difference would not have occurred if chance was the 
only factor.
An inference is a statement (or proposition or judgment) drawn from 
data that have been subject to some form of analysis. In this way, the 
statement follows logically (either deductively or inductively) from the 
data.
Inferences may be based on as little as one or two premises, or they can 
feature many premises in a cascading fashion depending on the data and 
the original research question. A simple example of an inference based on 
a deductive process consisting of two premises is:

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
37
•  People are criminals because they have been found guilty of break-
ing the law.
•  Mack DaKnife has been found guilty of breaking the law.
•  Therefore, Mack DaKnife is a criminal.
You will note in the deductive reasoning process, the analyst moves from 
specific data items to a general position. In inductive reasoning, the oppo-
site takes place—the analyst starts with a generalized position and moves 
to the specific, as seen in this example:
•  Country Q is similar to Country X.
•  Country Q provides a safe haven for terrorists.
•  Therefore, Country X provides a safe haven for terrorists.
In the first example, the two premises are both true; therefore, the infer-
ence is valid. Although the premises in the inductive reasoning example 
are not false, there are many other particulars (i.e., variables) that need 
to be considered before the analyst can draw the inference that has been 
presented about Country X’s providing a safe haven for terrorists.
The striking feature of the two approaches is that inferences developed 
by using deductive reasoning do not suffer the same degree of uncer-
tainty as those developed by inductive reasoning. Nevertheless, inductive 
data analysis is useful in certain situations, such as exploratory qualitative 
case studies.
A general (logical) truth of a matter cannot be established by examining 
only one, or a few, of the variables as there are potentially a very large 
number (some might say infinite) of variables that need to be weighed in 
an inductive argument.
Contrast this with a deductive argument where the premises and their 
conclusion are so integrally related that if the premises are true, then the 
conclusion must also be true. For inductive reasoning to be valid, it requires 
all the initial premises to be true, and as this is not possible, an inductive 
argument can only establish a degree of likelihood or probability.
Deductive reasoning produces either a valid argument or an invalid argu-
ment. Inductive reasoning can only produce a cogent, or sound (i.e., prob-
able), argument.

38 
Chapter 2
Interpreting information is a cognitive process based on general knowl-
edge, life experience, commonsense, and data collected in relation to the 
issues under investigation. This process involves identifying new issues 
and postulating the significance of these issues, which might include be-
ing viewed from the perspective of the target.11 The “so what?” questions 
can be answered in the interpretative process: what does this information 
mean in relation to the issue under investigation? The answers provide 
a useful starting point to formulate future courses of actions and make 
recommendations.
It is equally important to discover evidence of disagreement in the data as 
it is to find evidence that supports the research hypothesis. Differences add 
density to the conclusions drawn. Therefore, analysts should look for outli-
ers and rival explanations in the data.
MAKING RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendations stem from the conclusions, and it is the point where 
the analyst presents the decision maker with a proposed course of action. 
The action stems directly from the original research question, or it may 
stem from an ancillary issue the research has discovered.
At first glance, the process of making recommendations appears 
straightforward—an action is made in the form of a proposal: it is recom-
mended that ABC intervene by conducting an XYZ-style operation. Of 
course, such a recommendation would be fleshed out to include, perhaps, 
time frames and other considerations. However, a recommendation such 
as this would more often than not be found inadequate by a decision 
maker because it offers no options or choices.
It is rare that decision makers will base their resolves purely on factual 
evidence. As strange as this must sound, decision makers balance the 
facts gleaned from an intelligence report with the political imperatives 
surrounding the issue being studied. Often social, cultural, historical, eco-
nomic, and other considerations enter into the decision maker’s thoughts 
before embarking on a course of action.12
The art of recommendation-making is, therefore, another exercise in 
intelligence research. Intelligence analysts are not policy makers nor are 
they political advisors, but they are, nevertheless, subject experts who can 
offer a range of options that can potentially address the original research 
question—from a “do nothing” option (yes, doing nothing is a choice) to 
a “Rolls-Royce standard” response (whatever that might be in the context 

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
39
of the issue). In between these options will usually be two, three, or more 
options that can be presented on a scale of increasing efficiency or effec-
tiveness (i.e., a projection of the potential impact or consequence of the 
options). Each option, as it climbs the scale toward the Rolls Royce stan-
dard, will usually carry a heavier price in terms of financial, personnel, or 
material resources and perhaps time or other cost factors.
Although it is not always the role of the analysts to cost each of these fac-
tors, it may be incumbent upon them to at least brief the decision maker as to 
the relative expenditure required for each option. They then have to present 
an estimate or rank them in order of magnitude. This serves as a benchmark 
for the decision maker to assess the options within the package.
Take for instance an intelligence report recommending a surveillance 
team be tasked to gather additional information about a criminal gang in-
volved in the “rebirthing” of stolen motor vehicles. Based on the research 
and using deductive reasoning, this conclusion may be considered to be 
on firm ground. However, the agency may only have one full-time sur-
veillance team, and tasking it to gather information may place an existing 
surveillance operation into the importation of heroin at risk.
The police commander needs to understand the risks as well as the costs 
in order to weigh which operation will be supported. The outcome may 
never be known to the analyst as the drug operation may be a classified 
project and the analyst has no need-to-know. Likewise, the final decision 
should not be seen as a slight on the analyst’s work should the recom-
mendation not be acted upon. It is a balancing act on the part of decision 
makers to allocate resources under their command as best they can. None-
theless, it is important analysts are aware that they may be called upon to 
provide options and cost estimates so the best decision can be made.
Another way to describe how making recommendations fits into the 
intelligence research process is through the five Is:
Intelligence. Information gathering and analysis in relation to the 
problem, leading to making recommendations for intervention (options).
Intervention. The presentation of a set of responses or policy options 
addressing the proximate and/or distal causes of the problem.
Implementation. The action needed to translate the recommended in-
terventions into practice.
Involvement. The enlistment of key partner agency(s) and/or stake-
holder(s) to implement the recommended option.
Impact. The evaluation of intervention’s outputs and outcomes.
The Straw Man Technique
One method to help guide decision makers to the preferred option is to use 
the straw man technique. A proposal or solution is drafted (i.e., the straw 

40 
Chapter 2
man) and placed among the range of alternative options. The analyst then 
discusses this option by criticizing the shortcomings of the alternative 
recommendations. In this way, the straw man provides a springboard for 
exploring other possibilities. Presenting recommendations in this way al-
lows the decision maker to understand the strengths/benefits of the pre-
ferred option when contrasted with others. It can also facilitate some idea 
generation by the decision maker who may then request modifications to 
the preferred option based on political considerations that were beyond 
the privy of the analyst. Regardless, the straw man approach increases 
the chances that the decision maker will be more comfortable with and, 
hence, “own” the final choice.
REPORT DISSEMINATION
Dissemination is the term commonly used for the last phase of the intel-
ligence cycle where the product (e.g., a report or briefing) is delivered to 
the decision maker. Because intelligence reports vary in size from one-
page briefings (e.g., tactical or operational reports) to book length studies 
(e.g., strategic assessments), it is hard to categorically state who the end 
user will be within an agency or even at what level of political leadership 
it may ultimately end up.
In the case of business intelligence, an intelligence report may be re-
ceived by a board of directors (i.e., nonexecutive level), or it might be 
considered by the corporate executives who make day-to-day decisions 
about the business. Then again, it may only be read by a division-level 
manager who simply needs the insights to plan production schedules.
In the case of national security intelligence, strategic reports, unless in 
the form of a national estimate (essentially a synopsis of a much larger 
document), will not be read by a decision maker. In all likelihood, stra-
tegic reports will only be read in their entirety by one of the decision 
maker’s staff or advisers. These personnel will extract what they consider 
the key findings (and these may not be the key findings of the study) and 
brief the decision maker themselves. A strategic intelligence study may 
even be destined for a subject specialist, who may be a fellow intelligence 
analyst within another agency.
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Admiralty rating;
•  Data analysis;

 
The Intelligence Research Process 
41
•  Data collation;
•  Data collection table;
•  Data gathering;
•  Deductive logic;
•  Dissemination;
•  Fishbone diagram;
•  Inductive logic;
•  Inferences;
•  Information accuracy;
•  Information evaluation process;
•  Intelligence collection plan;
•  Intelligence collection requirements;
•  Intelligence systems;
•  Methodology;
•  Operationalize;
•  Source reliability; and
•  Straw man.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  Identify two reasons for conducting a literature review, and explain 
their importance to the overall intelligence research process.
2.  What are some of the benefits of data collation? List three issues, and 
describe the positive impact of each.
3.  Why formulate an information collection plan? Discuss what could 
go wrong if a plan is not incorporated into an intelligence research 
project.
4.  Explain the purpose of using a software package for collating 
data.
5.  Outline three methods for indexing data. Then choose one and de-
scribe its strengths and its limitations.
6.  Outline some reasons why an analyst should review data held in the 
agency database or file system for purging.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Review the difference between inductive and deductive reasoning. Con-
struct two simple inductive arguments and two simple deductive argu-
ments. Provide a short explanation as to why each is so.

42 
Chapter 2
NOTES
 1. Walter Laqueur, “Spying and Democracy: The Future of Intelligence,” Cur-
rent (March/April 1986).
 2. John Donne, Meditation XVII (1622), http://www.online-literature.com/
donne /409/ (accessed November 11, 2008).
 3. Edwin H. Sutherland, White Collar Crime: The Uncut Version (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 1983).
 4. U.S. Department of the Army, FMI 2-22.9: Open Source Intelligence (Wash-
ington DC: Department of the Army, 2006), 2–10.
 5. International Association of Chiefs of Police, Law Enforcement Policy on 
the Use of Criminal Intelligence: A Manual for Police Executives (Gaithersburg, MD: 
IACP, 1985).
 6. Jack Morris, The Criminal Intelligence File: A Handbook to Guide the Storage and 
Use of Confidential Law Enforcement Materials (Loomis, CA: Palmer Press, 1992).
 7. Henry Prunckun, Information Security: A Practical Handbook on Business 
Counterintelligence (Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1989).
 8. Soundex was originally developed by Margaret K. Odell and Robert C. Rus-
sell, cf. U.S. Patents 1261167(1918) and 1435663(1922).
 9. Henry Prunckun, SpyBase (Adelaide, Australia: Slezak Associates, 1991).
10. Donald E. Knuth, Sorting and Searching, vol. 3 of The Art of Computer Pro-
gramming (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1973), 391–92.
11. Michael Scheuer [pseud.], Through Our Enemies’ Eyes: Osama bin Laden, Radi-
cal Islam, and the Future of America (Washington DC: Brassey’s, 2002).
12. Terry-Anne O’Neill, “The Relationship between Intelligence Analysis and 
Policymaking—Some Issues,” Journal of the Australian Institute of Professional Intel-
ligence Officers 8, no. 1 (1999): 5–22.

43
3
c
Scientific Methods in 
Intelligence Research
T
his topic discusses how scientific methods are used in intelligence 
research by examining:
1.  Scientific research methods;
2.  Reasoning;
3.  Probability;
4.  Hypothesis testing;
5.  Constructing a hypothesis;
6.  Variables;
7.  Operationalizing variables; and
8.  Measuring variables.
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH METHODS
Scientific methods are the techniques and processes used by researchers to:
•  Investigate social, psychological, political, military, business, and eco-
nomic phenomena;
•  Acquire new knowledge in these areas; or
•  Set right or incorporate previously gained knowledge using the same.
It involves the systemic analysis of phenomena and logical problem solv-
ing. The aim is to provide insight through a transparent process in order 
to reduce uncertainty.

44 
Chapter 3
The methods are considered scientific because they are based on empiri-
cal evidence that can be observed (directly or indirectly) and measured. 
These data are subjected to the established principles of logic and must 
be repeatable, as in the physical world (e.g., chemistry and physics). 
Scientific methods of inquiry are founded on the steps of the intelligence 
cycle—problem formulation, data collection, data collation, analysis (in-
cluding hypothesis testing), and dissemination.
Although the focus of intelligence research differs from other fields 
of inquiry, the features of scientific inquiry remain the same. Like other 
researchers, intelligence analysts pose hypotheses to explain phenomena 
and plan methodological approaches to study real-world problems.
One prominent feature of scientific inquiry is the objectivity of the 
method, so bias is reduced when collecting and interpreting the data. 
In academic fields such as sociology, criminology, psychology, history, 
anthropology, political science, and economics, the findings are shared 
through publication in scholarly journals and professional conferences. 
There are a few reasons for sharing the research results, including:
•  Knowledge is cumulative, and all scholar researchers benefit from 
publication (i.e., increasing the sum of knowledge); and
•  Colleagues can critique the methods and interpretations of a study to 
exercise some level of quality control through peer review.
But this is not the case with intelligence research as it is secret research. 
The audience is key decision makers responsible for protecting and pre-
serving a way of life for many people; hence, the research is not intended 
for public airing, even within academic circles. For instance, the inability 
to critique methods and interpretations of a study is a drawback with in-
telligence research, but in its place, analysts could consider finding ways 
within their agency to have their work peer reviewed. This requires more 
than proofreading by a supervisor but could be done through a work-
in-progress forum of fellow analysts where the researchers present their 
methods and findings.
Reducing uncertainty is a problem well noted by military commanders like 
the Prussian general Carl von Clausewitz (1780–1831), who articulated such 
concerns in his landmark treatise On War.1

 
Scientific Methods in Intelligence Research 
45
REASONING
Deductive Logic
Deductive reasoning (or deductive logic) uses arguments to move from 
general statements (the premise) to a specific position to draw a conclu-
sion. The key feature of deductive reasoning is that the premises used to 
create the argument must be true. The premise consists of one or more 
propositions as well as another proposition referred to as the conclusion. 
Because the premise is true, the conclusion must also be true.
To assess whether a deductive argument has been constructed cor-
rectly, the analyst must ensure the argument is valid and sound. An argu-
ment is valid if the conclusion is a logical consequence of the premise. It 
will be sound if it is valid as well as having a true premise. Consider the 
following example:
•  All people breathe air (the major premise).
•  The president of the United States is a person (a minor premise—
there may be others).
•  Therefore, the president breathes air (the conclusion).
Note, however the validity of a deductive conclusion is not affected by 
the fact that the premise is not true as the conclusion will still be valid. 
Consider this example:
•  All drug addicted people live on boats.
•  All people are drug addicted.
•  Therefore, all people live on boats.
Although this argument is valid, it is not sound, and for the argument 
to be sound, the conclusion must be based upon a premise that is true. 
But analysts will not always have both validity and soundness in their 
arguments, and if they did, there would be little cause to conduct 
research. When contrasting deductive logic with inductive logic, one 
finds rather than the arguments moving from general statements to a 
specific position to draw a conclusion, the reasoning moves from the 
particular to the general, and this is usually the basis of intelligence 
research.

46 
Chapter 3
Inductive Logic
Inductive reasoning makes generalizations based on individual observa-
tions (e.g., phenomenal patterns). It is used to attribute traits or relation-
ships, or to formulate rules or theories. For example:
•  Premise: There is a shortage of heroin for sale on the streets of Syd-
ney.
•  This infers the general proposition or major premise: There is a short-
age of heroin throughout all of Australia.
Although inductive reasoning is valuable for posing a hypothetical posi-
tion, it cannot be seen in the same light as deductive logic—both valid and 
sound. For the conclusion to be sound, the premise needs to be true, and 
it is not likely an analyst will have every piece of information to construct 
such an argument, so the premise is true as the number of particulars may 
be in the hundreds or thousands.
Belief is like faith; both are expressions of opinion or conviction that some-
thing is true but have not been subjected to rigorous proof based on evidence. 
Belief and faith are, therefore, not recognized research methodologies.
PROBABILITY
Because inductive logic can be uncertain, analysts use probability when 
drawing conclusions: “this is the most likely truth based on what is pres-
ently best evidence.” An analyst who tests a particular theory will con-
struct a hypothesis based on the inductively produced theory; then using 
an appropriate method, the analyst will subject the research question to 
scientific inquiry.
Consider a study into a heroin shortage in Australia where illicit drug 
users in a few areas of Sydney experienced difficulty in obtaining heroin. 
A number of direct and indirect measures of availability were collected, 
and these data were subjected to analysis. The conclusion was that there 
was less heroin on the streets.
Some scholars extrapolated from these particulars an argument that 
the shortage was due to law enforcement efforts.2 The conclusion was 
valid, but the argument failed to consider a number of other propositions 
making the premise not true, including a Taliban-imposed restriction in 
Afghanistan where opium is grown and diversion of Southeast Asian 
heroin (destined for the Australian black market) to Europe.

 
Scientific Methods in Intelligence Research 
47
The initial conclusions were no doubt valid, but their soundness was 
questionable. It is likely that law enforcement played some part in the 
heroin shortage, but the probability that it was the sole basis for such 
results was highly unlikely. Therefore, what analysts need is some means 
of assigning a level of probability to the conclusions, including statistical 
techniques.
Tests of statistical significance can determine the likelihood that a par-
ticular result could have occurred by chance. Chance occurs when forces 
other than the independent variable act on the dependent variable. If it 
is unlikely that the result occurred by random variation, then the analyst 
can conclude the independent variable was responsible. The acceptable 
levels of probability (significance level) are 5 in 100 (p < 0.05) and 1 in 100 
(p < 0.01) (this refers to the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis—
see “Constructing a Research Hypothesis”). Therefore, if these results are 
obtained, the analyst can conclude that the study was significant at the 
acceptable levels, thereby supporting the hypothesis.
While numeric (quantitative) data can easily be used to conduct sta-
tistical tests of probability, analysts can also test nominal and categorical 
(qualitative) data using the chi-square. This technique will be discussed 
in chapter 8.
HYPOTHESIS TESTING
A hypothesis is the statement putting forward a proposition about a fact 
or set of facts. This statement, constructed by the intelligence analyst, 
is the basis of the research question or statement of guiding principle. 
Although a hypothesis can be created several ways, it is most likely the 
result of some form of inductive reasoning.
A problem is identified and a hypothesis framed, which usually starts 
out as the research question. The question might ask:
•  How much can we expect organized crime to grow in three years’ 
time?;
•  What industries will organized crime be expected to engulf in the 
coming five years?; and
•  Will their methods of operation differ from those being used to-
day?3
These questions, as they stand, are too broad to test using the scientific 
method. They are tentative questions derived from the issues raised by 
decision makers, social observers and commentators, or the subject lit-
erature. These questions may form part of the rationale for the study, but 

48 
Chapter 3
they need to be refined to be testable and falsifiable. Take for instance 
the question that asks: what industries will organized crime be expected 
to engulf in the coming five years? The analysts might postulate that the 
nightclub industry may be the target of organized crime based on obser-
vations of local or interstate field operatives or the experiences discussed 
in the literature from overseas. Using this theory, they craft a testable 
hypothesis to be the subject of their inquiries. It can be in the form of a 
question, a statement, or an “if” statement, for example:
•  Will the nightclub industry be the target of organized crime?;
•  Nightclubs are an attractive target for takeover by organized crime; 
or
•  If organized crime is looking to expand its influence, then the night-
club industry will be a target.
Any of these hypotheses are acceptable as they allow the analyst a clear 
focus for study. Each needs to consist of a dependent variable and an inde-
pendent variable to allow the former to be manipulated by the latter. As a 
hypothesis must be testable, it must also be falsifiable. Consequently, a hy-
pothesis can never be “proven,” but it can be “supported,” and it is to what 
degree a hypothesis is supported that determines its acceptance. So, state-
ments such as: “and this is strong evidence in support of the hypothesis” or, 
alternatively, “these data do not support the hypothesis” (i.e., do not reject 
the null hypothesis) are common when discussing research findings.
CONSTRUCTING A RESEARCH HYPOTHESIS
To construct a research hypothesis, analysts must state what they con-
sider their research will confirm.
Intelligence Hypothesis (H1). Nightclubs are an attractive target for 
takeover by organized crime.
A study may have more than one hypothesis, so each hypothesis is 
labeled H1, H2, H3, and so forth. Then the analyst must construct a null 
hypothesis (H0), which is simply the reverse of the research hypothesis.
Intelligence Null Hypothesis (H0). Nightclubs are not an attractive 
target for takeover by organized crime.
A null hypothesis is established to provide a form of devil’s advocate 
for the analyst. There is much data that can falsely support the research 
hypothesis; therefore, the analyst must aim to reject the null hypothesis. 
If the null hypothesis cannot be rejected, the analyst can state there is sup-
port for the research hypothesis. This is a subtle but important distinction 
to understand.

 
Scientific Methods in Intelligence Research 
49
VARIABLES
A variable can take many categorical forms: items, actions, thoughts, 
mindsets, and moments in time or any number of other category types the 
analyst is trying to measure. To create a testable hypothesis, the analyst 
needs an independent variable and a dependent variable.
The independent variable is independent or not affected by other vari-
ables in the study. It acts on the dependent variable, which is the subject 
of the inquiry. For instance, nightclubs are the independent variable in the 
example given above about the problem of invasive organized crime.
The dependent variable is, therefore, the factor that depends on other 
factors—in the current example, organized crime. A simple way of re-
membering the two variables is to repeat this phrase: the [independent 
variable] causes a change in the [dependent variable]. To illustrate the 
point: [nightclubs] cause a change in [organized crime]. Any number of 
industries can be substituted for nightclubs to measure if there is any 
change in organized crime (i.e., referring back to the research question of 
being “an attractive target for takeover by organized crime”).
In addition to the distinction between these two variables, it should 
be noted that all variables have attributes or specific values. The variable 
gender has two attributes: male and female.
Moreover, the attributes associated with each variable needs to be exhaus-
tive, so the list should include all possibilities. For instance, if the variable of 
religion is used, then limiting the attributes to Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, 
One technique that is useful for refining a difficult problem is that of restat-
ing the problem. Consider the problem of traffic accidents for the police: how 
can police officers reduce motor vehicle accidents? Police may try to do this 
by increasing the use of radar and mobilizing high-visibility patrols.
Suppose then that the problem is restated as: How can police make motor 
vehicle travel safer? Then solutions that present themselves widen consider-
ably. Additional options could include driver education programs, working 
with government departments that oversee roads and highways to identify 
dangerous intersections, turns, or “blind spots.” It might also include issu-
ing safety information to pedestrians, bicyclists, passengers, young drivers, 
aged drivers, truck drivers, and motorcyclists.
Restating the problem has the advantage of highlighting different goals, 
and these new goals present different solution paths. The more solution 
paths there are for a problem, the more likely it is that a solution can be 
found to treat it.

50 
Chapter 3
and Muslim would be a mistake as there are many more religions being 
practiced. One way to address this issue is to expressly cite the major attri-
butes but then use a category like “other” to account for the remainder.
Finally, attributes need to be mutually exclusive, so no variable should 
have two attributes simultaneously. Even though this may seem self- 
evident in practice, achieving this is not so simple. If a crime analyst is 
seeking to interview prisoners in jail to gauge their desire to join a “gang,” 
then the variable “gang status” with only two attributes “member” and 
”nonmember” would be inadequate. How would the analyst record 
an answer where a prisoner is a member of a gang but is also seeking 
membership of a second gang (or wants to quit his present gang and join 
another)?
OPERATIONALIZING VARIABLES
Operationalizing variables refers to defining the variables in terms so 
they can be observed and measured. This is necessary because when a 
phenomenon can be observed, it can be measured, and this measurement 
can lead to management. But not all variables are easily operationalized. 
Consider how one would define:
•  Organized crime; or
•  A nightclub.
Variables that are objective, effort independent (i.e., involuntary), or con-
crete are easier to observe and, therefore, easier to measure. Those that 
are subjective, effort dependent, or abstract are much more difficult to op-
erationalize. One way of reducing the confusion (and potential source of 
error) is to search the literature for other studies that have used the same 
or similar variable and consider the appropriateness of adopting that 
definition. Reliability (consistency in measuring) and validity (the degree 
to which the data collection instrument can measure what is intended) 
of the operational definition is paramount in the scientific method as the 
same results should be obtained if the study is repeated. The process of 
operationalizing a variable involves three steps:
1.  Define the concept to be measured;
2.  Assess the best quantitative measures for the concept (as there can 
be several measures for different concepts); and
3.  Consider the most appropriate method for obtaining these data (e.g., 
covert, unobtrusive, or open-source).

 
Scientific Methods in Intelligence Research 
51
MEASURING VARIABLES
There are three methods of measuring variables—directly, indirectly, and 
through constructs. An example of a directly measurable variable (or an 
observable variable) is the number of people attending a diplomatic func-
tion hosted by a target country’s government.
An indirectly measurable variable (sometime termed a hypothetical vari-
able or an indeterminate variable) would be the income of the guests at the 
diplomatic function. This could be used to assess the position they hold 
within society.
A variable “observed” through constructs cannot actually be physi-
cally observed as it is an abstract theoretical variable. They are created to 
represent some phenomenon like the emotional reaction of witnesses to 
a suicide bomber.
Units of Analysis
An important concept to consider when observing and recording data is 
the unit of analysis, which is an entity to be analyzed in the course of the 
intelligence study. A quick way to grasp this is to view an example from 
the military:
•  soldier;
•  squad (or section);
•  platoon;
•  company;
•  battalion;
•  regiment;
•  brigade;
•  division;
•  corps; and
•  army.
It is termed a unit of analysis because it is the level at which the study 
will analyze the data that determines the unit. For instance, if an intelli-
gence study is comparing the type of weapons carried by insurgents who 
operate from two locations, the unit would be the individual insurgent. 
However, if the study was comparing how the insurgents engage friendly 
forces, then the unit of analysis might be at squad or platoon level. De-
spite this, it is not uncommon for studies to analyze data at several units 
of analysis.

52 
Chapter 3
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Attribute;
•  Conclusion;
•  Dependent variable;
•  Hypothesis;
•  Independent variable;
•  Mutually exclusive;
•  Null hypothesis;
•  Operationalize;
•  Premise;
•  Probability;
•  Proposition;
•  Reasoning;
•  Scientific;
•  Scientific methods;
•  Significance level;
•  Sound;
•  Source reliability;
•  Unit of analysis;
•  Valid; and
•  Variables.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  Explain why intelligence research employs the scientific method of 
inquiry.
2.  What are the two forms of reasoning, and how would each be used in 
practice?
3.  Outline the role probability plays in research. 
4.  What are the two integral parts of a properly formed hypothesis, and 
why is it constructed this way?
5.  Describe the difference between the independent and dependent vari-
ables.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Consider the issue of operationalizing variables; then define the variable 
“assaults” so that it can be observed and measured.

 
Scientific Methods in Intelligence Research 
53
NOTES
1. Carl von Clausewitz, On War, trans. J. J. Graham (New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, 1993).
2. Hank Prunckun, “A Rush to Judgment?: The Origin of the 2001 Australian 
‘Heroin Drought’ and Its Implications for the Future of Drug Law Enforcement,” 
Global Crime 7, no. 2 (May 2006): 247–55.
3. Henry Prunckun, Special Access Required: A Practitioner’s Guide to Law Enforce-
ment Intelligence Literature (Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1990), 3.

54
0
c
Chapter Title
54
4
c
Approaches to 
Intelligence Research
T
his topic provides an overview of the approaches to intelligence re-
search by examining:
1.  Quantitative research;
2.  Qualitative research;
3.  Mixed methods research; and
4.  Intelligence research designs.
INTRODUCTION
Data are central to intelligence research, whether they are from primary 
sources, such as field observations, or from secondary sources, like nu-
meric data in its various guises. This chapter examines the three para-
digms for collecting, recording, and analyzing data: qualitative research, 
quantitative research, and mixed methods.
The difference between qualitative and quantitative research is akin to 
the human body where quantitative research would be the skeleton, and 
qualitative research is the flesh. One paradigm complements the other but 
does not necessarily replace the other. So, mixed methods combine both 
aspects, providing a fuller picture.
Each research paradigm has strengths and limitations. Sometimes the 
two approaches have been used jointly to triangulate research findings (i.e., 
increase the credibility of the study’s results). However, in practice, the 
use of one over the other often comes down to the researcher’s academic 

 
Approaches to Intelligence Research 
55
background and personal preference. Other times, it is simply a matter of 
how the research question is framed or what data are available.
QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH
Quantitative research rests on the analyst’s making observations that can 
be measured using a measurement instrument (or tool). These instruments 
can be well developed and established as a psychometric test for voca-
tional aptitude or a quickly designed survey. Some intelligence research 
projects lend themselves to a quantitative approach where the analyst:
•  Is working with large data sets or collecting data from a large num-
ber of human subjects (especially if funds and support staff are few 
or timeframes tight);
•  Has access to previously developed and tested data collection instru-
ments that are applicable to the project;
•  Has a group of decision makers who are more comfortable with nu-
meric data or must demonstrate in measurable terms why a certain 
recommendation was made; or
•  Is intending to estimate or predict some future possible outcome or 
event based on a sample.
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH
Qualitative intelligence research has the potential to extend understand-
ing by suggesting tentative causal explanations. The analyst approaches 
the problem under investigation by collecting data in an unstructured 
way—there are no standardized questionnaires or limiting “boxes to 
check.” Although some qualitative research may use a set of uniform 
questions to ask each respondent, the answers are not structured in the 
close-ended way that is a feature in quantitative research (e.g., character-
ized by simple “yes” or “no” answers or Likert-scale responses).
Qualitative research can be described as interactive field research or 
noninteractive documentary research. Data are collected by direct obser-
vation in the field or indirectly via diaries, journals, interviews, or focus 
groups. Secondary sources of data are numerous—documents exist in 
a myriad of forms. In intelligence research, qualitative data may also 
form the basis of a pilot study or develop a theory (e.g., grounded theory 
research) that could later be tested using quantitative data (e.g., using 
unobtrusive methods).

56 
Chapter 4
The keystone to qualitative analysis is impression. This is the effect the data 
have on the researcher who forms a view, image, or opinion about what the 
data “say.” In a practical sense, the analyst examines the data and forms a 
judgment; then through a process called coding, they describe these impres-
sions as concepts, categories, and properties (dimensionalizing). Following 
on, using one or more analytic techniques, which can include quantitative 
methods, the analyst then takes these categories and puts them back to-
gether in a way that makes connections; it is these connections that produce 
meaning. Some of the analytics used to make sense of unstructured data are 
described in detail in chapter 10—“Advanced Analytic Techniques.”
An example of using both qualitative and quantitative techniques is in 
content analysis where the analyst will discuss themes that appear in the 
text as well as the reading ease and grade level required for adequate under-
standing. The analyst’s impressions of the phenomenon under investigation 
are usually found in the section of the report that deals with conclusions.
Some intelligence research projects lend themselves to a qualitative approach 
when the analyst:
•  Is interested in the target’s behaviors, emotions, or thoughts;
•  Has found little in the way of previously published information on the 
issue, and an overview is needed; or
•  Needs an in-depth understanding of the issues (and perhaps associated 
issues) that quantitative data would not reveal (i.e., there needs to be 
more “flesh on the bones”).
MIXED METHODS RESEARCH
Mixed methods research is a combination of the quantitative and quali-
tative paradigms. If an analyst is uncomfortable with one or the other, 
mixed methods is not only a good way of bridging the rift between the 
two, but also there are indications mixed methods research (sometimes 
termed methodological pluralism or methodological eclecticism) frequently 
results in superior research when compared to mono-method research.1
INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH DESIGNS
The most widely encountered research designs in intelligence research 
include the following:

 
Approaches to Intelligence Research 
57
Experimental
Experimental research is used to test for causal process where there is 
the ability to control the variables. In an experiment, there may be one or 
several independent variables that are manipulated to assess their effect 
on the dependent variable.
Quasi-Experimental
Quasi-experimental research are experimental research designs lacking 
all the characteristic of a true experiment—notably random selection. 
Quasi-experimental designs are often the form of time-series analysis, 
which can be either an interrupted time series or a non-interrupted time 
series (see Time Series Studies, later in this section). This approach lends 
itself to analyzing archival and other forms of unobtrusive data.2
Case Studies
Case studies are studies of single issues or problems and can be manifested 
in a person, a group, an incident, or an event. It is a systemic way of examin-
ing a problem extending beyond the use of a limited number of variables by 
providing an in-depth investigation into the target phenomena. Case studies 
can be single or multiple cases and need not be solely qualitative. Instead, 
they can use a quantitative paradigm or a mixed approach. This type of 
research design is well suited to strategic intelligence projects (see, for ex-
ample, the case study into the 1986 Libyan air raid by the U.S. air force in 
retaliation of terrorist bombings in Europe targeting American interests3).
Evaluations
Evaluation research is the systematic assessment of an intelligence opera-
tion, a tactical service, or a strategic program. It is usually divided into as-
sessments that are either formative or summative. That is, formative evalu-
ations assess whether the operation, service, or program has been or can be 
improved through inputs, technology, training, or procedures. Summative 
evaluations assess whether the desired outcome of the operation, service, 
or program was achieved and if it was not (or partially), suggest improve-
ments it might make to achieve its goals in the future.
Focus Groups
Focus groups are used in qualitative research to gather data from a 
large number of people simultaneously through open-ended questions; 

58 
Chapter 4
although, closed questions can be asked to clarify points raised. One 
strength of this approach is the interactive discussion generated between 
the participants, creating information-rich results. This discussion is usu-
ally recorded by the researcher and transcribed later to derive data for 
the analysis.
In-Depth Interviews
In-depth interviews are similar to focus groups; although, there is only 
a single or possibly two respondents. The interview follows an unstruc-
tured format; however, the analyst will pose a basic set of open-ended 
questions to promote discussion and from which the data will be elicited 
to answer the research question. In-depth interviews are well suited to 
investigations where personal, sensitive, or confidential (e.g., classified) 
information is sought, making a group format inappropriate (e.g., coun-
terintelligence investigations).
Ethnographies
Ethnographies seek to answer questions concerning the way people live. 
Ethnographic research is ideal for examining the relationships between 
culture and behavior (e.g., insurgencies) and is a good paradigm for gain-
ing insight into an issue that could not be discovered using other research 
methodologies. While ethnography is a strategic, exploratory method, it can 
be used in a tactical or operational setting to answer specific questions.
Grounded Theory
Grounded theory is a research method where theory is developed from the 
data rather than research conducted to test an established theory. It is a truly 
inductive approach, taking the analyst from the specific to the general. In 
grounded theory research, concepts are the important elements of the analy-
sis as these are used to develop theory (i.e., conceptualization of the data).
Time Series Studies
Time series studies are sometimes referred to as repeated measures stud-
ies because there are two or more observations (e.g., measures) taken 
from the same variable separated by time. Time series analysis aims to 
understand phenomenon represented by a sequence of observations and 
forecast future values of the variable.

 
Approaches to Intelligence Research 
59
Pre- and Post-Designs
Pre- and post-designs are usually used to measure changes caused by 
some form of intervention (i.e., a purposefully imposed independent 
variable on the dependent variable). Measurements are taken before the 
intervention (baseline data) and then after to assess the causality of the 
intervention. These types of studies are sometime termed A-B designs, 
where A represents the baseline phase and B the intervention. Variations 
to an A-B design are A-B-A, A-B-A-B, and B-A-B. Although it might seem 
odd to use a B-A-B design, it has its place in cases where the analyst 
comes across an issue that is in the process of having an intervention ap-
plied (B phase), and no baseline data were previously obtained. In such a 
situation, the analyst can request secession to the intervention in order to 
measure the post-impact (A) and then reintroduce it (B).
Meta-Analysis
Meta-analysis is a statistical research method that summarizes previously 
conducted studies. Analysts, rather than survey respondents, survey pre-
viously published research reports. It is, therefore, a purely quantitative 
approach, comparing the statistical results across a number of studies.
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Coding;
•  Dimensionalizing;
•  Impressions;
•  Information rich;
•  Instrument;
•  Methodological eclecticism;
•  Methodological pluralism;
•  Mixed methods;
•  Qualitative research;
•  Quantitative research;
•  Repeated measures;
•  Research designs;
•  Tool; and
•  Triangulation.

60 
Chapter 4
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  Describe the difference between quantitative research and qualita-
tive research.
2.  Discuss the strengths and limitations of using quantitative research 
and qualitative research singularly.
3.  Describe how these two approaches can be used to complement each 
other when used in combination.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Consider the various research designs that can be used in intelligence 
research. Select one, and discuss how this design could be employed to 
research Country Q, which has recently made it public that it is develop-
ing a ballistic missile capability.
NOTES
1. R. Burke Johnson and Anthony J. Onwuegbuzie, “Mixed Methods Research: 
A Research Paradigm Whose Time Has Come,” Educational Researcher 33, no. 7 
(2004): 14–26.
2. Richards J. Heuer, ed., Quantitative Approaches to Political Intelligence: The CIA 
Experience (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1978).
3. Henry Prunckun and Philip Mohr, “Military Deterrence of International 
Terrorism: An Evaluation of Operation El Dorado Canyon,” Studies in Conflict and 
Terrorism 20, no. 3 (July–September 1997): 267–80.

61
5
c
Unobtrusive Data Collection
T
his topic examines one of the most commonly used techniques for col-
lecting data in intelligence research by looking at:
1.  Benefits of unobtrusive methods;
2.  Indirect data collection techniques;
3.  Content analysis; and
4.  Secondary analysis of data.
BENEFITS OF THE METHOD
Unlike surveys, in-depth interviews, and other methods where the re-
searcher has direct communication with the researched, unobtrusive 
methods attempt to extract data without gaining the target’s attention. 
Unobtrusive methods are conducted without the target knowing about 
an operation to collect information about him or her.
For intelligence analysts, there are a number of advantages for using 
unobtrusive methods in their research. Chief among these is what the 
analyst observes has actually taken place—as opposed to self-reporting 
by other techniques. These methods are, by nature, intrinsically safe as 
they do not place researchers or field operatives in contact with the target 
or in an environment that could be hostile or dangerous. They are, there-
fore, discreet and nondisruptive techniques.

62 
Chapter 5
Because these methods do not rely on direct contact, they increase the 
reliability of the study because the research can be replicated, thus allow-
ing checks of the study’s reliability and validity to be confirmed. Access 
does not present a problem because permission is not required, and in the 
case of a hostile target where permission could not be secured, the analyst 
does not have to resort to court-approved covert techniques.
Unobtrusive methods are cost efficient as undercover operatives do 
not have to be tasked, nor do surveillance teams or investigators/inter-
rogators have to collect data. Because of its relative economy, unobtrusive 
methods lend themselves to being used for longitudinal studies where the 
analyst needs to follow the activities of a target over time.
Three techniques will be examined here—indirect data collection, con-
tent analysis, and secondary analysis of data. Arguably, these three com-
prise the most favored techniques by analysts as summed up by Professor 
Harry Howe Ransom, who wrote in his influential work on intelligence: 
“95 per cent of peacetime intelligence [comes] from open sources.”1 Pro-
fessor Ransom’s own analysis of the United States’ national intelligence 
collection effort stated that in excess of 80 percent came from “overt, 
above-board methods [that] would normally be available to anyone with 
a well-organized information gathering system.”2
This, by no means, should underestimate the value of covert and clan-
destine data collections and data from secret sources, but it highlights the 
relevance open source information and unobtrusive analytic techniques 
have in collection plans.
Analysts should never overlook the time-honored library. This is a rich 
source for open source information. Location-dependent, the quality and 
quantity of a library’s holdings will vary, but generally, libraries have 
extensive holdings of nonfiction reference works as well as access to the in-
terlibrary loan program. The latter provides access to nationwide holdings 
through member libraries.
INDIRECT DATA COLLECTION
Indirect data collection can be used as the analyst’s primary source of data 
or used to supplement other forms of data in an attempt to triangulate 
results. Indirect methods lend themselves to collection by automated and 
electronic means.
The best way to understand indirect methods is by way of example. For 
instance, if a study wanted to measure the current interest in neo-Nazi 
issues (e.g., if there was some indication of a resurgence in hate crimes), 

 
Unobtrusive Data Collection 
63
an intelligence agency could set up a website to gather statistical informa-
tion about those who log on, with the assumption being that those visiting 
such a website are either ideological supporters of this form of dogma or 
participants—potential or otherwise—of the ideology’s edicts.
Data, such as the country where the Internet visitor originated, could be 
tracked along with the day, time, and web pages accessed. How long they 
stay on the website could be measured and whether they were returning 
viewers or once-only readers. Depending on the construction of the web-
site, many other types of data could be collected, including provision for 
interactive input by the website visitor. If the agency desired, this data 
collection method could also be used as part of a sting operation where 
email addresses are obtained via an opt-in facility or a blog.3
The study of radio station listening preferences is an example relating 
to business intelligence that has been cited in the literature from time to 
time. In this study, the researchers are reported to have conducted an 
unobtrusive survey of radio stations that were favored by car drivers in 
a particular geographic area. The researchers attended automotive repair 
shops, and while customers’ cars were being serviced, they noted the cur-
rent radio station displayed on the radio (whether it was in the AM or FM 
broadcast band and what particular frequency).
There are other sources of indirect information, including monitoring 
radio and television broadcasts for speeches made by political leaders 
and field operatives attending public speaking forums. In the case of the 
latter, intelligence analysts need to brief and debrief operatives regarding 
the specific information required (as per the data collection plan), as well 
as any additional information gleaned by observation.
The advantage of this method is that it does not rely on the respon-
dent having to tell the truth. A respondent who admits he or she lis-
tens to a station that plays music not in popular fashion or broadcasts 
certain political messages or is owned by a particular religious organi-
zation may feel embarrassed about his or her behavior. Prevention of 
embarrassment may lead respondents to lying, thereby distorting the 
data. Some of the limitations are that it only captures those respondents 
who can afford to have their cars serviced at a garage, thus excluding 
those who service their cars themselves (out of choice or necessity). It 
also assumes that the current station is the one most often or exclu-
sively listened to.
Nevertheless, if a company wanted to market its goods or services 
to a demographic consisting of Mercedes-Benz owners, then attending 
garages that repaired and serviced this make of automobile would be a 
quick and inexpensive way of collecting data about which radio station 
the business should spend its advertising budget with. It could also be 
used to verify claims by radio stations about what segment of the market 
they reach.

64 
Chapter 5
This method could also be used to canvas magazine or newspaper 
readership preferences by scanning the titles of these types of publica-
tions that are discarded by residents of a target neighborhood on the day 
paper products are left at the curbside for recycling.
One consideration that needs to be kept in mind when using this tech-
nique is that because data are being collected without the target’s consent, 
there may be ethical and legal issues to consider. For instance, with the 
radio station collection example, one would need to consider whether 
checking the car’s radio without the owner’s permission would violate 
any state or federal statutes regarding privacy. With the example of in-
specting discarded newspapers or magazines, it is unlikely that this data 
collection would be deemed either a trespass or an invasion of privacy by 
a court as these goods, by virtue of their abandonment, are no longer the 
property of (at that stage) the former owner.4 However, there may be lo-
cal bylaws that regulate interfering with material placed on the curbside 
for rubbish collection or recycling. So, before incorporating unobtrusive 
methods into an information collection plan, seek legal advice.
More often than not, indirect methods will be appropriate because the 
data sought are readily available. Reliability is an estimate of the consis-
tency a collection instrument will yield each time employed or the con-
sistency between two or more sets of data that have been collected. Using 
this technique is also likely to be ethical as well as legal. But just as with 
other data collection methods, the analyst will want to assure themselves 
of the reliability of the collection method. In this regard, indirect data 
collection techniques can act as a check for the reliability of another data 
collection method that may be being used (e.g., a direct method) or for 
estimating the reliability of itself via a test-retest approach. This is done 
by collecting data at two different points in time and computing the cor-
relation between the two sets of data. If the analyst considers that there 
is no change in the underlying condition between the two tests, then the 
data’s reliability can be estimated.
CONTENT ANALYSIS
Content analysis is the analysis of text contained in documents. Because 
these data are usually in narrative form (e.g., transcribed oral speeches, 
media interviews, or open letters to a public audience), the most common 
form of analysis is via qualitative methods, but analysis can also incorpo-
rate quantitative methods or both. The central purpose of content analysis 
is to develop an understanding of what is contained in the text beyond the 
superficial message. Some commonly used techniques for content analysis 
include thematic analysis, indexing, and qualitative descriptive analysis.

 
Unobtrusive Data Collection 
65
More specialized techniques, such as psychohistorical and psycho-
linguistic analysis, can also be used to provide clues about the target’s 
probable course of action. These techniques are based on an examination 
of behavior patterns exhibited by the target (which can include a nation 
state or other actor) in previous written (or transcribed oral) communica-
tions. The assumption is that behavior patterns are manifested in these 
communication forms, and through a psychoanalytic profile of the target, 
the analyst can distill a set of behavioral indicators. These profiles provide 
insight for basing recommendations for action. This technique requires 
the analyst to have expert subject knowledge (e.g., clinical psychology or 
psychiatry) to credibly assess the data. If not, help can be enlisted from 
private practitioners and university academics, depending on the security 
classification of the project.
On October 6, 1973, Israel suffered a surprise attack launched by Egypt and 
Syria—the Yom Kippur War. Israel failed to recognize or misinterpreted 
indicators that could have provided the insight it needed to stand up 
troops in preparation for war. If a psycholinguistic analysis was carried out 
of the provocative speeches by President Sadat weeks before, it may have 
revealed such indicators.
Similarly, psychohistorical analysis is based on the assumption that a 
country’s behavior may be influenced by a range of factors that make up 
its cultural identity, including social, anthropological, political, and note-
worthy historical events. For example, a psychohistorical analysis of Latin 
America would need to consider the issue of U.S.–Latin American rela-
tions. This is because U.S. interests in Latin America go back centuries, 
with the U.S. intervening in many of the region’s countries over that time. 
As such, an evaluation of the possible ramifications of any actions would 
need to be done as a number of those countries have felt a high degree of 
anti-U.S. sentiment. The benefit of such a psychohistorical analysis could 
provide the insight needed to avoid the political criticisms experienced 
after the 1961 Bay of Pigs incident.
Thematic analysis (a form of content analysis) is where a set of themes 
is distilled from the text. Ideas that present themselves in the reading are 
identified and given appropriate labels. The passages of text relating to a 
particular theme are marked and affiliated to the corresponding theme. 
Using a manual system, this could mean photocopying the page text; cut-
ting out the word, passage, or paragraph (using a pair of scissors); and 
placing it in a large envelope along with other passages that are identi-
fied. Each piece of paper (containing a word, passage, or paragraph) is 

66 
Chapter 5
referenced back to the text as one would do using, say, the Harvard ref-
erencing style so that when the material is compiled into the final report, 
the analyst knows where it has come from (similar to note taking when 
writing an essay).
If a computer-based software package is used, then the same procedure 
takes place, but the software avoids all of the manual cutting, referenc-
ing, and storage issues as this is done electronically. The advantages of 
using a computer-based solution are great as the software will have other 
features, including word count and metrics such as the Flesch Reading 
Ease and the Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level tests (see the section later in this 
chapter). These types of analysis allow the analyst to use a blended ap-
proach, incorporating both qualitative and quantitative analysis.
Any number of documents can be analyzed using this technique, and in 
cases where, say, speeches are delivered by a foreign political figure in the 
country’s local press, these public addresses can be analyzed over time 
in a quasi-longitudinal study. Alternatively, a number of author-known 
documents can be analyzed against a document of unknown or uncertain 
authorship with this tool.
As an illustration, the use of the Flesch Reading Ease and/or the 
Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level tests could be used where an analyst wants 
to gauge whether a speech was aimed at the local population or whether 
its appearance in the daily newspaper was just a vehicle for projecting a 
message to international leaders. The use of these two tests could quickly 
yield results that suggest whether the speech under investigation had 
a reading ease score and grade level commensurate with the country’s 
population or that it was much higher, perhaps suggesting it was aimed 
at a better educated international audience.
Indexing is another way of identifying meaning in the text. Rather than 
identifying themes, indexing identifies keywords in context. This is best 
done with computer software. An exceptions dictionary is first set up in 
the software package where words such as a, an, and, the, is, it, of, and so on 
are flagged as exceptions, so when the software searches the text, it does 
not index these inconsequential words. All other words are then indexed.
These words appear in their context within the document. This allows 
the analyst to not only count the appearance of certain words—say, a re-
peated word like “infidel”—but also then tag the sentence or paragraph 
where these key words appear so that they can be included in further 
analysis of a wider theme. Indexing is a technique closely tied to quanti-
tative descriptive analysis. Descriptive analysis seeks to describe features 
of the text quantitatively as is done with numeric data—by describing 
the most frequently used words or phrases. This type of analysis ideally 
lends itself to a blended approach of both qualitative and quantitative 
techniques.

 
Unobtrusive Data Collection 
67
Although content analysis has the advantage of being unobtrusive, and 
computer-based tools allow the analysis of very large documents (and 
multiple documents), the technique is not without limitations. Firstly, the 
data need to be textual. If there is no source of textual data, no analysis 
can take place.
Caution must be exercised in terms of sampling bias as with other ap-
proaches. In the hypothetical case of the foreign leader’s speeches in the 
local press discussed above, analysis would leave out all of the leader’s 
speeches delivered by way of radio or television broadcast or in-person 
delivery to crowds assembled. The other limitation is that although soft-
ware packages are useful in automating indexing, counting, and tagging 
text, these packages cannot interpret what words or phrases mean—this 
takes an analyst to do this word by word and phrase by phrase.
Flesch Reading Ease
The product of the Flesch Reading Ease analysis is a rating represented by 
a number on a scale between 0 and 100. The higher the score, the easier 
the text is to read. For instance, a document with the following Flesch 
Reading Ease scores would be interpreted as such:
•  90 to 100—very easy;
•  80 to 89—easy;
•  70 to 79—fairly easy;
•  60 to 69—considered to be what is generally termed plain English;
•  50 to 59—fairly difficult;
•  30 to 49—difficult; and
•  0 to 29—confusing.
The formula for calculating the score is: readability ease = 206.835 – (1.015 
 average sentence length) – (84.6  average syllables per word). Although 
most word processing packages will have this feature as part of its spell-
ing and/grammar checker, it will be of interest to the intelligence analyst 
to understand how it is calculated. The average sentence length is deter-
mined by taking the total number of words in the document and dividing 
it by the number of sentences. The average number of syllables per word 
is calculated by taking the total number of syllables divided by the total 
number of words. Step by step:
1.  Count all the words;
2.  Count all the syllables;
3.  Count all the sentences;
4.  Calculate the average number of syllables per word;

68 
Chapter 5
5.  Calculate the average number of words per sentence;
6.  Match the readability score.
Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level
The Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level analysis converts the Flesch Reading 
Ease score to a level equivalent to grade school rank (U.S.-based). The 
formula for calculating the score is: Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level = (0.39  
average sentence length) + (11.8  average syllables per word) – 15.59. For 
example, a score of 12 indicates that a person who has had a twelfth 
grade education could understand the text contained in the document. 
Step by step:
1.  Count all the words;
2.  Count all the syllables;
3.  Count all the sentences;
4.  Calculate the average number of syllables per word;
5.  Calculate the average number of words per sentence;
6.  Multiply the average number of words per sentence by 0.39, and add 
this number to the average number of syllables per word, which is 
multiplied by 11.8;
7.  Subtract 15.59 from the resulting number from step 6;
8.  Match the score with a U.S.-based school grade.
If a word processor or other software package is used to perform these 
calculations, note any limitations specified in the software as some results 
may only report a grade level of 12 even though the grade level exceeds 
this figure.
SECONDARY ANALYSIS OF DATA
Secondary analysis of data in a quantitative approach is like its close as-
sociate—content analysis, which relies on data that have been collected 
already. But rather than analyzing textual data, secondary analysis ana-
lyzes quantitative data for a second time; this examination is unconnected 
to the primary collection effort.
By way of example, intelligence analysts used secondary data analysis in 
the lead-up to the 1973 elections in France. At the time, decision makers in 
the United States were interested in knowing if a socialist-communist-left 
radical coalition was likely to form a government in France. Therefore, U.S. 
decision makers requested an intelligence assessment on the most likely 
outcome of the election. Intelligence analysts at the Central Intelligence 

 
Unobtrusive Data Collection 
69
Agency (CIA) were tasked with providing the assessment. Relying on exist-
ing data sets, CIA analysts used multiple regression analysis to gauge the 
impact various historical economic conditions had on the voting patterns 
of the left.5
Based on the results of this secondary analysis, analysts concluded that 
economic conditions did, in fact, impact elections but only in the absence 
of other important political considerations.6 The use of existing data sets 
allowed analysts to predict that the domestic political factors affecting the 
elections would not be as powerful as those in previous elections—therefore 
raising the potential of a left victory. However, these political factors were 
also assessed as being strong enough to ensure that the required number 
of votes would not go to a left coalition. Arguably, such analysis was only 
made possible by using this unobtrusive technique.
The amount of data collected by governments around the world for social 
and economic planning is extensive. There are census data, crime statistics, 
social data, educational data, economic data, and consumer data, just to 
mention a few. Data are also collected by private corporations, think tanks, 
and a variety of nongovernment organizations for their own planning pur-
poses, which are also available to outside researchers. Because these data 
are stored electronically, they can be imported into the software package 
being used by the analyst—say, a spreadsheet or a statistical package such 
as SPSS. As was seen in the 1973 French election example, CIA analysts 
used data from several databases to conduct their multiple regression 
analysis.
Secondary data analysis is an efficient means of conducting research. 
Preexisting data sets alleviate the problem of a potentially lengthy collec-
tion phase that, in some cases, may have taken months or years to collect. 
It also means the data may be available at no cost or a modest fee, thus 
making it inexpensive as well. If a pretext is used to obtain the data set, it 
will not alert the target (or target country or corporation) that they are the 
subject of an intelligence operation. For instance, most small intelligence 
research studies are unlikely to have a budget large enough to conduct a 
national sample (or international as in the French case cited) because of 
the cost and time required, but by using a census data set, even a small 
research budget can gain considerable leverage.
Secondary analysis does have some limitations. In the main, analysts 
may find it difficult to gain a full appreciation of the problems encoun-
tered during the original collection or the errors inherent in the resulting 
data sets so that these limitations can be taken into account when manipu-
lating the data during secondary analysis. It may also be a difficult task to 
link two or more data sets that have little in common—either by the struc-
ture of the database, the level of measurement (i.e., nominal, categorical, 
interval, or ratio), or units of measurement.

70 
Chapter 5
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Consistency;
•  Content analysis;
•  Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level analysis;
•  Flesch Reading Ease analysis;
•  Indirect data collection;
•  Open source information;
•  Psychoanalysis;
•  Psychohistorical analysis;
•  Psycholinguistic analysis;
•  Reliability;
•  Secondary analysis; and
•  Unobtrusive methods.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  Explain why unobtrusive data collection methods are considered 
intrinsically safe.
2.  Cite three unobtrusive information gathering techniques.
3.  Discuss one way an automated system for collecting indirect data 
can be set up using the Internet.
4.  Outline the main advantages of using unobtrusive methods.
5.  Explain how quantitative analysis can be conducted with unstructured 
data, say, in the form of a leader of a country’s public speeches.
6.  List five sources of secondary data.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Suppose that Country Q has had a sudden change of its leadership re-
gime. As such, the agents who were in place previously have lost access 
to all secret sources of data. Consider how you as an analyst might use 
“Not everything that counts can be counted, and not everything that can be 
counted counts.”
—Albert Einstein

 
Unobtrusive Data Collection 
71
unobtrusive data collection methods in the short term to provide the intel-
ligence needed to monitor the situation until field operatives reestablish 
their agent network(s).
NOTES
1. Harry Howe Ransom, The Intelligence Establishment (Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press, 1971), 19. Professor Ransom was quoting Ellis M. Zacha-
rias, a World War II deputy director of the Office of Naval Intelligence. According 
to Zacharias, only 4 percent of intelligence came from semi-open sources, and a 
mere 1 percent from secret agents.
2. Ransom, The Intelligence Establishment, 20.
3. See, for example: Henry Prunckun, “It’s Your Money They’re After: Sting 
Operations in Consumer Fraud Investigation,” Police Studies 11, no. 4 (Winter 
1988): 190–94; Henry Prunckun, “Sting Operations in Consumer Fraud Investiga-
tion,” Journal of California Law Enforcement 23, no. 1 (1989): 27–32.
4. Rick Sarre and Tim Prenzler, The Law of Private Security in Australia, 2nd edi-
tion (Pyrmont, Australia: Thomson Lawbook, 2009).
5. Susan Koch and Fred Grupp, “Regression Analysis: Impact of Economic 
Conditions on Left Voting in France,” in Quantitative Approaches to Political Intel-
ligence: The CIA Experience, ed. Richards J. Heuer (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 
1978).
6. Koch and Grupp, “Regression Analysis,” 57.

72
0
c
Chapter Title
72
6
c
Covert Sources of Information
T
his topic examines secret sources of information in the context of the 
wider spectrum of data available, including information that can be 
obtained from:
1.  Open sources;
2.  Semi-open sources;
3.  Clandestine sources; and
4.  Covert sources.
INTRODUCTION
The spectrum of information sources includes open, semi-open, clandes-
tine, and covert. This chapter examines covert sources of data that are 
available to the intelligence analyst. Because of their intrinsically safe na-
ture, open and semi-open sources of information do not require the same 
high level of planning and consideration when compared to organizing 
data to be collected by clandestine and covert means.
Open and semi-open sources can be dealt with in an up-front way 
with the analyst’s approaching the source and making a request for the 
data. This includes approaches such as interviews, surveys, question-
naires, and other forms of direct data collection. These particular meth-
ods are adequately covered in the literature relating to applied social 
science research, so analysts are referred to this body of information. 
These topics are only touched on here.

 
Covert Sources of Information 
73
Clandestine data collection, although akin to covert collection, is dif-
ferent in that clandestine operations operate in the open—visible to the 
target but disguised so that they do not appear to be what they seem. Co-
vert operations, in contrast, are carried out in secret. They are hidden and 
not visible to the target even in a disguised form; they are to some degree 
intrusive, but because they are invisible, the target has no knowledge that 
an operation is being conducted.
These methods are discussed here and include: undercover agents, 
physical surveillance, electronic surveillance, informants, mail covers, 
and waste collection. Analysts may want to use these methods in their 
collection plans because an attempt to obtain information via open and 
semi-open methods might be met with a nil result. For instance, covert 
methods are used where the target is concealing information. The only 
way to obtain such data under these circumstances might be to penetrate 
the security measures via covert methods.
OPEN AND SEMI-OPEN SOURCES
Because we live in an age where information is central to every aspect of 
life, an astonishing variety of obligations have been placed on individuals 
to recorded information about their affairs. The same applies to corporate 
bodies and governments. It is because of these record systems that society 
generates what has become known as a paper trail.
A paper trail can be described as all records and documents created 
by an individual or entity in the course of commercial and social interac-
tion with other individuals, organizations, government departments, and 
businesses (both public and private). These records and documents have 
the effect of leaving a trail detailing where the individual (or entity) has 
been, with whom they have had dealings, what goods and services they 
have purchased, what they own, what their likes and dislikes are, and 
more importantly, what their intentions may be.
To the analyst, this trail forms a composite picture for any target that 
comes under surveillance. Uncovering one part of the paper trail can lead 
the analyst to other sources of information. These sources are not only 
limited to those on paper but also can be extended to interviews with 
friends, neighbors, and colleagues of the target, perhaps using a pretext 
as well as physical, optical, or electronic surveillance.
To the analyst, the paper trail is a valuable set of leads. The value of 
this information in a collated and analyzed form can be seen in the arrests 
reported in the media from time to time of influential organized crime 
members that were, until that point, untouchable by law enforcement 
agencies.

74 
Chapter 6
Sources of open and semi-open information are by no means limited. 
Open source information (abbreviated OSINT for open source intelli-
gence) can be obtained from newspapers, magazines, professional jour-
nals, radio and television broadcasts, and the Internet. Arguably, until 
the terrorist attacks of 9/11, intelligence analysts used these sources of 
information simply as a means of supplementing classified information. 
The importance of systematically collecting and analyzing open source 
information did not become a priority for the intelligence community un-
til after these attacks. For instance, the effective mining of Internet-based 
information has enabled the intelligence community to better understand 
how jihadists use the Internet’s web-television capabilities, chat rooms, 
and news sites to train their members and raise money.1
Figure 6.1. Some of the texts on secret intelligence 
held by the Russell J. Bowen Collection of Works on 
Intelligence, Security, and Covert Activities at George-
town University.

 
Covert Sources of Information 
75
Examples of more traditional sources of information include but are not 
limited to: telephone directories (both current and backdated); city direc-
tories; vehicle license plates; drivers’ licenses; birth, death, and marriage 
records; civil and criminal court records; property titles, mortgage docu-
ments, liens, and caveats; school records; voter registration lists; credit 
reporting agencies; utility companies; credit card companies; insurance 
companies; stockbrokers; moving companies; chambers of commerce; 
racing or gaming commissions; banks and finance companies; the postal 
authority; numerous government departments, agencies, and statutory 
bodies (local, state, and national); and employment agencies.
A sometimes overlooked source of information is the public and uni-
versity library. In addition to the wealth of information contained in 
the library’s stacks, libraries have reference books, maps, newspapers, 
journals, periodicals, registers, and catalogs. There are also special col-
lections within libraries and privately maintained computer databases 
that contain topics of particular interest. An example of the former is the 
Russell J. Bowen Collection of Works on Intelligence, Security, and Covert 
Activities, which is housed in the Lauinger Library, Georgetown Univer-
sity, Washington, DC (see fig. 6.1).
The United States has its government printer, the Library of Congress, 
Congressional Record, National Archives, and information available 
through the Freedom of Information Act. In most liberal democracies, 
there exist equivalents to the freedom of information legislation as well 
as equivalents to the holdings of the U.S. archives cited. Finally, there are 
public radio and television broadcasts, which have the potential of pro-
viding an extremely wide range of information, as do photographic and 
motion picture archives.
UNDERCOVER AGENTS
The objective of the undercover agent is to infiltrate “as deep as possible and 
[gather information] on the opposition or enemy.”2
Undercover agents are able to get close to individuals or inside organiza-
tions to make firsthand observations. The use of agents is risky for the 
agents and the organization for which they are employed. These risks are 
both physical and psychological.
The agent risks physical harm in the form of bodily injury and death as 
well as a range of psychological injuries spanning from mild anxiety to 

76 
Chapter 6
severe psychiatric disorders. The physical risks are more apparent as one 
can easily visualize the ramifications of having to penetrate an illegal en-
terprise. The psychological injuries arise from the stresses associated with 
working in isolation, working in a dangerous environment, and perhaps 
engaging in activity that is illegal (including consuming illicit drugs and 
alcohol in binge quantities).
The data that can be obtained from an undercover agent can be very 
valuable because it is an opportunity to get a glimpse of the target’s inten-
tions, thereby providing an insight into the target’s thinking, rationale, and 
behaviors that could not be obtained by other means. However, given the 
risks and the monetary costs of “running” an agent, it is a method that is not 
often used in the first instance. It is usually reserved as a means of last resort 
or for targets that pose a serious danger to society or national security.
Because the agent will be in direct contact with the target, there are a 
number of issues that must be kept in mind. The most important is that 
the agent’s identity must be guarded with utmost secrecy. If knowledge 
of the agent leaks to the target, the agent’s cover will not only be “blown,” 
but also the agent is likely to suffer injury.
Part of the agent’s brief is to obtain evidence of wrongdoing but also 
intelligence data. Evidence may be in the form of admissions, but intel-
ligence data may be in the form of indicators of intent. To capture these 
data, the agent can either commit the details to memory and then record 
them later for transmission back to the analyst’s agency or use some elec-
tronic device that transmits the data live for recording and transcription. 
The latter is the most reliable and the best solution as it doesn’t rely on the 
agent’s ability to remember the details, which, from an intelligence point 
of view, can be critical. Data can be qualitative (e.g., discussions with 
the target) and quantitative (e.g., numbers of items, times, routes, colors, 
preferences, and so on).
INFORMANTS
Using informants to gather information places a safe distance between 
agency’s operatives and the target. An informant is someone who has 
indicated willingness to assist the agency in achieving its goals—whether 
that is to arrest a drug trafficker, close down a trademark infringement 
ring, or sell state secrets to a friendly government. Informants do these 
things for a variety of reasons. As T. J. Waters discussed in his memoirs 
Class 11: Inside the CIA’s First Post-9/11 Spy Class:
Values + beliefs = behavior. This is what you need to keep in mind. Know 
your target’s motivations in the context of their values and beliefs. Values 

 
Covert Sources of Information 
77
govern behavior as motivation for our actions. Beliefs are how we express 
our values to ourselves and others. . . . We must understand the agent’s 
history, the background fundamentals of how they became who they are in 
order to understand their motivations.3
The processes for informant handling vary from agency to agency and 
from informant to informant, but in general, the process of employing 
an informant starts with some form of “registration.” This serves several 
purposes, the main being accountability of the funds (or other gratuities) 
that will ultimately be paid to the informant for service.
Corruption is a temptation when running informants because the 
system relies on the honesty of the informant handlers to pass over the 
full amount of funds without “skimming” any for themselves. Also, 
there is the temptation to run fictitious informants in order to collect 
payment; this ruse was made legendary by Graham Greene in his book 
Our Man in Havana, whose main character, Jim Wormold, ran an entire 
spy network that did not exist but regularly passed on fictitious intel-
ligence reports.4
As such, informants are photographed, fingerprinted, and their vital 
statistics recorded on an official register. This register is maintained by 
the agency, and the data it contains are classified so only those that have a 
need-to-know can access it. This helps to protect the informant’s identity 
and, therefore, safety.
The data that informants can provide will vary greatly—from accurate 
and reliable down to inaccurate and unreliable. If the informants are not 
trained in observation skills or memory retention techniques, the data 
they will provide may be sketchy. If however, they are trained—as in the 
case of a foreign intelligence operative who has “swapped sides”—the 
data may be very sound. To overcome training shortcomings, a listening 
device may be employed (such as a body transmitter), but this option may 
be reserved to where the informant is only used once or twice as the risk 
of discovery and personal harm is great—with each use, the chance of 
detection increases. Also, there has to be an agency listening post nearby 
to receive the transmitter’s signals and record the audio. Having a van 
or other vehicle containing the listening post equipment parked near the 
target’s location may unduly raise suspicion.
If an apartment is rented close by to set up a more permanent listening 
post, this will incur added financial costs and open up another possible 
source of leaks—for instance the realtor or landlord may “talk” if the agency 
has rented the property openly without using a cover. If the agency has 
rented the premises under a cover, the foot traffic in and out of the building 
may expose the operation. As with undercover agents, the use of an infor-
mant to gather data must be weighed against a number of risks: exposure of 

78 
Chapter 6
the operation, harm to the informant, the likelihood of obtaining the infor-
mation sought, and the likelihood of obtaining that information accurately.
In regard to the last point, it will always be the case that the analyst 
needs to try to verify the accuracy and reliability of the informant’s data. 
There may be many ways of doing this, but one example is to compare 
the data against similar information provided by the same source. What-
ever way it is done, it should be borne in mind that there is some degree 
of uncertainty inherent in running informants. Their motivation can be 
greed, revenge, or exchange for some favor (e.g., reduced jail sentence), 
anything but the pursuit of truth.
PHYSICAL SURVEILLANCE
Operatives “assigned to a surveillance operation should possess a reason-
able amount of resourcefulness and adaptability so that [they] can effectively 
blend with the environment, both in appearance and conduct.”5
Physical surveillance is the act of making observations of people, vehicles, 
or the activities occurring at specific locations. Many research methodolo-
gies use observation as the key means of collecting data. This can take the 
form of a researcher standing on a street corner and counting pedestrians 
as they pass by or as they enter a building, or it could be a data collector 
who records the number of vehicles that pass a particular intersection or 
travel along a suburban street. Surveillance used in intelligence opera-
tions is usually covert and takes the form of either moving surveillance 
or fixed surveillance.
Physical surveillance may take place either at a particular location, 
which is known as a stakeout, or in a continually moving situation, re-
ferred to as a tail. Physical surveillance is often used to supplement 
information which has been obtained from open or semi-open sources. 
It can also be used early in an operation to accelerate the generation of 
leads, corroborate existing information, or obtain details that would not 
be available through other avenues of inquiry.
Fixed surveillance is a tedious and time consuming activity, but its value 
should never be underestimated. Its strength lies with the field operative, 
who is tasked with a single mission—to obtain details about the target. 
The results can be pivotal to any intelligence research project. Unlike social 
research where a data collector stands in the open with a clipboard and 
counts passersby, the covert surveillance officer, termed an operative, may sit 
for hours in the darkened interior of a van or in the backseat of a car, video 
recording the comings and goings of the target and associates.

 
Covert Sources of Information 
79
Moving surveillance is when the operative follows the target. The objec-
tives of the moving surveillance are the same as a fixed surveillance but, 
in addition, tailing the target wherever they go. The most common form 
of moving surveillance is via car as this is the usual mode of transporta-
tion people use. Surveillance on public transport—aircraft, bus, train, and 
tram—is also possible, but the level of risk of detection increases as fol-
lowing a target in such close proximity makes the operative’s task more 
difficult.
A benefit of covert surveillance is to validate the information coming 
from undercover agents and informants. For instance, a surveillance op-
erative should be able to independently verify that, say, an informant did 
meet with the target on the day and time provided by an informant. Al-
though it is highly unlikely that the operative will be in a position to verify 
what was said between the parties, validating the meeting may go a long 
way in establishing an informant’s creditability, especially if the pattern is 
repeated. However, there may be other ways of validating the details of a 
meeting if a surveillance operative is able to video the meeting.
For instance, the length of the meeting may be able to suggest whether 
the details the informant has purported during the conversation—a two 
minute conversation on a street corner outside a coffee shop is not con-
sistent with details of a long planning meeting over a lengthy meal at a 
restaurant. Surveillance would be able to shed light on this. Likewise, the 
body language of the two as they talk may be an indicator of how well 
the meeting went—was there aggravation, frustration, disbelief, threats, 
or did it conclude with mutual admiration, gratitude, and a relaxed atmo-
sphere? Such independent observations could prove valuable in supple-
menting or validating other covertly obtained data. The important point 
is that surveillance is actual observations, not self-reported information; 
the latter can be subject to any number of biases.
OPTICAL SURVEILLANCE
Because operatives rely so heavily on their eyesight in conducting physi-
cal surveillance, various devices are used to assist them to extend their 
vision. Using technology also assists operatives to position themselves 
much further away from the target than could normally be achieved with 
unaided sight, thus reducing the possibility of discovery (see fig. 6.2).
The principal and traditional device used in physical surveillance is 
a pair of binoculars. Binoculars are an optical device consisting of two 
prism-operated telescopes fixed in parallel. This configuration enables an 
operative (sometime termed the surveillant) to view a magnified image of 
the subject using both eyes. Binoculars have been designed to provide both 
magnifying power and light gathering capabilities. The latter is essential 

80 
Chapter 6
for surveillance work at dusk and at night. Binoculars that have a built-in 
digital camera are also available commercially.
Viewing a subject at distances that exceed the effective range of binoculars 
is accomplished by using a telescope. The magnifying power of the telescope 
ranges from 20 to several hundred times that of normal vision. Binoculars, in 
comparison, range from about 6 to 20 times that of normal vision.
A viewing device usually at home in submarines, but sometimes used 
in land-based information gathering, is the periscope. Small, portable 
high quality devices are used to peer into high, inaccessible windows, 
over walls, and around corners. Periscopes are also used in applications 
such as surveillance vans (e.g., mounted on the roof).
Recent developments in optical technology have now made low light 
(night) viewers available at affordable prices. These units are designated 
as either “active” or “passive” night vision devices. The first group, the 
active devices, are devices that operate by using an infrared light beam. 
The surveillant projects the invisible beam of energy so that it illuminates 
the subject. The image is then viewed with special equipment, which 
converts the infrared radiation into the visible light spectrum. The sec-
ond range of devices operates by amplifying the existing background 
light—moon, stars, street lights, and so on—by several thousand times, 
thus literally turning night into day through the sights of the surveillant’s 
night scope.
Figure 6.2. Covert optical surveillance of illegal fishing—Port 
Roper near the Gulf of Carpentaria, Australia (photograph by 
Intelligence Officer Nathan McGrath of the Northern Territory 
Police, Fire, and Emergency Services, Australia).

 
Covert Sources of Information 
81
COVERT PHOTOGRAPHY
By far, the most commonly used camera in covert photography is a digital 
single lens reflex (SLR) (which replaced the older 35 millimeter film-based 
camera). However, in some unique situations, such as surreptitious copy-
ing of documents, a subminiature camera would usually be employed. 
The value of subminiature cameras lies in their concealable size (e.g., mo-
bile/cell phones with built-in cameras). Nevertheless, the advantage of 
digital SLRs are their fast (light sensitive) lenses. The ability to download 
images, edit them using commercial software, and send them over the 
Internet applies to all digital photography.
As with binoculars and telescopes in physical observation, telephoto 
lenses play an important role in covert photography. A reflective mirror 
lens (catadioptric) not only enables a surveillant to greatly reduce the 
physical size of his equipment, making concealment easier, it acts to extend 
the agent’s operational distances. Basically, catadioptric lenses use a system 
of mirrors to compress the light’s optical path. Magnification (measured in 
the focal length of the lens) varies from about 100 to 2,000 millimeters.
Digital video cameras are also popular for surveillance work. These 
cameras are no larger than SLRs—and, in a growing number of models, 
smaller—so they are often used with a telephoto lens, thus allowing sur-
veillants to record their observations from safe distances. In the case of a 
fixed position surveillance (a stakeout), a time-lapse option can be used 
to provide extended coverage from a single digital memory device. In or-
der to achieve this, time-lapse photography operates in a frame-by-frame 
mode at greatly reduced memory (25 frames per second is considered 
real-time recording). Many state-of-the-art video cameras can be built into 
such items as briefcases, books, wall clocks, paintings, and plants.
AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHY
Aerial photography from both rotary and fixed wing aircraft is another ef-
fective method of information gathering. The history of aerial surveillance 
dates back to the mid-nineteenth century when the first photograph was 
taken from a French military (hot air) balloon.
Since that time, many developments have occurred in the area of pho-
toreconnaissance. The technology currently available ranges from recon-
naissance satellites and ultra-sophisticated spy planes down to the light 
plane-for-hire with conventional handheld photographic equipment. The 
former, of course, are used by intelligence agencies of various nations, while 
the latter would probably be used on a rental basis by smaller agencies on 
an ad hoc basis.

82 
Chapter 6
Internet-based mapping facilities give analysts an easy and cost-effective 
option for obtaining aerial photographs. Websites provide satellite images 
of the earth and cover almost all locations on the globe. Intelligence analysts 
can select several different types of views: satellite imagery, maps, and 
terrain, or combinations. Street-level views are also available. Although 
these sources would not be practical for the analyst who is monitoring 
an arms control agreement (for the most part, these are static images re-
freshed only occasionally), they may be all that is needed to brief a local 
police or private investigation surveillance team as to, say, reconnoiter the 
terrain surrounding the target’s place of business.
ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE
Electronic surveillance is most likely to be in the form of audio surveillance 
(i.e., room listening devices or bugs), telephonic intercepts, or Internet-
based intercepts. There are other forms of electronic surveillance, such as 
radio frequency intercepts (i.e., the interception of radio transmissions), but 
the most commonly used intercepts are from these three methods.
Audio Surveillance
The fundamental principle of any audio surveillance operation is to be able 
to plant a quality microphone as near as possible to the target and, in doing 
so, avoid background noise that may render the intercept unintelligible. The 
types of microphones used in audio surveillance are required by the nature 
of the work to be very small and are referred to in the trade as subminiature. 
Their minute size allows them to be secretly deployed in the target’s envi-
ronment. Once in place, they can be connected to a high gain amplifier, then 
to headphones (for live monitoring), a digital recorder (for listening at a later 
time), or a transmitter to relay the audio to a listening post.
If a transmitter is not used to send the intercepted audio, then wires are 
needed; the wires leading from the microphone to the listening/amplify-
ing equipment must be concealed to prevent detection. In some cases, 
existing wires such as telephone, electrical, or even, paradoxically, burglar 
alarm wires can be used instead of running new wires, thus making detec-
tion more difficult. There are also special metal paints on the market which 
an operative can use to “paint” wires across a room. Once touched up with 
paint of the surrounding decor, these “wires” are reported to be very dif-
ficult to detect (especially if used in an industrial or warehouse setting).
There are several types of microphones the surveillant can use depend-
ing on the particular situation. They are the tube, contact/spike, pneu-
matic, and directional microphones.

 
Covert Sources of Information 
83
Tube microphones are designed to be inserted into a targeted room via 
a very small drill hole. This species of microphone consists of an element 
connected to a thin tube. The tube emerges flush with the wall in the 
targeted room and can only be detected by very close inspection. Tube 
microphones are likely to be located in spots made classic in spy novels—
behind a wall, a picture, a piece of furniture, anything that would hinder 
detection for as long as possible.
Contact and spike microphones, in contrast, require less effort to secure 
their installation. These microphones do not respond to air vibration as a 
conventional microphone does but rather translate vibration into sound. 
Contact microphones are similar to the “pick-ups” used by musicians to 
amplify their instruments, and spike microphones resemble the vintage 
phonograph needle. These types of microphones are attached to the exte-
rior of a wall, window, floor, or ceiling. Once in place, these devices will 
reproduce quite clearly the sounds produced within the targeted room. 
These microphones lend themselves well to permanent installation.
The pneumatic cavity microphone is the electronic version of the drink-
ing glass placed against the wall trick, historically recognized as an effec-
tive method for monitoring adjacent room conversations. The pneumatic 
microphone is substantially superior and operates by using a specially 
constructed shell which is highly responsive to surface vibrations at audio 
frequencies found in the range of human speech. This “cavity” is used 
in conjunction with a conventional microphone element to enhance the 
Figure 6.3. Drinking glass placed against the wall 
trick.

84 
Chapter 6
device’s performance. It also forces audio output to correspond to a wall’s 
surface (or window, floor, or ceiling, depending on the case) vibrations 
rather than a direct sound output.
Directional microphones are of two types: parabolic and shotgun. 
Parabolic microphones consist of a “dish” with an inwardly pointing 
microphone element. The targeted audio is reflected and focused into the 
microphone element, thus gaining a directional effect. The shotgun mi-
crophone (also known as a rifle or machine gun mic) operates on the same 
principle but utilizes a long tube, or set of tubes, in a cluster to pinpoint 
the targeted conversation. The effective range of these microphones is 
reported to be about 150 meters, and they are known to be able to pick up 
audio through closed windows at closer distances.
Radio transmitters offer an agent much greater degree of safety from detec-
tion because installation requires far less effort than a hardwired device.
Another area of audio surveillance, discussed briefly above, is that of wire-
less microphones, also known as miniature radio transmitters. These devices 
rank further up the hierarchy in surveillance sophistication. These devices 
do not have any wires or connections to reveal their location. They can be 
attached to furniture or fixtures by means of a magnet or adhesive surface or 
concealed in everyday objects such as rings, pens, cigarette lighters, books, 
ashtrays, or pictures. Transmitters do not require the eavesdropper, or his 
equipment, to be located nearby. Their range of transmission varies from 
60 meters to almost a kilometer. It is directly dependent upon transmitter 
strength, the thickness of surrounding walls, the sensitivity and selectivity 
of the receiver, as well as its antenna system.
Body transmitters are generally larger, more powerful, and better 
constructed than wireless microphones. This is because the chance of de-
tection is slight, and the device is intended to be used repeatedly. These 
devices are designed to operate from an operative’s coat pocket, under-
clothing, or attached by tape directly to the agent’s body.
Akin to the body transmitter is the briefcase transmitter. Not only can this 
device be used by a “walk-in spy,” but it can be conveniently “forgotten” in 
the target’s room or office in order to obtain ensuing conversations.
Another type of electronic surveillance transmitter operates by broadcast-
ing in the very low frequency range (VLF is between 3 kHz and 30 kHz). 
This device uses electrical power lines for signal transmission. The signals 
move along the wire path, and, because of the device’s very low frequency, 
very little energy is radiated into space. This method of communication is 
used by many of the household wireless intercoms sold commercially.

 
Covert Sources of Information 
85
Communication equipment which operates outside of the standard FM 
radio broadcast frequencies tends to be more secure from interception (that 
is, outside of the 88 MHz to 108 MHz frequency range). This is because 
the radio receivers needed for this type of radio reception are not sold in 
regular retail outlets. Nevertheless, they are available commercially at ra-
dio and electronic stores and are a common feature in the radio rooms of 
radio amateurs (i.e., “ham radio”). There is also a cadre of radio enthusiasts 
known as listeners who scan the radio spectrum listening for any unusual 
content or sources. They have high-gain antennas and receivers that scan 
many hundreds of individual radio frequencies each second and, as such, 
could detect the conversation collected by a bug. If there is a chance of this, 
the radio technician who will oversee the bug installation should consider 
the use of a scrambler or other form of encryption.
Some receivers operate in the microwave part of the radio spectrum, 
such as those used by telephone companies for telecommunications and 
by private enterprises for computer data transmission. Such receivers are 
complicated in design and expensive; although, military and governmen-
tal intelligence agencies would have ready access to these. Units used for 
intercepting microwave communications can be set up in a van or build-
ing anywhere along the path between the transmitter and the receiver, 
which could be several hundred kilometers long.
Several devices, although not specifically designed for surveillance 
work, are worthy of a brief note because their function provides the op-
eratives with an increased scope of application. These are the drop-out 
relay, the voice-operated relay (VOX), and the carrier switch.
The drop-out relay is attached to the target’s telephone line and then 
wired to a transmitter. It will switch the bug on whenever the hand piece 
is lifted from its cradle and off when it is replaced. This prolongs battery 
life, and because the bug is not transmitting continuously, it lowers the 
risk of being detected by an electronic countermeasures sweep.
A VOX is similar in purpose to the drop-out relay. If connected to a 
room transmitter, the bug remains dormant until activated by the sound 
of a voice or noise. The VOX turns the bug on and off as individuals enter 
and leave the targeted room.
Finally, a carrier switch can be used to start and stop a digital recorder 
when it receives an audio signal, and it can be activated by a hidden trans-
mitter. Employed in conjunction with a drop-out relay or a VOX, the switch 
carrier increases exponentially the surveillance capabilities of the operative.
Telephone Intercepts
The telephone is a very useful medium for electronic surveillance. Obtain-
ing information using the telephone involves two methods: the first uses 
devices that intercept conversation directly from landlines and requires 

86 
Chapter 6
no entry into the target’s property, and the second is one that uses a 
portion of the telephone system for room eavesdropping and usually re-
quires physical access to some part of the telephone system.
Wiretaps
Wiretapping is the interception of fixed line telephone and facsimile com-
munication, as well as computer data that are transmitted over landlines. 
The interception of these signals can take place anywhere between the 
target’s location and those of the surveillant. The more difficult parts of 
the telephone system to install a device are at the target’s property and 
the lines leading out of that building. Once the targeted line(s) leaves the 
building and melds with the wider telephone network, interception is far 
less difficult because with a court ordered warrant, a surveillant can install 
unobtrusive equipment with greater ease.
Because the telephone company provides all of the electrical power 
required to operate a target’s telephone service, this medium offers great 
eavesdropping benefits to operatives. For example, the telephone’s power 
supply can be used to directly operate electronic eavesdropping devices; the 
wires themselves can be used to carry the resulting audio signals, and the 
microphone in the handset can be used to listen in on room conversations.
The techniques used to tap conversation from telephone lines consist 
of: (a) direct wire connections and (b) induction coils. In direct wire con-
nections, the lines are cut, and the listening device spliced in place, using 
an electronic matching network. With induction coils, the tapping process 
literally lifts the audio signals off the telephone line and, therefore, does 
not require splicing. For this reason, induction coils can prove to be unde-
tectable by electronic countermeasure sweeps. The only effective way to 
detect this type of bug is by visual inspection of the telephone wiring.
An alternative to direct wire connections is a radio system. This is the 
same as the wireless microphones described previously, except that it 
requires no microphone element. This is because the audio signals are 
already in an electrical form. Radio systems use the telephone line voltage 
for power, as opposed to batteries, and transmit whatever conversations 
are on the targeted line to a remote receiver/digital recorder.
The placement of telephone surveillance devices can be quite arbitrary; 
the only limit to their deployment would be the ability of an operative to 
gain access to the target’s telephone system. The devices may be installed 
within the telephone instrument itself, anywhere along the line in the 
targeted building, on a telephone pole outside the building, or in the wire 
closet or terminal room where the lines are joined to the branch feeder 
cable.

 
Covert Sources of Information 
87
There are several other electronic telephone surveillance devices which 
allow an operative to record the telephone numbers and dates when di-
aled by a target but do not permit the recording of the conversation. These 
are the dial impulse recorder, commonly referred to as a pen register, and 
the touch tone decoder. They operate simply by counting the impulses in 
each dial pulse group, that is, the digit dialed. An alternative to these two 
devices is the variable speed tape recorder. This operates by recording 
the desired conversation, then replaying it at a reduced speed so that the 
impulses can be counted to determine the number dialed.
The harmonica bug, or infinity transmitter, is an eavesdropping device 
used for planting within the telephone instrument itself. This device con-
sists of a tone controlled switch, coupled with an audio amplifier and a 
microphone. Although it uses the telephone system, the device functions 
as a room eavesdropper as opposed to a telephone conversation intercep-
tor. The infinity transmitter uses the existing telephone lines for convey-
ing the surreptitiously acquired conversation. It is activated from an 
infinite distance by a tone generator similar to those used by answering 
machines. The tone is said to be a note produced by a harmonica, hence 
its alternative name.
In order to operate the infinity transmitter, the operative dials the 
target’s telephone number, which can be local, interstate, or interna-
tional. After dialing the number, but before the telephone rings, a tone 
is sounded into the operative’s telephone mouthpiece. On the target 
end of the telephone, the infinity transmitter receives the audio tone 
and switches the device to answer this telephone electrically rather than 
physically. If this is performed correctly, the target telephone should not 
ring. This, in effect, means that the telephone is working even though the 
hand piece still remains on the cradle. Once operational, the surveillant 
may monitor the room conversation. If the subject attempts to use the 
telephone, the operative simply hangs up, and the device is electrically 
disconnected, returning the instrument to normal operation.
There are several other techniques directed at modifying the telephone 
instrument for eavesdropping. This form of electronic surveillance ex-
ploits the normal operation of the entire telephone system. By shorting 
or bypassing the hook switch on the instrument, the telephone becomes 
a live microphone. This technique is known as telephone “compromis-
ing.”
Another dimension to electronic surveillance is systems that operate 
by using directional beams of light energy. These systems are based on 
the use of laser beams of either visible or infrared energy to convey their 
intercepted audio. They are reported to be quite reliable and virtually 
undetectable. The system consists of a laser light source, which focuses 

88 
Chapter 6
its beam on a window in a targeted room, and an optical receiving/
decoding device. The system operates by detecting minute vibrations of 
the reflected beam caused by the room’s audio. Decoding of these vibra-
tions reproduces the conversation or sounds within.
Interception of computer data can be accomplished in similar ways to 
eavesdropping on room conversations. With data interception, the legiti-
mate user’s data transfer is intercepted through a suitable wiretap or bug 
and either recorded or transmitted to a listening post as is done in the case 
of audio. With the interception of computer data, an agent monitors the 
data exchange from terminal to main computer, thereby tabulating input 
data and computer responses.
Pen Registers
There are also devices that allow operatives to collect data relating to the 
telephone number dialed by a target (known as a pen register) or to collect 
the telephone number that dials the target (known as a trap-and-trace de-
vice). The possession and use of these devices are governed by legislation, 
and laws vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
Pen registers are usually manufactured to only record details such as 
the target’s telephone area code, number, and, where an extension tele-
phone is used, the number of the extension dialed. In the main, the reason 
why pen registers are not capable of collecting what is termed “transac-
tional data” is that the data input by touchtone telephones—for instance 
an account number or a PIN number—would require another form of 
court order (i.e., warrant). Therefore, a pen register that is only capable of 
recording numbers avoids inadvertent breaches of an electronic intercep-
tion warrant.
Internet-Based Intercepts
Apart from some university and government research libraries, the In-
ternet is arguably the wealthiest source of information for analysts. It is 
not only a source for published material but also the private messages 
transmitted over the Internet (e.g., email). Businesses, governments, and 
individuals all create, access, or modify records of numerous descriptions 
that are located on computer servers connected to the Internet. Because 
these data exist in digital form on magnetic media, this realm is known 
as cyberspace.
In general, analysts can obtain data without a warrant if the data are 
placed in the public domain. This is analogous to the physical world 
where access is not restricted—public libraries, commercially published 
books and magazines, and newspapers. However, where access could be 

 
Covert Sources of Information 
89
considered “private” by a court, then some form of order is likely to be 
needed. By and large, the laws pertaining to telephonic intercepts apply 
to intercepting data in cyberspace, and in many jurisdictions, laws have 
been enacted to cover online searches.
AUDIO SURVEILLANCE LIMITATIONS
For obvious reasons, it is impossible to determine the extent of electronic 
eavesdropping that is carried out by the intelligence community each year; 
although, from media reports, it appears to be quite widely used and not 
limited to any one intelligence type. If a target suspects he or she is the sub-
ject of a wiretap or bug, an audio countermeasure sweep is the usual way 
the target will try to determine if an operation is underway.
The sweep, however, will reveal devices operating at that given time 
only. It must be stressed that no room can be guaranteed to be proof 
against audio surveillance. In the past, even the most sensitive rooms in 
the United States embassy in Moscow have been reported to have been 
penetrated. Conducting sweeps at nonconstant intervals is the target’s 
most effective way of countering an intelligence agency’s audio surveil-
lance. It is the most reliable way to check for, and clear, audio surveillance 
devices.
There are limitations, however, to this type of countermeasure. Firstly, 
with regard to telephones, even if the target’s telephone instrument(s) 
appears to be clear at the time of a sweep, there is no way of determining 
whether the telephone of another party is under surveillance by inspect-
ing the target’s end of the line. There is also no technology available 
to date which can check for listening devices at, or beyond, the central 
telephone exchange. Secondly, there are some state-of-the-art devices 
and techniques used by intelligence agencies that may be undetectable 
because of their high level of technical sophistication.
Audio countermeasure sweeps are conducted by both specialist 
business counterintelligence firms and by private investigators. Such 
services are usually listed in the Yellow Pages of the telephone direc-
tory. A professional sweep usually includes both a thorough physical 
search—inspecting literally every inch of and every object in the sus-
pected area—and an electronic sweep. The electronic sweep may utilize 
a broadband receiver (like those used by ham radio operators) and/or 
a specially designed field-strength meter to test for transmitters. Metal 
detectors can be used to hunt for bugs in nonmetallic objects and 
deeply planted devices in walls, floors, and ceilings. There are also a 
wide range of diagnostic meters used to test the telephone line voltage 
for the presence of wire taps.

90 
Chapter 6
PLACEMENT OF SURVEILLANCE DEVICES
If audio surveillance devices were to be placed in the target’s property, 
it could be done by one or more of the following time-proven espionage 
methods:
•  Friendly access;
•  Surreptitious entry;
•  Infiltration; or
•  Secreted in a gift.
Friendly Access
Access to a target’s building may be limited to employees and visitors 
who are known or have appointments. All other visitors may be screened 
and their identities verified prior to entry. People making deliveries, 
including mail deliveries and maintenance workers, may be handled in 
the same manner. Access to offices could be on a restricted, need-to-be-
there basis. If visitor/staff traffic is heavy, a system of custom designed 
identity cards to be worn by employees would be an efficient method 
of establishing “friend” or “foe.” Toilets and other isolated places might 
be checked at the end of the day’s business for operatives hiding in the 
building.
Surreptitious Entry
Break-ins and burglaries are not an uncommon occurrence for busi-
nesses and private homes to experience. However, in June 1972, Wa-
tergate underscored the reality that break-ins are not only a method 
for acquiring cash and valuable physical assets but also are also a tech-
nique for information gathering.6 In intelligence work, this technique 
is referred to as a black bag operation. Surreptitious entries are used to 
plant surveillance devices or to carry out other covert intelligence gath-
ering activities. From the viewpoint of the operative, this is encourag-
ing as short of creating a mini-fortress, there is nothing that will make 
an office 100 percent burglar-proof—even Buckingham Palace has had 
its intruder.
Infiltration Using a Pretext, Ruse, or Disguise
A pretext offers an operative acting on behalf of the intelligence analyst 
a plausible, common sense technique for obtaining confidential informa-
tion. A pretext is any act of deception—ruse, subterfuge, ploy, trick, or 
disguise—that allows an agent to solicit information by a false reason. This 

 
Covert Sources of Information 
91
includes entering premises for obtaining information or being in a place 
that an operative wouldn’t otherwise have access to or permission for.
“The art of using pretexts is a science and should be approached as one.”7
Pretext should not be confused with the term social engineering, which 
has gained popularity in recent years. Social engineering is a slang term 
that commonly refers to an individual act of manipulation (usually for 
fraudulent purposes) to gain access to IT systems. This is vastly differ-
ent from its true meaning, which is large-scale societal planning. The use 
of the term social engineering in this context is incorrect. The technique is 
nothing more than a ruse, subterfuge, or pretext. In fact, pretext is the term 
most used by private investigators—PIs rely heavily on this technique as 
a means of gaining information about their targets.8, 9
By Telephone
This method is used by operatives, usually on a one-time basis in order 
to obtain general information about a business. It is the safest and most 
innocuous type of infiltration to perpetrate. This type of infiltration is 
carried out by simply telephoning the target, then using a pretext, at-
tempting to extract as much information as possible. Several calls could 
be made over a period of time.
On the surface, individual calls would appear to be unrelated, but each 
is designed to obtain specific pieces of information. Depending on the 
pretext and the number of pretext calls made, the depth of information 
an operative could gather might be limited to general information. The 
target might have acute security awareness, especially about unknown 
persons. If the target is suspicious, he or she may try to identify a tele-
phone caller by requesting the caller’s telephone number, then verifying 
it by using an online telephone directory before calling the operative back 
(known as confirmation by callback).
By Mail and Email
This is another low grade form of infiltration. Again, using a pretext, the 
operative will write to a target requesting information. Security-aware 
targets will look for the warning signs of a mail infiltration, such as the 
use of post office boxes, business name “fronts,” and out-of-state ad-
dresses. As for email, free web-based accounts can raise the target’s sus-
picions because these are non-verifiable accounts.

92 
Chapter 6
In Person
Direct personal infiltration of the target may follow pretext contacts by 
telephone and mail/email infiltration and physical surveillance. In this 
way, an operative can gather enough information to establish a credible 
cover for a direct penetration, or acquaint them with the information 
needed to recruit an agent (i.e., a proxy) to carry out the task.
Indirectly
This infiltration technique is complex to organize and run but can yield 
impressive results. Basically, an operative creates a covert business or or-
ganization designed to draw the target, the target’s business, or a member 
of the target’s staff. The bogus business is controlled by the operative. 
These covert enterprises can be as simple as a trade newsletter or as elabo-
rate as a fully operational business.
Once established, the operative uses this cover to gather the informa-
tion identified in the analyst’s information collection plan. An example of 
this is the advertising of positions in a new and very attractive-sounding 
business. The business may offer a salary and fringe benefits package in 
excess of those offered in the market in order to entice the target. Once 
the target’s curriculum vitae is received, it is analyzed for the desired 
information. If it does not disclose the information sought, additional 
information will be requested from the applicant and/or a personal inter-
view conducted. The operative, or someone from this cover organization, 
would then “pump” the target for information.
Gifts
If a listening device is concealed in a gift that will be presented to the 
target (a form of a Trojan horse), it needs to be done expertly. There have 
been numerous cases where gifts have housed listening devices; the most 
notable was the 1952 presentation of the Great Seal of the United States to 
the American embassy in Moscow by the Russian government. A target 
that is security aware is likely to examine gifts well.
POSTAL MAIL COVER
A very useful data collection method is the postal mail cover. This in-
vestigative technique has been used by law enforcement agencies for 
many decades. It collects information by recording what is printed on the 
outer covering of an envelope or package via some form of photographic 

 
Covert Sources of Information 
93
technique—photocopying, digital scanning, or digital photography. For 
the analyst, it is important to note that a mail cover operation does not 
involve reading or recording the contents of the postal item (e.g., letter or 
card); only the data on the outside are recorded.
Nonetheless, this simple and effective method of data collection can 
reap a wealth of information—return address, postmark related infor-
mation (date and place of posting), and any description of the contents 
(e.g., “do not bend–photos enclosed,” card, etc.) Because the mail is not 
opened, no search is being conducted, only a form of physical surveil-
lance. The targets will never know that their mail is being monitored, so 
there is usually no administrative disclosure requirement by the agency 
that it is conducting surveillance.
Postal mail covers are usually bound by the laws or regulations of a 
nation’s postal service, and these governance arrangements dictate how 
and when this technique can be used as well as how long the collection 
operation is allowed to proceed.
WASTE RECOVERY
This is a long-standing law enforcement and private investigator tech-
nique that is popularly referred to as dumpster diving.10, 11 Despite the 
initial aversion to the thought of rummaging around in someone’s waste 
material, this is a potentially rich and valuable source of information. 
Confidential material of all types can be found in waste—manuals, notes, 
letters, memos, reports, files, photographs, passwords, identity cards, 
receipts, schedules, itineraries, telephone numbers, and much more (in-
cluding computer hard disk drives, USB flash drives, and a variety of 
data that have been backed up onto CDs/DVDs). The reason for this is 
that most people believe that once a piece of paper (or an old computer 
drive) is placed in a waste bin, it has “disappeared.” They believe that 
no one would bother “getting dirty” searching through someone else’s 
garbage.
Recovery can take place at any point between where the waste leaves 
the target’s premises to, and including, the landfill site. If the recovery 
is to take place on the target’s premises, be conscious that there may be 
legal issues associated with the operation, as a court could find that the 
material recovered was still in the possession of the target, and hence, a 
warrant of some kind was required.12
Information obtained via waste recovery was at one time considered 
high-value/low-cost because it yielded more benefit than what it cost 
to gather it. However, with its popularization in the press and cinema, 

94 
Chapter 6
waste recovery has become more difficult. Government agencies, busi-
nesses, and individuals regularly use document shredders and are more 
conscious of how and what they dispose. Security surrounding waste 
has improved with commercial-scale confidential document destruction 
becoming a service that is widely available.
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Aerial photography;
•  Audio surveillance;
•  Black bag operation;
•  Bugs;
•  Clandestine sources;
•  Confirmation by callback;
•  Covert photography;
•  Covert sources;
•  Dumpster diving;
•  Electronic surveillance;
•  Fixed surveillance;
•  Friendly access;
•  Infiltration;
•  Informants;
•  Internet-based intercepts;
•  Moving surveillance;
•  Open-source information;
•  Operative;
•  Optical surveillance;
•  Paper trail;
•  Pen registers;
•  Physical surveillance;
•  Postal mail cover;
•  Pretext;
•  Radio transmitters;
•  Semi-open sources;
•  Stakeout;
•  Surreptitious entry;
•  Surveillant;
•  Tail;
•  Telephone intercepts;
•  Undercover agents;

 
Covert Sources of Information 
95
•  Waste recovery; and
•  Wiretaps.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  Explain the difference between obtaining information by covert 
methods as opposed to clandestine methods.
2.  Explain the different types of covert data collection available to the 
analyst.
3.  Describe some of the inherent limitations of covert data and the 
security precautions a target might employ to guard against penetra-
tion.
4.  What are the advantages of covert data, and how could an analyst 
use these in practice? Give examples.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Select a public building in your jurisdiction. Use an Internet-based aerial 
photography facility to create an electronic slide briefing for a notional 
surveillance team. Provide in your briefing details on access to and from 
the building, the surrounding terrain, and potential infiltration and exfil-
tration points. Note any limitations the maps may have as a way of better 
understanding what can be done with these types of sources.
NOTES
1. Richard Best and Alfred Cummings, Open Source Intelligence Issues for Con-
gress (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2007).
2. J. Kirk Barefoot, Undercover Investigation (Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 
1975), 4.
3. T. J. Waters, Class 11: Inside the CIA’s First Post-9/11 Spy Class (New York: 
Dutton, 2006), 118–19.
4. Graham Greene, Our Man in Havana (London: Heinemann, 1958).
5. Raymond Siljander, Fundamentals of Physical Surveillance: A Guide for Uni-
formed and Plainclothes Personnel (Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1977), 5.
6. G. Gordon Liddy, Will: The Autobiography of G. Gordon Liddy (London: Severn 
House, 1980).
7. Greg Hauser, Pretext Manual (Austin, TX: Thomas Investigative, 1994), 5.
8. M. Harry, The Muckraker’s Manual: How to Do Your Own Investigative Report-
ing (Mason, MI: Loompanics Unlimited, 1980), 73–78.
9. Hauser, Pretext Manual.

96 
Chapter 6
10. John Hoffman, The Art and Science of Dumpster Diving (Boulder, CO: Paladin 
Press, 1993).
11. John Hoffman, Dumpster Diving: The Advanced Course: How to Turn Other 
People’s Trash into Money, Publicity, and Power (Boulder, CO: Paladin Press, 2002).
12. Rick Sarre and Tim Prenzler, The Law of Private Security in Australia, 2nd edi-
tion (Pyrmont, Australia: Thomson Lawbook, 2009).

97
7
c
Data Collation Techniques
T
his chapter examines some of the most accepted techniques for collat-
ing information:
1.  Brainstorming;
2.  Nominal group technique;
3.  Mind mapping;
4.  Affinity diagrams;
5.  Check sheets; and
6.  Matrix diagrams.
INTRODUCTION
Filing information is simply cataloging data and storing it for retrieval. Al-
though collation involves these two processes, it also entails some rudimen-
tary forms of analysis. If the analogy of a pole-vaulter is used, the catapult-
ing athlete can be seen as analysis and the run-up to the vault as collation. 
Analysis cannot be done without collation. And, as with the athlete’s run-
up to the high bar, how the run-up is executed will see the vault succeed or 
fail. If collation is done properly, then analysis will be enhanced.
In the main, collation aids the analyst to identify information that 
should be collected while highlighting information that was sought and 
hasn’t been collected. And, it can show relationships that hitherto were 
unknown—especially if the collation technique is visual. As collation tech-
niques are numerous, this chapter will discuss the most widely used.

98 
Chapter 7
BRAINSTORMING
Brainstorming has enjoyed widespread use among researchers for de-
cades.1 Although it has some limitations, it is arguably one of the most 
popular techniques for collating unstructured data. It can be used as a 
way to organize data post-collecting (e.g., when field operatives have 
seized large amounts of data from the target), or it can be used in the pre-
collection phase to set up a structure for collecting (not to be confused 
with the information collection plan). Although brainstorming can be 
used in group settings (e.g., all members of the analytic section), it can be 
used in a solitary setting by individual analysts.
Brainstorming is a creative process that results in participants coming 
up with ideas that are a bit unusual. Nevertheless, it is this feature that 
allows the generation of numerous ideas in a lateral thinking process. 
Criticism is to be avoided, and evaluation of the pool of ideas only 
takes place at the end. Brainstorming sessions need only be short—5 to 
20 minutes. It is important that the session facilitator does not let criti-
cism creep into the discussion phase and keeps discussion focused on 
the defined problem (best posted in clear view in front of the group). 
Encouraging participants to have fun helps generate a wider range of 
ideas, but balance needs to be struck so that no one vein of thought is 
perused too far or for too long.
The ideas are recorded so that all participants can see the list, and this 
helps generate other ideas. If performed as an individual, a mind map 
can be used instead. If conducted as a group, an affinity diagram can help 
structure the ideas (see the Mind Mapping and Affinity Diagram sections, 
later in this chapter).
Some limitation occur when used by groups—participants can become 
distracted or disengaged mentally because they would rather be doing 
the work piling up on their own desks back in the office. In addition, 
some participants may inhibit open and creative discussion if there 
are personality clashes within the group. Yet still, some may feel self-
conscious and may self-censor because they feel they are unable to con-
tribute or that their contribution isn’t as worthy as others made by the 
group. However, the use of brainstorming in groups can have a positive 
effect that lies outside the production of ideas: that is, it offers a platform 
for what is termed buy-in or ownership by those participating.
The 6-3-5 Method
There are several ways to stimulate creative thinking and the 6-3-5 
method is one.2 Using this method, the analyst convenes a group of six 

 
Data Collation Techniques 
99
suitable people who are able to consider the brainstorming issue, or sev-
eral groups of six can be convened simultaneously using this method. 
Each person is asked to generate three ideas within five minutes, hence 
the name 6-3-5.
Once this is done, participants pass their sheets of paper to the next 
person in the group. Each person views the other person’s ideas, consid-
ers them, and then records three more ideas (within five minutes), thus 
building on the first three. The process is repeated until each person has 
had an opportunity to see all sheets of paper.
Variations can be made to this method if time or the number of con-
tributors is constrained, say, a 3-3-2 method, or another variation.
Devil’s Advocate
This can be a useful technique if used correctly during brainstorming. 
But it can also be a persona that could hold back creativity if used ag-
gressively; its use is a matter of balance and good judgment. Simply, one 
member of the group acts as the devil’s advocate by putting forward op-
posing ideas, options, or possibilities. It is useful because it steers thinking 
away from what could be a narrowly focused discussion, thus prevent-
ing “groupthink.” Groupthink is where members of the group suppress 
alternative views because they think others may disagree or are embar-
rassed to voice dissent. Having a devil’s advocate in the group can avoid 
the TINA (there is no alternative) syndrome by encouraging members to 
think wider.
NOMINAL GROUP TECHNIQUE
Nominal group techniques can be used as an alternative to brainstorming, 
especially where the participants may feel some constraint when it comes 
to articulating their thoughts in front of a group. The process is ideally 
suited as a means of circumventing a person(s) who may stifle discussion 
because it encourages passive participants.3 Step by step:
1.  Make the team of participants comfortable around a table, and sup-
ply them with writing materials;
2.  Put the question under investigation to the group. It should be 
phrased as an open-ended question in order to encourage thought, 
for example: What are some of the ways Country Q could encourage 
its security forces to do [insert action]?;

100 
Chapter 7
3.  Request that each participant consider the question for a minute or 
two and then individually brainstorm several possible ideas. The 
brainstorming is to be done silently with the participants’ noting 
their ideas on a sheet of paper;
4.  Call in the sheets of paper containing the participants’ ideas. On 
a flipchart (or via a computer data projector), display the ideas 
so that all can see. During this process, eliminate duplicates by 
combining like with like. As with brainstorming, no criticism is 
allowed—all ideas are to be used. The facilitator can clarify ideas 
but does so by requesting guidance from the group before making 
any changes;
5.  Request that all participants evaluate the ideas by individually (and 
anonymously) voting. This can be done several ways, but two com-
monly used methods are:
•  Ranking the ideas from most favored at the top to the least favored 
at the bottom. Then the rankings are combined and a total calcu-
lated for each idea. The ideas that score the most are the ones that 
deserve attention. Using a scale ranging from 1 to 5 (with 1 being 
the lowest and 5 being the highest priorities), table 7.1 illustrates 
this. It shows that Issue B would have the highest priority (n = 20), 
with Issue E the lowest (n = 11).
•  The other way is to use a weighting system. For instance, each 
participant can award 100 points across the ideas in any propor-
tion. This is shown in table 7.2—Issue B has the highest priority 
(n = 165) in this example, with Issue E the lowest (n = 25).
Table 7.1. Ranking Ideas Method
 
Dave 
Betty 
Kait 
Lyndsey 
Chris 
 
Total
Issue A 
1 
5 
4 
1 
2 
= 
13
Issue B 
3 
4 
5 
3 
5 
= 
20
Issue C 
3 
5 
3 
4 
3 
= 
18
Issue D 
4 
2 
1 
4 
1 
= 
12
Issue E 
1 
5 
2 
1 
2 
= 
11
Table 7.2. Weighting Ideas Method
 
Dave 
Betty 
Kait 
Lyndsey 
Chris 
 
Total
Issue A 
 
25 
40 
 
 
= 
65
Issue B 
30 
20 
50 
 
65 
= 
165
Issue C 
30 
30 
10 
50 
35 
= 
155
Issue D 
40 
 
 
50 
 
= 
90
Issue E 
 
25 
 
 
 
= 
25

 
Data Collation Techniques 
101
MIND MAPPING
A mind map is a diagram representing a set of related ideas. Mind maps 
can take a variety of forms, but the two most popular are hierarchical lists 
and spider diagrams. In practice, it comes down to personal preference of 
the analyst which to use—some researchers think in terms of lists, while 
others are visual.
Table 7.3 shows an example of part of a mind map for this book, which 
was created by the author. It is evident that such a list lends itself ideally 
to became the book’s table of contents (yes, a table of contents is a form 
of mind map). If an analyst prefers using a spider diagram, it can be con-
verted into a list by grouping (and/or regrouping) the major ideas of the 
diagram into a hierarchical list. Likewise, a list can be converted into a 
spider diagram (see fig. 7.1).
Table 7.3. A Hierarchical List of Topics
The Fundamentals of Intelligence 
The Intelligence Research Process
Intelligence versus information 
Problem formulation
Intelligence defined 
Literature review
Intelligence as knowledge 
Methodology
Intelligence’s consumers 
Intelligence collection plan
“A mind map is the ultimate organizational thinking tool. And it is so 
simple! . . . Computers can be helpful when you mind map! Although it 
is still your brain that comes up with all the ideas, the latest software can 
allow you to draw a mind map on your screen. The advantages of this are 
obvious. You can save your mind maps in a file and then transmit this in-
formation to others. Computer mind maps allow you to store vast amounts 
of data in mind map form, to cross-reference that data, to shift branches 
around from one part of the mind map to another, [and] to rearrange entire 
mind maps in light of new information . . .”4
AFFINITY DIAGRAMS
Creating an affinity diagram is a method that analysts can use to cluster 
data items (ideas or concepts) along similar lines—hence, its name affinity 
diagram or data cluster (e.g., similar characteristics, qualities, attributes, parts, 
features, and so on). This clustering should not be confused with classifica-
tion. In classification, items are assigned according to classes that have been 
predefined (e.g., in biology or agronomy). In clustering, the objective is to 

Figure 7.1. Spider diagram of topics.

 
Data Collation Techniques 
103
take the data and break it down into smaller clusters, which can be better 
managed and, therefore, better analyzed.
Data clustering can be the follow-on step after a brainstorming session, 
or it can be used to help sort data that have been acquired by field opera-
tives (e.g., from a search-and-seizure operation or material that has been ac-
quired by an undercover agent or informant). Figure 7.2 shows an example 
of an affinity diagram of ideas that were generated by an individual who 
was brainstorming transnational organized crime issues. Step by step:
1.  Separate the larger concept/issue/idea/problem into a number of 
smaller categories;
2.  Display these categories via a convenient medium such as a board 
(e.g., whiteboard, pen-board, or marker-board), large flipcharts, or 
computer data projector;
3.  Group (and/or regroup) the individual pieces of information (fac-
tors) into common clusters (as is done in mind mapping); and
Figure 7.2. Affinity diagram of transnational organized crime issues.

104 
Chapter 7
4.  Give a heading to each of the clusters (this is done at the end of the 
process because if assigned initially, the name may change several 
times as more factors/data items are added, or it may give rise for a 
newly created cluster when, say, it is discovered that a cluster is too 
narrow to accommodate all the associated factors).
CHECK SHEET
Check sheets aid analysts to systematically compile and record data. These 
data can be either from historical sources or from observations as they oc-
cur, and the sheets can be designed and pressed into use very quickly.
The main advantage of using a check sheet system is that as data are en-
tered into the system, a picture is built, making it increasingly clear what 
the facts are, as opposed to what opinions people are expressing about the 
problem, issue, or situation.
To create a check list, the analysts define the events or conditions that 
need to be observed. They then allocate who will collect the data and 
specify over what period of time (if it is a phenomenon that is occurring 
and being observed live) or from what data (e.g., historical records or 
files). Finally, they then design a check list sheet (which can be computer-
ized using suitable software) and begin collecting data.
To illustrate this, take the example of a local village that reports seeing 
an increase in suspicious vehicle traffic passing to its south. It is rumored 
to be associated with a possible build-up of insurgents in the area. Field 
operatives are tasked to covertly record this traffic over a 24-hour period 
using a check sheet. Table 7.4 is an example of such an instrument.
Table 7.4. Example of a Check Sheet

 
Data Collation Techniques 
105
MATRIX DIAGRAM
Analysts can use a matrix diagram to show a many-to-many relation-
ship between two data sets. This type of analysis is known as network 
analysis. In practice, it is a simple but effective technique, as demon-
strated in detail in table 10.8 and figure 10.4 of chapter 10 (“Advanced 
Analytic Techniques”). You will note in these two illustrations that the 
various relationships are recorded in the matrix, but analysts can con-
vert these data into a network chart (see fig. 10.4). Where a relationship 
exists between the data elements in the matrix, a symbol is inserted. A 
step-by-step description of how to perform this technique is provided in 
chapter 10.
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  6-3-5 method;
•  Affinity diagrams;
•  Brainstorming;
•  Buy-in;
•  Check sheets;
•  Data clusters;
•  Devil’s advocate;
•  Hierarchical lists;
•  Many-to-many relationship;
•  Matrix diagrams;
•  Mind mapping;
•  Nominal group technique; and
•  Spider diagrams.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  Explain the purpose of collation.
2.  Describe some of the techniques available to the analyst for collating 
data.
3.  Compare brainstorming with the nominal group technique by giv-
ing an example of how an analyst could use each.
4.  Could brainstorming and the nominal group technique be substi-
tuted for one another? If so, could it be done in all circumstances or 
only in particular cases? Explain.

106 
Chapter 7
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Suppose an analyst is presented with the task of researching outlets for 
counterfeit name-brand goods. Use a mind map to collate information 
pertaining to the types of outlets that might exist in your jurisdiction and 
the location of same.
NOTES
1. Alex F. Osborn, Your Creative Power: How to Use Imagination (New York: Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, 1948).
2. Helmut Schlicksupp, Kreative Ideenfindung in der Unternehmung: Methoden 
und Modelle (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1977).
3. A. L. Delbecq and A. H. Van de Ven, “A Group Process Model for Problem 
Identification and Program Planning,” Journal of Applied Behavioral Science VII (July–
August 1971): 466–91.
4. Tony Buzan, How to Mind Map (London: Thorsons, 2002), 4, 69.

107
8
c
Basic Statistical Analyses
T
his topic presents the essential statistical techniques used in intel-
ligence analysis:
 1.  Levels of data measurement;
 2.  Univariate analysis;
 3.  Calculating percent increases and decreases;
 4.  Per capita calculations;
 5.  Index numbers;
 6.  Ratios;
 7.  Rounding numbers;
 8.  Bivariate analysis;
 9.  Statistical significance; and
10.  Problem solving using algebraic equations.
LEVELS OF DATA MEASUREMENT
In intelligence research, if variables are observed, the data gathered by 
these observations are organized according to numbers attributed to them 
by analysts. Assigning numbers to represent variables is done as a way of 
preparing these data for statistical testing. The numbers assigned to the 
data are the factors that determine the level of measurement and, hence, the 
kinds of statistical tests that can be applied.
There are four levels of measurement: nominal data, ordinal data, inter-
val data, and ratio data. Each level of measurement represents an increase 

108 
Chapter 8
in the types of statistical tests that are permissible. As such, the level of 
measurement, it could be argued, is the foundational assumption for all 
statistical testing. That is, the data type determines which statistical test 
can be conducted. If this assumption is violated, it makes the results of 
any subsequent statistical test invalid.
For instance, if data were of a nominal scale, then only statistical tests 
designed to analyze these types of data can be used (say, for example, chi-
square analysis). However, if the data were of a ratio scale, then any test 
at the ratio level and those for lower level data could be applied. This is 
because ratio data can be reduced to a lower level of measurement to be 
analyzed using an appropriate test. If the data are already at a lesser level 
of measurement, they cannot be converted to a higher level. Likewise, 
once the data are converted to a lower scale, unless the original data are 
retained in ratio form, they cannot be disaggregated.
Analysts also use what is termed derived data—but this is not the same 
as a level of measurement; it is information that is produced from com-
bining or interrelating two or more data items to produce a new piece of 
information. For example, suppose an analyst has data on several events 
and also has data on when those events took place. Using a computer 
program, the analyst can produce new data based on an algorithm that 
requests “a list of all events that occurred before a certain date but after 
another specified date, as long as the event was not followed at any time 
by another type of event.”
Nominal Data
Nominal data is the lowest level of measurement and comprises observa-
tions that can be placed in a group, for instance: Americans, Australians, 
Britons, Canadians, or New Zealanders (as such, it is sometimes referred 
to as a categorical scale). The chief attributes of nominal data are that there 
is no rank or order to the data—that is, one group is not “greater” or 
“more” than another group.
By itself, there is no “distance” between the groups as in higher level 
data. So, one cannot say that if you are an Australian, you are twice as 
“ethnic” as a New Zealander. All that can be said in this example is that 
one is in the Australian group, and the other is in the New Zealand group. 
Also, an observation can only be in one group, not multiple groups.
Ordinal Data
Ordinal data has the same attributes as nominal data, but in addition, it 
introduces the attribute of rank (sometimes referred to a rank scale). Rank 
in this sense suggests that the scale has some direction—say, from less to 

 
Basic Statistical Analyses 
109
severe. Take, for instance, the crime of terrorism—three events could be 
ranked as to their severity: kidnapping, assassination, and bombing. One 
will note that they have the same attributes as nominal scale data in that 
observations can be placed in groups, but these groups have a relation-
ship in how they are ranked. Because these observations can be ordered 
in this way, the level of measurement increases.
Nevertheless, even though there is direction to these data, there is no 
indication of distance between the data items. For instance, an analyst 
cannot say that assassination is twice as severe as kidnapping. However, 
the analysts can say that bombing is greater than kidnapping, that bomb-
ing is greater than assassination, and that assassination is greater than 
kidnapping.
Interval Data
Interval data has the same attributes as ordinal data, but it introduces 
the dimension of distance, or interval. That is, data measured using this 
scale will be able to demonstrate a common unit of measurement for all 
observations.
Take, for instance, the interval measure of time—a terrorist planted an 
improvised explosive device in a busy market place at 1:00 p.m., and it 
was detonated by remote control at 1:30 p.m. The analyst can conclude 
that there were two distinct events (nominal scale), one event followed 
the other (ordinal scale), and the time that elapsed between the two events 
was 30 minutes (interval scale). Because there is now a measureable dis-
tance, the interval scale allows the analyst to conduct arithmetic calcula-
tion on the data. One should note that there may be a zero point in this 
scale (e.g., 00:00 hours) but that zero is an arbitrary notion—it is not real.
Ratio Data
Ratio data is the highest level of data as it has all the attributes of inter-
val data, but in addition, it has a real zero for the scale’s starting point. 
Having a real zero starting point reference allows the analyst to calculate 
ratios between any two observations—data can be added, subtracted, 
multiplied, and divided.
By way of example, suppose the terrorist-improvised explosive device 
cited above was estimated to contain 15 kilograms of high explosive. Sup-
pose also that another explosion that day was due to a device containing 
30 kilograms. The analyst can conclude that there were two explosions 
(nominal scale), one used more explosives than the other (ordinal scale), 
the larger explosion was 15 kilograms greater (interval scale) as well as 
having twice the destructive power (ratio scale).

110 
Chapter 8
UNIVARIATE ANALYSIS
Univariate analyses are used when the analyst wants to simply describe 
a person, organization, location, or object that consists of a single de-
pendent variable. Hence, univariate analysis is also known as descriptive 
statistics. Contrast this type of analysis with bivariate and multivariate 
analyses where two (bi-) or more (multi-) variables are analyzed (in such 
analyses, the variables may or may not be dependent upon each other). 
Univariate analysis can be used with the different levels of data as shown 
in table 8.1. The descriptive statistics that can be produced are listed in 
the right-hand column.
Frequencies
Constructing a frequency distribution is often an analyst’s first task in 
analyzing data. This is done by counting the number of observations per 
category (nominal and ordinal level) or per score (interval and ratio level). 
The results can be described in the intelligence report’s narrative as well 
as being displayed graphically. Figure 8.1 (ordinal level) and table 8.2 
(ratio level) are examples of how terrorist event data can be presented. 
Figure 8.1 shows the number of terrorist events by organization before 
and after the 1986 U.S. air raid on Libya.1 Whereas, table 8.2 shows the 
number of (notional) bombing events (X) terrorist groups were respon-
sible for in Country Q.
Count
Count is the total number of values in a distribution (i.e., data set). Using 
the following distribution as an example, the count would be 11. These 
data could represent the number of people killed by roadside bombs:
4, 8, 10, 12, 15, 16, 19, 20, 24, 28, 31
Table 8.1. Examples of Descriptive Statistics
Measurement Level 
Analytic Technique
Nominal 
Frequencies
Ordinal 
Frequencies, range, median, mode
Interval 
Frequencies, range, minimum, maximum, median, mode, mean,
 
 weighted mean
Ratio 
Frequencies, range, minimum, maximum, median, mode, mean,
 
 weighted mean

 
Basic Statistical Analyses 
111
Minimum and Maximum
The minimum is the lowest value in a distribution. The maximum is 
the largest value. For instance, using the same data set as above, the 
minimum number of people killed by roadside bombs and the maximum 
number were 4 and 31, respectively:
4, 8, 10, 12, 15, 16, 19, 20, 24, 28, 31
Range
The range is the difference between the minimum and maximum values 
with a distribution. This is calculated by subtracting the smaller value 
from the larger. Using the same example, the range would be 27:
31 – 4 = 27
Table 8.2. Frequency Distribution of (Notional) Bombing Events
X (score) 
f (frequency) 
fX
5 
 2 
10
4 
 3 
12
3 
 7 
21
2 
15 
30
1 
30 
30
 
N = 57 
fX = 103
Figure 8.1. Terrorist events by Libyan-sponsored groups targeting Americans and U.S. 
property abroad.

112 
Chapter 8
Mean
The mean, also known as the arithmetic average, is used to average out 
quantities. It is calculated by adding all the values of a data set, then di-
viding the sum by the count of those numbers. Again, take for instance 
the distribution above: the total number of people killed was 187. Divide 
187 by 11, and this equals 17:
(4 + 8 + 10 + 12 + 15 + 16 + 19 + 20 + 24 + 28 + 31) = 187 / 11 = 17
The mean can be used with both interval and ratio data; however, one of 
the disadvantages of using the mean is that it is affected by extremes at 
either end of the distribution. For example, if we use the notional road-
side bomb data set and substitute 97 for the value 31, the resulting mean 
would be skewed to 23. Nevertheless, the mean is a useful statistical test 
as it can be used to conduct further tests—for instance, an analyst can 
compare the means of several different samples.
Weighted Mean
Another method used to average quantities is the weighted mean. It is used 
in cases where not all of the quantities are of equal importance. The for-
mula for calculating a weighted mean is expressed in the following, where 
“bar-x” is the mean, w is the weight, x is the number, and  is the sum:
x–
w 
=
 w1x1 + w2x2 + w3x3 + . . . + wnxn 
=
  w * x
w1 + w2 + w3 + . . . + wn 
 w
Suppose a situation where an intelligence analyst is trying to establish the 
average price paid for heroin on the street but on a national basis. Data 
from each state’s capital city are compiled and are weighted according 
to the population of each city (i.e., using census data). This takes into 
account the fact that there are price variations at the same point in time 
between locations because illicit drug prices increase “as one moves away 
from the drug sources and prices are lower in larger markets.”2
Suppose that there are three capital cities in Country Q. The price paid 
for heroin in one city is $148 per gram, another is $256, and the third is 
$300. The populations of the cities are 5 million people, 2 million people, 
and 1 million people, respectively. Therefore:
x–
w 
=
 (5)(148) + (2)(256) + (1)(300)
 
5 + 2 + 1
= 1,552
 
8
= $194 per gram

 
Basic Statistical Analyses 
113
If the analysts had averaged these data without using a weighting system 
to take into account the price variations caused by distances from the 
point of importation (the largest city with its port and international air-
port), they would have obtained $235. This is because the state with the 
smallest population that was far removed from the large port city—hence, 
the highest price—skewed the average upwards.
Weighted Grand Mean
There may be times when a grand mean, or the mean of the sum of all 
the means, is needed to be calculated. Such cases may arise where, for 
instance, a mean for heroin in each state’s capital city has been calculated, 
but the national average is needed. To do this, the analyst totals the means 
for each city and then divides this figure by the number of cities. But 
because averaging the average can skew the results (sometimes consider-
ably), a weighted grand mean is used. This is calculated by using the same 
formula for a weight average; however, instead of using x, the analyst 
uses bar-x, that is, the mean.
Median
The median is the middle value of a distribution. It is, therefore, the 
halfway point between those values that are greater than the median and 
the half that are less than the median. Using the following data set, the 
median is 16:
4, 8, 10, 12, 15, 16, 19, 20, 24, 28, 31
The median is less susceptible to extremes at the edges of the distribution. 
Again, take for example the notional roadside bomb data set we used 
previously, and again substitute 97 for the value 31, as was done for the 
mean, but now the resulting median would be 16, not the skewed 23 that 
was seen under the mean. Therefore, the median is generally more useful 
where there are extremes, and the mean most useful when the distribu-
tion is absent of such features.
Mode
The mode is the most frequently occurring value in a distribution. How-
ever, some data sets do not have a mode as is evident with the example 
distribution used so far—there is a single count for each number. If, by 
contrast, the following distribution was used, the mode would be 12:
4, 8, 10, 12, 12, 15, 16, 19, 20, 24, 28, 31

114 
Chapter 8
Sometimes data sets have several sets of numbers appearing in equal 
frequency. In such cases, these are referred to as being bimodal (two 
modes), trimodal (three modes), or in the case of more—multimodal. 
Bimodal:
4, 8, 10, 12, 12, 15, 16, 19, 20, 24, 28, 28, 31.
Trimodal:
4, 8, 10, 12, 12, 15, 16, 19, 19, 20, 24, 28, 28, 31
Of the three measures of central tendency—mean, median, and mode—
the mode is the least useful unless the number of values represented by 
the mode form a large percentage of total distribution. Moreover, no 
further analysis can be conducted on the mode—an analyst cannot, for 
instance, compare modes of different samples as the result would make 
no sense at all.
CALCULATING PERCENT INCREASES AND DECREASES
Sometimes an analyst will need to express a number as a fraction of 100. 
This is usually done because the analyst needs to show how one quantity 
is related to another. The mathematical function used to do this is percent 
(meaning, per hundred). As an illustration, 54 percent is 54 / 100, or 
expressed as a decimal, 0.54. When a number increases, an analyst can 
calculate its percentage increase using the following formula:
percent increase = [(new figure – original figure) / original figure]  100
When a quantity decreases, the analyst can calculate the percentage de-
crease by:
percent decrease = [(original figure – new figure) / original figure]  100
It is important to note that both the formulas exhibit the following prin-
ciple:
percent increase / decrease = (change in figure / original figure)  100
This is because the analyst is calculating either the percent increase or de-
crease with the amount of change to the original figure as demonstrated 
in the following two examples:

 
Basic Statistical Analyses 
115
1.  The number of people attending political rallies in the city of Or-
renabad rose from 16,000 to 22,000. What percent increase does this 
represent?
percent increase = (22,000 – 16,000) / 
16,000 = 6,000 / 16,000 = 0.375  100 = 37.5%
2.  The number of political websites hostile to the new democratically 
elected government in Orren declined from 930 to 200. What percent 
decrease does this represent?
percent decrease = (200 – 930) / 930 = –730 / 
930 = 0.785  100 = –78.5%
PER CAPITA CALCULATIONS
Per capita simply means per person. An analyst can calculate the per 
capita occurrence of x where x is the issue under investigation:
per capita = (total x / population)  rate
So, using an example of suicides, the per capita figure would be the total 
number of self-inflected deaths divided by the population. In this case, 
the population could be either the population of the town or city, the 
region or state, or the country. This statistic can then be used as a means 
of comparison to other towns or cities or from country to country in a 
meaningful way.
One of the detractions of per capita calculations is where the figure is 
very small; in such cases, the ratio becomes meaningless. In such cases, 
the analyst can use per 100,000 in the population, 10,000, or even 1,000 as 
alternatives.
By way of example, take the notional regional town of Isobel. The town 
recorded 200 residential burglaries during the year, and it had 100,000 
households. Therefore, the burglary rate would be 0.002. This is not a very 
meaningful figure. However, if it is calculated per 1,000 in the population, 
then it is 2 burglaries per 1,000 households.
(200 / 100,000)  1,000 = 2
By using a rate per 1,000 instead of a per capita rate, in this example, the 
figure can more easily be understood.

116 
Chapter 8
INDEX NUMBERS
A benchmark can assist analysts when comparing changes in different 
kinds of data, and in statistical terms this is referred to as an index. “Since 
index numbers show percent changes rather than arithmetic change, the 
size of the data and the units of measurement are not important.”3
As a demonstration, the rate of inflation can be compared with the pro-
duction of goods by using the consumer price index with the industrial 
production index. “Although prices are measured in dollars and produc-
tion is measured in physical volume (number of cars, tons of coal, etc.),”4 
the two can be easily compared using this method.
As part of a study into heroin trafficking in Australia, Prunckun5 used 
index numbers to control for confounding variables. His study collected 
data relating to Australia’s population, its rate of inflation, and its number 
of sworn police officers. These data were gathered as a means of compar-
ing or adjusting the rate of change observed in variables. For instance, 
population data were used to adjust methadone and heroin usage rates 
relative to “the population in the age groups in which opiate users are 
found (namely 15 to 44 years).”6 The inflation rate was helpful in adjust-
ing the illicit drug prices, and the police staffing data were helpful in 
comparing changes in police numbers with that of some of the law en-
forcement workload data. The formula for calculating an index is:
index = (current value / base value)  100
Suppose that Country Q had 5 warships in 2005. By 2010, intelligence 
indicated that this number had grown to 20 (with the intervening years 
being 6 in 2006, 9 in 2007, 14 in 2008, and 17 in 2009). How has this num-
ber changed between 2005 and 2010?
The base period is 2005, and the base value is 5, which is given a value of 
100 that corresponds to 100%. The index is then calculated for the period 
following the base period using the above formula and is displayed in 
table 8.3. The index number shows that there was an increase of 300% in 
warships since the base period (i.e., 400% – 100% = 300%).
RATIOS
An analyst who wants to compare two things can use a ratio. A ratio is an 
expression of something to something else, for instance: a ratio of small 
arms to soldiers. Ratios are expressed in several ways: either as a fraction 
(3/4) or using the word to (3 to 4) or using a colon (3:4). To illustrate this, 
say, an analyst observes that there are 30 soldiers in a combat unit of a 
foreign country. One is assigned to radio communications. Later, intelligence 

 
Basic Statistical Analyses 
117
indicates that this unit has added a second radio operator, but the size has 
grown to 60 soldiers. Despite the changes in overall numbers, the ratio of radio 
operators to soldiers within the unit has remained the same—30:1 before and 
60:2 after (which can be simplified by mathematical reduction to 30:1).
ROUNDING NUMBERS
Rounding numbers is a common occurrence where the decimal fraction makes no 
sense or adds confusion. Sometimes an estimate is all that is needed to demonstrate 
a point or make a prediction. In these cases, rounding takes place. Step by step:
1.  Determine the unit that is required to be rounded off—thousands, hun-
dreds, units, or a decimal fraction;
2.  Examine the number to the right of the unit to be rounded off;
3.  If this number is 5 or more, add an additional unit;
4.  If the number is less than 5, subtract a unit.
For instance, if rounding 394.6 to the nearest hundred, it would be 400. If 
rounding 394.6 to the nearest tens, it would be 390. But, if rounding 394.6 
to the nearest unit, it would be 395.
BIVARIATE ANALYSIS
Chi-square
Chi-square is one of the more useful statistical tests for intelligence ana-
lysts because it can be used on nominal level data. It has few assumptions 
and is, therefore, straightforward to apply and interpret.
Chi-square is a nonparametric test of statistical significance. The term 
nonparametric refers to statistics that deal with variables that are without 
assumptions as to their form or their distribution parameters. It returns 
a statistic that reflects the “goodness of fit” or the difference between the 
Table 8.3. Example of Index Numbers for Warships
Year 
Number of Warships 
Index Number
2005 
 5 
100
2006 
 6 
120
2007 
 9 
180
2008 
14 
280
2009 
17 
340
2010 
20 
400

118 
Chapter 8
observed frequency and the expected observations according to a model 
hypothesis (H0).
The power of the chi-square statistic is that it will tell the analyst 
whether the actual distribution occurred by chance or was likely to be the 
result of the interaction of the independent variable according to a level of 
confidence (e.g., .01 or .05). Later in this chapter, the importance of setting 
the appropriate level of confidence is discussed in more detail. There are 
only three requirements for using chi-square and these are:
1.  Any level data can be used;
2.  There must be more than five observations per category (if there are 
less than five observations, they will be meaningless); and
3.  The observations must be independent.
Unlike some other statistical tests, there is no direction indicated by 
chi-square, so once the result is obtained, an inspection of the data is 
required to determine this. Consider the following example of a single 
sample chi-square: Analysts are concerned about whether the numbers 
of terrorists in a target organization’s cells in North America are equal 
to those in the organization’s Asia region. The observed frequencies 
are arranged in table form (referred to as a contingency table). If the data 
were represented by two independent samples (that is, in the form of a 
2  2 contingency table), then the convention is to list the independent 
variable (x) along the top of the table with the dependent variable along 
the side (y).
Chi-square can also be used for cases involving two independent 
samples. For instance, suppose an analyst wanted to know if there were 
significant differences between insurgents who were young males as 
opposed to older males and whether these people had previously been 
involved in criminal activity before joining the insurgency. H0: The num-
ber of terrorists in North American cells and Asian cells are equivalent. 
H1: The number of terrorists in Asian cells is more. The observed distri-
bution is:
North America 
86
Asia 
120
Total 
206
The expected distribution under the H0 is for 50 percent to appear in each:
North America 
103
Asia 
103
Total 
206

 
Basic Statistical Analyses 
119
The formula for calculation of chi-square is as follows:
 X2 =  ([A1 – E1 ] – .5)2
 
E
 X2 = chi-square
  A = actual or observed frequency
  E = expected frequency
–.5 = Yates’ correction for continuity
The calculations follow; however, many software spreadsheet packages 
contain the chi-square function. It is a simple matter of entering the data 
into the spreadsheet, indicating the degrees of freedom, and activating the 
chi-square function from the menu options. The spreadsheet will return the 
chi-square statistic (here it was done manually and is shown in table 8.4).
Yates’ correction for continuity is applied in instances where the degrees 
of freedom are equal to 1 or where the observed frequencies are less than 
10. This prevents an overestimation of statistical significance. The degrees 
of freedom are calculated thus: df = C – 1 (where C represents categories). 
So, in this example it would be 2 – 1 = 1df.
In chi-square analysis, the critical value is the threshold that determines 
at what point an analyst would not reject the null hypothesis. Using the 
critical values contained in the appendix, we observe that a value of 5.28 is 
greater than the required 3.84 at the .05 level (1df), so we can reject the null 
hypothesis—numbers of terrorists that exist in the Asia cell are greater (i.e., 
we accept H1). This means that there would be less than 5 chances in 100 
that a result like this would be obtained if random variation was the only 
explanation.
As can be deduced from the formula, the chi-square statistic is the 
product of each of the individual frequencies. Therefore, each frequency 
contributes to the final chi-square statistic. If a given frequency is greatly 
different from the expected frequency, then its contribution to the chi-
square statistic can be expected to be large. Conversely, if the frequency 
Table 8.4. Manual Calculations for Determining Chi-Square
 
North America 
Asia 
Total
Actual/observed 
86 
120 
206
Expected 
103 
103 
206
(A – E) – .5 
16.5 
16.5
([A – E] – .5)² 
272.25 
272.25
([A – E] – .5)² / E 
2.64 
2.64
 
5.28

120 
Chapter 8
closely aligns itself to the expected frequency, then the contribution of 
that frequency to chi-square will be small.
It is clear that large chi-square statistics indicate that the contingency 
table contains a frequency(s) that differs noticeably from the expected 
frequency(s), but the statistic will not be able to point to the frequency(s) 
responsible for the elevated chi-square. It can only indicate that such a 
frequency(s) is present. When an excessive result is obtained, it requires 
the analyst to examine the table in order to determine which frequency(s) 
is the cause.
In the body of the analyst’s report, it should discuss the conclusions 
drawn from these results, what they mean, and the implications they have 
for the study. When discussing these issues, refer directly to the table(s) 
so the reader is not left in doubt about any aspect of the conclusions.
Scatter Plots
A scatter plot (sometimes termed scattergram or scatter diagram) is used 
to visualize relationships between two data sets (i.e., paired samples). In 
doing so, the two variables do not have to have a dependent and indepen-
dent relationship as plotting will demonstrate the degree the variables are 
correlated. As such, plotting data using this method is synonymous with 
regression analysis.
Scatter plots are able to reveal a number of relationships in addition to 
the degree of correlation, for instance: a positive relationship, a negative 
Figure 8.2. Positive correlation.

 
Basic Statistical Analyses 
121
relationship, and a null relationship. These are illustrated in the follow-
ing series of figures. Figure 8.2 shows the pattern of dots sloping from the 
lower left to the upper right, thus demonstrating a positive relationship. 
Figure 8.3 shows a pattern of dots sloping from the upper left to lower 
right suggesting a negative correlation. The “tighter” the dots are in form-
ing a straight line the more correlated the data are—see figure 8.4 for an 
Figure 8.3. Negative correlation.
Figure 8.4. Strong positive correlation.

122 
Chapter 8
example of a perfectly corrected paired sample. Finally, figure 8.5 shows 
a nonlinear, or null, relationship.
An analyst can quickly construct a scatter plot either by hand or by us-
ing a software package (usually a spreadsheet program). The first step is 
to draw a chart with a horizontal axis (x) and a vertical axis (y) and place 
appropriate and proportional numeric gradations along the axes. Data 
are then plotted on the graph. If doing this by hand where values are 
repeated, the analyst can indicate the repeated values by placing a circle 
around those points. If using a software package, the program will gener-
ate the chart once the data items are entered into the spreadsheet. Follow 
the menu options to produce the scatter plot.
The chief advantage of a scatter plot is that it will indicate the strength 
of the relationship between two variables. The stronger the relationship 
the more likely a change in one variable will result in a change in the other 
(but will not predict cause).
STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Type I and Type II Errors
The concept of statistical significance is important to the analyst as it makes 
clear what likelihood there is for an error in judgment. At the center of this 
process is the confidence level chosen by the analyst—this is referred to as 
the alpha-level or p-value, for example: .05, .01 (or another level either higher 
or lower). Regardless of the level chosen, there is the risk that the null hy-
pothesis could be rejected when it should have been accepted or vice versa—
Figure 8.5. Nonlinear relationship.

 
Basic Statistical Analyses 
123
accepted when it should have been rejected. The risk of error increases as 
the confidence level gets smaller.
For instance, a p-value of .01 means that there would be less than one 
chance in one hundred that a result like this would be obtained if random 
variation was the only explanation (i.e., a 99% chance of being true). A 
p-value of .05 indicates that there is a 95% chance of being true. And, 
a p-value of .001 indicates there is 99.9% chance of being true.
Such errors are referred to as type I errors and type II errors. The former 
are false positives, and the latter are false negatives.
Suppose an analyst has selected a confidence level of .05; in this case, 
the analyst could more easily reject the null hypothesis and declare that 
there is a statistically significant difference in the data than what would 
have occurred if he or she had selected the .01 level. However, the analyst 
would be wrong in this conclusion 5 percent of the time. If, however, the 
analyst selected a confidence level of .01, he or she would be wrong only 
1 percent of the time.
Type I errors are when some phenomenon is observed and the conclusion 
is drawn that there is a difference when in fact none exists—this is why they 
are viewed as false positives. A type II error is a false negative—accepting 
the null hypothesis when it should have been rejected. This is where the 
analyst fails to observe a difference and accepts the null hypothesis.
What is the impact on the analyst’s findings of type I and type II errors? 
A type I error could be described as a “false alarm”—sending a signal that 
the observed phenomenon is worthy of note (and presumed action) when 
in fact it is a mistaken conclusion. The analogy could be a miner finding 
pyrite (i.e., fool’s gold) instead of gold. In contrast, a type II error could 
be attributed to a lack of sensitivity of the data collection instrument or an 
omission of some sort so that the difference was not detected. If the miner 
analogy is used again, the miner would have thrown out the gold with 
the tailings from the mine.
From this discussion, the analyst can see that in any research project, 
they are at risk of making one of these two types of errors. So, which error 
is “worse” to make? It depends on the question that has been asked by 
the decision maker. Both can be equally devastating as can be seen in the 
following two examples:
•  If the decision maker asked if there are any weapons of mass destruc-
tion in Iraq, then committing a type I error will have serious repercus-
sions if the decision maker is planning a military invasion (i.e., wrongly 
concluding that such weapons existed when there were none).
•  If, however, the analyst is asked whether the United States faces an 
attack by a terrorist group (e.g., in the manner of al-Qaeda), then a 
type II error needs to be avoided—overlooking a genuine threat to 
national security could result in a September 11, 2001-style attack.

124 
Chapter 8
PROBLEM SOLVING USING ALGEBRAIC EQUATIONS
Algebraic equations are used in a range of research activities to solve a 
myriad of problems. In essence, algebraic equations are formulae-based 
models that represent situations in the kinetic world. Rather than try to 
canvas the countless ways algebra can be used, we will draw on an in-
dicative example to demonstrate the power of this type of analysis.
Consider a situation where an operational commander needs to be ad-
vised as to the estimate of the arrival time of enemy troops (in a military 
intelligence context) or the arrival of a motorcycle gang that is on the 
move (in a law enforcement intelligence context). Using algebra to solve 
this dilemma becomes an exercise in predictive intelligence, albeit one 
that is purely operational. To solve this problem the analyst:
•  Notes the location of the troops/motorcycle gang at present;
•  Notes the location of where the troops/motorcycle gang are ex-
pected to arrive;
•  Calculates the distance between the two points;
•  Notes the rate of advance (e.g., from information received from a 
reconnaissance unit, an airborne observer, or covert surveillance);
•  Calculates the approximate arrival time for the troops/motorcycle 
gang, taking the distance between the two location points and divid-
ing it by the rate of advance (T = D / R).
In this example, suppose the distance between the two points of interest 
is 200 kilometers. And, suppose that the persons of interest are advancing 
at a rate of 50 kilometers per hour. Therefore, 200 km / 50 km per hour 
= 4 hours. The intelligence analyst can then brief the commander that the 
estimated arrival time of the persons of interest will be in approximately 
4 hours.7
This type of estimate can be applied to business intelligence and private 
intelligence too. In the case of the former, analysts could estimate the mar-
ket arrival of a competitor’s new model Gizmo. If the rate of production 
per unit is known (or can be estimated based on previous information or 
similar processes), then the timeframe for delivery can be calculated by 
inverting the equation used above and amending the variable labels to 
reflect the events:
delivery date = number of units needed  rate of production
In the case of private intelligence, an analyst can use algebraic equations 
to, say, deduce that it was feasible for the suspect in an insurance fraud 

 
Basic Statistical Analyses 
125
matter to set the fire in question. Using the formula cited in the distance 
traveled example above, the analyst could use it to show that the person 
of interest was capable of traveling, without exceeding the speed limit, 
from his location to the site of the alleged arson and back within the times 
given by witnesses.
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Algebraic equations;
•  Average;
•  Base value;
•  Bimodal;
•  Bivariate;
•  Categorical data;
•  Chi-square analysis;
•  Contingency table;
•  Critical values;
•  Descriptive statistics;
•  Frequency;
•  Index numbers;
•  Interval data;
•  Level of confidence;
•  Levels of measurement;
•  Maximum;
•  Mean;
•  Medium;
•  Minimum;
•  Mode;
•  Multivariate;
•  Nominal data;
•  Nonparametric;
•  P-value;
•  Per capita;
•  Percent decrease;
•  Percent increase;
•  Range;
•  Rank data;
•  Ratio data;
•  Ratios;

126 
Chapter 8
•  Regression analysis;
•  Rounding;
•  Scatter diagram;
•  Scattergram;
•  Scatter plot;
•  Statistical significance;
•  Trimodal;
•  Type I error;
•  Type II error;
•  Univariate;
•  Weighted grand mean;
•  Weighted mean; and
•  Yates’ correction.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  What are the four levels of measurement in statistics? Describe the 
attributes of each level.
2.  List the different types of univariate analysis available to the intel-
ligence analyst.
3.  Describe the differences between mean and weighted mean. Give an 
example of how an analyst might use each.
4.  What is the difference between a type I error and a type II error? 
Explain.
LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1.  Suppose ocean-going freighters regularly use the straits off the coast 
of Country Q to save travel time. Suppose also that these straits are 
the subject of pirate attacks. You, as an intelligence analyst, have 
been asked to calculate the decrease in international shipping using 
these straits after a certain date. The daily number of ships before 
was 416 and after was 232. What was the percentage decrease due 
to hostile activity?
2.  Community elders in Country Q are concerned about attacks on 
street markets—they suspect that they are not random and that this 
could signify growing factional tensions. The intelligence cell at-
tached to the nation’s paramilitary police has divided the country 
into five equal regions and collated the attack data accordingly. This 
information revealed the following distribution:

 
Basic Statistical Analyses 
127
Region 
Number of Attacks
1 
26
2 
19
3 
31
4 
17
5 
11
Using a chi-square test of significance, determine whether it is likely that 
this distribution of attacks is by chance (random) or that other forces may 
be at play. Use a 0.05 confidence level. What can you conclude from these 
results?
NOTES
1. Henry Prunckun, “Operation El Dorado Canyon: A Military Solution to the 
Law Enforcement Problem of Terrorism—A Quantitative Analysis” (master’s 
thesis, University of South Australia, 1994), 47.
2. Jonathan Caulkins, “What Price Data Tell Us about Drug Markets,” Journal of 
Drug Issues 28, no. 3 (Summer 1998): 602.
3. Ester H. Highland and Roberta S. Rosenbaum, Business Mathematics, 3rd ed. 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1985), 420.
4. Highland and Rosenbaum, Business Mathematics, 420.
5. Henry Prunckun, “Chasing the Dragon: A Quantitative Analysis of Austra-
lia’s Law Enforcement Approach to Combating Heroin Trafficking—1988 to 1996” 
(PhD diss., University of South Australia, 2000).
6. Commonwealth Department of Human Services and Health, Review of 
Methadone Treatment in Australia (Canberra, Australia: Australian Government 
Publishing Service, 1995), 29.
7. U.S. Department of the Army, FM 34-2-1: Tactics, Techniques and Procedures 
for Reconnaissance and Surveillance, and Intelligence Support to Counterreconnaissance 
(Washington DC: Department of the Army, June 1991), 2–20.

128
0
c
Chapter Title
128
9
c
Presenting Statistical Results
T
he key concepts that will be discussed in the chapter are:
1.  Graphs;
2.  Tables; and
3.  Stem-and-leaf plots.
GRAPHS
Graphs are used to display numeric data pictorially; in effect, they are 
symbolic representations. In practice, the term graph is used interchange-
ably with the term chart. Intelligence analysts use graphs to display infor-
mation that would be too complex to do so in narrative form. Therefore, 
the graph offers the analysts a simple, concise format for conveying the 
gist of their results to the decision maker.
The most commonly used (and easily recognized by nonanalytic users) 
are the pie chart, bar chart, and line chart. A pie chart is a circular figure di-
vided into segments that resemble a pie. Each “slice” of the pie represents 
a particular data item. The size of the overall pie is 100 percent, with each 
slice being a representation of a proportion of the total.
A bar chart uses vertical bars (but sometimes they are laid out horizon-
tally) to show the relationship between data across categories. Bar charts 
are used where the data items are categorical (i.e., independent of each 
other), for instance: the number of rockets, automatic weapons, and hand 

 
Presenting Statistical Results 
129
grenades that a guerrilla force may have in its possession (a pie chart 
could be used for the same purpose as it also represents individual data 
items). The bars are not drawn contiguously, as in a histogram (see fig. 
9.1), but with separations between them to demonstrate they are not re-
lated by time or score interval. If, however, the bars are joined in a contig-
uous manner, then it is referred to as a histogram. A histogram is a picture 
of a grouped distribution, which shows the shape of the distribution.
A frequency polygon serves the same purpose as a histogram, but it only 
shows the midpoint of the intervals of the scores. It can be displayed as 
either bars or dots. If shown as a series of dots, each dot is connected by 
a line (see fig. 9.2). In this regard, the line becomes a bar chart but with 
the bar image suppressed—they are merely represented by dots joined 
by a line.
Figure 9.1. Histogram.
Figure 9.2. Frequency polygon.

130 
Chapter 9
In contrast, a line chart is used where the data are required to be dis-
played showing passage of time (time series), say, the number of rocket 
propelled grenades an insurgent group has held in its cache month by 
month (see fig. 9.3).
Some forms of graphs use pictures or symbols in place of bars, col-
umns, or lines as a way of reinforcing the message. These are termed 
pictographs and lend themselves to briefings where the analyst is 
presenting his or her results via a data projector on a large screen. 
However, before an analyst uses such a technique, thought should be 
given to whether its inclusion will trivialize the presentation. This is 
because the images that are used can be construed by decision makers 
as frivolous, and therefore, they lessen the impact of the message being 
conveyed.
Figure 9.3. Line chart.
SOME TIPS FOR CONSTRUCTING GRAPHS
•  Give graphs captions that reflect the dependent and independent vari-
ables being displayed.
•  The X axis displays the independent variable, while the Y axis the 
dependent variable.
•  Label both axes, and assign an appropriate unit of measurement.

 
Presenting Statistical Results 
131
TABLES
A table is a data set arranged in columns. When constructing a table, con-
vention is to only use horizontal lines. Some software packages place ver-
tical lines into tables, but strictly speaking, this is not correct. An example 
of a properly laid out table is shown in table 9.1.1
STEM-AND-LEAF PLOTS
As an alternative to displaying data in a histogram, the analyst can use a 
stem-and-leaf plot. Stem-and-leaf plots are constructed by creating a stem 
(left-hand column) that contains the tens-unit digits. The leaves of the plot 
are the integer-unit digits for each corresponding tens-unit and listed in 
the right-hand column. Once constructed, the horizontal leaves in a stem-
and-leaf plot correspond to the vertical bars of a histogram.
Stem-and-leaf plots can be used for decimal numbers also. They are 
produced by using the integer portion of the data as the stem and the digit 
after the decimal point as the leaf. If the decimal portion has two figures, 
the analyst rounds the last digit so only one decimal place remains. The 
following shows a stem-and-leaf plot using whole numbers:
5: 3
5: 4 4
5: 5 5 5
5: 6 6 6 6 6
5: 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
5: 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
5: 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9
6: 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
6: 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
6: 2 2 2 2 2
6: 3 3 3
6: 4 4
6: 5
Table 9.1. Worldwide Terrorist Events by Severity Level Pre- and Post-1986 U.S. Air 
Raid on Libya
 
Terrorist Events
Severity Levels 
Before Raid 
After Raid 
% Change
High 
541 
458 
–15.3%
Medium 
170 
155 
–8.8%
Low 
145 
244 
+68.3%
Totals 
856 
857 
+00.1%

132 
Chapter 9
And the following is a stem-and-leaf plot using decimal numbers:
5: 3
6: 3 4
7: 4 5 6 7
8: 2 6 7 8 8
9: 2 3 4 5 5 6 8 9
10: 1 1 2 3 5 5 6 8 8 9
11: 0 1 2 3 3 4 5 5 6 7 7 9
12: 1 2 3 3 4 4 5 6 8
13: 1 1 2 3 5 9
14: 2 4 7 9
15: 4 3 7
16: 5 7
17: 1
Note that the length of the leaves shown in the leaf-and-stem plot for 
whole numbers corresponds to the frequencies in table 9.2 when repre-
sented in a frequency table. To construct a frequency table, the analyst 
arranges the data by categories, increments, or—as is the case with table 
9.2—groups.
Table 9.2. Example of a Frequency Table
Groups 
Frequency
51–55 
 6
56–60 
44
61–65 
18
TRAPS TO AVOID
Here are a few things to keep in mind when constructing graphs:
•  Do not be tempted to enhance a graph by using what could be consid-
ered a gimmicky feature contained in some software packages—such 
as three-dimensional charts. Features like this trivialize your research 
and distract the decision maker’s attention away from your study’s 
results and focus too much on the eye-catching graphical image;
•  Be mindful of inadvertently distorting chart results by setting the 
baseline value (i.e., the value at the bottom of the vertical, or y, axis) 
to a score other than zero; and
•  Do not mistakenly display categorical data as a frequency polygon 
(i.e., along the horizontal, or x, axis)—instead, present these data as 
a bar chart.

 
Presenting Statistical Results 
133
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Bar chart;
•  Chart;
•  Frequency polygon;
•  Frequency table;
•  Graph;
•  Histogram;
•  Leaves;
•  Line chart;
•  Pictograph;
•  Pie chart;
•  Stem;
•  Stem-and-leaf plot;
•  Table;
•  X axis; and
•  Y axis.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  Explain why an analyst would use graphs to display statistical re-
sults.
2.  What are the types of visual representations available for intelli-
gence analysts to use?
3.  Discuss the difference between a histogram and a frequency polygon.
4.  Describe the attributes of a correctly laid out table of statistical 
data.
5.  When would an analyst use a stem-and-leaf plot? Give an example.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Suppose an intelligence analyst is preparing a briefing to industry execu-
tives of the occurrences of trademark violations in a major city known for 
its high international tourist traffic. Over the past year, field operatives 
have noted the following numbers of individuals trading in counterfeit 
trademarked goods for each month starting in January and ending in De-
cember: 27, 35, 17, 13, 42, 37, 52, 48, 20, 24, 12, and 30. Select an appropri-
ate method of displaying these data for an electronic slide presentation, 
and prepare the slide.

134 
Chapter 9
NOTE
1. Henry Prunckun, “Operation El Dorado Canyon: A Military Solution to the 
Law Enforcement Problem of Terrorism—A Quantitative Analysis” (master’s 
thesis, University of South Australia, 1994), 52.

135
10
c
Advanced 
Analytic Techniques
A 
number of sophisticated analytic techniques will be discussed in this 
chapter:
 1.  SWOT analysis;
 2.  PEST analysis;
 3.  Force field analysis;
 4.  Pareto analysis;
 5.  Analysis of competing hypotheses;
 6.  Fishbone analysis;
 7.  Morphological analysis;
 8.  Perception assessment analysis;
 9.  Timeline analysis;
10.  Network analysis;
11.  Telephone record analysis;
12.  Event and commodity flow analysis;
13.  Genealogical analysis; and
14.  Financial analysis.
INTRODUCTION
One issue that is common to advanced statistical analyses is “customer ac-
ceptance.” Due to the abstract nature of the mathematical formulae of tech-
niques, like multivariate analysis, decision makers can feel troubled when 
asked to trust assessments based on such methods. However, this chapter 
describes a number of advanced analytic tools that can be used to make 

136 
Chapter 10
sense of unstructured data in a range of intelligence settings that are easy 
to understand by decision makers and easy to employ by the analyst.
The reason for discussing a variety of tools is that each tool tends to 
be problem specific. That is, some tools work better with certain types 
of data or with certain types of issues, and others work better in other 
circumstances. Some tools are used for strategic analysis, while others are 
used for tactical or operational problems.
But just because an analyst has examined data using one of these tools 
does not mean that the results can be taken as absolute—analytic techniques 
are simply methods that allow analysts to form judgments (i.e., defensible 
conclusions) in a way that is transparent to the reader of their reports. Their 
analyses are able to be repeated in order to demonstrate the validly and 
reliability of the methods used (i.e., in keeping with the tenets of scientific 
research). The point is that analytic tools are not replacements for sound 
critical thinking or the application of professional judgment, but they aid 
both.
There is little doubt that the analysis of qualitative data enjoys no consensus 
about what technique is used.
SWOT ANALYSIS
Arguably, an analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and 
threats (SWOT) is one of the most popular analytic tools used by intel-
ligence analysts. This is for two reasons: 1) it can be used with a variety 
of unstructured data (qualitative data from either primary or secondary 
sources), and 2) the focus of the research is not variable dependent—it 
can be either the target or the agency conducting the operation against 
the target. The technique was devised for long-range business plan-
ning, but it can be applied to a variety of issues in the intelligence 
realm that are either strategic or tactical. Or it can be used to analyze 
information in order to build a profile or help understand the current 
situation (e.g., situational analysis). A SWOT begins with the analyst’s 
defining the end-state, as it is called in a strategic setting or objective if 
it is tactical.
Using any one of several idea generation or data collation methods, the 
analyst populates each of the four quadrants of the SWOT matrix with the 
data (although a matrix typically displays a SWOT, SWOT analyses can 
be laid out in any way that is suitable for the analyst). For strategy assess-
ments, it is advantageous to have a broad view of the issue and, hence, 
employ a multidisciplinary team approach (i.e., an ideas workshop) to 
consider each of the four factors. A tactical assessment could be done by 

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
137
an analysis based on the data collected in the lead-up to an operation or 
during an operation.
Once this has been done, it is a matter of assessing the factors one at a 
time and then cross-checking them for agreement (i.e., ensuring there are 
no contrary or paradoxical positions stated in different quadrants). As-
sessing can be done by asking hypothetical questions such as:
•  In what way can the strengths be used to an advantage?;
•  How can the weaknesses be shored up?;
•  What is the best way to take advantage of each opportunity?; and
•  What needs to be done to mitigate each threat?
In a tactical setting, analysts can use the results of SWOT to examine a 
target’s operating structure, method of operating, capabilities, financial 
base, and so on. Strategies can be formulated based on combinations of 
the factors as follows:
Strengths/Opportunities. Ways that will use strengths so that oppor-
tunities can be realized.
Weaknesses/Opportunities. Ways to address weaknesses in order to 
provide relief so that opportunities can be followed.
Strengths/Threats. Ways that use strengths “offensively” to moderate 
threats.
Weaknesses/Threats. Defensive ways that will protect against threats.
PEST ANALYSIS
If an analytic tool could have a cousin, PEST could be said to be rela-
ted to SWOT. PEST is an acronym for political, economic, social, and tech-
nological factors (social factors could be couched in slightly broader terms, 
Table 10.1. SWOT Analytical Matrix
Analysis of Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats
 
Supportive 
Detrimental
Internal
External
Strengths are the attributes 
associated with the [issue/problem/
agency/etc. under investigation] 
that are conducive to achieving the 
end-state.
Opportunities are the conditions 
[legal/criminogenic/social/
economic/political/psychological/
etc.] that would assist achieving the 
end-state.
Weaknesses are the attributes 
associated with the [issue/problem/
agency/etc. under investigation] 
that are detrimental or may prevent 
achieving the end-state.
Threats are the conditions [legal/
criminogenic/social/economic/
political/ psychological/etc.] that 
might be detrimental to the way the 
agency carries out its operations.

138 
Chapter 10
such as sociocultural, if desired). These factors are usually the indepen-
dent variables that are acting on the dependent variable. This technique 
has been used by the business community to assess the impact that these 
external factors might have on the organization or the market in which it 
operates. But, like SWOT, PEST can be used to an advantage by the intel-
ligence community to assess a variety of issues under investigation.
Because PEST examines external factors, it is essentially half of a SWOT. 
But where the two differ is in the focus of the inquiry—PEST examines the 
environment in which the issue is positioned, whereas SWOT examines a 
dilemma or the actions of, say, a target. Viewed another way, PEST could 
be seen as the macro scene, and SWOT is the micro perspective. PEST is, 
therefore, used as the main tool for analysts when conducting what are 
termed environmental scans. In this sense, PEST is more likely to be used 
for strategic analysis where the issues are complex.
PEST analysis can be conducted before a SWOT analysis (e.g., via a 
workshop) to help identify issues. Though, it is less likely that a SWOT 
would be conducted before a PEST as there may be issues raised in a 
PEST that would subsequently feed into a SWOT.
There are many variations of PEST. Some analysts add additional 
factors, thus modifying the acronym to variants such as: STEP (PEST ar-
ranged differently—stay with PEST as it is universally known); PESTELI 
(adding environmental, legal, and industrial factors); PESTELO (same 
as PESTELI, but instead of the industrial factor, it uses organizational); 
STEEP (social, technological, economic, ethical, and political); and STEE-
PLED (social, technological, economic, ethical, political, legal, environ-
mental, and demographic).
There is a view that some of these variants are not necessary and make 
the analysis overcomplicated. Some scholars have argued that the four 
factors under PEST cover all of the issues that would arise out of an ex-
amination of the other sub-factors. That is, the sub-factors are contained 
in the main PEST factors. Nevertheless, any of these factors can be mixed 
and matched to suit the research project.
Finally, like the SWOT, PEST has a simplicity that lends itself to ease of 
understanding while powerful enough to convey the results to decision 
makers. Two templates that can be used are shown in tables 10.2 and 
10.3. One is a simple table, and the other contains more detail. They can 
be modified to suit most intelligence research projects or used according 
to the analyst’s personal preference.
FORCE FIELD ANALYSIS
Force field analysis is a practical technique for examining the pressures 
that can be applied for or against a particular policy position, an opera-
tional tactic, or any other issue under investigation. It is a method that 

Table 10.2. Simple PEST Analysis Template
allows the analyst to form a judgment based on careful weighing of the 
pros and cons involved.
For instance, a force field analysis can be carried out to weigh the pos-
sible success of a planned operation, or it can be used to gather driving 
forces in order to overcome or reduce the impact of restraining forces. Force 
field analysis also lends itself to other variations of possible use.
“There is no ‘perfect’ decision. One always has to balance conflicting objec-
tives, conflicting opinions, and conflicting priorities. The best decision is 
only an approximation—and a risk.”1
Step by step:
1.  In a few words, describe the issue, plan, proposal, or policy option 
in the middle of the diagram (see fig. 10.1);
2.  In the left-hand column, list those attributes, options, or factors that 
can be considered driving forces in relation to the issue under inves-
tigation;
3.  In the right-hand column, list those factors that are restraining forces;
4.  Assign a numeric quantity to each force factor listed in the two col-
umns. For instance, use an ordinal scale that ranges from, say, weak 
(+1) to strong (+5) for driving forces and for restraining forces, weak 
(–1) to strong (–5). In assigning a numeric quantity to each factor, ana-
lysts should be conscious that they do not bias the results by assigning 
values that reflect their own personal views, or the official view of the 
government of the day, or perhaps of one of the key decision makers 

Table 10.3. Detailed PEST Analysis Template
 
 
 
 
 
 
Import
 
 
 
 
 
 
Critical
 
 
Impact Estimate 
Timing 
 
Rise/Fall 
Important
 
 
High 
0–6 mths 
Direction 
> Increase 
Somewhat
 
Comments 
Medium 
7–12 mths 
+ Positive 
< Decrease 
Not Very
 
and 
Low 
13–24 mths 
– Negative 
= Stable 
Not At All
 
Observations 
Unknown 
24+ mths 
0 Neutral 
0 Unknown 
Unknown
Political 
Include comments and 
High 
6 mths 
+ 
> 
Not very
 
 observations here
Economic 
Ditto 
Medium 
12 mths 
+ 
> 
Not at all
Social 
Ditto 
Low 
15 mths 
– 
< 
Somewhat
Technological 
Ditto 
High 
24 mths 
0 
= 
Critical

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
141
(e.g., in order to curry favor). Projecting such bias into the method is 
unethical because it will artificially manipulate the analysis and use 
the scientific method simply as a guise for objective research. The 
safest way to assign the values is to achieve consensus through dis-
cussion with, for instance, a number of subject specialists that might 
take the form of a “judgment sample,” “convenient sample” or other 
availability-based sampling technique.2, 3 If time and resources permit, 
the nominal group technique can be used to great advantage. Doing 
so removes any question of bias from the analysts (and the analytic 
unit that employs them).
5.  Tally each column and add the two columns. If the total is a negative 
number, then the options regarding what the restraining forces are 
suggesting need to be considered carefully. If the number is positive, 
then the driving force options need to be considered. There is also the 
possibility that a zero result could occur or a weak (i.e., +1 or –1) re-
sult, suggesting that the direction may, on balance, be the way to pro-
ceed. But the analyst needs to apply judgment based on experience in 
such situations. Remember, these are just tools to guide thinking and 
reason; they do not reflect an absolute for any given situation.
As an example, consider this situation: an analyst is tasked with briefing 
decision makers about the likely impact of a newly proposed law that is 
intended to curb motorcycle gang violence. Based on the data obtained 
via the information collection plan, the analyst constructed a force field 
diagram similar to the one in figure 10.1.
Sources of information can also include brainstorming workgroups. This 
approach is particularly helpful if the timeframe of the issue being studied 
has a horizon of greater than six months. If the timeframe is measured in 
years, then complexity increases and convening a multidisciplinary (and, 
perhaps, multiagency) group to brainstorm the issues is a must.
Then, using a data projector, the analyst displays and talks about the 
force field diagram, discussing the pros and cons, and finally presents the 
agency’s preferred position. This option will directly address the original 
research question (i.e., will the proposed new law have an impact on 
curbing motorcycle gang violence?).
When crafting recommendations, the analyst could also suggest changes 
to individual factors that, if implemented, could address the issue in favor 
of the driving forces, for it is the sum effect that the analyst is considering. 
For example,
•  Suppose there was a restraining force like this: New anti-gang legisla-
tion could inadvertently contribute to the workload of the court sys-
tem, which in turn would result in trial delays.
•  A recommendation that adds force to the drivers could be crafted as 
such: To prevent over-listing and trial delays when the new anti-gang 

142 
Chapter 10
legislation is enacted, prosecutors would need to work with the crimi-
nal courts’ listing coordinators to manage trial lists.
Recommendations formulated along the lines of the second item could tip 
the balance from a position that suggests restraining forces dominate to 
one that sees driving forces considered. Viewed another way, force field 
analysis is a way to identify not only the forces for or against the issue 
under investigation but also to create a chart that allows the analyst to 
visualize ways of countering restraining forces.
Pros-Cons-Fixes
Force field analysis is closely related to the decision making tool known as 
pros-cons-fixes. This variation starts by listing possible options for dealing 
with a problem. A corresponding note is placed next to each option, stat-
ing its positive attributes (this is usually done in table form). Then, all of 
the consequent negatives are listed, followed by ways of how the negatives 
can be overcome—these are the fixes. If no fix is available, then “no fix” is 
assigned to that option. The final step is to relist all of the options but omit 
those with fixes. This is because options that can be fixed are seen as neu-
Figure 10.1. Force field analysis.

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
143
tral; they are extraneous and can confound judgment. What are left in the 
table are a number of pros and cons that can be assessed more clearly.
Plus-Minus-Interesting
A quantitative version of the pros-cons-fixes technique is termed plus-minus-
interesting. The steps in conducting this type of analysis are the same, except 
that instead of labeling the column fixes, it is labeled interesting issues; these 
can be either positive or negative. In addition, each issue comment (for all 
plus, minus, and interesting issues) in the table is rated on a Likert-type scale 
ranging from –5 (very negative) to +5 (very positive), with 0 as the neutral 
point midway. Once this is done, the analyst adds the ratings for all issues 
listed to arrive at a score for each option. A separate table is constructed for 
each option under consideration so that the total derived for each option can 
be assessed against the others being considered. (See table 10.4.)
PARETO ANALYSIS
Pareto analysis is a quantitative way of prioritizing a list of options. The 
Pareto principle states that 80 percent of the effect of being observed is a 
result of 20 percent of the causes.
Pareto analysis, therefore, relies on a rating for each option. As such, Lik-
ert scores are often used. But whatever the metric, it must make sense in the 
context of the intelligence project. The following is a list of policy options 
generated by brainstorming; they relate to how a nation could deal with 
international pirates. Scores were assigned for each policy option after all 
of the ideas were written down. The higher the score, the more important 
the option was considered. Evaluating each option can be done through a 
Table 10.4. Abbreviated Example of One Option of a P-M-I Analysis (Aggressive 
Stand against International Pirates)
Plus 
Minus 
Interesting
Boost domestic confidence 
(+3)
Boost international 
reputation (+4)
Secure safety of sea lanes 
(+5)
Ensure international trade 
(+3)
Some may see intervention 
as a risk to the lives of 
nationals living overseas 
(–2)
Could be misinterpreted 
as a play for regional 
power (–2)
A further cost to the 
military (–1)
Military personnel to be 
overseas longer or more 
often (–1)
Media and press 
opportunities with other 
foreign leaders (+4)
Joint operations (+2)
Valuable training for 
special forces (+2)
International law issues for 
intervention/interdiction 
(–3)

144 
Chapter 10
SWOT analysis or other evaluative process. Ideally, scores should be dis-
crete, but if two options are considered equal, there is no reason why the 
same score cannot be assigned to each. Nevertheless, the final prioritized 
list must make sense to those who will be implementing the recommenda-
tions. In this example, the goal is to take an aggressive stand against inter-
national pirates. The six options are:
1.  Increase surveillance by aircraft (+5);
2.  Institute a system of in-country, covert “coast watchers” (+2);
3.  Increase maritime naval patrols (+6);
4.  Monitor radio communications frequencies used by pirates (+3);
5.  Randomly search vessels of the class used by pirates (+4); and
6.  Scuttle all vessels found carrying offensive arms or explosives (+1).
If this list is then prioritized according to the Pareto principle, an action-
able list is created. From highest to lowest effect, the options are:
1.  Increase maritime naval patrols;
2.  Increase surveillance by aircraft;
3.  Randomly search vessels of the class used by pirates;
4.  Monitor radio communications frequencies used by pirates;
5.  Institute a system of in-country, covert “coast watchers”; and
6.  Scuttle all vessels found carrying offensive arms or explosives.
ANALYSIS OF COMPETING HYPOTHESES
Analysis of competing hypotheses is a useful tool to think about inductively 
construed theories in a rational way. It is an important tool when the analyst 
is faced with several plausible propositions to explain the issue under inves-
tigation. Rather than being compelled to accept just one theory, analysis of 
competing hypotheses allows the analyst to evaluate all theories.4
Through this technique, the available evidence suggests the most plau-
sible theory rather than having to decide on subjective factors (here, the 
term evidence is a generic term that also applies to arguments and the like). 
If there are insufficient data to draw a conclusion, the techniques can aid a 
new (or revised) information collection plan so that further or better data 
can be fed into the process.
Managers of field operatives and other information collecting assets 
can use the output of this type of analysis to task their resources more ef-
ficiently, saving valuable time. Here are the steps involved in conducting 
an analysis of competing hypotheses:

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
145
•  Draw up a matrix like the one shown in table 10.5, listing the 
various hypotheses across the top and important pieces of evidence 
(including a lack of evidence) down the left-hand column.5 Each 
hypothesis and each piece of evidence does not have to be listed in 
full, a simple abbreviation of H1, H2 . . . and E1, E2 . . . will suffice. 
The analyst’s descriptions in detail can be listed above or below the 
matrix as a reminder. At this point, the matrix is a quick way of 
bringing together all the information to form a clear picture.
•  Working across the columns, assign a nominal value (+ or –) to indi-
cate if each piece of evidence is consistent with the hypothesis or is 
inconsistent with the hypothesis.
•  Tally the columns and consider whether the column with the most 
pluses should be advanced as the most likely hypothesis. The ca-
veat placed on the conclusions drawn using force field analysis (see 
above) apply to this technique also.
•  Just because one column may have the most “pluses” does not mean 
it is the best choice. Some pieces of evidence can and should carry 
more weight than others. In this regard, the process still requires 
the analyst to apply some degree of judgment before proceeding to 
advance this as the course of action.
•  If sensitivity is an issue, analysts could consider using another 
scale, say, the ordinal scale, to attribute weight to each piece of 
evidence. For example, the use of double pluses (+ +) and double 
minuses (– –) could be added to the single signs discussed in this 
section, or a scale like that used in force field analysis could be 
adapted.
Although the use of the matrix is very useful, it is unlikely that any 
analyst will include it in the final report or briefing unless the audi-
ence is technically oriented (e.g., perhaps presenting the initial results 
to a peer group as part of a quality control process or validating the 
methodology).
Table 10.5. Competing Hypotheses Matrix: From Prunckun’s Study of Heroin6
 
H1 
H2 
H3 
H4
E1 
+ 
– 
– 
–
E2 
– 
+ 
– 
–
E3 
– 
– 
+ 
–
E4 
– 
– 
– 
+
E5 
– 
– 
– 
+
E6 
– 
– 
– 
+

146 
Chapter 10
Research Question
What are the likely factors that caused the heroin shortage in Sydney in 
2001? The hypotheses are as follow (while the analysis is on the previous 
page, in table 10.5):
H1—Recent seizures (at that time) by law enforcement agencies.
H2—The arrest of significant personalities in the supply and distribution 
chain.
H3—A severe water drought in the poppy-growing regions of Myan-
mar (Burma).
H4—A Taliban-enforced reduction of Afghanistan-grown opium.
Evidence
E1—Quantitative data about Australian law enforcement seizures.
E2—Elimination of unnamed and unspecified personnel.
E3—Data on crop production and rainfall in Myanmar.
E4—Quantitative data on drug production in Afghanistan.
E5—A 3,000 metric ton reduction in Afghanistan-grown opium.
E6—Police intelligence of trafficking routes to Europe confirming a di-
version of Golden Triangle heroin (destined for Australia) diverted 
to Europe to fill the Afghan void.
FISHBONE ANALYSIS
Fishbone analysis is used to show cause and effect by identifying and 
then exploring the surrounding problem under investigation. It can also 
be adapted by analysts as a tool to help manage the information collection 
process (see, for instance, fig. 2.1 in chapter 2).
The analyst lists the problem to be investigated at the right-hand side of 
the diagram (the fish’s head). He or she constructs the major bones of the 
Military intelligence analysts could use the nine order of battle factors to 
spotlight issues surrounding friendly, neutral, or enemy forces. These fac-
tors include: 1) composition of organizational units; 2) disposition (location 
and deployment) of units; 3) strength of units regarding personnel, weap-
ons, and equipment; 4) tactics that would be used by the units; 5) training at 
individual and unit levels; 6) logistics for unit supply; 7) combat effective-
ness of the unit; 8) electronic and communications technical capability; and 
9) miscellaneous background and supporting information about the unit.

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
147
fish by listing the major categories of information concerning the issue.  
Traditionally, the categories are machinery/equipment, people, methods, 
and materials. Alternatively, the analyst can use categories such as poli-
cies, procedures, plant/equipment, and people. The categories used are 
not critical as they merely act as a framework for analysis.
From each of the major bones, minor bones can sprout to form a list of 
contributing issues. This is analogous to watercourses—small brooks and 
creeks that flow into larger streams, which, in turn, flow into rivers. Each 
issue contributes to form a larger problem. Fishbone analysis is aimed 
at identifying the problem’s causes so that the analyst can suggest treat-
ments. This analytic technique will not identify symptoms because the 
symptom is the focus of the analysis (i.e., the issue under investigation). 
See figure 10.2 for a template for conducting a fishbone analysis.
When populating the diagram, the analyst may find that some issues con-
tribute to more than one problem. This is good to note because when seeking 
a solution, it might be advantageous to address those issues that contribute 
to more than one problem. Analysts can use methods such as brainstorming 
and the nominal group technique to generate ideas for treatment.
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
The term morphological is used in the intelligence context to describe how 
analysts impose structure to their investigations in order to test multidi-
mensional relationships. It is used to study how various concepts or ideas 
fit together. Morphological analysis is often used to explore complex 
policy issues where the factors involved are not quantifiable and would 
be difficult to model using statistical methods.
One of the strengths of morphological analysis is that it can generate a 
large number of possible explanations for a phenomenon. Or it can pro-
duce possible outcomes, treatment options, or causal theories for an event 
that has occurred or may occur in the future. In this regard, analysts can 
use the technique in place of brainstorming if time is a constraint or access 
to subject experts is not possible. Analysts can feed the output generated 
into subsequent analyses, such as competing hypotheses. Step by step:
1.  Deconstruct the issue under investigation to expose its component 
parts. As an example, take the research question: what means are 
available for controlling cyber weapons? Headings for analyzing 
this problem could be borrowed from the fishbone analysis—that is, 
either the categories of machinery/equipment, people, methods, and 
materials or the categories of policies, procedures, plant/equipment, 
and people. Or analysts are free to devise their own categories.

Figure 10.2. Typical template for conducting a fishbone analysis.

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
149
2.  Create a matrix to organize the headings associated with the re-
search question. Table 10.6 is an illustration taken from Prunckun’s 
study of cyber weapons control.7 In the row across the top, list the 
category headings that were identified in the deconstruction phase 
(step 1). In the columns extending downwards, list the possible ele-
ments that comprise the concept category heading (this order can be 
reversed, if desired, with the headings down the left-hand column 
and the possible elements across each row).
3.  Generate possible scenarios. There are several ways to generate 
scenarios. Starting with the first heading, the analyst selects an ele-
ment from somewhere in the corresponding column and then moves 
across one and selects an element from the next row, randomly. This 
is repeated until one element is selected from each row. Another, 
more methodical way, is to perform the selection in an orderly way 
that ensures every possible combination is included. In a two-by-six 
matrix this would be 36 possible outcomes. One can see that the ma-
trix offers the analyst a mechanism for generating a large number of 
possibilities quickly.
4.  Assess each of the explanations (i.e., output from step 3 above), and 
place in descending order from most plausible to least plausible. 
Some of the possibilities generated may be quite illogical; neverthe-
less, the process affords analysts a range of possibilities that they can 
now consider as a part of a set of action items for decision makers. 
Alternatively, analysts can use the process to just identify options 
(selectively) that they could not realize using other methods and, as 
such, can explore through further research.
PERCEPTION ASSESSMENT ANALYSIS
Perception assessment analysis allows the intelligence analyst to dem-
onstrate relationships between actions taken by field operatives and 
the perceptions of those who will observe or experience those actions. 
Table 10.6. Morphological Analysis Matrix
Prohibited 
Regulated
Creation of cyber weapons 
With existing criminal statutes
Possession of cyber weapons 
With amendments to existing criminal statutes
Distribution of cyber weapons 
Use existing licensing regime (e.g., for sporting guns)
Sale of cyber weapons 
Create new licensing regime
Transfer of cyber weapons 
For software weapons only
Use of cyber weapons 
For hardware weapons only

150 
Chapter 10
In psychology and the cognitive sciences, perception is defined as an 
awareness derived though sensory information. This technique enables 
operational managers to understand the possible impediments that 
implementing certain actions might give rise to because of perceptions. 
A matrix format displays the analytic results so that decision makers can 
understand how perception may become a blockage.
Taking an example from the military, an assessment might show how 
others in the operational environment—“enemy, civilian population, 
multinational, or coalition partners”—could perceive the dealings they 
have with friendly forces.8 The matrix is ideal for this as it lends itself to 
including other factors, including success criteria.
But in order to carry out this type of analysis, it requires a more than 
average degree of understanding about the social and cultural issues that 
dominate the nation, the region, or the locality where troops are operating 
(as there can be both subtle and noticeable changes from one area to an-
other). Nevertheless, if the analysts do not possess this knowledge, there 
is no reason why they cannot glean this information from subject experts 
(e.g., through in-depth interviews or focus groups). This knowledge is 
then used to assess the likely reactions the observers might have to ac-
tions by friendly forces.
Measuring perceptions is a difficult science at best. One could argue that 
there is a relationship between the magnitude of the physical stimuli (i.e., 
say, actions taken by friendly forces) and how a person perceives these ac-
tions. But this may not be the case in a sociocultural setting—what friendly 
forces view as a positive activity, the local population could perceive as 
insulting or disrespectful. These actions could cause a backlash against the 
actions being taken by friendly forces and the forces themselves.
Analysts can measure perception by several methods. Four methods 
are suggested by the U.S. army,9 and these are:
•  Determine demographic and cultural factors that shape perceptions 
and reactions;
•  Identify patterns and indicators from previous expectations and re-
actions in a society’s history;
•  Compare reported reactions to determine if they were based on real 
or perceived conditions; or
•  Monitor editorial and opinion pieces of relevant newspapers for 
changes in tone or opinion shifts that can steer or may be reacting to 
the opinions of a society, organization, or group.
An example of a completed perception assessment analysis is shown in 
table 10.7. It appeared in the U.S. army’s interim field manual entitled 
Open Source Intelligence10 and shows across the top, the categories that 

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
151
need to be considered before action is taken. In each of the rows are pre-
sented the issues relating to the corresponding heading. The first three 
columns at the right of center are essential factual data, but the three rows 
to the left of center are interpretations of the data to the right and, as such, 
require expert subject knowledge.
TIMELINES OF KEY DATES ANALYSIS
A sometimes undervalued analytic technique is timeline analysis. It is 
akin to descriptive statistical analysis in that it describes in qualitative 
terms issues associated with key dates. The findings are displayed in a 
chronology table or a modified version.11 The table provides decision 
makers with a wealth of factual information that allows them to place 
proposed actions in sociocultural/political/religious contexts to avoid 
clashes with the local population.
Although what is discussed here is from a military perspective, time-
line analyses can be used by law enforcers for issues like counterterrorism 
planning. These reports inform the decision maker how certain elements 
of the population might react to friendly force activity or when and why 
local law enforcement might expect an attack by terrorists.
These timelines list such events as national, regional, and local holi-
days as well as religious and cultural events. In areas that have had ex-
perienced political turmoil, public events and events that have symbolic 
political significance should also be noted.
Table 10.7. Completed Perception Assessment Analysis

152 
Chapter 10
It is common to include descriptions of the demographic makeup of 
the population and political developments relevant to the planned op-
erations. Information that features in reference works like The CIA World 
Factbook12 could also be considered for inclusion in this type of analysis—
geography, economy, people, government, communications, and defense 
forces. An example of a timeline of key dates is shown in figure 10.3.13
NETWORK ANALYSIS
If a research question involved the need to understand the relationships 
between two or more individuals, organizations, events, or other factors, 
then network analysis can help make these associations clear. The relation-
ships can be anything—social, business, financial, or even relationships that 
show abstract concepts such as influence, support, or mentoring.
The origin of network analysis is in the social sciences where scholars, 
like Moreno,14 devised the use of two dimensional diagrams to display 
relationships.15 These were, and are, called sociograms, but in intelligence 
work analysts have termed them network analysis.16 Network analysis 
should not be confused with the closely related analytic technique known 
as traffic analysis.
Figure 10.3. Example of a timeline of key dates.

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
153
Network analysis is also called association analysis and link analysis because 
during the process, analysts use a matrix to show associations and lines 
to shown links.17 Although these terms are used, this author is in favor of 
standardization with the term network analysis as the other terms only de-
scribe part of the overall analytic technique. Because network analysis has 
a long history and tradition within the intelligence community,18 analysts 
should stay with this term and avoid others.
Network analysis consists of plotting nodes that represent entities—
circles indicate people, squares indicate companies or businesses, solid 
lines represent strong associations, dotted lines are used for weak or 
unconfirmed links, and the numbers along the lines count the number of 
contacts each entity has had with the other during the period of the study. 
Concepts such as influence can be represented by using arrows instead of 
lines.
The individual links that comprise the overall network can be described 
by the attributes of the associations between the entities. In a criminal 
context, these attributes might include routine pieces of information, like 
victims’ addresses and phone numbers, their movements prior to the 
alleged offenses, and the offenders’ modus operandi—all of which are 
analyzed in order to generate investigative leads, infer an organization’s 
hierarchy (or lack of one), determine points of vulnerability/strength, and 
so on. Step by step:
1.  Identify all entities. This can be done through other forms of 
analysis such as telephone record analysis or distilled from sur-
veillance reports, notes or transcripts of interviews, telephone or 
email intercepts, documents seized during raids, and so forth.
2.  Assemble these data in an association matrix (see table 10.8 for an 
illustration). This is a standard matrix consisting of the same entities 
listed across the top and down the left-hand side. Where an entity 
intersects itself, the cell is blanked out. Where there is a known or 
Network analysis has a common bond with traffic analysis; the latter involves 
intercepting radio or telecommunications traffic between entities. Using 
analytic tools, patterns in these communications can reveal inferred mean-
ing in the context of the issue under investigation. It is the exchange of the 
communication that is the subject of the analysis, not the content of the mes-
sage. Times, days, frequency, duration, method of transmission, encryption 
method, and so  on are the elements that are studied. As such, traffic analy-
sis is an important methodology for situations where the targets are using 
encrypted radio transmissions.

154 
Chapter 10
confirmed association between two entities, a solid dot is entered into 
the corresponding cell for the two. If the association is suspected, a 
hollow dot is used, and a plus sign is used to denote that a person is 
a key individual in a company or organization.
3.  Depict the entities as symbols on a chart (the chart can be a marker 
board, a flipchart, or a computer document), and draw the rela-
tionship lines (i.e., links) between them (see fig. 10.4). Common 
symbols are: circles for people, squares for corporate entities, and 
circles within squares for persons associated with an organization; 
solid lines represent strong associations, dotted lines for weak or 
unconfirmed links. Influential relationships use arrows pointing 
from dominant to subordinate. If using a computer program, it 
will have preassigned symbols for entities, for instance a tele-
phone symbol for telephone numbers, a boat for watercraft, a car 
or truck for motor vehicles, and so on. There is no correct way to 
display the entities on the chart. As intelligence projects differ, 
so too will each chart. The number and relationship between the 
Table 10.8. Example of an Association Matrix

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
155
entities will vary. As such, analysts will have to use their sense of 
artistic arrangement to create an exhibit that will clearly and easily 
show the viewer the relationships. If it is too “busy,” it is likely to 
be confusing. If it is confusing, it defeats the purpose of presenting 
the data in this way.
TELEPHONE RECORD ANALYSIS
This is a variation to the association matrix discussed in network analysis 
above. This technique is performed in the same way as association analy-
sis, but instead of listing entities, the matrix lists the telephone numbers 
that were called on the left-hand side and the numbers that made the calls 
across the top. Where associations exist, a numeral is used to record the 
number of times that telephone called the other.
Taking these data, analysts construct a chart exactly as they did for 
network analysis, but arrows are used to show the numbers making 
the calls to other numbers. The frequency of calls made is shown as a 
numeral alongside the arrow. Landline telephones, pagers, mobile (cell) 
Figure 10.4. Example of a network chart showing links.

156 
Chapter 10
telephones, fax machines, and computer modems can all be part of this 
analysis.19
The technique streamlines an otherwise labor-intensive process, es-
pecially if there is a large volume of data (e.g., obtained from telephone 
bills or pen registers). If this technique is used in conjunction with a 
network analysis of entities, the findings could help identify targets for 
installing covert listening devices or for conducting physical surveil-
lance.
EVENT AND COMMODITY FLOW ANALYSIS
Event flow analysis is a technique that is used to clarify situations that 
comprise multiple events and take place over a period of time—hours, 
days, weeks, months. These situations are usually characterized by com-
plex simultaneous or closely related historic events that would be confus-
ing to understand unless ordered sequentially in time.
Analysts can also use this technique to understand the flow of commod-
ities—illicit drugs, stolen goods, importation or exporting of restricted/
prohibited items, sales of weapons or their components, explosives, pre-
cursor chemicals, technology, and the like.
An event/commodity flow analysis is a diagrammatic depiction of the 
chronological events/movements. Once visualized in this way, analysts 
can draw inferences to generate further investigative leads or to test a 
hypothesis. Step by step:
1.  Identify all events associated with the issue under investigation. 
Analysts can obtain these data from crime scene examinations or, 
as with network analysis, through the distillation of surveillance re-
ports, notes or transcripts of interviews, telephone intercepts, docu-
ments seized during raids, and so on.
2.  Assemble these data in a chronology table. This is a similar pro-
cess to the timeline table produced in the analysis of key dates 
(above).
3.  Depict each event as a symbol on a chart (the chart can be a marker 
board, flipchart, or computer document), and draw a progress line 
between them. Times that separate the events can be shown as ver-
tical dividing lines at uniform time periods. If two or more events 
occur at the same time, then the progress lines joining the events 
will split and connect to the simultaneous events. These lines will 
converge again as they move to the next event(s).

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
157
GENEALOGICAL ANALYSIS
Genealogy is the study of families by searching their lineages back 
through history. From time to time, intelligence analysts may be called 
upon to provide a descriptive analysis of the extent of a target’s family 
relationships. A case in point is the late dictator of Iraq, Saddam Hussein, 
where a detailed understanding of his family’s relationships aided in his 
capture in December 2003.20
These data come from many sources: oral histories (of relatives); per-
sonal historical records (e.g., family bibles); birth, death, and marriage 
records and newspaper notices of same; grave and burial records; census 
records; and military and other government records. Analysts can use 
any source of information that shows kinship or pedigrees. Contrast ge-
nealogy with family history research—the former is a study of kinship, 
while the latter is a more detailed investigation into the lives and history 
of the family members.
Analysts display genealogical research findings in chart form as the 
visual presentation of the associations is easy to follow. They also use 
written narratives, but unless the number of kinships is few, such narra-
tives can confuse the reader (though analysts can use an indented outline 
to show generations more plainly).
Analysts can draw pedigree charts in a number of ways, including 
freehand and with preprinted templates. But the use of a computer 
package to collate and display the relationships is the most efficient 
method. These packages typically have other features for producing 
reports, including the ability to generate: group sheets for individual 
families, descendent or ancestor charts, individual relationship charts 
and individual summaries, lists of anniversaries (e.g., birth, death, 
marriage), and if photographs of the family members are available, 
these can be incorporated into the genealogical database and displayed 
in the pedigree chart as illustrated in the invented example shown in 
figure 10.5.
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
The single most useful analytic technique for the non-account analyst is 
net worth analysis. In most agencies, financial analysis is conducted by 
a qualified accountant because of the degree of knowledge it requires 
to understand the processes and procedures to reconstruct the target’s 
financial position.

Figure 10.5. Example of a photographic pedigree chart.

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
159
Nonetheless, an intelligence analyst can conduct a preliminary analysis 
of the target’s net worth using the methods described here. If the anal-
ogy of a paramedic and a surgeon is used, the intelligence analyst would 
be the paramedic performing the first stage analysis while calling in the 
surgeon to perform the more intricate analysis once the major issues are 
identified.
Net Worth Method
Net worth is an indirect method of assessing the target’s income and, 
therefore, is a handy tool in situations where the analyst may have come 
across information that suggests some form of illegal enterprise. It could 
also be used to assess a target’s suitability to an approach by a field op-
erative who is hoping to recruit the target as an agent (e.g., an offer of 
financial assistance).
Net worth is simply the difference between the target’s assets and li-
abilities. If the analyst conducts a net worth analysis over a period of time, 
say, for the end of each financial year, he or she can compile a picture as 
to whether the target is growing in worth or is experiencing losses and 
what the magnitude of these gains or losses might be. The formulas for 
calculating net worth are as follows, step by step:
1.  Assets – liabilities = net worth
2.  Net worth – prior year’s net worth = increase or decrease in net 
worth
3.  Net worth increase (or decrease) + living expenses = income
4.  Income – funds in known sources = funds from potentially illegal 
sources21
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Analytic tools and techniques;
•  Association analysis;
•  Competing hypotheses;
•  Driving forces;
•  End-state;
•  Environmental scan;
•  Event and commodity flow analysis;
•  Evidence;
•  Financial analysis;

160 
Chapter 10
•  Fishbone analysis;
•  Force field analysis;
•  Genealogical analysis;
•  Link analysis;
•  Morphological analysis;
•  Network analysis;
•  Net worth method;
•  Pareto principle;
•  Pedigree chart;
•  Perception assessment matrix;
•  PEST analysis;
•  Restraining forces;
•  Sociogram;
•  SWOT analysis;
•  Telephone record analysis; and
•  Traffic analysis.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  What are the four quadrants in a SWOT analysis? Describe each, and 
explain what type of data the analyst would seek to populate each.
2.  Compare and contrast SWOT with PEST. Discuss when an analyst 
might use one technique over the other and why.
3.  Describe the variations that can be applied to PEST.
4.  Summarize the steps in creating a network analysis.
5.  Discuss situations when an analyst might use event flow analysis 
and commodity flow analysis.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Suppose you have been tasked to construct a pedigree chart for the dic-
tatorial leader of Country Q. Your findings will form part of a psycholin-
guistic analysis of him. Using hand drawn lines or a software package, 
create a pedigree chart. For the purpose of this learning activity, use your 
own family members as a way of indicating your skill in creating the 
chart. Seek as many different sources of data as possible to simulate a 
real-world project. If stumbling blocks are encountered in obtaining data 
about family members (as they would be with a real target), consider how 
you could collect this information from other sources. List the possible 
alternative sources and methods of acquiring these data (e.g., using an 
information collection plan format).

 
Advanced Analytic Techniques 
161
NOTES
 1. Peter F. Drucker, Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices (Woburn, MA: 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1974), 387.
 2. Gary T. Henry, Practical Sampling (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1990), 17–20.
 3. Gennaro F. Vito, Edward J. Latessa, and Deborah G. Wilson, Introduction 
to Criminal Justice Research Methods (Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1988), 
127–28.
 4. Richards J. Heuer, Psychology of Intelligence Analysis (Washington, DC: Cen-
ter for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, 1999).
 5. Hank Prunckun, “A Rush to Judgment?: The Origin of the 2001 Australian 
‘Heroin Drought’ and Its Implications for the Future of Drug Law Enforcement,” 
Global Crime 7, no. 2 (May 2006): 247–55.
 6. Prunckun, “A Rush to Judgment?”, 247–55.
 7. Hank Prunckun, “‘Bogies in the Wire’: Is There a Need for Legislative Con-
trol of Cyber Weapons?” Global Crime 9, no. 3 (August 2008): 262–72.
 8. U.S. Department of the Army, FMI 2-22.9: Open Source Intelligence (Fort 
Huachuca, AZ: Department of the Army, 2006), 4–16.
 9. U.S. Department of the Army, FMI 2-22.9, 4–16.
10. U.S. Department of the Army, FMI 2-22.9, 4–16.
11. Marilyn Peterson, Applications in Criminal Intelligence: A Sourcebook (West-
port, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994), 36.
12. Central Intelligence Agency, The CIA World Factbook, 2009 (New York: Sky-
horse Publishing, 2008).
13. U.S. Department of the Army, FMI 2-22.9, 4–18.
14. Jacob L. Moreno, Who Shall Survive? Foundations of Sociometry, Group Psycho-
therapy, and Sociodrama (Washington DC: Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing, 
1934).
15. John Scott, Social Network Analysis: A Handbook (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 
1991).
16. Henry Prunckun, “The Intelligence Analyst as Social Scientist: A Compari-
son of Research Methods,” Police Studies 19, no. 3 (1996): 67–80.
17. International Association of Law Enforcement Intelligence Analysts, Suc-
cessful Law Enforcement Using Analytic Methods (Alexandria, VA: IALEIA, 1997).
18. Francis Ianni and Elizabeth Reuss-Ianni, “Network Analysis,” in Paul 
Andrews and Marilyn Peterson, eds., Criminal Intelligence Analysis (Loomis, CA: 
Palmer Enterprises, 1990).
19. Marilyn Peterson, “The Context of Analysis,” in Paul Andrews and Mari-
lyn Peterson, eds., Criminal Intelligence Analysis (Loomis, CA: Palmer Enterprises, 
1990).
20. U.S. Department of the Army, US Army Field Manual 3-24/ Marine Corps 
Warfighting Publication 3-33.5 (University of Chicago Press, 2007), 323.
21. Leigh Edwards Somers, Economic Crimes: Investigating Principles and Techniques 
(New York: Clark Boardman Company, 1984), 99.

162
0
c
Chapter Title
162
11
c
Analytic Techniques 
for Counterterrorism
T
his chapter discusses the analytic techniques that are used in counter-
terrorism analysis:
1.  Threat analysis;
2.  Vulnerability analysis;
3.  Risk analysis; and
4.  Prevention, preparation, response, and recovery planning.
INTRODUCTION
Threat analysis is the first of three integrated phases in developing a 
counterterrorism plan. The two subsequent phases are vulnerability anal-
ysis and risk analysis. The results of these three pieces of analytic work 
lay the groundwork for crafting a policy that addresses prevention, prepa-
ration, response, and recovery (PPRR). In other words, all of the techniques 
contained within this chapter are intrinsically linked and act as building 
blocks to form a comprehensive “toolkit” for analyzing counterterrorism. 
These steps in summary form are:
1.  Identify the threat(s);
2.  Explore vulnerabilities to this threat(s);
3.  Gauge the likelihood that the threat(s) will eventuate;
4.  Assess the consequence the threat will have; and
5.  Construct a PPRR plan.

 
Analytic Techniques for Counterterrorism 
163
Consider the following example of how these steps are applied in practice:
1.  Threat—cyber attack via an email-borne virus;
2.  Vulnerability—the agency’s servers and workstations via the Internet;
3.  Likelihood—greater than 85 percent probability;
4.  Consequence—moderate to severe loss of computer resources; and
5.  PPRR—develop a plan that does four things: attempts to prevent 
such an attack (prevention); prepares the agency for such an attack 
if prevention measures fail (preparation); guides the agency in the 
actions it needs to take to respond to an attack that is underway or 
has occurred (response); and, suggests what needs to be done to aid 
the agency in recovery once an attack has passed (recovery).
Although discussed here as a packaged approach to counterterrorism, 
any one of these analyses can be carried out on its own or applied to 
problems other than terrorism. For instance, a risk assessment could be 
conducted in relation to a person or group acting criminally.
The term counterterrorism has been adopted in widespread use for defensive 
measures over the term antiterrorism. Strictly speaking counterterrorism in-
volves offensive measures taken to “prevent, deter, pre-empt, and respond 
to terrorism.”1 Nonetheless, counterterrorism is used in this text as it is in 
common use by many law enforcement and security agencies worldwide.
THREAT ANALYSIS
A threat is a person’s resolve to inflict harm on another. Threats can be 
made against most entities—people, organizations, and nations (i.e., by a 
threat agent). The potential harm can be in many forms and can be suffered 
either physically or emotionally/mentally. Threat agents do not have to 
openly declare their resolve to cause harm in order to constitute a threat, 
though explicit words or actions make it easier for field operatives to 
identify the threat agent and for analysts to assess the threat.
Threat analysis acknowledges two key factors—that there needs to be a 
threat agent (which could be anything from a physical substance to a per-
son or a body corporate/organization) and an object of the threat (i.e., the 
target—which does not have to be a material target such as a shopping mall 
or an individual—can be intangible such as the threat to national security 
or the security of a particular venue or event). Stated another way, a threat 
agent who has intent and capability must be able to harm something. By 
way of example, a threat agent could be a drug trafficker who is intent and 

164 
Chapter 11
capable of illegally importing, say, heroin or a group of insurgents who has 
an intent and capability to destroy a bridge, and so on.
When analysts assess a threat agent, they are gauging whether the agent 
has intent and capability to produce harm to a target. To weigh whether the 
agent has intent and capability, analysts need to establish two elements for 
each of these factors: desire and expectation (or ability) for intent, and knowl-
edge and resources for capability. These considerations are shown diagram-
matically in figure 11.1. As an equation, threat is expressed as:
threat = (desire + expectation) + (knowledge + resources)
Desire can be described as the threat agents’ enthusiasm to cause harm in 
pursuit of their goal. Expectation is the confidence the threat agents have 
in that they will achieve their goal if their plan is carried out. Knowledge 
is having information that will allow the threat agents to use or construct 
devices or carry out processes that are necessary for achieving their goal. 
Resources include skills (or experience) and materials needed to act on 
their plan.
Figure 11.1. Threat analysis.
threat intent =  the optimism a threat agent has about successfully 
attacking a target
threat capability = the force a threat agent can bring to bear on a target
A fishbone analysis could be used to show the factors that contribute to 
each of these elements in a cause-and-effect relationship (refer to fig. 10.2 
in chapter 10). Recall from our discussion of fishbone analysis in chapter 10 
that at the fish’s head is listed the problem to be investigated—in this case, it 
is “threat.” The major bones of the fish constitute the significant categories of 
information concerning the problem—desire, expectation, knowledge, and 

 
Analytic Techniques for Counterterrorism 
165
resources. From each of these major bones, minor bones sprout, comprising 
the contributing factors that constitute each of the four categories.
Analysts need to consider the context of the threat, their agency’s mis-
sion, and the list of potential targets when adopting a model in order to 
aid them in determining the threat environment. A model for calculating 
threats might look something like table 11.1.
Though models do not eliminate subjectivity, using a model forces 
the analysts to be transparent about how they calculate threat and, in 
doing so, are able to defend their conclusions. You will note that there 
is no weighting attached to what constitutes a high level of intent. That 
is because one cannot say how many media announcements it would 
take from, say, al-Qaeda to represent high intent. Ideally, some form of 
Table 11.1. Threat Posed to the Orrenabad Community by the Omen Martyrs Faction
Scale 
Scores 
 
Tally
 
 
Desire
Negligible 
1
Minimum 
2
Medium 
3 
 
 3
High 
4
Acute 
5
 
 
Expectation
Negligible 
1
Minimum 
2
Medium 
3 
 
 3
High 
4
Acute 
5
   Intent 
 
 
 6
 
 
Knowledge
Negligible 
1
Minimum 
2
Medium 
3 
 
 3
High 
4
Acute 
5
 
 
Resources
Negligible 
1
Minimum 
2
Medium 
3 
 
 3
High 
4
Acute 
5
   Capability 
 
 
 6
   Threat coefficient 
 
 
12

166 
Chapter 11
conditioning statement would be attached to each of these categories so 
that the decision maker knows what is meant by high intent, low intent, 
and so forth. An example of how such a conditioning statement scale 
could be constructed is shown later in this chapter, in table 11.5.
In addition, models do not eliminate miscalculations because of inadver-
tent skewing. Note in table 11.1 that intent is calculated by adding desire 
with expectation, and in turn, this sum is added to the sum of knowledge 
and resources (and will range from a low of 4 to the maximum of 20). The 
process of adding limits the spread of values, whereas the process of mul-
tiplying any of these scores would increase the values. For instance, if all 
scores were multiplied—that is, substituting multiplication for addition—as 
per the equation, the range would be spread from 1 to 625.
The precision of this wide range of values diminishes the analyst’s 
ability to accurately determine either intent or capability. Therefore, it 
is suggested that adding all values, rather than multiplying them, will 
reduce the spread and, therefore, maintain the threat coefficient as an 
indicator rather than promote it as a reflection of its absolute condition. 
(Even if the analyst multiplied desire and expectation, and knowledge 
and resources but added the resulting sums, it would still yield a very 
wide spread—from 2 to 50—as would the opposite, that is, multiplying 
the sums that comprise intent and capability, from 4 to 100.)
Having said that, two additional issues need to be noted: 1) there is still 
a need to provide conditioning statements so that the reader of the intel-
ligence report understands what is meant by a medium threat intent and 
capability (e.g., along the lines of table 11.5), and 2) “unknowns” are not 
accommodated in this model.
The threat coefficient obtained from this analysis is then compared 
against a reference table to gauge where it sits on the continuum of dan-
ger of attack. The scale suggested in table 11.2 can be varied with addi-
tional qualifiers, or it can be collapsed if the number is deemed too many. 
Likewise, how the incremental breakdown of coefficients is determined 
will depend on whether the agency is willing to accept the risk that a 
threat agent may slip under its gaze by raising the categories of negligible 
and minimum. In the end, the number and their descriptors need to make 
sense in the context of the asset being protected. That is, each of the de-
scriptors needs to have a conditioning statement attached to it to define 
Table 11.2. An Example of a Threat Coefficient Scale
Threat 
Coefficient
Negligible 
 4–6
Minimum 
 7–10
Medium 
11–15
High 
16–18
Acute 
19–20

 
Analytic Techniques for Counterterrorism 
167
what is meant by negligible, minimum, medium, high, and acute. Table 
11.5 (shown later in this chapter) is an example.
Threats are context dependent, and what forms a threat in a business 
setting does not necessarily form a threat in a military setting or national 
security setting (though the opposite may be true). Bearing this in mind, 
an example from the military will be discussed to illustrate the threat 
analysis method.
In a low intensity conflict, threats can range from spontaneous street dem-
onstrations by the local population at one end to terrorist bombings and con-
frontations with insurgent or guerrilla units at the other end. The techniques 
for assessing the elements of a threat can vary depending on the issue under 
investigation and the analyst’s personal preference or the agency’s policy.
Nevertheless, the approach is to weight each element using some 
verifiable means that is open to third-party scrutiny. For instance, an 
analyst may use a force field analysis to judge whether there are threats 
in Country Q associated with a low intensity campaign being prosecuted 
by friendly military units. Likewise, the nominal group technique could 
be employed not only to assess the four elements of a threat (i.e., desire, 
expectation, knowledge, and resources) but also to generate a list of pos-
sible threat agents (i.e., belligerents) to compare the elements against each 
other. Participants for such a group could be drawn from subject experts 
or operational specialists or a mixture of both. Some of the other analytic 
techniques discussed in chapter 10 can also be used. There is no firm rule 
on how this analysis should be done.
One way of contextualizing threats is to see them as threat communities. 
Some examples of threat communities pertaining to malicious human 
threats include:
External
•  Competitors;
•  Criminals and criminal groups;
•  International or transnational terrorists;
•  Insurgents and guerrillas;
•  Domestic anarchists;
•  Cyber law breakers;
•  Rights campaigners;
•  Spies-for-hire (i.e., ex–law enforcement, security, or intelligence per-
sonnel who have turned private operatives); and
•  Foreign government intelligence services.
Internal
•  Principals of the business or corporation;
•  Associates;

168 
Chapter 11
•  Employees; and
•  Contractors.
These threat communities can be subdivided into more distinct groups if 
there is a need—for instance, rights campaigners can be classified into po-
litical activists, religious activists, single-issue activists (anti-whaling, ani-
mal rights, anti-abortion, environmental, etc.). But bear in mind that mem-
bership of one threat community (or subcommunity) does not exclude that 
person being a member of another or several other threat communities.
When compiling a threat profile, targets can and should be considered in 
terms of their criticality, cost (either as a direct loss or an indirect or conse-
quential loss due to disruption), or sensitivity (e.g., compromised informa-
tion). This is because targets that do not possess any of these attributes may 
not be considered by threat agents with the same weight.
To better understand the “who” that comprise a threat community, 
analysts need to compile a threat profile. The profile needs to be adequate 
(perfection is rarely, if ever, obtainable) in order to understand the threat 
environment, which aids the next phase in counterterrorism analy-
sis—that is, vulnerability analysis. In the meantime, consider the threat 
profile shown in table 11.3 as an example that demonstrates the important 
aspects of a fictitious threat agent (the order can be rearranged to suit 
the analyst’s research project, and other factors can be added if these are 
deemed inadequate to communicate the message).
VULNERABILITY ANALYSIS
In short, vulnerability is a weakness in an asset that can be exploited by a 
threat agent (the term asset is being used in this context to denote a resource 
that requires protection). Viewed another way, vulnerability is an asset’s ca-
pability to withstand harm inflected by a threat. Harm can be anything from 
experiencing a minor nuisance event to a situation that is catastrophic.
Vulnerability is a function of several factors—attractiveness of the target, 
feasibility of carrying out an attack, and potential impact. This model is 
shown diagrammatically in figure 11.2. Usually, these factors entail such 
considerations as: status of the target, potential for the attack to succeed, po-
tential for the threat agent to get away with the attack, and potential to inflict 
loss. These factors can be weighed against measures to mitigate loss and to 
deter or prevent attack on an asset (e.g., through a force field analysis).

Table 11.3. Threat Profile for the Notional Omen Martyrs Faction
Summary Type 
Observations
Organization
Organization 
Well organized but not hierarchical
Affiliation 
Autonomous
Recruitment 
Ethnic population centers
Financing 
Extortion and kidnapping the wealthy
International connections 
Training and ideological support
Behavioral
Motivation 
Radical religious ideology
Intent 
Extensive destruction
Tolerance to risk 
High
Self-sacrifice 
Very accepting
Willingness to inflict collateral harm 
Extreme
Operational
Planning 
Based on target acquisition intelligence
Targets 
 Objects that represent Western values or people
 who do not ascribe to their interpretation of
 their faith (including other believers)
Target characteristics 
 Symbolic and iconic objects that afford high
 visibility and, hence, high media coverage
Tactics 
 Targets mass gathering, critical infrastructure, 
 communications, mass transport, and
 distribution chains
Weapons 
Improvised explosives and small arms
Resource summary
Skills and knowledge 
 Attack vector dependent (e.g., computer—low;
 electronic—moderate; explosive—high)
Figure 11.2. Vulnerability analysis.

170 
Chapter 11
Formulae-based analyses are popular among law enforcement and 
security agencies engaged in counterterrorism, and although these vary 
from agency to agency, they follow a basic stepwise formula:
1.  Define what constitutes an asset (critical infrastructure, transport 
network, food chain, distribution hubs, or any of the essential 
services—e.g., electric power, gas, potable water, sewerage, etc.);
2.  Sort these assets into categories;
3.  Assign a grade or level of importance to each asset; and
4.  Identify potential impact on the asset if it suffers harm.
As there is no one single criterion for calculating vulnerability because 
each class of asset may require special considerations to be taken into ac-
count (and there may be agency protocols that take precedence also), one 
general approach is to use a model such as:
vulnerability = target attractiveness + ease of attack + impact
To operationalize attractiveness, the analyst could ask questions along the 
following lines and tabulate the results to insert into the model:
•  Is the target readily recognizable? Rather than answer this question 
in a dichotomous way (i.e., using nominal data—yes/no), the analyst 
could use ordinal data to give greater precision to the overall vulner-
ability indicator, for example: is the target recognizable internation-
ally in the same way the World Trade Center was, or is it recogniz-
able only nationally, statewide, or just locally? (See fig. 11.3.)
•  Is the target the subject of media attention/coverage? Again, an analyst 
could construct a scale of attention from rarely to frequently/weekly. 
Coverage could be in the local press or through to global newscasters.
•  Does the target have a symbolic status in terms of historical, cultural, 
religious, or other importance? The analyst could assess this factor as 
having no symbolic status to having multiple imports.
Attractiveness needs to be placed in context with the threat agent. Say, for 
instance, some Islamic extremist groups may see assets that represent West-
ern culture or symbolize Western values as attractive.2 To operationalize the 
concept ease of attack, the analyst could ask these types of questions:
•  How difficult would it be for the threat agent to predict the peak atten-
dance times at the target? Establish a scale from certain (as in the case 
of published opening hours) to very difficult (in the case of a training 
center located in a remote area and opened only for ad hoc lectures).
•  Are there security measures in place (e.g., calculated on a scale of low 
to high deterrence or low to high prevention)?

 
Analytic Techniques for Counterterrorism 
171
Questions that probe the existence and extent of controls (or lack thereof) 
can also be asked to gauge ease of attack. On the one hand, if there is a 
high degree of control effectiveness, this will usually reduce ease. On the 
other hand, if there is a low level of control effectiveness, it will increase 
ease. Analysts should be mindful that, with some targets, even a small 
reduction in control effectiveness can result in a disproportional increase 
in ease of attack. Impact could be operationalized by questions like:
•  What are the numbers of people frequenting the target? Establish 
a scale ranging from a few daily/weekly/monthly to hundreds or 
thousands daily/weekly/monthly. Are these same people attracted 
from the local community, or are they international tourists?
•  In dollar terms, what would the financial impact of an attack be if the 
asset was: disrupted, incapacitated, or destroyed? Or it could be put 
in terms of hours without operation, units of production, and so on.
Impact is predicated on an assumption that terrorists want their attacks 
to result in large numbers of deaths. This may be true in the al-Qaeda 
focused climate that existed at the time of this writing, but such an as-
sumption may not always be valid; for instance, there may exist a na-
tionalist-focused group that seeks to destroy infrastructure rather than 
kill people. In such a case, these terrorists may view heavy public traffic 
as an inhibitor to ease of attack. The two paradigms could be described 
as effect-based attacks versus event-based attacks.3
Figure 11.3. International recognition: The former World Trade Center.

172 
Chapter 11
A template for calculating vulnerability might look something like that 
shown in table 11.4.
The vulnerability coefficient derived from this analysis is then compared 
against a reference table to gauge where it sits on the continuum of sus-
ceptibility to attack. The scale can be increased with additional qualifiers, 
or it could be collapsed if the number is deemed too many. In the end, the 
number and the descriptors need to make sense in the context of the asset 
being protected (the left-hand and center column of table 11.5). Qualitative 
descriptors (i.e., conditioning statements) can be added for each category 
as shown in the right-hand column of table 11.5.
Note that consequence is not a factor that is considered in a threat assess-
ment. It is, however, considered in a risk assessment (see the following 
section).
RISK ANALYSIS
Risk is a function of likelihood and consequence. (The term probability is 
sometimes used instead of likelihood. Both are acceptable.) A risk assess-
ment can be carried out in relation to almost any situation; it is not just 
Table 11.4. Vulnerability of the City’s Main Bridge over the Orrenabad River
Scale 
Scores 
 
Tally
 
 
Attractiveness
Negligible 
 
1
Minimum 
 
2
Medium 
 
3 
3
High 
 
4
Acute 
 
5
 
 
Ease of Attack
Negligible 
 
1
Minimum 
 
2
Medium 
 
3 
3
High 
 
4
Acute 
 
5
 
 
Impact
Negligible 
 
1
Minimum 
 
2
Medium 
 
3 
3
High 
 
4
Acute 
 
5
Vulnerability coefficient 
 
 
9

Table 11.5. Vulnerability Coefficients
Vulnerability 
Coefficient 
Qualifier
Negligible 
1–3 
•  Can only be attacked successfully if the threat agent 
has an acute threat coefficient; or
 
 
•  Has little or no symbolism; or
 
 
•  The range of security measures makes attack very 
difficult; or
 
 
•  If attacked, the target has significant redundancy and/
or has sufficient capacity to continue functioning.
Minimum 
4–6 
•  Can only be attacked successfully if the threat agent 
has a high coefficient (or greater); or
 
 
•  Is symbolic locally or regionally; or
 
 
•  The range of security measures makes attack difficult; or
 
 
•  If attacked, the target has a large measure of 
redundancy and/or has a large capacity to continue 
functioning.
Medium 
7–9 
•  Can be successfully attacked if the threat agent has a 
medium coefficient (or greater); or
 
 
•  Is a well recognized regional symbol and/or a 
somewhat recognized national symbol; or
 
 
•  The range of security measures makes attack 
moderately difficult; or
 
 
•  If attacked, the target has a moderate amount of 
redundancy and/or has an average capacity to 
continue functioning.
High 
10–12 
•  Can only be successfully attacked if the threat agent 
has a minimum threat coefficient (or greater); or
 
 
•  Is a well recognized national symbol; or
 
 
•  The range of security measures makes attack 
undemanding; or
 
 
•  If attacked, the target has little redundancy and/or has 
little capacity to continue functioning.
Acute 
13–15 
•  Can only be successfully attacked if the threat agent 
has a low threat coefficient (or greater); or
 
 
•  Is a well recognized international symbol; or
 
 
•  The range of security measures is non-existing; or
 
 
•  If attacked, the target has no redundancy and/or no 
capacity to continue functioning.

174 
Chapter 11
for issues of grave concern. Nor is risk management solely for counter-
terrorism; risk analysis techniques can be applied to situations that may 
be the target of criminals or criminal organizations not associated with 
terrorism. Nevertheless, analyzing risk allows analysts to recommend 
measures that will provide field commanders with the ability to:
•  Accept the risk as is; or
•  Treat the risk (which includes such decisions as to avoid the risk 
altogether, mitigate the risk, or defer the risk to another person or 
agency).
In intelligence research, analysts can focus on a wide range of risks. These 
can vary from the minor—say, a noncritical facility—to risks that liberal 
democratic nations face from the likes of weak and corrupt governments, 
rogue states, sub-state, and trans-state actors as well as organized crimi-
nal, radical ethic, racial and religious groups, and ultra right-wing politi-
cal groups.
Internationally, risk analysis is the subject of a standard. The Swiss-
based International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has published 
a document that puts forward a common approach for dealing with risk 
by providing generic guidelines in relation to the principles for how risk 
is managed.4 In Australia, as well as in New Zealand, uniformity in risk 
management is specified by AS/NZS 4360:2004. This document is pub-
lished through a joint venture by these two organizations: Standards Aus-
tralia and Standards New Zealand. AS/NZ 46300:2004, along with the ISO 
31000, can be applied to a number of activities, decisions, or operations in 
the private and public sectors as well as the military. They can also be ap-
plied by nonprofit organizations, community groups, and individuals.
Some of the key terms used in risk management are the name of the tech-
nique considered here—risk analysis—as well as risk, risk assessment, and risk 
management. According to AS/NZ 4360:2004,5 risk is “the chance of some-
thing happening that will have an impact on objectives.” Risk assessment 
is “the overall process of risk analysis and risk evaluation,” and risk man-
agement is “the culture, processes and structures that are directed towards 
realizing potential opportunities whilst managing adverse effects.”
Understanding these terms helps distinguish the process of managing 
risk from the analytic process of assessing risk using the equation:
risk = likelihood + consequence
Likelihood refers to the probability that “a specific event or outcome, 
measured by a ratio of specific events or outcomes to the total number 
of possible events or outcomes.” AS/NZ 4360:2004 defines consequence 
as: “The outcome of an event expressed qualitatively or quantitatively, 

 
Analytic Techniques for Counterterrorism 
175
being loss, injury, disadvantage or gain.”6 Likelihood and consequence 
are evaluated in the analysis phase of the risk management cycle. This 
analytic cycle comprises five phases shown in figure 11.4.7 Step by step:
1.  Use two tools—in the form of scales—to evaluate a target’s risk rating 
(i.e., the asset under consideration). These two scales consist of a likeli-
hood scale (see table 11.6) and the consequences scale (see table 11.7).
Figure 11.4. The risk management cycle.

176 
Chapter 11
2.  The results of these two assessments are then fed into a risk rating 
matrix (see table 11.8) that returns a risk rating coefficient.
3.  Finally, the analyst looks up the risk rating coefficient on the risk 
evaluation scale (see table 11.9) in order to determine what actions 
(if any) are required.
In addition to the descriptors listed in the tables, a set of conditioning 
statements may be necessary, along the lines of those contained in table 
11.5. This also applies to the descriptors contained in table 11.7.
An example of low risk events includes:
•  An event that would occur rarely and would result in insignificant 
consequences (reflected in table 11.8 as E1); or
•  An event that is unlikely to occur and would result in minor conse-
quences (reflected in table 11.8 as D2).
Examples of high risk situations include:
•  An event that would occur rarely but would result in catastrophic 
consequences (reflected in table 11.8 as E5); or
•  An event that is likely to occur and have minor consequences (re-
flected in table 11.8 as B2).
Table 11.6. Typical Example of a Likelihood Scale
Rank 
Likelihood 
Descriptors
A 
Almost certain 
The situation is expected to occur
B 
Likely 
The situation will probably occur
C 
Possible 
The situation should occur at some time
D 
Unlikely 
The situation could occur at some time
E 
Rare 
The situation would only occur under exceptional
 
 
 circumstances
Table 11.7. Typical Example of a Consequences Scale
Rank 
Consequences 
Descriptors
1 
Insignificant 
Will result in little disruption
2 
Minor 
Will result in minor disruption
3 
Moderate 
Will cause considerable inconvenience
4 
Major 
Causes noticeable impact
5 
Catastrophic 
Causes function/services to totally fail with high impact

 
Analytic Techniques for Counterterrorism 
177
Treating Risk
Once each risk is assessed in this way, they can be positioned on the risk 
rating matrix (see table 11.8) so they can be compared with each other 
in order to prioritize treatment options. Take for instance the following 
events considered by troops stationed in Country Q:
•  The risk posed by a person-borne suicide bomb to a public meet-
ing place could be located at C5 (possibly with catastrophic conse-
quences—therefore, it is an extreme risk); or
•  Violence as a result of a street demonstration could be located at B3 
(likely with moderate consequences—so the risk is high).
The scale provided in the risk rating table (see table 11.9) is useful for 
judging whether the analyst recommends accepting the risk or treating 
the risk (and, if so, to what extent). Without the risk assessment process, 
the recommendations of the analyst could be called into question as an 
overreaction or, equally, deemed an underestimate of the seriousness of 
the situation. These models curb subjectivity to some extent by providing 
transparency about how analysts make their calculations.
Table 11.8. Typical Example of a Risk Rating Matrix
 
Consequences
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
Likelihood 
Insignificant 
Minor 
Moderate 
Major 
Catastrophic
A
Almost certain 
Moderate 
High 
Extreme 
Extreme 
Extreme
B
Likely 
Moderate 
High 
High 
Extreme 
Extreme
C
Possible 
Low 
Moderate 
High 
Extreme 
Extreme
D
Unlikely 
Low 
Low 
Moderate 
High 
Extreme
E
Rare 
Low 
Low 
Moderate 
High 
High
According to Emergency Management Australia (EMA), some treatment 
options for critical infrastructure include: awareness and vigilance, com-
munication and consultation, engineering options, monitoring and review, 
resource management, security and surveillance, and community capability 
and self-reliance.8

178 
Chapter 11
Although the risk rating (see table 11.9) shows what is a generally ac-
cepted distribution of risk levels,9 analysts will need to make their own 
judgments as to where these transition points take place. Many times this 
will be a topic for discussion with the employing agency or a matter set by 
policy. But by using a systematic approach to risk management, analysts 
can reduce the likelihood and lessen consequences through the applica-
tion of technology, science, or personal or collective effort.
PPRR PLANNING
There are four elements to PPRR policy development—prevention, prep-
aration, response, and recovery. Prevention considers the risk and tries 
to implement ways that could stop it from happening. Preparedness ac-
knowledges that despite preventative measures, the event may still occur, 
so one should prepare for it. If it does occur, response is that part of the 
plan that deals with how agencies will mobilize and take action (and what 
type of action, etc.). The final element provides guidance for recovery op-
eration. This aspect of the plan anticipates the worst-case scenario. That is, 
preventative measures have failed, and preparation measures may have 
mitigated the impact to some degree, but it still occurred; response has 
contained and brought the event to an end, but it is now time to recover 
from the event’s effects.
Even though this chapter addresses PPRR from a counterterrorist point 
of view, it should be borne in mind that when planning for one type of 
event, it is prudent to consider actions to cover what is termed all hazards. 
For instance, if an analyst is considering the impact of a particular terror-
ist event, then he or she should consider the event occurring as a result of 
nature—wildfire, flood, earthquake, and so on.
When compiling a PPRR plan, try to avoid constructing the plan in 
such a way that elements form either conceptual or real barriers between 
them—there is usually no clear delineation between the elements, though 
they may be expressed in these terms. Also, bear in mind that not each 
element will carry the same weight of importance—the four elements 
may not be equal. In fact, some elements may not have any strategies or 
treatments, or few, or minimal.
Table 11.9. Typical Example of a Risk Evaluation Scale
 
Risk Rating and Suggested Actions for Treatment
Low risk 
Manage using standard operating procedures
Moderate risk 
Outline specific management actions that need to be taken
High risk 
Create a business contiguity plan and a response plan (test annually)
Extreme risk 
Urgent actions are necessary (in addition to those per high risk)

 
Analytic Techniques for Counterterrorism 
179
Further, although the elements are cited in a sequence—PPRR—they 
may be put into action at the same time; for instance, response and recov-
ery can (and should) start at the same time as they are inextricably linked 
(see fig. 11.5).
Finally, though the language appears to contain action-oriented terms, 
the treatments do not have to be physically-based options. Options in-
volving social dimensions are also needed as, arguably, people are the 
ultimate targets of a terrorist attack (recall the basic philosophy of the 
terrorist: kill one, frighten ten-thousand). Analysts should try to keep their 
thinking about treatments broad and innovative.
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
• All hazards;
• Attractiveness;
• Capability;
• Coefficient;
• Consequence;
• Desire;
• Ease of attack;
• Expectation;
• Impact;
• Intent;
•  Knowledge;
•  Likelihood;
Figure 11.5. Comparison of response and recovery efforts.

180 
Chapter 11
•  PPRR;
•  Resources;
•  Risk;
•  Threat;
•  Threat agent;
•  Threat communities;
•  Threat profile;
•  Treatment; and
•  Vulnerability.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  List the elements that comprise a threat analysis. Describe each, and 
explain why each is important to understanding a threat.
2.  List the elements that comprise a vulnerability analysis. Describe 
each, and explain why each is important to understanding the con-
cept of vulnerability.
3.  List the elements that comprise a risk analysis. Describe each, and 
explain why each is important to the understanding of risk.
4.  List the elements that comprise a PPRR plan. Describe each, and 
explain why each is important to counterterrorism.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Suppose the agency in your jurisdiction that is responsible for monitoring 
threats of subversion and terrorism has assessed that the water pipeline that 
connects the city’s drinking supply (say, a reservoir of some description) to 
your city’s population is vulnerable to attack by the notional Omen Martyrs 
Faction. Using PPRR, devise a plan that considers each of the elements.
NOTES
1. U.S. Department of Defense, Joint Publication 1-02, Department of Defense Dic-
tionary of Military and Associated Terms (Washington DC: Department of Defense, 
October 18, 2008), 132.
2. Carl Hammer, Tide of Terror: America, Islamic Extremism, and the War on Terror 
(Boulder, CO: Paladin Press, 2003).
3. Victoria Herrington, personal communication, May 3, 2009.
4. International Organization for Standardization, Guidelines on Principles and 
Implementation of Risk Management, ISO 31000 (Geneva, Switzerland: ISO, 2007).

 
Analytic Techniques for Counterterrorism 
181
5. Standards Australia, The Australian and New Zealand Standard on Risk Man-
agement, AS/NZS 4360:2004 (Strathfield, Australia: Standards Associations of 
Australia, 2004), 4.
6. Standards Australia, The Australian and New Zealand Standard on Risk Manage-
ment, 4.
7. Standards Australia, The Australian and New Zealand Standard on Risk Manage-
ment.
8. Emergency Management Australia, Critical Infrastructure Emergency Risk 
Management and Assurance, 2nd ed. (Canberra, Australia: Attorney General’s De-
partment, 2004), 43.
9. Queensland Government and Local Government Association, Local Govern-
ment Counter-Terrorism Risk Management Kit (Brisbane, Australia: Queensland 
Government and Local Government Association, 2004), 16.

182
0
c
Chapter Title
182
12
c
Presenting Spatial Data
T
his topic focuses on three ways of presenting spatial data:
1.  Maps;
2.  Overlays; and
3.  Mosaics.
MAPS
Basics
A map is simply a two-dimensional graphic representation of part of the 
earth’s surface. It is drawn to a scale (except for those that are created in the 
field and termed mud maps) by cartographers and is always oriented with 
a bearing to north. Mapmakers incorporate certain devices into the map in 
order to make reading easy—universal symbols for various features in the 
physical world as well as colors and lines to augment the representations.
While some rare maps are three dimensional—being constructed out of 
sand, clay, wood, plastic, paper, or cardboard—our discussion here will 
limit itself to two-dimensional, paper-based maps and digital maps. These 
can be produced by even the most modest forms of spatial analyses, and 
the results can easily be displayed for decision makers’ consideration.
Maps are important as they allow an analyst to simultaneously display 
a number of pieces of information that may prove confusing in narrative 
form—recall the adage a picture is worth a thousand words. Further, through 
the medium of a map, analysts can conduct their analysis-in-chief—say, 

 
Presenting Spatial Data 
183
comparing distances and lines of sight and evaluating access, travel 
routes, and so on. Because each map contains numerous data items, it is 
a self-contained database that shows the existence and location of many 
ground features as well as the distance between them.
Arguably, the most frequent user of maps in intelligence work is the 
military. Although some use is made by law enforcement agencies with 
the mapping of crimes and crime hotspots, its use is not universal. If 
a map is to be incorporated into an intelligence report, it is imperative 
that the analyst knows the cartographic skill level of the reader. If, for 
instance, the reader has no knowledge beyond reading a city street map, 
then this is the maximum level of sophistication that should be presented 
in the map. More detail may cause the reader to lose interest, and there-
fore, the analyst will lose his or her audience.
Sources
Maps can be sourced from many places—from government departments 
that are responsible for land surveying to commercial companies that spe-
cialize in the production of high quality maps. At the time of this writing, the 
Internet featured several digital sources of maps, including maps that show 
satellite images of the earth. The resolution of these images is good, and the 
user can select the level of magnification required. These satellite images can 
also be displayed as a simple map with terrain features or in composite form 
(i.e., terrain and image). Other Internet-based mapping systems available at 
the time of this writing included those that showed street-level maps (views) 
of cities around the world and a virtual view of the oceans’ landscape.
Through the use of desktop computer workstations and software pack-
ages, analysts can convert paper-based maps to digital images for projec-
tion in oral briefings, incorporate them into digitally created documents, 
or save them to a secure intranet site within the host agency (e.g., in some 
form of electronic knowledge base).
Aerial Photographs
Aerial photographs are those photographs taken from any of a variety of 
airborne platforms, such as fixed and rotatable wing aircraft, unmanned 
drones, hot air and gas-filled balloons, and satellites. The aerial photo-
graph can be used as either a supplement to a cartographic map or as a 
map substitute.
Why would an analyst consider displaying intelligence in the form of 
aerial photography? On the one hand, a topographic map may have been 
created some years previous and, hence, could be obsolete. On the other, an 
aerial photograph taken recently (via the analyst’s information collection 

184 
Chapter 12
plan at the start of the research) shows any changes in landscape as they 
occur.
In this regard, a display of aerial photographs and maps provides more 
information than either alone. Photographs can be obtained readily, whereas 
maps take months to prepare. Changes can be noted and compared daily or 
even hourly if the issue is that important (e.g., the Cuban missile crisis of 
October 1962). The downside however is that aerial photographic interpre-
tation is both an art and science that takes considerable skill and training.
OVERLAYS
Overlays are used to display additional information about the terrain or 
activities within the geographic area bound by the map. Overlays can 
be used for both maps and aerial photographs. An illustration of a map 
overlay, from the U.S. army’s field manual entitled Map Reading and Land 
Navigation,1 is shown in figure 12.1.
Figure 12.1. Example of a military map overlay with notation in the margins.

 
Presenting Spatial Data 
185
Physical overlays are usually clear sheets of plastic-like material that 
allow the analyst to hand draw or annotate the map/photo with stan-
dardized symbols or codes. They are most commonly used in operational 
theaters that are characterized by quick decisions and frequent changes of 
plans. Marks on the clear sheets can be erased and redrawn as events or 
plans change. Several overlays can be used to “build” a picture of various 
activities or present different tactical options.
Anything that can be presented in a hand-drawn overlay can be pre-
sented electronically using a software package. This method is most ef-
fective in oral briefings where an image is shown, and with the click of 
a mouse button, addition information can be overlaid, thus emphasizing 
the point the analyst wants to make.
MOSAICS
A mosaic is created by combining two or more overlapping graphics in 
such a way that they form a single picture. Graphics can be maps, aerial 
photographs, and vertical photographs (including those taken at low- and 
high-oblique). However, the majority of mosaics are of a photographic 
nature as they offer operational commanders and field operatives a pan-
orama-like view of an area under investigation.
Since their employ during World War I, mosaics have been useful in 
displaying spatial data and, hence, vital intelligence. With today’s soft-
ware packages, photographs can be combined with terrain data so that 
a digitized image can be constructed to produce a three-dimensional, 
mosaic-orthogonal map.
These mosaics are valuable in training field operatives in such tech-
niques as border crossing and covert insertions—techniques that require 
the operative to enter a hostile country (or in the case of law enforcement, 
a violent or dangerous neighborhood in an urban area). These computer-
generated, mosaic-orthogonal maps can be extensive, covering tens of 
thousands of square kilometers.
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
• Aerial photograph;
• Map;
• Mosaic;
• Mud map;
• Oblique; and
• Overlay.

186 
Chapter 12
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  Define the term map, and give three examples of common maps.
2.  Describe a situation where an intelligence analyst might use an 
overlay.
3.  List the main features of a mosaic.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Suppose you have been asked to construct a map overlay to assist field 
operatives in a covert operation. Using a street map for the city in which 
you live as an example, use some imagination in constructing an overlay 
that shows the following detail: a muster point for pre-operation brief-
ings, the location of the target, any potential hazards (countersurveillance 
points), and an exfiltration route. Annotate the overlay with an appropri-
ate security classification.
NOTE
1.  U.S. Department of the Army, FM3-25.26: Map Reading and Land Navigation 
(Washington DC: Department of the Army, 2001), figure 7-2.

187
13
c
The Intelligence 
Research Report
T
his chapter focuses on several topics relating to intelligence reports 
including:
 1.  Writing reports;
 2.  Key parts of a strategic intelligence report;
 3.  Example of an operational intelligence report;
 4.  Example of an oral intelligence briefing;
 5.  Target profile template;
 6.  Tactical assessment template;
 7.  Correct use of intelligence terminology;
 8.  Use of tables and figures in reports;
 9.  Dissemination with regard to the concepts of “need-to-know” and 
“right-to-know”; and
10.  Some final thoughts on writing reports.
WRITING REPORTS
The end point of the intelligence cycle is to produce a report of some de-
scription. Often termed an intelligence product, the central purpose of the 
report is to inform the decision maker about the problem, how the analyst 
approached the inquiry, what was learned, what the information means, 
and what implications the findings might have for the future. Reports 
take two forms—written reports and oral briefings. Each may contain a 
third form of report, which is graphics. (See table 13.1.)

188 
Chapter 13
Rare is the analyst who can produce a word-perfect report in one draft. 
Writing an intelligence report is a formative process, not summative. The 
analyst should not be discouraged if it takes several passes at redrafting 
before arriving at the final version. During the process, the analyst should 
seek feedback and advice from colleagues—doing so can only strengthen 
the document’s message.
The objective should be an error-free report with no awkwardness 
that will distract the reader from the content. A good approach is to 
read the text through the eyes of the intended audience. Will they un-
derstand what is being said? Can they follow the thought sequence? 
Is it well laid out, and is the organization logical? The length and for-
mat of reports vary according to the agency, the type of information 
the audience wants to know, and the message that is trying to be con-
veyed (some examples and templates are provided further on in this 
chapter).
On the point of academic rigor, analysts should ask themselves: does 
the intelligence report reflect sound research and analysis? The research 
methods and the analytic techniques used need to be thoughtfully consid-
ered as to their appropriateness for the research question or hypothesis. 
Put another way: will the research and its findings withstand critical 
appraisal by peers? Reading widely and having a substantial personal 
library that contains texts on applied research methodologies are keys to 
being successful as a scholar spy.
STRATEGIC INTELLIGENCE REPORT TEMPLATE
Abstract
An abstract is a summary of the intelligence report that provides the 
reader with an overview of the research’s purpose and findings. It ap-
pears at the start of the report, before the introduction or background. In 
the open-source literature, indexing services will often use the abstract as 
a way of cataloging the report for other researchers to find.
Table 13.1. Summary of Report Types
Products 
Form
Operational and tactical reports, memos, minutes, strategic studies, 
Written 
 and estimates
Briefings 
Oral
Charts, overlays, and situational maps 
Graphic

 
The Intelligence Research Report 
189
Title
The purpose of the report is usually to inform decision makers who au-
thorized the intelligence research project (e.g., a special project), or key 
personnel receive such reports as a matter of course (e.g., routine brief-
ings). Therefore, the report’s title should capture the reader’s attention 
but, at the same time, accurately reflect the essence of what’s contained 
in the report.
Aim of the Study and its Significance
This section should contain a succinct statement of the analyst’s research 
question, statement of the problem, or statement of controlling purpose. It should 
be worded along these lines: “The purpose of this research is to . . .” The 
statement should not encompass everything related to the issue; it should 
limit itself to, for example, examining the relationship between two concepts 
(i.e., variables)—for instance, “An increase of police on the street leads to 
a reduction in victim reported crime.” The research question should be set 
in the wider context of the issue under investigation to highlight its signifi-
cance, and it needs to be stated clearly, ideally in its own subsection (e.g., a 
subsection entitled rationale).
Literature Review
The literature review is an essential part of all intelligence research proj-
ects. This section serves several purposes, but the most important is that 
it places the issue under investigation in context. It establishes what has 
been discovered before, especially in what is viewed as the landmark 
studies pertaining to the topic and what problems those researchers en-
countered. It also identifies the knowledge gaps that still exist.
This section also needs to contain a discussion about the study’s theo-
retical base and the presumed relationship between the variables. This 
part of the report will need to demonstrate that the analyst has an ap-
preciation of what research has already been conducted by describing the 
key concepts and terms so that they can be operationalized in the report’s 
methodology.
Methodology
Arguably, this section is the most important in the intelligence report. If 
the analyst has carefully crafted the research question and placed it in 

190 
Chapter 13
its theoretical framework, it will guide the research design. Such designs 
include:
•  Evaluation (to plan intervention programs/operations);
•  Case study (what is going on);
•  Longitudinal study (has there been any change over time?);
•  Comparison (are A and B different?);
•  Cross-sectional (are A and B different at this point in time?);
•  Longitudinal comparison (are A and B different over time?);
•  Experimental and quasi-experimental (what effect does A have on 
B?); or
•  A combination.
Analysts need to define the concepts they are studying so that they can be 
measured (i.e., operationalized). Analysts also need to identify what data 
they will require (whether these data will be from primary or secondary 
sources; whether they will be qualitative, quantitative, or both; if the data 
will come from open-sources, such as surveys, interviews, empirical obser-
vation, or via covert sources, etc.) and how these data will be collated and 
analyzed (e.g., statistically or content analysis) to test the hypothesis.
Analysts will need to turn their minds to the related issues of sample 
size, how they will control for confounding variables (i.e., the potential 
that observations are due to something other than what is being mea-
sured, and what limitations these extraneous influences might present 
for the research (e.g., possible alternative explanations for the relationship 
between A and B) or the limits inherent in the data, and so forth.
Results
Generally speaking, the results section of a strategic intelligence research 
report will be presented in three phases. The first is a description of how 
the data were prepared for analysis. This section needs to be brief and 
focus on the more unique aspects of the analytic technique.
This is then followed by descriptive statistics of the most relevant or im-
portant information. But again, these need to be brief to avoid overwhelm-
ing the reader with volumes of results—doing so will run the risk of confus-
ing them by inadvertently obscuring the report’s central line of reasoning 
(i.e., the idiom “miss the forest for the trees” applies in this situation). These 
descriptive data need to be carefully considered and well organized by such 
techniques as summary tables and graphs, maps, or other diagrams.
The third phase is linking any inferential analyses to the research ques-
tion or hypothesis. If statistical analyses were not used, then this section 
would discuss the results of any of the specialized analytic techniques 

 
The Intelligence Research Report 
191
that were employed to test the hypothesis, such as SWOT, PESTO, force 
field, competing hypothesis, or other analytic techniques.
Ethical Considerations
In the social and behavioral sciences, if a study involves human subjects, 
then approval to conduct research has to be granted by an ethics commit-
tee. But as we are discussing secret intelligence research—not research 
that will be disseminated via public avenues (e.g., scholarly journals)—
the issue of ethics takes on a different dimension.
As such, questions like, “Will there be confidentiality issues regarding 
the data or the findings the study will produce?” need to be considered. 
Could the study impact national security? Could revealing the findings 
jeopardize ongoing operations (or collection techniques) or the identity of 
key informants/witnesses/undercover operatives?
If it is not secret intelligence research but some form of strategic 
planning, then there may be questions about issues of privacy, intru-
siveness, and appropriateness (e.g., physical or mental distress) that 
could arise. Analysts don’t have to answer each of these questions in 
this section, but nevertheless, they need to consider the issue of ethics 
holistically.
Conclusion
Put the study’s conclusions into a few paragraphs or a page or two, de-
pending on the length of the report. This section is intended to reinforce 
why the research was important and what the ramifications might mean 
for field operations or strategic policy.
References Cited
List the references that have been used in compiling the research report 
using the Harvard style of referencing. Once complete, check the docu-
ment for consistency in referencing, and double-check the report for inad-
vertent errors, such as not citing other scholars’ intellectual work.
EXAMPLE OF AN OPERATIONAL INTELLIGENCE REPORT
SALUTE is a U.S. military acronym for size, activity, location, unit/
uniform, time, and equipment. It is a type of operational report about 
captured or foreign material and is prepared by the unit that acquired 
these goods. The report can be presented in either an oral or a written 

192 
Chapter 13
format. Because this type of report is filed by a field operative, its only 
analysis is in the form of descriptive data that accord to the letters that 
make up the acronym. An example of a SALUTE report taken from 
the U.S. army’s field manual entitled TECHINT: Multi-Service Tactics, 
Techniques, and Procedures for Technical Intelligence Operations1 appears 
in the following:
To: G-2 V Corps DTG: 230900Z Aug 89
From: G-2 24th Inf Div (Mech) Report No: 07-0623
1.  Size: Not applicable.
2.  Activity: Capture of shoulder-fired laser target designator by 1/64th Armor 
Bn 2d Bde 24th Inf Div (Mech) (include capturing unit).
3.  Location: Town of Al-Dahran (UTM EH556937) (as a minimum always 
give grid coordinates).
4.  Unit: 3d Republican Guards Regiment (include enemy unit if known).
5.  TIME: Item captured on 230230Z AUG 98 (always use ZULU time).
6.  Equipment: One laser target designator and sighting device (give best 
possible description).
EXAMPLE OF AN ORAL OPERATIONAL 
INTELLIGENCE BRIEFING
SMEAC (pronounced smee ack) is an acronym for situation, mission, ex-
ecution, administration and logistics, command and communications (or 
signals) used by police and emergency services. Sometimes variations of 
this acronym exist, depending on the agency involved.
It is usually delivered in an oral intelligence briefing for advice to the 
troops who are preparing to conduct an operation. Although a SMEAC is 
typically delivered in this manner, it can also be delivered in a written report 
format for those higher up the command structure to advise them of what 
is happening in the operational environment. Note that it is like a SALUTE 
report in that it is factual and contains no analysis, though it is a product of 
an analytic process. Because it is an operational intelligence report, the facts 
of the matter are most important, and the analysis that feeds the preparation 
of the report is the responsibility of the analysts who issue the SMEAC.
Situation: A summary of the current situation.
Mission: A single sentence statement about the task’s objective or what 
needs to be done.
Execution: The basic plan to accomplish the mission. Although presented 
in simple terms, it needs to contain as much detail as possible so that troops 

 
The Intelligence Research Report 
193
carrying out the mission can do it successfully. This aspect of the SMEAC 
may contain visual aids such as diagrams, maps, and overlays.
Administration and logistics: Composition of the teams that will be 
involved, how the plans will be executed, what the arrangements are for 
food, water, fuel, sleeping, equipment as well as the paperwork for logs 
and other record-keeping requirements.
Command and signals: A clear summary of who is in command and 
the legal authority for carrying out the mission. Directions need to be 
given as to how and when teams will communicate (e.g., the two-way 
radio channels or frequencies, mobile telephone numbers, code words to 
be used for predefined situations, etc.).
TARGET PROFILE
A target profile is an intelligence report that summarizes information about 
a specific target. The target can be an individual, but it could also be a com-
pany or organization. In the case of the latter, the report may be entitled 
a “criminal business profile,” “terrorist organization profile,” or similar 
name. A variation to the target profile is the problem profile—this is a report 
that focuses on an issue, not a person or organization. An example could 
be a series of crimes occurring in a geographic “hotspot.” In any case, the 
target can be either the subject of a current inquiry or an emerging target 
for a proposed investigation. The report summarizes what is known about 
the target and, in doing so, identifies information gaps, which feed into a 
collection plan for additional data.
Target profiles often provide field operatives with a range of options 
regarding possible intents (i.e., hypothesis derived from inductive rea-
soning) or possible ramifications if the target continues the activity at the 
central of the report’s concerns (e.g., risk assessment). In doing so, a good 
report will prioritize the need to make further inquiries about the target 
in ranked order with other targets under investigation so that intelligence 
unit managers can allocate resources.
A target profile consists of several sections that are arranged to tell a story: 
background, personal details, criminal record (in the case of a law enforce-
ment target assessment), physical environment, analysis, and target plan-
ning. There may also be attachments appended to the end of the report.
Context is the background to a problem or situation. It allows analysts to 
make sense of why an event is happening by allowing them to explain key 
contributing factors.

194 
Chapter 13
Background
The background section of the profile contains a short statement of the 
report’s aims or objectives, scope, and a brief description of how the 
target fits into the broader picture—the context (e.g., motorcycle gangs in 
the region). In addition, this section provides a short statement about the 
legal basis or agency policy, which gives the analyst authority to compile 
the report, and the name of the authorizing officer (e.g., the intelligence 
unit’s manager).
Personal Details
This section provides a descriptive analysis of the target (sometimes re-
ferred to as the person of interest or abbreviated as POI). It will contain a 
biography and physical description of the target and, if available, a pho-
tograph. Any aliases used by the target are included along with a descrip-
tion of the target’s usual or last practiced occupation, business address, 
business affiliations, and so on. Other pertinent facts, such as driving 
licenses, trade licenses, and vehicles owned or regularly driven (in the 
case that they do not own a vehicle), appear in this section.
The personal details section can also contain details about the target’s 
social and/or psychological functioning. This could take into account in-
formation about places the target frequents, personal friends, close family 
connections, and business associates.
Business Details
A range of information about the target’s own business or the businesses 
they are associated with appears here. Rather than being prescriptive 
about what should be included in this section, suffice to say that any 
detail that bears directly on portraying any of the five WHs—who, what, 
where, when, why, and how—associated with the aim or goal of the re-
port should be included. By way of example, in a money laundering case, 
details should be included on off-shore banks, electronic fund transfer 
arrangements, businesses and nonprofit organizations in the cash flow 
chain, key personnel, financial information, and company data from the 
government agency responsible for registering companies in the jurisdic-
tion, and so on.
Criminal Record
In addition to outlining the target’s criminal history, this section could con-
tain a list of court appearances, how they responded to previous probation 

 
The Intelligence Research Report 
195
or parole orders, and, if currently on bail, bail conditions and reporting ar-
rangements. There may be intelligence from a prison or jail intelligence unit 
that could prove insightful—if available, consider including it.
If the target has prior convictions or has been arrested for violence or 
firearms offenses, these details need to be highlighted as an occupational 
safety issue for fellow officers who might have to deal one-on-one with the 
target. Further, the types of crimes or the frequency of offense may be rel-
evant as to why the target profile is being developed, and therefore, it too 
should be a feature. If agency records note the target’s modus operandi, 
then this information will be another important aspect for inclusion.
Physical Environment
Observations made by surveillance operatives appear in this section of 
the profile. Details about the target’s physical space complements what is 
known about his or her social and psychological makeup (e.g., arrests and 
convictions can be considered external manifestations of their psyche). 
Moreover, surveillance operatives may have noted some of the ways the 
target practices countersurveillance or has put in place other intelligence 
countermeasures. Surveillance reports may have also commented on 
whether these precautions are conducted regularly, on an ad hoc basis, 
and whether they appear to be effective.
Analysis
This is the “engine room” of the report. The material that appears in the 
sections just discussed is descriptive in nature. However, in this section, 
the analyst applies one or more analytic tools to these data to derive some 
insight. It is sometimes described as the “so what” section. That is, what do 
all the previous facts mean, and what implications do they have? Depend-
ing on the issue or allegation, it might be as simple as positioning the target 
within the wider criminogenic landscape, or it might be as sophisticated as 
detailing where the target fits within a transnational crime syndicate.
This is done via analysis; analysts cannot rely on “gut feel” or base it on 
“experience” or “belief.” If a conclusion is drawn, then analysts must be 
able to demonstrate how they arrived at this finding. For instance, if an 
assessment centers on the risk the target poses to the community (or field 
operatives, etc.), then a risk analysis must be conducted. How elaborate 
this analysis is depends on the facts and the issues surrounding the target 
as well as the aim of the report. But generally, for the purposes of a target 
profile, it can be a simple, straightforward table examining the likelihood 
and consequences of key hazards (i.e., the sources of risk).

196 
Chapter 13
Even if the data are “thin,” at a minimum an analyst can conduct a 
SWOT analysis that examines the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, 
and threats posed by the target. Such an analysis can highlight missing 
data and form the basis for recommendations for additional data col-
lection (via a new information collection plan). If business and financial 
information is presented in the business section of the report, the analyst 
could then present some form of financial analysis or network analysis of 
the key personnel involved.
The analyst can insert additional analyses depending upon what data 
were described in the preceding sections, but one important analysis that 
the analyst should always include is that of countermeasures (if any). A 
simple force field analysis of the precautions taken by the target when 
using landline and mobile telephony, voice over internet (VOiP) commu-
nications, data transmission (including email), two-way radio, and satellite 
telephony would be helpful for planning how field operatives are tasked 
in the future. If these are missing, it needs to be highlighted. Include also 
observations made when the target makes face-to-face contact with “sig-
nificant others” (does the target practice countersurveillance techniques in 
these situations?). Are codes, ciphers, or encryption used when they com-
municate?
Target Planning
Having presented the known facts and analyzed these to gain an under-
standing into the target’s activities, this section takes the insights devel-
oped and answers the question of “where to from here?” or “so what do 
we do now?” The planning section usually starts off with a short narrative 
summarizing the findings in the context of the overall aim and then dis-
cusses practical and realistic ways of addressing the problem.
This is usually done by providing a range of policy or operational op-
tions—from the “do nothing” option to an option that could be described 
as a “Rolls-Royce standard.” Unless, there are large political pressures 
being applied because of the actions of the target, the Rolls-Royce option 
is normally outside most agencies’ budgets, so one of the middle options 
is going to be more attractive (acknowledging that there will be some 
trade-offs in effectiveness and/or efficiency which should be noted in 
the report). The bottom line is to present decision makers with a way of 
stopping, disrupting, or reducing the illegal, harmful, or otherwise detri-
mental effects of the target’s activities.
The do-nothing option, although at first glance appears an option that 
would be dismissed outright, could be a viable choice where further time 
is required to either gather critical pieces of information or where all nec-
essary data are in hand and arrest, capture, seizure is the next and final 
step. If more information is required, then the analyst must be mindful of 

 
The Intelligence Research Report 
197
the costs that will be incurred in gathering these data and the likelihood 
that such intelligence gathering will benefit the analysis and improve the 
recommendations of the report in a material way.
Attachments
Because a target profile is usually a short, sharp, and focused report, at-
tachments should be kept to a minimum. A few examples of what might 
appear in an appendix are: a map, a photograph, or an organizational 
chart showing complex relationships that would be confusing if they ap-
peared in a narrative form in the body of the text.
TACTICAL ASSESSMENT
A tactical assessment is a type of intelligence report that takes a wider 
view of a situation than does the target profile. Whereas the target 
profile focuses on a particular individual (or company or organiza-
tion), the tactical assessment looks at the problem in a broader way. 
The audience for a tactical assessment would be a whole-of-agency 
group that deals with tasking or an inter-agency group responsible for 
coordinating assets across several organizations (which could include 
agencies at different levels of government, or sectors—e.g., military 
and law enforcement).
For example, if a target profile examines Mack DaKnife who is involved 
in drug trafficking, then a tactical assessment may not only look at where 
DaKnife fits into this picture but the extent to which the drugs are traf-
ficked, those involved (buying and selling), the social and economic 
impact on the community of the direct effects of the illicit drugs, and the 
indirect and consequential effects of the ill-gotten profits on, say, corrupt-
ing legitimate business, political, or regulatory officials.
Although this description of a tactical assessment has the hallmarks of 
a strategic assessment, it falls short of its companion because it focuses on 
short-term objectives that would result from immediate action to prevent 
further illegal or otherwise unwanted activity. A strategic assessment 
looks at a longer timeframe and usually features several recommenda-
tions that in combination need to be put in place in order to defend 
against the threat or treat the risk/hazard.
Agencies will have their own house style for this type of report (and it 
may even be known under a variation of this name), but it will follow this 
template to a large degree. Analysts may optimize the sections and format 
to suit the intelligence project they are working on. Because the life-span 
of a tactical assessment is short, a new or revised report may have to be 
produced weekly or every two weeks.

198 
Chapter 13
Introduction
The report’s introduction section will contain a statement of the report’s 
aim or objective as well as a description of how the problem or issue un-
der investigation arose. Like a target profile, this section needs to provide 
an acknowledgment of the legal basis or agency policy that provides the 
authority for compiling the report and the name of the authorizing officer 
(e.g., the chair of the tasking group or the officer in charge of the inter-
agency committee).
Current Situation
The current situation section of a tactical assessment is comparable to the 
various descriptive sections that appear after the background section but 
before the analysis section of a target profile. In fact, this section may com-
prise several subsections of descriptive data about the problem. These 
data can come from other intelligence reports (e.g., target profiles), open 
sources (e.g., Internet), academic studies (PhD dissertations and master’s 
theses), articles in scholarly journals, and government publications (e.g., 
bureau of statistics), to cite a few.
In addition to describing the phenomenon, the analyst can discuss the 
ramifications of the problem in its social, economic, or political context 
and its extent in the jurisdiction (e.g., the region, the nation, or around 
the globe). The analyst could discuss any progress being made, pitfalls 
encountered during the investigation, or the implementation of interven-
tions to date. This information sets the scene for the next section, which 
is the analysis.
Analysis
As in the analytic section of the target profile discussed above, this is 
where analysts present the results of their analysis using techniques 
such as statistical analysis, network analysis, force field analysis, SWOT, 
PESTO, or competing hypotheses—or possibly others, depending on the 
scope of the research question.
Prognosis
The prognosis section is essentially a discussion of the analysis but ex-
trapolates from the findings to assess what is revealed about the activity 
under investigation and what can be done to provide relief. The analyst 
may consider a change in focus from what is or was being done to a 

 
The Intelligence Research Report 
199
modified or totally new approach or a shift in priorities using the same 
interventions, and so forth.
It is common to present this discussion within the frame of a results 
analysis. Although termed results analysis, this is an exercise in deduc-
tive reasoning but in a narrative form—“thinking out loud.” In order to 
produce a range of options for decision makers to consider, this section 
talks about the agency’s strategic mission/goals or key performance 
indicators (KPIs) and how possible interventions may impact on these 
benchmarks. Decisions makers around the conference table can then 
argue priorities and resources according to “what works,” “best value,” 
or “best practice.” The format of the results analysis can follow the five 
I model:
Intelligence. Information gathering, collation, and analyzing;
Intervention. Tactics to block, disrupt, weaken, or eliminate “the 
problem”;
Implementation. Translating the goal of the proposed intervention 
(theory or principles) into practical methods on the ground;
Involvement. Ways to get other agencies (or companies, organizations, 
and individuals) to contribute somehow to being part of the implementa-
tion of the intervention(s); and
Impact. How the problem will be evaluated and by whom. The evalu-
ation may be simple or complex, but as the problem is one of a tactical 
nature, a basic evaluation is most likely all that is needed (i.e., an output-
based evaluation rather than one that is outcome focused).
Recommendations
Intelligence managers dealing with tactical issues that are within the 
scope of this type of report will require options for consideration. Stem-
ming from the previous section, the analyst needs only restate the range of 
options available. This can appear in the form of a bulleted list to simplify 
what is possible. If there is a preferred option, this can be highlighted in 
some way—for instance, appearing first in the list with the other options 
appearing in a list below in diminishing order, with the least preferred at 
the end.
Appendixes
Because a tactical assessment is another type of focused report, the at-
tachments that may be included need to be kept to a minimum. Examples 
are similar to a target profile—a map, a photograph, or an organizational 

200 
Chapter 13
chart showing complex relationships that can be more helpful than a 
drawn-out narrative.
General Considerations for Report Writing
When writing the intelligence report, avoid placing facts, inferences, rec-
ommendations, and analysis within the same sections. Consider using an 
“hourglass” approach to constructing the report. That is, start from the 
general, work to the specific, and then end back at the general—like the 
shape of an hourglass.
Each section needs to help explain the “story” so the narrative flows 
logically. If there is a section of the report that discusses the current situ-
ation, it could contain the facts that are known. The analysis section that 
follows takes these facts and subjects them to one or more analytic tech-
niques so that insight can be developed. This analysis should also place 
some level of likelihood/probability to these scenarios (or hypotheses) 
with discussion about the limits (e.g., based on, say, a risk or inferential 
analysis). This narrative would then lead the reader to the plan/recom-
mendations section—like an hourglass. Or simply, it’s a story that has a 
beginning, middle, and an end.
Unlike fictional stories, the beginning of an intelligence story contains 
facts—who, what, where, when, why, and how (five Ws and one H). The 
middle tends to contain analysis, and the end contains the report’s con-
clusions, recommendations for action, or policy options, all of which can 
appear in a variety of forms (often prescribed by the employing agency 
in a standardized template).
Analysts should resist the temptation to append their analytic results 
at the end of the report as it could mean they failed to refer to them in 
the narrative (i.e., to help explain the story). Alternatively, referring the 
reader to peruse the appendices is getting the reader to do the job of the 
analyst.
In the same vein, tables of data or matrices should not be simply 
dropped into the analysis section of the report as there is often a lot of 
detail contained in these. It is better to summarize the key aspects of these 
analyses, and in case the reader wants to see the big picture or how you 
arrived at your conclusion, place the diagram or other figure/table in an 
appendix.
The reason for suggesting this writing approach is that the key points 
become the basis on which the analyst will make recommendations. Pre-
senting the study’s recommendations as a set of options is an important 
aspect of the report. Couching the options in terms of a threat assessment, 
a risk assessment, a budget, or the human resources available are excel-

 
The Intelligence Research Report 
201
lent approaches. To the reader, such features make the recommendations 
actionable.
These guidelines are not hard-and-fast, but following them will in-
crease the likelihood that the message contained in an intelligence report 
will be understood by decision makers and, if so, more likely to be acted 
upon.
TERMINOLOGY
In practice, some terminology used in the intelligence arena is applied inap-
propriately. As practitioners, it is important that we use key terms correctly; 
otherwise, our reports will lack credibility. Following are a few words that 
typically cause difficulties. Next to each term appears a definition. No doubt 
there are other definitions, but what is important in considering these is that 
analysts focus their thoughts on writing precisely.
Intelligence. “Insight” expressed in the form of a product (e.g., report, 
target profile, target assessment, estimate) and the process that produces 
such a product.
Investigation. The assembling (i.e., pre- or during) or reconstruction 
(i.e., post-) of facts surrounding an event.
Truth. A subjective notion. For instance, it was once viewed that 
the earth was flat, and this was the accepted truth at the time. To have 
questioned this truth was heresy. In the criminal justice setting, truth is 
derived via a judicial process of proofing evidence in accordance with the 
rules of evidence, criminal procedures, and precedent.
Fact. Something that can be observed or experienced through one of 
the five senses.
Allegation. An accusation yet to be substantiated.
Suspected. Alleged.
Proof. The legal process of introducing a fact into evidence with the 
intent to establish the truth of something.
Standard of proof. Beyond reasonable doubt (criminal) and on the bal-
ance of probabilities (civil).
Inference. A conclusion drawn from data that have been subject to 
analysis.
Conclusion. An inference.
Analysis. Systematic examination that follows some scientific, math-
ematical, or logical procedure or process.
Assumption. Something that is considered to be true without proof.
Postulate. Something that is considered to be true and forms the basis 
of a theory.

202 
Chapter 13
Hypothesis. A theory, an explanation for something, which is then 
used as the basis for examination or investigation.
Speculation. Conjecture, guesswork.
Believe/Belief. Synonymous to faith, not a recognized intelligence 
methodology. Suggest that the word consider is used. Consideration is 
based on reasoning.
Consideration. Deliberation, a process of long careful thought.
Probability. Likelihood, chance of something happening. Statistical 
confidence is the probability that a statement is true. If probability is 
not based on analysis, it is conjecture. (The use of words such as “will” 
conjure the idea of 100 percent certainty—avoid saying “something will” 
unless probability analysis confirms this.)
Evidence. Something that provides an indication that something exists 
or contributes to the process of proving the truth of something.
Finally, different words mean different things to different people. Ad-
jectives that invoke some level of sensationalism should be avoided in an 
intelligence report. The best way to do this is to “describe” or “explain,” 
but don’t excite. For instance, what an analyst might see as “extreme” 
may be “insignificant” to the reader.
Avoid the use of personal, subjective, or unproved ideas and ambiguous 
language in the intelligence report. Statements made need to be supported 
by evidence.
TABLES AND FIGURES
Representing complex data in a report will often take the form of a graph, 
chart, or table—or a picture such as a photograph, diagram, or drawing. 
When doing so, the analyst needs to label this symbolic representation 
correctly so the reader can identify it in the body of the report.
There are just two terms used to do this—tables and figures. A table is 
where data are arranged in rows and columns. Graphs, charts, diagrams, 
photographs, and any other illustrations are known as figures. They are 
numbered sequentially as they appear in the text and independent of each 
other—that is, tables are numbered as a group, and figures are numbered 
as another group.
DISSEMINATION
Dissemination is the object of your project; but to whom do you intend 
to distribute your findings? To some degree, you should have discussed 

 
The Intelligence Research Report 
203
this in the section on significance, but here it needs to be spelled out—will 
the results be for publication in an academic journal, circulated directly to 
decision makers, or will it be a classified report for operational command-
ers who may use it to initiate a criminal investigation or to guide/focus 
an existing inquiry? In this regard, will you formulate any intervention 
strategies that will form part of your report’s conclusions?
Need-to-Know and Right-to-Know
The term need-to-know is used by the military as well as law enforcement 
and government agencies to describe sensitive information that needs to be 
protected by limiting those who receive it. According to the need-to-know 
doctrine, even if one has a security clearance (e.g., secret), it does not entitle 
him or her to have access to any or all material classified at the secret level. 
Before people are given access, they need to demonstrate that they have a 
need-to-know. In short, this is some justification that access to the report 
will aid an intelligence project or operational mission. (In the post-9/11 
security environment, there is also the newly introduced concept of need-
to-share.2)
Some consideration will need to be given to not only at what level will 
the analyst’s report be classified but also some suggestion as to whether the 
report (or briefing) will be beneficial to other analysts, commanders, or other 
agencies that might be working on the same or related issue. The idea is to 
discourage those with a mere curiosity but not hinder legitimate access.
Consider this historical case as an example of need-to-know: during the 
planning of the June 6, 1944, D-Day invasion of Nazi-occupied Europe, 
thousands of military commanders were involved. However, only a few, 
by comparison, knew the full details of the plan. The great bulk of com-
manders were only privy to the details that allowed them to execute their 
part of the invasion.
Contrast need-to-know with right-to-know. The latter is where a legal 
precedent exists, allowing a person to have access to information. Usually 
this precedent is embodied in a statute but may be found in common law. 
Further, right-to-know may extend to a freedom of information law or a 
similar law. Analysts should make themselves familiar with laws in their 
jurisdiction and how they impact what they write and to whom it is dis-
seminated, as unintentional public disclosure may result. Such disclosure 
may put at risk methods or information that could jeopardize operations.
SOME FINAL THOUGHTS ON WRITING REPORTS
Analysts will frequently consider the question of what constitutes a good 
intelligence report at the culmination of their inquiries. Given that there are 

204 
Chapter 13
only two ways analysts communicate with decision makers—orally and in 
writing—deliberation will invariably center on clarity of expression.
Decision makers are people with busy agendas, tight budgets, and sub-
stantial pressures, so an analyst’s report needs to be concise and precise. 
If a decision maker cannot find the important information in a report, 
then, to a large degree, the report has failed. Remember, the purpose of 
intelligence is to provide insight so the best possible decision can be made. 
This is why the above examples and templates have been described in 
this section—they have been tested many times by many agencies and by 
busy managers. Some key points to remember are:
•  Double check that the report’s conclusions and recommendations 
dovetail with the original aim of the inquiry;
•  Comply with the agency’s in-house style or template for reports;
•  Do not selectively omit data items if they do not support a “preferred” 
position—this is not only unethical but can lead to civil and criminal 
charges against individuals or the agency if a court or commission of 
inquiry finds the intelligence investigation did not act in good faith;
•  Use a number of analytic techniques to distill the data so that the 
clearest picture emerges;
•  When formulating judgments, make it clear what the limitations 
are—do not give false indications;
•  Follow the agency’s policy on making and couching recommenda-
tions; provide options in objective terms, and avoid “rivers of blood” 
prognoses that manipulate decision makers (doing so is bordering 
on the unethical);
•  Aim to write several drafts, and run each version past a colleague 
who is senior in years of service. This is because he or she is likely to 
have experienced many of the pitfalls common in presenting reports 
and can steer a new analyst around the “holes in the road.” It is better 
that someone close to you critically reviews your work than to have 
an executive in your agency do it with the potential consequence of 
getting a “black mark” against your reputation; and
•  Always get someone else to proofread your work—it is more likely 
that he or she will note spelling and typographical errors than you 
as the author.
In intelligence writing, there is a need to present findings in tentative terms 
and to avoid the temptation of absolutism.

 
The Intelligence Research Report 
205
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Abstract;
•  Context;
•  Figures;
• Five I model;
•  Five Ws and one H;
•  Graphical presentation;
•  Insight;
•  Need-to-know;
• Need-to-share;
•  Oral briefing;
•  Person of interest;
•  Product;
•  Right-to-know;
•  SALUTE;
•  SMEAC;
•  Tables;
•  Tactical assessment;
•  Target profile; and
•  Written report.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  Describe the “hourglass” approach to report writing and its advan-
tages.
2.  Explain the standard parts of a strategic intelligence report.
3.  Explain the individual parts of a report represented by the acronym 
SMEAC.
4.  Explain the acronym SALUTE stand for, and how is it different from 
a SMEAC.
5.  What is the difference among a need-to-know, a right-to-know, and 
a need-to-share? Give an example of each.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Suppose you are requested to present the findings of your research into 
an issue facing your agency. To demonstrate the skills learned in this 
chapter, construct an electronic slide show that will be the basis of your 

206 
Chapter 13
oral presentation. Use the hourglass approach to do this, and for the sub-
ject material use the topic of report writing.
NOTES
1.  U.S. Department of the Army, FM 2-22.401: TECHINT: Multi-Service Tactics, 
Techniques, and Procedures for Technical Intelligence Operations (Fort Monroe, 
VA: Department of the Army, 2006), B-3.
2.  Need-to-share involves a mindset that asks the question “who needs to know 
this piece of information?” or “who should I be sharing this information 
with?” Some in the national security arena argue that need-to-know should 
be replaced with need-to-share. But this may be a simplistic argument as the 
need-to-know doctrine still has a role to play. Nonetheless, need-to-know 
does not exclude the need-to-share philosophy and could easily accommo-
date it if it is articulated correctly in policy.

207
14
c
Ethical Considerations 
in Intelligence Research
T
his topic introduces the notions of accountability and control in col-
lecting data secretly. It also examines the ethical issues involved in 
presenting research findings by looking at applied social research and 
how ethics in this field of inquiry compare to secret intelligence re-
search.
INTRODUCTION
Discussions about morality, politicalization, “guideposts,” principles, 
codes, creeds, and values are not the expected reading material for an 
intelligence analyst. Indeed, such a collection of ethics-based issues is a 
most unlikely feature of the profession’s tradecraft. Yet, intelligence pro-
fessionals face the dilemma of acting ethically while at the same time en-
gaging in what some have portrayed as an unethical business—spying.
Decision making is not easy, especially when faced with a choice between 
options that are unappealing or distasteful. However, in intelligence work, 
this can be the case.

208 
Chapter 14
BACKGROUND
By and large, intelligence analysts are recruited with academic backgrounds 
in such fields as sociology, criminology, anthropology, psychology, history, 
political science, and the military sciences. While obtaining their profes-
sional credentials, analysts are likely to have been indoctrinated in the phi-
losophy that they must be ethical—for instance, to take responsibility for 
the mental, emotional, and physical well-being of those they research.1
A number of questions therefore arise, and these concern both research 
ethics and practice ethics:
•  Should intelligence analysts be bound by the same ethical guidelines 
as their social and behavioral science brethren?
•  If so, how does one reconcile being asked to carry out secret intel-
ligence research where the welfare of those researched is not only 
removed from the fore of the analyst’s considerations but also is 
unlikely to even feature anywhere in the research methodology?
•  Likewise, how do analysts restrain their personal opinions from 
making their way into a formal assessment?
•  How do they guard against presenting their own beliefs in the intel-
ligence product?
•  How do analysts maintain professional distance and not attempt to 
influence decision makers through their analytic product yet still 
provide advice as to options?
Then there are the questions at the opposite end of this ethical issue, ex-
emplified by what the Australian government, under the prime minister 
John Howard (March 1996 to December 2007), was accused of doing 
with intelligence assessments on Iraq. These intelligence products were 
purported to have been created with qualifiers to reflect the ambiguity of 
the situation in Iraq prior to the 2003 invasion. However, an intelligence 
analyst then with the Australian Office of National Assessments, Andrew 
Wilkie, alleged that the former Howard government skewed these find-
ings by taking the ambiguity out of the weapons of mass destruction issue 
and presented what appeared to be a clear-cut situation to the public.2, 3 
How does an analyst deal with this type of problem?
SOME ETHICAL DILEMMAS
Given the breadth and scope of these dilemmas, the question that pres-
ents itself is: what guidelines should intelligence professionals follow? 

 
Ethical Considerations in Intelligence Research 
209
As there is no clear-cut answer, the best way to deal with these issues is 
to read widely and discuss the dilemmas with colleagues and raise these 
issues at staff meetings.
It would be a good starting point for the analyst to examine the issue of 
ethics within the intelligence community in its widest context: “‘truth’ is a 
goal, yet deception, secrecy and morally troubling compromises are often 
necessary.”5 Whether it is collecting data by deception, or, say, coercing 
criminals into becoming informants, the effects of such actions on intel-
ligence officers can be profound. Having to decide what is “right” can 
result in self-inflicted psychological damage as well as suffering the real-
world consequences from actions taken (reflect on what Wilkie risked by 
blowing the whistle on the Iraq war and weapons of mass destruction).
As for intelligence collection and analysis, a recently declassified 
speech given by the then director of central intelligence, Robert Gates, 
in the CIA auditorium in March 1992 exemplifies how politicalization 
manifests itself in different ways—from deliberately distorting analysis 
and judgments to suit the preferred line of thinking to forcing intelligence 
products to conform to policymakers’ preconceived views. Gates draws 
attention to the issue of how management can apply pressure to “define 
and drive certain lines of analysis and substantive view points,”6 to alter 
the tone or emphasis of the product or the process that created these prod-
ucts, or to limit alternative viewpoints expressed within.
The points made by Gates were given new currency when they were 
echoed in the Report to the President of the United States by the Commission 
on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons 
of Mass Destruction.7 This report pointed out that the key intelligence 
briefings to White House personnel and senior executives were skewed. 
Australian Institute of Professional Intelligence Officers: Code of Ethics
•  To continually strive to increase professionalism, integrity, respect and 
recognition of the profession.
•  To ensure that duties and responsibilities are carried out with diligence 
while maintaining the highest degree of professionalism and avoiding all 
unethical practices.
•  To fully comply with all applicable laws and regulations in relation to 
official duties.
•  To protect intellectual property and confidential information with strict 
observance of the protocols in this regard.
•  To promote and encourage compliance with these standards within the 
profession and work environment.4

210 
Chapter 14
The report said that these intelligence products demonstrated “attention-
grabbing headlines and drumbeat of repetition, [that] left an impression 
of many corroborating reports when in fact there were very few sources. 
And in other instances, intelligence suggesting the existence of weapons 
programs was conveyed to senior policymakers, but later information 
casting doubt upon the validity of that intelligence was not. In ways 
both subtle and not so subtle, the daily reports seemed to be ‘selling’ 
intelligence in order to keep its customers, or at least the First Customer, 
interested.”8 It’s interesting that Gates’s insights preceded the commis-
sion’s findings by some thirteen years—it highlights how short corporate 
memories can be for “lessons learned.”
Nelson Blackstock’s book Cointelpro: The FBI’s Secret War on Political 
Freedom is an example of how domestic intelligence operations were used 
to subvert political groups in the 1960s and 1970s.9 The counterintel-
ligence program ran for decades, ending officially in April 1971. It was 
argued that the primary purpose was to harass and disrupt legitimate 
political activity under an alarmist guise of national security (e.g., com-
munists, the New Left, and the Ku Klux Klan).
Putting aside the unpalatable political philosophies that these groups may 
have advanced, Blackstock presents an equally unpalatable tail of systemic 
misuse of intelligence by several U.S. government agencies that participated 
in the counterintelligence activities. As a case study, Cointpro presents a 
springboard for ethical discussion by students of the craft of intelligence.
ISSUES WITH INTELLIGENCE DISSEMINATION
Dissemination is the ultimate object of an intelligence research project, but 
what is it that the analysts intend to do with their research findings? The 
analysts should have discussed this, but here it needs to be spelled out. 
Will the results be for publication in an academic journal, circulated to 
government policy makers, or published in a classified report for opera-
tional commanders? Will you formulate any intervention strategies that 
will form part of your report’s conclusions?
Nations can lose sight of their purpose and jeopardize the demo-
cratic principles they are trying so diligently to protect. This same 
issue has been highlighted with regard to foreign policy intelligence. 
For instance, Roger Hilsman, former professor at Columbia University, 
succinctly put the case: “Finally there remains the ultimate moral and 
ethical question, whether the means we use will eventually corrupt our 
values so as to change the nature of our society just as fundamentally 
as if we were conquered.”10

 
Ethical Considerations in Intelligence Research 
211
Another key area is that of intelligence operations—that is, covert 
action—by field operatives. It is important to avoid the alarmist anti-
intelligence literature that abounded some years ago and focus on lit-
erature that stimulates meaningful debate. James Barry’s article “Man-
aging Covert Action: Guidelines from Just War Theory” is outstanding 
in this regard.11
Barry argues that creating a framework based on “just war” guidelines 
could prove a credible basis for mounting paramilitary operations as well 
as those involving various forms of coercion and violence in its different 
manifestations. Although it goes without saying that it would be unrealis-
tic to think such an approach on its own would eliminate the controversy 
surrounding covert action, nonetheless, just war theory is a credible plat-
form for announcing the fact that a government is interested in the issue 
of “right” versus “wrong” and addressing it in an atmosphere of open-
ness and transparency (and in doing so, making sure that this important 
policy option is still viable).
“The most popular technique for securing information is socializing with 
competitors in non-business settings. Business people generally view their 
competitors negatively, believing that they go to much further lengths than 
does their own corporation in gathering competitive intelligence.”12
Finally, there are the ethical issues in some selected parallel professions 
that have been associated with intelligence gathering—sociology, anthro-
pology, and business. Darren Charters’s article on the challenge of ethical 
competitor intelligence is worthy of note.13 (Competitor intelligence is 
sometimes termed business intelligence so that its abbreviation—CI—is not 
mistaken for counterintelligence. CI is also used by law enforcement agen-
cies when they refer to the protection of critical infrastructure.) In his ar-
ticle, Charters provides a “tool” for gauging whether one’s actions could 
be deemed ethical or not. His tool—based on an evaluative process—is 
particularly helpful for analysts who are operating in an environment that 
does not have formal policies or guidelines in place.
Using the acronym CHIP, Charters constructs a four-factor process 
by which analysts can weigh the gravity of their proposed actions—
community virtues, harm, individual as end, and personal virtues. 
Using a matrix approach (similar in intent to a SWOT analysis), CHIP 
compares ethical theories by considering the planned competitor 
intelligence activity from the perspectives of utilitarian, Kantian, 
and virtue ethics. Though one could argue CHIP is not a substitute for 

212 
Chapter 14
ethical training, the model does offer a realistic means for benchmarking 
ethical competitor intelligence activities. Its use would certainly en-
courage quality and consistency in order to avoid violating professional 
standards (as well as legal statutes—lest we forget Watergate).
The U.S. Economic Espionage Act of 1996 criminalizes the unauthorized 
appropriation of trade secrets:
 a)  To benefit a foreign government, foreign instrumentality, or foreign 
agent; or
 b) For financial or commercial benefit.14
Overall, it would be advantageous for analysts to examine the literature 
on the ethics of intelligence. It might help prompt the formulation of 
ethical codes for both research analysts and field operatives. Such codes 
could pave the way for analysts who need to work through the issue of 
“doing the thing right” when confronted with the dilemma of “doing the 
right thing.”
But, in reality, the distinction between these two paths will no doubt 
be made with some temperance. Analysts should always be conscious 
that the final judgment will be grounded in what the people and their 
constitutionally elected representatives consider “necessary and proper” 
in the context of the threat (thinking particularly of international terror-
ism and transnational crimes, such as the trafficking in arms, drugs, and 
humans).
Suggestions put forth by the International Association of Chiefs of 
Police (IACP) to guard against allegations of unethical conduct by law 
enforcement field operatives are worthy of note. The IACP advises that 
in order to protect the rights of individuals genuinely not involved in 
criminal acts, a set of rules and standards should be adopted to deal with 
the recording and purging of intelligence files.15 In the main, these guide-
lines urge that when an individual’s association is not criminal in nature, 
or criminally related, the information should not be recorded. Likewise, 
in the case of organizations, unless an organization’s “ideology advocates 
criminal conduct and its members have planned, threatened, attempted 
or performed such criminal conduct,” it is both unnecessary and wrong 
to gather such information.16
Moreover, information about an individual’s “sexual, political or 
religious activities, beliefs or opinions, or any dimension of private life-

 
Ethical Considerations in Intelligence Research 
213
style” should not be collected or recorded in intelligence files unless that 
information is material to a criminal investigation.17 In addition, all in-
formation collected should be evaluated prior to collation to determine 
its accuracy. The source also requires evaluation to determine its level 
of reliability. Information that is not verifiable should not be stored in 
criminal intelligence files, and likewise, the collection of such informa-
tion should be strictly limited.
A set of standards is necessary to maintain a successful intelligence unit 
filing system. The elements of such a system include:
1.  Specific guidelines should be established for determining:
a)  the kind of information that should be kept in intelligence files;
b)  the method of reviewing the material as to its usefulness and 
relevance; and
c)  the method of disposing of material purged from intelligence files 
considered to be no longer useful or relevant.
2.  Systematic flow of pertinent and reliable information;
3.  Uniform procedures for evaluating and validating information;
4.  A system for proper analysis of information;
5.  A system capable of rapid and efficient retrieval of all information;
6.  Explicit guidelines for disseminating information from the files; and
7.  Security procedures.18
Systematic purging of files according to such guidelines should ensure 
that information being collected (as per an intelligence collection plan) is 
related to approved projects and necessary to meet the decision maker’s 
intelligence requirements.
Situations where data have become irrelevant because of age should 
not be allowed to develop. For instance, a Rand Corporation study once 
found an American police department retained intelligence files that 
“contained information on suspected Nazis, the concern of the 1940s; 
Communist Party membership rosters, the concern of the 1950s; Black 
militants, right-wing extremists, and anti-war demonstrators, the concern 
of the 1960s.”19
Intelligence managers in the twenty-first century would be hard 
pressed to justify the retention of these types of data. Analysts should 
always be mindful of their targets. No matter how unpalatable the cause, 
they should be conscious of the difference between legal, lawful protest, 
and subversion and criminal activity—distinctions not always correctly 
made in the past.

214 
Chapter 14
For the most part, secrets in the context of this book are secrets of the state 
(or a private corporation), and as such, keeping them secret will most 
likely be an obligation of a legal statute or a legally binding agreement. 
Because of this, and unless disclosure is covered by a countervailing legal 
instrument (e.g., a whistleblower-type act, an order of a court, a police 
warrant, a direction given by a judge or magistrate), then disclosure 
should not be made. However, if the secret is the cornerstone of a cover-
up of an illegal activity or it relates to the planning or commission of an 
illegal activity (or covered under a whistleblower-type law), then reveal-
ing the secret is not likely to fall into this category—in fact, there may be 
a legal obligation to disclose these facts to a law enforcement agency.
By way of example, take the U.S. army’s field manual Open Source Intel-
ligence which lists a number of areas that prohibit the carrying out of intel-
ligence activities, specifically mentioning activities that may be a violation 
in law. The prohibited intelligence activities identified are the improper 
collection, retention, or dissemination of U.S. person information:
•  Gathering information about U.S. domestic groups not connected 
with a foreign power or international terrorism.
•  Producing and disseminating intelligence threat assessments con-
taining U.S. person information without a clear explanation of the 
intelligence purpose for which the information was collected.
•  Incorporating U.S. person criminal information into an intelligence 
product without determining if identifying the person is appropriate.
•  Storing operations and command traffic about U.S. persons in intel-
ligence files merely because the information was transmitted on a 
classified system.
Society of Competitive Intelligence Professionals: Code of Ethics
•  To continually strive to increase the recognition and respect of the profes-
sion.
•  To comply with all applicable laws, domestic and international.
•  To accurately disclose all relevant information, including one’s identity 
and organization, prior to all interviews.
•  To avoid conflicts of interest in fulfilling one’s duties.
•  To provide honest and realistic recommendations and conclusions in the 
execution of one’s duties.
•  To promote this code of ethics within one’s company, with third-party 
contractors and within the entire profession.
•  To faithfully adhere to and abide by one’s company policies, objectives 
and guidelines.20

 
Ethical Considerations in Intelligence Research 
215
•  Collecting U.S. person information from open sources without a 
logical connection to the unit’s mission or correlation to a validated 
collection requirement.
•  Identifying a U.S. person by name in an intelligence information 
report without a requirement to do so.
•  Including the identity of a U.S. person in a contact report when that 
person is not directly involved with the operation.21
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Cover-up;
•  Democratic principles;
•  Ethics;
•  Legal obligations;
•  Moral dilemmas;
•  Politicalization;
•  Purging files; and
•  Whistle-blower.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  In your view, should intelligence analysts be bound by the same 
ethical guidelines as colleagues in the social and behavioral sciences? 
Discuss the issues.
2.  As an intelligence analyst, cite several practical ways you could ex-
ercise restraint when it comes to expressing your personal opinions 
in a formal assessment.
3.  Discuss how analysts might maintain professional distance and not 
attempt to influence decision makers through their analytic product 
while still providing advice as to policy options.
LEARNING ACTIVITY
Suppose you are asked to carry out a classified intelligence research project. 
Discuss how you would reconcile the fact that you are being tasked to 
carry out secret research where the welfare of those being researched is 
not a feature in the project’s methodology. Consider the legal and ethics 
issues, and weigh-up the importance of these factors in your overall judg-
ment. Are there instances where such considerations are a non-issue?

216 
Chapter 14
NOTES
 1. Max Futrell and Cliff Roberson, An Introduction to Criminal Justice Research 
(Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1988), 201–4.
 2. Veteran Intelligence Professionals for Sanity and Andrew Wilkie, “Memo-
randum: One Person Can Make a Difference,” in The Ethics of Spying, ed. Jan Gold-
man (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2006), 188.
 3. Andrew Wilkie, Axis of Deceit (Melbourne, Australia: Pan Macmillan Aus-
tralia, 2004).
 4. Australian Institute of Professional Intelligence Officers, Inc., Intelligence 
Officer Code of Ethics, http://www.aipio.asn.au/files/file/CODE_ETHICS.pdf 
(accessed April 25, 2009).
 5. Jan Goldman, ed., The Ethics of Spying (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 
2006), x.
 6. Robert M. Gates, “Guarding against Politicization: A Message to Analysts,” 
in The Ethics of Spying, ed. Jan Goldman (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2006), 
172.
 7. Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding 
Weapons of Mass Destruction, Report to the President of the United States (Washing-
ton DC: U.S. Independent Agencies and Commissions, March 31, 2005).
 8. Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding 
Weapons of Mass Destruction, Report to the President of the United States, 14.
 9. Nelson Blackstock, Cointelpro: The FBI’s Secret War on Political Freedom (New 
York: Vintage Books, 1976).
10. Roger Hilsman, “On Intelligence,” Armed Forces and Society 8, no. 1 (Fall 
1981): 129–43.
11. James A. Barry, “Managing Covert Action: Guidelines from Just War 
Theory” in The Ethics of Spying, ed. Jan Goldman (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 
2006), 248–65.
12. William Cohen and Helena Czepiec, “The Role of Ethics in Gathering Cor-
porate Intelligence,” Journal of Business Ethics 7, no. 3 (1988): 199.
13. Darren Charters, “Business: The Challenge of Completely Ethical Compe-
tiveness Intelligence and the ‘CHIP’ Model,” in The Ethics of Spying, ed. Jan Gold-
man (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2006), 362–77.
14. U.S. Congress, Title 18 of the United States Code, Part I, Chapter 90, 1831–39.
15. International Association of Chiefs of Police, Law Enforcement Policy on the 
Management of Criminal Intelligence (Gaithersburg, MD: International Association of 
Chiefs of Police, 1985), 8–9.
16. Los Angeles Police Department, Standards and Procedures for the Anti-Terrorist 
Division (Los Angeles: Los Angeles Police Department, 1984), 2.
17. Los Angeles Police Department, Standards and Procedures, 2.
18. International Association of Chiefs of Police, Law Enforcement Policy, 9.
19. Brian Michael Jenkins, Sorrel Wildhorn, and Marvin Lavin, Intelligence Con-
straints of the 1970s and Domestic Terrorism: Executive Summary (Santa Monica, CA: 
Rand, 1982), 5.

 
Ethical Considerations in Intelligence Research 
217
20. Society of Competitive Intelligence Professionals, SCIP Code of Ethics for CI 
Professional, http://www.scip.org/About/content.cfm?ItemNumber=578&navIte
mNumber=504 (accessed April 25, 2009).
21. U.S. Department of the Army, FMI 2-22.9: Open Source Intelligence (Fort 
Huachuca, AZ: Department of the Army, 2006).

218
0
c
Chapter Title
218
15
c
Document and 
Personnel Security
T
he topics discussed in this chapter focus on data security and associ-
ated issues for those who handle it, including:
1.  Information security;
2.  Handling sensitive information;
3.  Security clearances; and
4.  Storing, protecting, and disposing of intelligence data.
INFORMATION SECURITY
The term information reflects all forms of data—ideas, concepts, and plans. 
Information security is therefore concerned with the arrangements for pro-
tecting these data once they are recorded. Information security should 
not be confused with the same term used by the information technology 
industry, which has a narrow application—that is, the security of data 
processing hardware and software, and access to the same.
The role information security plays in an intelligence unit is to protect 
data and reports from unauthorized personnel. Keep in mind that the infor-
mation held by an intelligence unit and the finished intelligence it produces 
are destined for a very specific client group. These customers have either 
a need-to-know or a right-to-know. The delicate subject matter in a unit’s 
files makes it an attractive target to organized criminals, terrorists, corrupt 
public officials, investigative journalists, and a wide range of antiestablish-
ment ideologues.

 
Document and Personnel Security 
219
In determining the security needs of an intelligence section, we are re-
minded that it is not absolute security that is sought but a level of security in 
line with the sensitivity level of the information being guarded. However, 
having said that, the requirements of security should not eclipse the basic 
objectives of the unit and impinge upon its operational effectiveness. Secu-
rity should not inhibit the flow of information or hamper the dissemination 
of intelligence to authorized users (i.e., recall the need-to-share doctrine).
In addressing the issue of security, there are three areas to be examined: 
1) personnel, 2) physical, and 3) information. In the defense industry, for in-
stance, standards have long been established to ensure confidential matters 
are not prematurely disclosed. By way of example, if the Australian navy 
were to develop a new electronic guidance system for its offensive ship-
to-ship missiles, such a project would be expected to necessitate dozens of 
civilian contractors, numerous military units, and various political leaders.
The logistics of containing the myriad details associated with such a 
project could be a nightmare if a comprehensive set of classifications and 
supporting guidelines were not developed. For example, guidelines can 
be found in the open-source literature such as the U.S. Department of 
Defense’s National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual1 and A 
Guide to Marking Classified Documents.2
Similarly, in the law enforcement or regulatory context, a set of informa-
tion classifications and security procedures is mandatory. An example of 
this is the former Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence’s guidelines 
entitled Document Security.3
HANDLING SENSITIVE INFORMATION
Classification of Data
Initial Considerations
The considerations outlined in this chapter are not intended to be 
rigid in their adaptation but rather flexible in their approach. The 
reader must consider many factors before implementing the following 
countermeasures. Important issues that affect the establishment (or 
upgrading) of a security program include, but are by no means limited 
to, financial constraints and the willingness of staff to follow proposed 
procedures once enacted. There is little sense, for instance, in spending 
large sums of money on a state-of-the-art, monitored intruder detection 
system if the costs push a budding private intelligence business to the 
brink of insolvency. Likewise, staff may be tempted to bypass security 
procedures if those procedures are viewed as overly complicated or 
time consuming.

220 
Chapter 15
The security treatments discussed here can be adapted either in whole, 
or in part, depending on circumstances. The important fact is that the 
principles of security are observed and that periodic inspections are car-
ried out to check on the standard of security practiced.
Identifying Levels of Threat
Threat identification is the initial step for any intelligence unit when 
establishing a security program. Likewise, it becomes an ongoing consid-
eration once a security program has been developed. Following are three 
broadband sources of threat. This list is intended to give the reader an 
appreciation of the hierarchy of threats that an intelligence unit may face 
in the course of conducting “business.”
Steps taken to thwart intelligence collection at what could be termed 
a level II threat would be sufficient to guard against any attempt by the 
inferior level III threat but not the reverse. This is an important factor 
to remember. It is critical for intelligence units to determine where their 
threats lie before deciding on the range and depth of security measures 
they will require. Furthermore, an intelligence unit’s threat level may 
change from time-to-time due to the dynamics of its operations. There-
fore, its security needs will also be required to either escalate or abate in 
response to these changing conditions.
Level I Threat. Surveillance by a foreign government’s security or intel-
ligence agency, or surveillance by one’s own national law enforcement/
intelligence organization(s).
Level II Threat. Surveillance by a regional/state law enforcement or 
intelligence unit, an organized criminal group, a foreign or domestic busi-
ness competitor employing a “spy-for-hire,” a private detective acting on 
behalf of a party interested in the analyst’s unit, or other professional fact 
finders (e.g., an investigative journalist).
Level III Threat. Nonprofessional surveillance by, say, an employee, a 
business associate/competitor, or another interested individual or group 
acting on for profit or revenge.
Classification of Information
Business and Private Intelligence
In order to foil possible attempts by a hostile agent to obtain information 
in the private or business sector, information about the unit’s activities 
should be divided into classifications of sensitivity. Moreover, these clas-
sifications should be used as a guide when releasing or disseminating 
information. (Classification of information in the law enforcement, mili-

 
Document and Personnel Security 
221
tary, and national security sector is discussed further on in this chapter.) 
Information in this context means knowledge which requires protection 
from disclosure in addition to the protection afforded to the intelligence it 
produces or that is being produced. This includes such areas as:
•  Research plans;
•  Research methods;
•  Research schedules;
•  Reporting dates and timeframes;
•  Strategic plans;
•  New intelligence targets and research projects;
•  Customer/client distribution lists;
•  Details of alliances with other intelligence units;
•  Policy directives;
•  Operating budgets;
•  Information sources;
•  Information, technology, and communications; and
•  Personnel (their numbers, positions, salary packages, and expertise).
The lowest classification of information, designated as grade IV, consists 
of information of a general and unrestricted nature. The type of informa-
tion provided in company prospectuses is a good example of this. Such 
information would be suitable for all general inquiries and posting to a 
website.
The next highest classification, grade III, consists of information which 
should be available to clients only upon request. Information of this type 
is best described as information and/or material that, if disclosed to an ad-
versary, could reasonably be expected to cause some degree of “damage” 
to the intelligence unit.
Moving up the scale again is grade II information. This information 
should be available to a unit’s most important customers. Information with 
this designation would be information and/or material that, if disclosed 
inappropriately, could reasonably be expected to cause “serious damage” 
to the intelligence unit.
Finally, the most sensitive information, grade I, should be available only 
to staff with a need-to-know and government departments that have ap-
propriate authority. Information of this type, if disclosed to an adversary, 
would reasonably be expected to cause “exceptionally grave damage” to 
the intelligence unit. (In a business setting, this classification might mean 
that the company’s bottom line could suffer an impact of five percentage 
points or more.) Staff authorized to access documentation of this grade 
should be required to sign a “chain of custody record” in order to assure 

222 
Chapter 15
control over its content. The chain of custody record also facilitates with-
drawal and destruction when the documentation is no longer required.
In order to inform staff members of a particular document’s degree of 
sensitivity, each document should be identified with a marking indicating 
its grade (the Roman numerals I to IV in red ink). When marking a docu-
ment, keep in mind that perhaps not the entire document needs to be clas-
sified at a particular sensitivity level. Take for instance a report compiled 
on a recent research project. It is considered to be ideal for public release 
in a future counterterrorist awareness campaign in the media (grade IV), 
but a page (or even several paragraphs) contains technical data about the 
research that is best kept reserved. That section can carry a grade II stamp, 
while the remainder of the text displays the general grade IV classification.
By using an information classification system, inappropriate disclosure is 
less likely to occur, and as the information contained in various documents 
becomes dated and less sensitive with the passage of time, reclassifying the 
information’s grade downwards can then take place.4 The extent to which 
an intelligence unit goes to enact a classification system is determined by 
its size and the overarching authority imposed on it by its mandated cre-
ator (i.e., government and military intelligence units will have standards 
imposed by law or regulation, whereas private intelligence units will be 
guided by policy). In the case of a sole intelligence practitioner or a small 
research firm, there will be far less need for formal arrangements when 
compared to large organizations.
SECURITY CLEARANCES
Screening Personnel
Arguably, all agencies hold some form of information that would be valu-
able to a competitor or an adversary, especially intelligence agencies. If 
this information is released in an unauthorized manner or prematurely, it 
could compromise the operations of the agency or if a nation, its security.
To mitigate such disclosures, personnel undergo an investigation that 
leads to a security clearance. This type of investigation delves into the 
employee’s charter, trustworthiness, and loyalty in order to ensure that 
he or she can be relied upon to hold secrets secure. The theory is that a 
person who has been found unreliable in one or more of these areas may 
be a risk when it comes to guarding information. Or the person may be 
subject to blackmail and forced to surrender information to avoid disclo-
sure of compromising details of past or present activities.
These investigations, therefore, probe personal character; they examine 
how people conduct themselves in public and private, test their honesty, 

 
Document and Personnel Security 
223
their financial position, and inquire about any criminal involvement. 
They also try to gain an appreciation of their emotional and mental 
strength as well as other issues that might jeopardize their work with im-
portant secrets. Foundational to almost all these investigations are checks 
of national police records and credit worthiness. In addition, most inves-
tigations conduct interviews with individuals who know the applicant’s 
personal behavior patterns and ethical temperament.
Countries may have slightly different security classifications, but gen-
erally speaking, national security classifications are divided into catego-
ries that comprise the following:
Unclassified. Documents that do not require the protection of a secu-
rity classification. They may include documents suitable for public release 
and could include those deemed “for official use only.”
For Official Use Only. Despite appearing to be a security classifica-
tion, it is not. The annotation merely alerts the user to the fact that it is 
protected under a privacy act because it is sensitive data.
Confidential. Information, if disclosed, could reasonably be expected 
to cause damage to national security.
Secret. Information, if disclosed, could reasonably be expected to cause 
serious damage to national security.
Top Secret. Information, if disclosed, could reasonably be expected to 
cause grave damage to national security.
What necessitates a security clearance? In most cases it is based on 
one’s access to classified information. Say, for instance, if an analyst’s job 
involves accessing confidential information, that person would require a 
security clearance to the level of confidential. If the person’s job required 
him or her to have access to secret information, they would have to obtain 
a clearance to secret level.
The screening process for personnel usually starts at the application stage 
with the applicant completing a detailed personal history statement (PHS). 
This is carried out to prevent both the hiring of unethical people, who may 
in time disclose confidential information, but also to frustrate any attempt 
at penetration by a hostile agent. In addition to the applicant’s full name, 
current residential address, and date and place of birth, the PHS can include 
such sub-histories as:
•  Marital history;
•  Residential history;
•  Citizenship history (usually 10 years for a clearance to secret level 
and 15 years for top secret);
•  Educational history;
•  Employment history;

224 
Chapter 15
•  Overseas travel history;
•  Military history;
•  Criminal history; and
•  Details of organizational memberships, as well as character, profes-
sional, and credit references.
When reviewing the applicant’s PHS, a background investigation will 
look for any inconsistencies, discrepancies, or unaccountable periods 
(usually around three months or more). Even though applicants may pass 
this initial screening process, once they are hired, a probationary period 
is usually set as a contingency for their possible dismissal should they be 
suspected of having become a security risk. Similarly, when analysts are 
promoted or assigned to more sensitive research projects (e.g., top secret), 
another screening procedure can be conducted, covering the time elapsed 
from their initial hiring to the present. This is to ascertain if any factors in 
the analysts’ recent past could jeopardize the confidentiality of the infor-
mation they will be handling.
Another means of safeguarding sensitive information is by drawing 
up nondisclosure or secrecy agreements. These agreements are intended 
to create a psychological impression on analysts, reinforcing the impor-
tance of protecting information to which they have been entrusted. These 
agreements are in effect legal contracts and can be used as evidence in a 
court of law should the analyst be found to be in violation. Nondisclosure 
agreements are also used for temporary research support staff such as 
data entry operators, computer programmers, and the like.
STORING, PROTECTING, 
AND DISPOSING OF INTELLIGENCE DATA
Document Storage
An intelligence unit’s first line of defense against penetration by a hostile 
agent is its external barriers—its walls, doors, and windows. Its second 
line of defense is the “containers” that house its confidential documents, 
for example, computer servers, desktop workstations, and filing cabi-
nets/storage shelves. It is, therefore, essential that an intelligence unit 
identify all documents and records that may be the target of a hostile 
agent and secure these in containers that minimize the risk of their unau-
thorized acquisition. The concern is with both the theft of the documents 
and the undetected theft of the information they contain. So, to further 
reduce the risk of attack on containers designated for sensitive material, 
the intelligence unit should not store valuables, such as cash, securities, 
jewels, and precious metals, in them.

 
Document and Personnel Security 
225
Photocopying sensitive documents or digitally photographing them 
surreptitiously are the two most likely ways a hostile agent could obtain 
information without a unit’s knowledge. Another method, although dif-
ficult to attempt, is to remove the document(s) from the unit’s offices, 
copy them, and then return them to their storage container undetected. 
To guard against the former case, access codes should be installed on the 
office photocopier to strengthen this potentially weak security link.
To counteract both possibilities, intelligence units should ensure that 
containers housing their documents have locks and that the locks are 
used faithfully. Metal containers, such as filing cabinets, with padlocks 
offer a reasonably high level of security; however, safes and cabinets with 
combination locks incorporated as part of their physical structure offer a 
much higher level of protection.
Secure storage is equally applicable to computer disks, portable and 
flash USB drives, and tape backups (including offsite storage of backups). 
The control of keys for an intelligence unit’s document containers should 
follow those guidelines outlined previously.
Document Reproduction
The reproduction of classified documents bearing confidential, secret, 
and top secret (or in a private intelligence organization—grades I, II, and 
III) are often marked with the classification of the original material. Only 
sufficient copies necessary to meet operational requirements are dupli-
cated, and all reproductions are destroyed as soon as they have served 
their purpose (e.g., concluding a briefing for a decision-making commit-
tee). Also, when photocopying sensitive documents, analysts should be 
cognizant to collect the original(s) before leaving the machine.
Document Safeguards during Use
When confidential documents are not held in secure containers, the ana-
lyst using the documents is usually required to:
•  Keep the documents under constant visual surveillance;
•  Place the documents in a storage container and cover it or turn it face 
down when an unauthorized person is present;
•  Return the documents to their designated storage container after use; 
and
•  In the case of plans, graphs, charts, or other forms of visual aids, they 
should be labeled with a code name or code number and not openly 
bear a designation that could identify the project to an unauthorized 
observer.

226 
Chapter 15
Document Disposal
An intelligence unit’s waste paper basket is an easily accessible source 
of information for the hostile agent. For instance, it isn’t unreasonable to 
assume that 80 percent or more of the paper generated by a commercial 
business or professional consulting firm contains information that is con-
fidential to one degree or another. This is information that, if acquired by 
a competitor, could adversely affect business performance. This informa-
tion gathering technique is known in the vernacular as “dumpster div-
ing” and is carried out simply by collecting the day’s paper waste before 
the disposal truck arrives.
An easily overlooked source of information leakage is the photocopier. 
Spoiled and overrun copies should not be indiscriminately dropped into 
the waste paper basket. An important piece of equipment for all intel-
ligence units is a document shredder. These devices are so common now 
that even retail stores carry them as standard items. An alternative for 
large units is to use a bulk document destruction service. These compa-
nies are usually listed in the Yellow Pages.
Another often overlooked source of information leakage is the impres-
sions left on writing pads. To guard against this, a thin piece of acrylic, 
plastic, or aluminum should be used under the top sheet of all memo pads 
and writing tablets to prevent impression marks being left on the pad. 
Stenographic notes, worksheets, sticky notes, and similar items should 
be destroyed—not just disposed. Needless to say, a readable copy can be 
obtained from any of these sources, and therefore, they are as dangerous 
as the originals in the hands of a hostile agent. Dictation recorded on tape 
or digitally should be deleted immediately after being transcribed.
Computer Workstations
Desktop computers pose specific security problems. The chief risks are 
from unauthorized hardware and software access and software sabotage. 
In the main, the best countermeasures are those of sound physical and 
personnel security and software management. Countermeasures de-
signed to protect computer software and data include:
1.  Using passwords to authenticate legitimate users of the system. Pass-
words should be impossible to guess, so it is advisable to avoid using 
any name that is common or familiar in the work environment, busi-
ness, or to the project. Also, names that are meaningful to the user, for 
example a spouse, child, or pet’s name, should be avoided. Passwords 
consisting of a combination of letters and numbers/symbols are ideal 

 
Document and Personnel Security 
227
for a very high level of security. Ensure that the software security 
program that controls user access does not display the password on 
the screen when logging on or appears on any printouts. Users should 
commit passwords to memory; they should never be posted on termi-
nals, work stations, or notice boards. Above all, users should never 
tell anyone without proper authority a system’s password. A system’s 
password should not be changed at regular intervals but randomly to 
foil any attempt to anticipate security changes.
2.  Isolating information of various grades on separate drives and la-
beling each with its level of sensitivity, that is, unclassified, official 
use only, confidential, secret, top secret (or grades I, II, III, IV) as 
outlined in the section on classification of information.
3.  Avoiding the use of fixed hard disks for storing sensitive data pri-
marily because they cannot be readily removed for safe storage. A 
removable/portable hard disk offers a much higher level of security. 
If a fixed hard drive must be used for work associated with projects 
involving top secret (grade I) information, the alternative is to store 
the data on portable or flash USB drives.
4.  Storing all disks (data disks or flash drives, master program disks, 
and backup program disks) in secure containers.
5.  Degaussing damaged or defective drives that contain business in-
formation before returning them to the manufacturer or retailer for 
credit.
6.  Overwriting drives before using them for information of a lower 
classification.
7.  Disposing printouts as outlined in the section on document dis-
posal.
8.  Disposing of portable and flash USB drives by physically destroying 
them.
9.  Shutting down idle terminals.
Countermeasures designed to protect computer hardware include:
1.  Bolting the computer base unit to the work station.
2.  Locking the server room when technicians are not in attendance.
3.  Positioning computer screens to prevent viewing from windows, 
doorways, or through glass partitions.
4.  Allowing only trusted and qualified technical personnel to service or 
make modifications to a system.
5.  Conducting electronic countermeasure sweeps at irregular intervals 
for bugs or wiretaps.

228 
Chapter 15
6.  Shielding cables leaving the server room in metal conduit to prevent 
electromagnetic radiation, which could be intercepted, and to deter 
illegal tapping.
7.  When disposing of old hard drives, use a commercial disk cleaning 
software package that writes zeros over the entire disk surface. This 
will leave the disk useable but sensitive data unrecoverable. If the 
object is to destroy the disk, then after using a software cleanser, 
drill four holes (e.g., at 12 o’clock, 3 o’clock, 6 o’clock, and 9 o’clock) 
through the unit so that each punctures the platter.
And countermeasures designed to guard against software sabotage in-
clude:
1.  Using only commercial software from recognized, reputable soft-
ware manufacturers or a custom developer.
2.  Loading programs from the manufacturer/designer’s original copy 
or downloading directly from the developer’s website.
3.  Using only programs on an “approved programs list” in order to 
reduce the possibility of contracting program viruses from non-com-
mercial software.
If non-commercial software must be used, for example public-
domain programs, shareware, freeware, and programs downloaded 
from the Internet, the software should first be thoroughly examined 
and tested for the possible presence of the sabotage mentioned 
above.
Before screening new, non-commercial, software products for 
viruses and the like, access to the system’s hard disk should be 
temporarily blocked in order to avoid infection should there be any 
form of contamination in the program.
Once new non-commercial software has passed rigorous screen-
ing, system users should then be supplied with approved (tested) 
copies of the program.
4.  Implementing or upgrading backup and recovery procedures, which 
will facilitate a quick and complete reconstruction of a system’s pro-
grams and data in the event that a saboteur strikes.
Finally, the security measures that an intelligence unit adopts to protect 
its computer work stations and IT systems should not be discussed 
with anyone outside of the organization. It is acceptable, however, to 
acknowledge that measures to combat espionage and sabotage are in 
place, but the specific techniques and procedures should never be con-
firmed.

 
Document and Personnel Security 
229
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
Confidential information should always be regarded as having a finite 
lifespan. It must be realized that despite the best engineered security plans 
and the installation of the most sophisticated countermeasures equipment, 
eventually information that is being guarded will become known to others. 
The American nuclear fighting capability became known to the entire world 
on August 6, 1945—the day before it was classified top secret.
Obviously, the best way to keep secrets is to store them in one’s head and 
not communicate them to anyone. This is not a very realistic countermeasure 
in a business environment. The point to be made, however, is that as more 
people know about some particular secret and the more that is written and 
recorded about it, the more likely that the secret will become prematurely 
known to unauthorized people (either inadvertently or by design).
This was the case with the early American atomic bomb research; a So-
viet espionage operation was able to penetrate the top secret project and 
acquire that information well before the rest of the world knew it existed. 
The second point to be made is that once intelligence agents know or even 
suspect that someone is guarding secrets, half of their work is done; their 
next step is to devise a method to acquire it. The question every military, 
government agency, and business must consider is: how long is this in-
formation going to be secure?
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES
The key words and phrases associated with this chapter are:
•  Classification;
•  Compromised information;
•  Confidential;
•  Countermeasures;
•  Document sensitivity;
•  Hostile agent;
•  Information security;
•  Official use only;
•  Personal history statement;
•  Premature disclosure;
•  Screening;
•  Secret;
•  Security clearance;
•  Threat level;

230 
Chapter 15
•  Top secret; and
•  Unclassified.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1.  List at least six types of information that would be considered sensi-
tive enough to carry a security classification.
2.  List the different levels of security classifications, and describe the 
differences between each.
3.  Brainstorm four different categories of hostile agents that your 
agency might have concerns about.
4.  Describe the methods an intelligence analyst should use when dispos-
ing of classified material. Does your agency adhere to such methods? 
If not, how can this aspect of information security be improved?
LEARNING ACTIVITY
What does premature disclosure mean? Does this means that every clas-
sified document will be released one day? Research the laws in your 
jurisdiction as they apply to different types of intelligence documents. 
Determine which ones are subject to a permanent classification—never to 
be released—and those that are subject to a time limitation, meaning that 
one day they will be released to the public.
NOTES
1. U.S. Department of Defense, DoD 5220.22-M: National Industrial Security Pro-
gram Operating Manual (Washington DC: GPO, February 28, 2006).
2. U.S. Department of Defense, DoD 5200.1-PH-1: A Guide to Marking Classified 
Documents (Washington DC: GPO, May 2000).
3. Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence, Document Security (Canberra, Aus-
tralia: Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence, 1987).
4. If sensitive information has been compromised or just “lost,” the following 
guidelines will assist in minimizing the damage that may result:
•  Attempt to regain custody of the documents/material;
•  Assess the information that has been compromised (or subjected to com-
promise) to ascertain the potential damage, and institute action necessary to 
minimize the effects of such damage;
•  Investigate to establish the weakness in the security arrangements that 
caused or permitted the compromise, and alter these arrangements in order 
to prevent any recurrence; and
•  Take actions appropriate to either educate/counsel/discipline the person(s) 
responsible.

231
Appendix
Critical Values of Chi-Square Distribution
Degrees of Freedom 
P = 0.05 
P = 0.01
 1 
3.84 
6.64
 2 
5.99 
9.21
 3 
7.82 
11.35
 4 
9.49 
13.28
 5 
11.07 
15.09
 6 
12.59 
16.81
 7 
14.07 
18.48
 8 
15.51 
20.09
 9 
16.92 
21.67
10 
18.31 
23.21
11 
19.68 
24.73
12 
21.03 
26.22
13 
22.36 
27.69
14 
23.69 
29.14
15 
25.00 
30.58
16 
26.30 
32.00
17 
27.59 
33.41
18 
28.87 
34.81
19 
30.14 
36.19
20 
31.41 
37.57
21 
32.67 
38.93
22 
33.92 
40.29
23 
35.17 
41.64
24 
36.42 
42.98
25 
37.65 
44.31
Note: Tables of critical values of chi-square are available in the public domain via the Internet. The above 
data were extracted from one such table and adopted for indicative use here.


233
About the Author
Dr. Hank Prunckun, BS, MSocSc, PhD, is adjunct associate professor 
of criminal intelligence at the Australian Graduate School of Policing, 
Charles Sturt University, Sydney. He specializes in the study of transna-
tional crime—espionage, terrorism, drugs and arms trafficking, as well as 
cyber crime. He is the author of numerous reviews, articles, chapters, and 
books, including: Shadow of Death: An Analytic Bibliography on Political Vio-
lence, Terrorism, and Low-Intensity Conflict (Scarecrow Press, 1995); Special 
Access Required: A Practitioner’s Guide to Law Enforcement Intelligence Litera-
ture (Scarecrow Press, 1990); and Information Security: A Practical Handbook 
on Business Counterintelligence (Charles C Thomas, 1989). Dr. Prunckun 
has won two literature awards and a professional service award from 
the International Association of Law Enforcement Intelligence Analysts. 
He has served in a number of strategic research and tactical intelligence 
capacities within the criminal justice system over the last twenty-eight 
years, including almost five years as a senior counterterrorism policy 
analyst. Dr. Prunckun is also a licensed private investigator and a radio 
engineer.

Teaching intelligence research and analysis in the Middle East, August 2009. The author (standing, third from left) and an academic 
colleague are presented with tokens of thanks from a group of intelligence officers who were studying for the degree of Master of 
Arts (Criminal Intelligence).

